 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ARA 086 COURSE TITLE: Arabic Morphology 1 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE: ARA 086 COURSE TITLE: Arabic Morphology COURSE DEVELOPER/ Prof. M.A.
Bidmos WRITER: School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos.
COURSE EDITOR/ PROGRAMME /LEADER Prof. A.F.
Ahmed School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA i 2 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria First Printed ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii 3 CONTENT PAGE Introduction……………………………………………………………….
1 Course Aims……………………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives……………………………………………………….... 1 Working through this Course……………………………………………... 2 Course Materials………………………………………………………….. 2 Study Units………………………………………………………………....2 Textbooks and References………………………………………………….3 Assignment File…………………………………………………………….4 Presentations Schedule……………………………………………………..4 Assessment………………………………………………………………....4 Tutor Marked Assignment………………………………………………….4 Final Examination and Grading…………………………………………….4 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………………………....4 Course Overview…………………………………………………………....5 How to Get the Most from this Course……………………………………...5 Facilitator/Tutor and Tutorials………………………………………………7 Summary…………………………………………………………………….7 iii 4 Introduction Before you is a Course Material coded and entitled ARA086: Arabic Morphology.
called in Arabic, the course is compulsory for the NOUN Diploma students.
As a beginner, you should take note of the development and the importance of .
In the first and second centuries of Islam, was developed amongst the series of subjects developed by Muslims to preserve and understand the language of the Qur’an – Arabic.
Mu‘ādh bn Muslim al–Ħarrāī is recognized as the exponent of .
Another school of thought attributes its development to ‘Alī bn Abī Tālib.
So far, has proven to be an extraordinary mechanism of enriching Arabic language as you will see it practically as we enter into the nitty-grity of Course Aims ARA086 aims at ensuring your ability to: • comprehend the position of in the entire Arabic Studies; • identify the scope of ; • employ the available mechanism to conjugate verbs and nouns; • state the relationship between and and • employ various available patterns in to enrich your language acquisition skill.
Course Objectives To accomplish the above aims, you have a golden opportunity in the series of objectives which are divided into two, namely short term and long term.
While short term objectives revolve around immediate accomplishment i.e.
what you are able to attain at the end of each unit, the long term objectives indicate your demonstration of mastery of .
In technical terms, your short term objectives are called behavioural objectives.
Such objectives are meant to measure the extent to which you have benefited from the unit lesson just taught.
In other words the extent you can recall, state, comprehend, or perform any prescribed task on just concluded lesson.
On the other hand, the long term objectives are futuristic i.e.
they revolve around your ability to permanently retain the conjugation of verbs from to or noun from to , or the extent you can derive fresh words from their roots such as – – – – etc.
based on the skills acquired during the course.
You are hereby expected to be able to: • describe the scope of ; • state what and have in common; • conjugate verbs; • enrich and enlarge your vocabulary base through derivatives known as ; and • use in sentences the newly acquired words 1  Working Through this Course ARA086 is made up of 12 units, carefully packaged to enable you to learn without tears.
Basically, you are expected to study all units in addition to any other books as may be recommended by NOUN.
As you progress in this course, you will find Assessment exercise specially designed to enable you to gage your level of attainment of the behavioural objectives.
Further more, at the end of every unit, you will required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
You will also write a final examination at the end of this course.
Course Materials Major components of course materials are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment Files 5.
Presentation Schedules You are expected to obtain the materials which are available in NOUN offices.
You can approach either the facilitator in your Study Centre or the Study Centre Manager to obtain your copies.
Study Units In this course, there are 12 study units broken into four modules.
They are as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Unit 2 Unit 3 Module 2 Unit 1 Unit 2 Unit 3 Unit 4 2 Module 3 Unit 1 Unit 2 Unit 3 Module 4 Unit 1 Unit 2 Each Unit contains a number of self – tests.
In general terms, these self-test questions on the lessons you have just covered are meant to help you to evaluate your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the lessons.
Along with your Tutor – Marked Assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the lessons.
References and Textbooks Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try to get as many as possible of those textbooks and materials listed.
The textbooks and materials are meant to depen your knowledge of the course.
For example, you may find the following textbooks useful.
• Al – Maydani, A.M. (1978) Agege, Matba‘atu `th-Thaqāfah al- Islamiyyah.
• Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu aş-Şafā.
• Ali al-Jārim/ Mustapha Amīn, (N.D.) Al – Qāhirah.
• Tarablīsī/Abu Ħarb (1967) Damascus, Al-Matba‘ah a`t – Ta‘āwuniyyah • Al – Maħāsinī/Sultan/Akkash, (1966) Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
• Abdullah al – Wuhaybī & Co. (1970) Jeddah, Ministry of Education.
• Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
• Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1976).
Baghdad, Matba‘at Tīmis.
• Al-Fāriħ, S.
(Ed.)
(1986) Kuwait, Kuliyyatu `l- Ādāb, University of Kuwait.
Assignment Files 3 In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
You will find further information or assignments in the Assignment file itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assignment.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of Tutor – Marked Assignment and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) and a final examination you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor – Marked Assignments (TMAs) Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select four which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The Tutor – Marked Assignments may be presented to you in a separate file.
Just know that for every unit there are some Tutor – Marked Assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination which shall last for two hours, you will be requested to answer three questions out of at least five questions.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assignment Marks Assignments Four assignments, best three marks of the four count as 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of Course Marks Course Overview 4 Unit Title of Work Weeks Activity Course Guide Module 1 Definition of Sarf and its Scope Unit 1 Definition of Week 1 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Abstract verb and Week 1 Assignment 2 noun Unit 3 Measures of verbs Week 3 Assignment 3 Module 2 Sound, Weak, Transitive and Intransitive Verb Unit 1 Sound and Weak Week 3 Assignment 1 Verb Unit 2 Sound Verb and its Week 4 Assignment 2 branches Unit 3 Transitive Verb Week 4 Assignment 3 Unit 4 Intransitive Verb Week 5 Assignment 4 Module 3 Types of Noun: Derivative and Abstract Unit 1 Types of Noun Week 6 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Derivative Nouns Week 6 Assignment 2 Unit 3 Abstract Nouns Week 7 Assignment 3 Module 4 Unit 1 Letters of Week 8 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Mubālaghah Nouns Week 9 Assignment 2 Total 14 How to Get the Most from This Course One of the great advantages of distance learning is that the study units replace the university lecture.
This is because you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in – class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the 5 unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Design a “Course Overview” to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the unit.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write your own date’s schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up – to – date course information will be continuously available there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates); keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
6 10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the course guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials The dates; times and locations of these will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and the address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention too the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important; therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
Summary In ARA086: Arabic Morphology, you are taken through different aspects of .
To a large extent, is simplified for you.
It is made easy.
Words/terms such as etc.
are defined.
Where necessary, terms with technical connotation are described with illustrations.
For example, terms such , (derivatives) where they are derived from, common ground between and are explained with illustrations.
Conjugation as the core of is extensively explained across the units of the course.
However, your ability to conjugate, define, describe, and illustrate in sentences depends on your taking maximum advantage of the Course Guide which accompanies this Course Material.
7  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE / TITLE ARA086: Arabic Morphology COURSE DEVELOPER / WRITER Prof. M. A. Bidmus School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
COURSE EDITOR / PROGRAMME LEADER Prof. Asif Ahmed School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University, Victoria Island, Lagos 8  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2010 First Printed 2010 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii 9 TABLE OF CONTENTS Content Page Title Page i Publisher ii Table of Contents iii Module 1 Definition of Ṣarf and its Scope Unit 1 Definition of Ṣarf 1 - 7 Unit 2: 8 - 14 Unit 3: 15 - 21 Module 2 Unit 1 23 - 29 Unit 2 30- 35 Unit 3 36 - 42 Unit 4 : 43 - 48 Module 3: Unit 1: 49 - 55 Unit 2: 56 - 61 Unit 3: 62 - 66 Module 4: Unit 1: 67 – 72 Unit 2: 73 - 78 iii 10 Module 1 Definition of Ṣarf and its Scope Unit 1 Definition of Ṣarf 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Ṣarf 3.2 The Scope of Ṣarf 3.3 Similarity between Ṣarf and Nahw 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Morphology, , was introduced within the array of language studies which include Grammar Rhetoric Philology , Phonetics , etc.
The main motivation for the development/introduction of these language studies was the preservation of the Qur’ān – which was revealed in Arabic – in terms of its ensuring its correct reading and accurate understanding of its message.
It should be noted that the language studies of which formed a part came within the context of the complete change brought by Islam to the life of the Arabs in the Arabian Peninsula.
It was a total transformation of life which means a sharp shift from the prevailing Jahiliyyah culture to civilization and urbanization spanning across social, commercial, judicial and religious aspects of life in the first and second centuries of Hijrah corresponding with seventh and eighth centuries of the Christian Era (CE).
Since came as a branch of language studies, little wonder that it shares a lot with other branches especially (Grammar) which is explained below.
Against this background, our attention in this unit is focused on definition of , its scope and what it shares in common with .
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define ; • describe the scope of ; and • state similarities and dissimilarities between and Nahw.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of For the purpose of illustration, let’s consider the following text: 1  By definition, Morphology, simply called in Arabic is the study of the structural formation of words and the cases that affect the formation.
The literal meaning of is indicative of what Morphology is all about.
Literally, means to change i.e.
to change from one form to another form.
Technically, means a structural change affecting a word called from one form to another form or to several forms.
For instance, you will observe in the above text how the word changed from one form to several forms.
The word (to write) has structurally changed severally e.g.
In the same text, the word changed from ( ) to ( ) i.e.
to correspond with e.g.
It can further change to (meaning to make one write) It can change to (meaning to subscribe to a paper or a journal) It can also change to i e. to ask one to write.
It can change to Further, some of its derivatives are: a book holy book the children’s school Self Assessment Exercise Give definition of with illustration 3.2 The Scope of The word precisely defines the scope of .
Kalmah which means a word is of three types; namely (verb) (noun) (particle) Examples: 2  to beat a boy from to seat bread to to study a book in Of all the three types of Kalmah listed above, covers verbs and nouns to the exclusion of particles.
The question you may ask then is: what does do to verbs and nouns?
The answer is, simply put, which means structural transformation of verbs and nouns into various shapes and forms.
It should be quickly noted that the structural transformation we are talking about is for a purpose which is the reflection of different meanings and situations sometimes tied up to periodization.
When takes its toll on verbs and nouns, they (verbs and nouns) are called i.e.
and .
This is a situation when a verb is conjugated such as conjugating a verb from past tense , present tense ( ), and command i.e.
future tense ( ).
When noun is taken through the same process of i.e.
conjugation, it changes from singular ( ), dual ( ) and plural ( ).
It is illustrated as follows: Regarding conjugation of i.e.
its , it runs thus: The full length of conjugation is the following pattern: Similar to further extension as in the case of verb above, full conjugation of noun is also extended to cover genealogy ( ) and diminutive e.g.
: Self Assessment Exercise Show the difference between verb conjugation and noun conjugation with illustrations.
3 3.3 Between Ṣarf and Nahw and Nahw in terms of their functions are like a pair of scissors in which one tongue cannot function alone without the other tongue.
Both and Nahw complement each other in preserving the Arabic language and ultimately guide the learner towards making correct and intelligible sentences.
So, what they both share in common is the role of preserving the language through application of their rules and regulations.
However, in terms of the scope of operation, they differ significantly as illustrated in the text below.
3.3.1 Analysis You will notice in the text above that the (words) change from one form to another.
For example, verbs such as: change from one form to another to reflect different periods.
In the same token, nouns such as: change from one form to another to reflect number.
This constant change is known as (deletion) and it applies to both and .
Let us consider the following two tables which are loaded with extracted from the text above.
Change in Verb or Reflect Time Change in Verb or Reflect Number 3.3.2 The difference between Ṣarf and Nahw lies in the two terms and .
The English term declension is used to denote both and .
While 4 means structural transformation of a verb or noun as illustrated in the two tables above, means changes that occur in the vowels at the end of a word be it verb or noun.
The vowels that are amenable to changes are Dammah Fathah Kasrah and Sukun .
The following sentences give examples of in action.
In the first sentence, is in the nominative case which is known as with alf () representing dammat.
In the word , takes kasrah due to the influence of the article .
in the second sentence takes kasrah due to the influence of .
the end of also takes kasrah due to the influence of .
in the fourth sentence takes fat-hah because it is in the accusative case under the influence of .
the word as (also accusative) takes fat-hah.
The word takes kasrah as you can see it in ( ).
This is called genitive case .
The verb takes fat-hah due to the influence of what is known as .
takes fat-hah because it is while takes kasrah becase it is in genitive case .
.
while takes fat-hah due to the influence of , is in genitive case and so it takes kasrah which is represented in yaa.
In the last sentence, known as takes sukun as the sign of jazm.
By now, the distinction between and must have been crystal clear to you.
For example, while with its rules governs the act of changing the words (i.e ,) from one form to another, takes the control of alteration of vowel at the end of words in accordance with the prevailing case.
Basically, both and are supposed to guide you to make correct statement with a view to accurately reflecting the intended meaning and situations correctly.
One point of observation, you should recall that the particle is the third member of the family.
But it is not governed by any regulation that will make it change its form.
It has a lone structure that never changes.
Unlike the nature of and the particle such as are free fron any rule that could either change their forms or their vowels.
Self Assessment Exercise What is the difference between and ?
Illustrate your answer with examples.
5  4.0 Conclusion and have one thing in common; namely preservation of Arabic Language through provision of rules and regulations that guide the learner of the language to make flawless and intelligible expressions.
Further more, both of them have (word) as the area of operation.
But while deals with the structural transformation of the words into various shapes and forms, deals with the changes that occur in the vowels especially at the end of the word ( ) 5.0 Summary This Unit introduced Ṣarf (Arabic Morphology) to you as the study of the structural changes taking place in words with a view to creating various meanings from one single root.
It showed how both and take the as their area of oppration.
It gives coupious examples as illustration and provides you with self assessment exercises so that you will be able to know your level of understanding.
The conclusion highlights the main point discussed.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) State with illustrations the importance of Ṣarf in the study of Arabic Language.
7.0 Reference/ Further Reading: 1.
Ahmad bn Muhammad al-Maydānī (1978), with addendum and commentary by Adam Abdullah al-Illūrī; Agege, Markaz Ta ‘līmi `l- ‘Arabī Press.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu aş-Şafā.
3.
Ali al-Jārim/ Mustapha Amīn, (N.D.) Al – Qāhirah.
6 Module 1: Definition of Ṣarf and its Scope Unit 2: 0.0 Introduction 1.0 Objectives 2.0 Main Content 2.1 2.2 2.3 3.0 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 6.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In the first Unit, was defined for you with illustrations.
Also treated was the scope of which is be it or .
In this Unit, the status of is explained as well as that of ..
In other words, you will learn that in the unit different technical descriptions of each of them.
And as usual, this will be loaded with illustrations.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to describe: - - - 3.0 Main Content 3.1 is so called when it is pure.
The purity of the is when all its letters are free of any form of defect.
Such letters are called Radicals to the extent that they are all original to that verb and each of them is indispensable for the verb will be rendered meaningless, should any of the letters be omitted e.g.
: .
Take the verb which means he took a ride, should letter be omitted the rest two letters becomes meaningless or at least the remaining two letters cannot mean to take a ride.
So, is because each of the three letters is basic.
Essentially, we must take note of the fact that i.e.
a three-lettered verb is the smallest verb in size as far as Arabic is concerned.
And the longest in size is the one called i.e.
a six-lettered verb treated below in details.
Let us consider the following sentences.
Ahmad rode a camel – The seeker and the sought are weak – 7 God always assists the wronged – Whatever the mighty does is beautiful – Hearing about Muaydi is better than seeing him – Noha’s ark did not capsize in the flood – God saved Noah’s ark from capsizing – The hardworking student passed with distinction – 3.1.1 Analysis In the above sentences, the following verb features: .
Each of the verbs is .
They are so called because their foundation letters do not suffer any form of deficiency.
Each of the letters is called radical.
It should be noted quickly that the opposite of is which is simply defined as a verb with additional letters – i.e.
additional to the foundation radicals.
For example, take note of the verbs in the following excerpt: Celebrate the praises of thy Lord And remember Moses prayed for water for his people Then gushed forth therefrom twelve springs The verb have, to their foundation radicals, additional letters such as in in in in The meaning of with the additional i.e.
is to glorify your Lord.
But in case that additional is removed, you are left with which is still meaningful albeit a different meaning.
In other words, its removal can only alter the meaning of the remaining letters but not to render them meaningless.
And when the additional letters are removed, the remaining is meaningful.
It means to forgive i.e.
granted forgiveness.
is to seek drinking water.
And with the removal of , the remaining is meaningful.
It means he granted drinking water.
The case of is mentioned here only in passing for illustration purpose.
It will be treated in details in 3.2 below.
Meanwhile, we return to .
Self Assignment Exercise Extract from the above verse and explain what makes them .
8  3.2 By now, you should be able to describe what Mujarrad is with illustration.
You can even state its opposite which is Mazīd.
But you should recognize the two types of Mujarrad that do co-exist; namely and .
They are the two types and each of them with its own branches which are not treated in this unit.
Suffice it to say that is the three lettered verb with the three radicals, as already explained and illustrated, all of which are basic, pure and indispensable.
You should be able to explain what indispensability of a basic radical means in a verb – Mujarrad verb.
Any of the verbs we have come across above will be good enough as example of .
etc.
3.2.1 may require more attention because you are coming in contact with it for the first time in this material.
can be defined as a four lettered verb or quadratic.
Like the description of the three lettered verb, is the four-lettered verb whose four letters are basic, original and indispensable.
Should any of the four letters be omitted, the meaning of three letters become meaningless.
means he said , means he said , means he gathered or assembled something.
Each of these verbs is because all the radicals in them are basic and indispensable.
Read the following text: 3.2.2 Analysis The four-lettered (quadratic) verbs in the excerpt are: … He recited … He says … The Shepard forced his camel down.
… Truthfulness is manifest.
These are pure four-lettered verbs, the letters are foundation radicals.
And should any of the letters drop, the remaining letters lose meaning and effectiveness.
In the same excerpt, there are other four-lettered verbs such as – – – .
Though they are four-lettered, they are not because they have in their foundation letters additional letter that can be removed without rendering the 9 remaining letters meaningless.
The verbs of this nature are known as which is treated in 3.3 below.
Self Assignment Exercise Give each of the following verbs its appropriate descriptive terms and use it in a sentence.
- - - - 3.3 as alluded to in passing above is the opposite of Mujarrad.
A verb is described as al-Mazid feehi if it contains one or more additional letters to the original component ones which are known as foundation radicals.
Both and can take additional letters to become .
An example of al-Mazeed thulaathiyy is with the additional to .
It can also become as and are added.
Or as are added to .
Or as are added to .
3.3.1 In order to make formation of easy, there are specific letters used.
The letters are known as additional letters .
Again, for easy reference, the letters contained in a statement designated in .
You can see that they are ten: i.e.
.
However, there is also what is known as .
This is a case in which serves as an additional letter.
For example, in , letter is doubled with .
In such a case, which is one of the foundation radicals also becomes an additional letter.
means to study.
But when another is added, we have which means to teach.
The following table gives classification of various .
Below is - The teacher sent Fatima to the market – Jafar waged war with Sulayman Bilqis submitted to Allah through Sulayman Talhat taught me Tajwid People waged war - The camel gathered - 10  The believer sought forgiveness from his lord The cloud cleared - -- The land grew a lot of weed The debtor was restful - In this table, you will notice that letters like are doubled by shaddah to create additional letters e.g.
.
This is to emphasize that apart from the 10 letters which are specifically designated as in , any other letter can assume the position of additional letter through i.e.
.
3.3.2 Distinction between and By now, you must have been able to state the characteristics of be it or .
By means of revision, is a three-lettered or four-lettered verb which has all its component letters original and pure.
It is so described because should any of the letters drop, the remaining letters can no longer qualify as a verb.
In contrast, we have as described in 3.3 above.
Both and are capable of being increased by one, two or three letters or by what is called i.e.
It should be noted that the purpose of increasing letter of a verb is to change the meaning.
For example: (he) studied (he) taught (he) knew (he) informed (he) sat (he) caused some one to sit (he) moved slowly (he) sent some one forward (he) killed (to) fight each other (he) forgave (he) sought forgiveness (he) said (he) resigned You should also note that the increased verbs ( ) are given appropriate terms as they take additional letters.
These include: (four-lettered) (five-lettered) (six-lettered) 11 Self Assessment Exercise What is the purpose of ?
Give four complete sentences in Arabic for illustration of your answer.
4.0 Conclusion It has been clarified in this unit that the are ten as contained in .
But it should be noted that shaddah known as can also serve as an additional letter as reflected in etc.
Furthermore, you should note that are also among .
These are called they are illustrated in .
5.0 Summary The distinction between and is that every letter in the is original and cannot be dropped without disrupting the meaning of the verb.
For example, if a letter is removed from e.g.
the remaining have no meaning.
In case of removing a letter or more can only change the meaning but not to render the verb meaningless e.g.
if is removed from you still have which is meaningful i.e.
he killed though it is different from the meaning of .
Generally, is advantageous in terms of widening the scope if verbs as a verb through can produce various meaning.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment State the advantages of with illustrations.
What are the characteristics of ?
Give examples.
7.0 References/Further Readings 1.
Al-Maydani, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu Thaqafatul Islamiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu aş- Şafā.
3.
Al – Maħāsinī S. A.
(1966), Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
4.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
12 Module 1: Definition of Ṣarf and its Scope Unit 3: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 3.2 3.3 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction is the plural of which means a scale or yardstick or measure.
The function of is to categorise the Arabic verbs by way of putting each verb in its appropriate context.
In this unit, therefore, you will be introduced to the six known measures called for the as well as others for .
Also to be treated are the for .
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify and describe: - - - 3.0 Main Context 3.1 Read the following text: We can extract from the text above these verbs: .
These verbs represent in its six which are encompassed in .
It is the middle letter of that changes to give birth to all six .
This is graphically illustrated as follows: 13  Application of the representation produces the following: Every letter in is technically analysed as follows for easy application to the target verbs: So, you can see that plays a crucial role in all the .
Furthermore, it is that determines the taken by the in e.g.
.
The principle is simply applied thus: whichever taken by the in determines the given to in .
If, for example, takes or in of any verb, the of of such a verb will take e.g.
But the of will take dammah whenever the in of any verb takes e.g.
: 3.1.1 Conjugation of Verbs ( ) This section is devoted to the full illustration of the principles highlighted above i.e.
in its six weights ( ).
14  - or - - You should note that , and do not have because verbs such as these are known as i.e.
a verb that does not have .
This will be treated fully in unit 1 of Module 2 below.
15 3.1.2 Meanwhile, you should take note of the fact that has its own wazn which is used in conjugation.
The main difference is that while has six , there is only one wazn for which is .
It is analysed thus: Unlike which has six , there is only one for which is and it is conjugated as follows: For example: (to assemble) (to say ) (to inhibit) It is noteworthy at this juncture to draw your attention to the fact that there are some (four lettered verbs) which are not but .
For example, we have , , which are conjugated as follows: Examples are (to teach) from to learn/to study (to send) from to be long or send off (to fight) from to kill You must appreciate the significance of .
It is to create fresh deals/meanings e.g.
: means (he) killed … means (he) fought … means (he) sent him … means (he) studied/leant … 16  means (he) taught him … Self Assessment Exercise Conjugate the following verbs fully vowelized 3.2 i.e.
Five lettered verb has, coincidentally, five .
But you should pay attention to the following points: (1) All the various types of are ; none of them is .
In other words, there is no .
(2) Four of them are .
(3) Only one is .
The five are They are conjugated as follows: 3.2.1 Examples: to open from to be wiped out from to assemble/meet from to listen from to study together from to be near one another from to be gathered from to reflect from to roll down from 17  Self Assessment Exercise Identify from the above verses of the Qur’ān: (1) (2) Explain the status (3) Conjugate them appropriately 3.3 means a six-lettered verb which is the longest verb in Arabic.
Verbs in this group are all .
A verb in this group is either e.g.
which is from or e.g.
which is from .
The following are the : – He granted - He sought forgiveness forgiveness – He wrote - He made him to write - Grassy or covered with green grass 18 A Muslim sought forgiveness of his Lord The teacher commanded the student to write The land is full of grass The cattle gathered Self Assessment Exercise Identify from any part of the Qur’an 4 different , explain the status of each and conjugate all appropriately.
4.0 Conclusion You will observe that in the conjugation of , it is only verbs of scale that have .
Others do not have .
But how do you know the verb with and those that do not have?
The surest mechanism is through the meaning.
For example, if you say ‘I laughed and I drank’.
In the first sentence, you just laugh and the action of laughter ends with you.
Whereas, in the second sentence, you drank; you must have drunk some liquid, water, tea or milk.
So, to drink needs while to laugh does not require .
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have been taken through from three lettered to six lettered ones.
And the mechanism of conjugation has been sufficiently treated.
However, your ability to navigate conveniently in the aspects of we have treated so far requires extensive reading because some aspects of are based on what is known as i.e.
oral tradition which does not follow clearly defined patterns or rules.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment State with illustrations any two characteristics of that distinguish it from Nahw.
7.0 References/Further Reading 1.
Al-Maydani, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu Thaqafatul Islamiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu aş- Şafā.
3.
Al – Maħāsinī S. A.
(1966), Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
4.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
5.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
19 Module 2 Unit 1 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 3.2 3.3 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Classification of into and is one aspect of you will find quite interesting.
The beauty of this classification is that the learner can navigate across the various categories with minimum assistance and guidance because every category is distinct and easy to grasp with illustrations that are lucid and handy.
What makes this classification more interesting is the examples that can be easily drawn from materials in unit 3 module 1 above.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define with illustration • define with illustration • define with illustration 3.0 Main Content 1.1 Simply defined, means the verb that is sound and free of any form of defect.
The verb is sound when it is particularly free from the which are Verbs like or which you have come across in the segment provide appropriate illustrations.
The difference between and is in i.e and i.e .
As already explained, a verb is declared when it is free from such as , and it is if it is free of .
So while is qualified for , it (i.e. )
is not qualified for because of the in its .
Let us consider the following sentences: Then Imam rode on a camel to the mosque Zaynab laughed for her success in 20 school certificate Examination I thanked God for the favour of Islam God sent forth examples for people Mobile phone is made in Nigeria God assisted Muslims at Badr Muslims learnt their life lesson at Hunayn Your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him.
3.1.1 Analysis You will notice that in the sentences above, all the verbs except are sound.
They include .
All of them are free of any defect i.e .
Therefore, it should be very easy for you to identify .
Regarding the conjugation of you can use all examples already used in above Self Assessment Exercise Identify from Suratul 'A'la five sound and healthy verbs ( ) and conjugate them.
3.2 Fi'lun Saalim is known as a safe and regular verb.
It is so called because it is, like , free of .
It is also free of and e.g , .
You can use them as follows: Ahmad assisted his brother The guest sat on the chair Sulaiman rode his horse It should be noted that like and like are not but they are .
This concept can be graphically illustrated as follows: 21  Like , does not contain any .
It is defined as the verb that has hamzah as its e.g.
or its e.g or as its e.g Abdul Razaq ate rice Zayd asked the teacher about interest The broadcaster read the news bulletine Don't you see really working like a typical with all its radicals taking fat-hah.
You should be able to identify from among hundreds of verbs.
Regarding , it is like because it has its three radicals like ( ) but the two identical radicals i.e.
are integrated into one known as .
Again, you should be able to identify with ease.
Example of : 22  The thief fled from prison The week passed like a flash The parent guided his son on the way It should be noted that there are and .
has been explained/illustrated above.
Regarding , is the that has and from the same radical and and from the same radical Example: The water spred The truth is manifest Their Lord punished them for their sin Self Assessment Exercise Give two examples for each of , , and use them in sentences.
3.2 ( ) This is the verb that is weak or deficient as a result of having as one or two of its radicals.
You will recall that are three.
They are .
However, is of four types: these are , , and .
We can express it graphically as follows: 23  is the verb that has or as its e.g , , , , .
Your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him You threw not when you did throw, but Allah threw And Noah called his son who had separated himself It appeared to me that the winter season is near.
means the hollow verb i.e the verb that has as its e.g 24  Muhammad said that resurrection is real Yusuf walked to the school quickly Khalid slept during the lesson in the class Sa'd rose from his sleep early The sinner repented to him Lord This is the verb that has two in its foundation radicals (i.e the foundation letters).
It is of two types: namely i.e which has its two weak radicals follow each other e.g He who toys with knowledge has goofed Ahmad intended to perform pilgrimage this year Abu Hurayrah narrated more than a thousand Hadith The second type of is the one called i.e the one in which the two week letters are separated by a sound letter e.g The father saved his noble son from destruction Abdulkarim learnt by heart the entire Nahw rules A muslim fullfils his promise This is so called because it looks like for having all its radicals given like despite its been e.g.
God promised the fearing ones the paradise Sulaiman inherited Dawud A motor accident occurred on the express way Self Assessment Exercise Identify and explain the types of contained in Suratud-Duha.
4.0 Conclusion You must have noticed that both and have branches ( ).
I would like to believe that each of them has been clearly defined and sufficiently 25 illustrated for you in a manner that enables you to easily identify each with its characteristics 5.0 Summary As a matter of tradition, every verb has the appropriate measure ) that goes with it.
That implies that verbs treated in this unit have their and delayed till the next unit for treatment 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) • Arrange the following verbs in the appropriate categories.
Give each category the appropriate definition.
----------- 7.0 References / Further Reading.
1.
Al-Maydani, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu Thaqafatul Islamiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu aş- Şafā.
3.
Al – Maħāsinī S. A.
(1966), Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
4.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
5.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
6.
Tarablīsī/Abu Ħarb (1967) Damascus, Al-Matba‘ah a`t – Ta‘āwuniyyah 26 Module 2 Unit 2 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 3.2 3.3 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, definition of with its branches and with its branches were treated.
They were all backed up with considerable illustrations.
In this unit, you will be taken through conjugation of the verbs just referred to above.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • conjugate with all its branches; • conjugate with all its branches; and • conjugate 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conjugation of As a reminder, is the verb that is free from which are three; namely .
But is the verb that is free of like Saheeh.
The difference, however, is in and .
While accommodates as in and as in , does not.
In other words, constitutes a branch of while and are other branches of .
But then, each of them is conjugated as follows.
3.1.1 Since with all its branches is like which has been extensively conjugated in Module 1, Unit 3 all that is necessary here is provision of one or two samples of e.g --- ---- ------ ---- 27  You should note that of is both and which puts its at and .
In the same token, the of which is puts its at and its at Self Assessment Exercise Conjugate the following verbs with their appropriate : 3.2 To be conjugated in this segment are the branches of which include and First, which is in the category for having which is a as one of its radicals i.e the constituent letters.
But it is called because it appears like for having all its radicals including vowelized like sound verb ( ).
In other branches of such as and either the middle or the last letter is not vowelized e. g. I have selected these verbs because they present different patterns of .
For example: 28 There are three patterns in as far as is concerned.
They include based on based on , which presents a unique pattern as it retains its at while all others lost their at .
Secondly, which is so called because it is hollow i.e a hole-like case at the middle e.g You will notice that presents three patterns of .
These are: What you do with in this case is to reduce the main verb e.g to and what happens to in the main verb will be replicated to of the .
So , , Self Assessment Exercise Conjugate the following verbs with their appropriate - - - - - 3.3 Next, we take on which has in its e.g - - - - - 29  You will notice that presents three patterns of in its which are - - 3.3.1 is the verb that harbours two .
It is called if the two follow each other e.g.
-- It is called if the two are separated by a regular radical e.g What is peculiar in is that it loses its two in its .
Correspondingly, in its wazn, it also loses both of them.
Self Assessment Exercise Conjugate the underlined verbs in the above verses of the Qur'an and explain the status of each verb.
4.0 Conclusion It is interesting to note that in all its branches has just the way has.
However, that has to be taken on separately in another unit for explicit explanation.
5.0 Summary 30 One peculiarity posed in this segment is that or (in its plural form) take shape and status of the i.e the target verb, For example, if the (target verb) is which loses its two in its , the two letters will similarly be lost in the of the .
You must have noticed, therefore, that becomes a follower following the target verb in any situation or case.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Explain the status of each of the following verbs and conjugate them citing the appropriate to each.
- - - - 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.
Al-Maydānī, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu `th-Thaqāfatu `l- Islāmiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu `ş- Şafā.
3.
Al – Maħāsinī S. A.
(1966), Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
4.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
5.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
6.
Tarablīsī/Abu Ħarb (1967) Damascus, Al-Matba‘ah a`t – Ta‘āwuniyyah 31 Module 2 Unit 3 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 3.2 3.3 Conjugation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In the previous Module, we have seen how is classified into and .
We have also treated and .
In this unit, we shall focus on the classification of into and .
First, we examine 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of with illustrations; • identify that governs two ; and • conjugate all the verbs used 3.0 Main Content 3.1 is the verb that requires an object known as in a sentence.
This is the verb that can not stand with its subject alone without an object i.e .
It is known as transitive verb i.e.
it transits or governs an object.
Transitive verb are in categories.
There is a category that governs only one object ( ) and it is the commonest.
And there is another category that governs more than one object.
is better appreciated when it is learnt in a text.
For example: – – 32  Meaning My father sent me to a local Arabic school to study the reading of the Qur'ān.
It is the practice in our town that every Muslim intends giving his children Arabic and Islamic education at a very early age.
I was fortunate to attend a school where the provost finds leisure and joy in training young ones.
I studied the Qur'ān at the age of nine and a half years.
Oh!
I studied it in reading and not in memorization.
I have seen on the television screen young children who were not more than ten years old, reading the verses and chapters from memory.
As for me, naturally, I memorized some short chapters which I recite during the five daily obligatory prayers.
I wish I could memorise the Qur'ān as a whole one day and read it excellently well like the young children I saw on the television screen.
3.1.1.
Analysis In the above text, you can produce the following table The verbs highlighted above in the table are: To send To study To wish To see To read To understand To see To exceed To memorise 33  All the verbs highlighted above are which by the rule of will assert fa-thah on its as you can see in column 3 of the table above while you can see in column 2 i.e.
the doer.
Again, in column three you will notice that some nouns in the position of such as and which ought to have taken fat-hah, did not, because of certain considerations which could be explained to you in details in a class.
Let it be reiterated that the transitive verbs in this text are the ones that govern or require only one object .
Self Assessment Exercise Use the following verbs in sentences showing their and vowelized.
3.2 means a transitive verb that governs two objects.
i.e .
Let it be explained from the on-set that the two objects in this context can be two distinct words like or it could be in form of like As usual, let us consider the following text We have two analyses to make on the above sentences.
First, a table: – – - – 34  Secondly, you would have noticed that in the first sentence above is made of : i.e.
.
Is made of two distinct words .
In the third sentence, two distinct words made : - In the fourth sentence, two distinct words -- made .
In the fifth sentence, two distinct words made i.e.
.
In the sixth sentence, as made the Self Assessment Exercise State the two types of and illustrate it in four sentences.
3.3 In this segment, all the verbs i.e.
the transitive verbs used in the illustration above are conjugated.
The rationale is to enhance your competence in conjugation with the appropriate .
35  Self Assessment Exercise Conjugate the following verbs: 4.0 Conclusion You should note that conjugation is a core exercise in generally.
It is called .
You are expected to practice conjugation regularly.
It helps you to acquire convidence and competence in the use of verbs in your sentence construction.
5.0 Summary Reading of the holy Qur'ān is a sure and reliable way of identification of By constant reading of the Qur'ān, you will not only identify but you will also acquire the competence of identifying them into one category and category.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Identify from Sūratu `l- Baqarah: 125 – 132 and classify them into the category of one and that of 36 7.0 References Further Reading 1.
Al-Maydānī, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu `th-Thaqāfatu `l- Islāmiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu `ş- Şafā.
3.
Al – Maħāsinī S. A.
(1966), Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
4.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
5.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
6.
Tarablīsī/Abu Ħarb (1967) Damascus, Al-Matba‘ah a`t – Ta‘āwuniyyah .
- - - - 37 Module 2 : Unit 4 : 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 3.2 3.3 Conjugation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The transitive verb known as in its various categories has been treated in unit 3 above.
Intransitive verb known as which is the direct opposite of is treated in this unit.
Also to be treated is how intransitive verb can change to transitive.
You will be taken through the mechanism of achieving that.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify • utilize the mechanism of changing it to transitive; • conjugate all verbs used for illustration 3.0 Main Content 3.1 This is the direct opposite of with which you are already familiar.
is the verb that does not require in a sentence.
Taste is the main facilitator that assists you to identify .
For example, if Bilqis is reading and Fatimah is running.
Your taste must tell you that Bilqis must be reading something: a textbook, a news paper, a novel or a letter.
Whatever she is reading is which means that the verb read is transitive; .
On the other hand, running in the second sentence does not require an object of running as your taste will inform you.
Running begings and ends with the runner.
Therefore, to the extent that the verb run is intransitive in Arabic, you say: Bilqis is reading the Qur’an Fatimah is running A text for illustration: 38  The pilgrims returned to the country yesterday Khalid traveled to the USA Ahmad was happy for his success The News spreds The revelation came down Zayd stood up as a respect for his teacher The Imam went to the mosque The Prophet Nuh (AS) had a long life 3.1.1 Analysis In all the eight sentences listed above, you will note that each of them contains the verb and the doer without an object .
That is in action.
The verbs are: Returned Traveled Returned Felt happy Spread Descended Stood up Went (stayed) long From the forms and shapes of the verbs; it is clear that cuts across all categories of i.e.
But whenever it may occur, its hallmark is the needlessness of Self Assessment Exercise Which of the following verbs are ?
Use them in sentence 3.2 It is interesting to note that can turn The mechanism is by adding e.g or For example: by adding becomes to stage.
Muhammad stood up Muhammad stage a ceremony 39 The baby slept The Nurse made the baby sleep The Nurse made the baby sleep Therefore, the eight intransitive verbs used above can be made transitive through the instrumentality of or The dog sent the guest back Security men sent a foreigner away The provost recalled to the school the indebted student Ahmad's success made his father happy Khalid spread the news of his father's death God sent down the Qur'an The staged a ceremony on the occasion of Eid-Fitr God made away with our sorrow May God prolong your life Self Assessment Exercise Use the appropriate mechanism to change the following intransitive verbs to transitive and use them in sentence 3.3 In view of the special significance of conjugation , we shall conjugate all verbs used in 3.1 and 3.2 above in both their transitive and intransitive forms.
40  41  Self Assessment Exercise With the aid of or , change the following to and conjugate them accordingly.
- - - - 4.0 Conclusion You should note that can become through the aid of .
For example, to open is e.g i.e Abdul-Rahman opened the door.
But with , can become i.e the door opened.
Furthermore, with the aid of a noun i.e.
like Egypt can become verb e.g.
or i.e Abu Zayd became an Egyptian and Stephen became a Nigerian 5.0 Summary So far, you would have noticed that the skill of how to change transitive verb to intransitive and vice-verser is very advantages.
It can enhance for the learner acquisition of vocabulary.
Once you master how to use , you are on top of vocabulary acquisition.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) What is the significance of the use of in changing intransitive verbs to transitive?
Illustrate with four intransitive verbs in sentences.
7.0 References / Further Reading 1.
Al-Maydānī, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu `th-Thaqāfatu `l- Islāmiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu `ş- Şafā.
3.
Al – Maħāsinī S. A.
(1966), Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
4.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
5.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
6.
Tarablīsī/Abu Ħarb (1967) Damascus, Al-Matba‘ah a`t – Ta‘āwuniyyah 7.
Abdullah al-Wuhaybī et al (1970) , Jeddah, Ministry of Education.
42 Module 3: Unit 1: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 3.2 3.3 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In the last two modules, it has been explained to you that and constitute the scope of .
To a large extent, you have been taken through what does in .
In this module, the searchlight is beamed on what does in starting with the definition of and its various types.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define .
• state various types of .
• conjugate .
3.0 Main Context 3.1 means noun and it is defined in Arabic almost the same way noun is defined in English Grammar i.e.
the name of any person, place or things.
Lets us see Ism in the following text: Meaning: Fatima is a girl from a practicing Muslim family.
She was brought up on Islamic ethics and traditions.
She always puts on dresses distinguished with courtesy.
When she got admission to the University, Fatima used to shuttle between lecture hall, Library and the hostel.
Actually, she spends most of her times in the library 43 where she read essential books in Medicine that she studies.
No wonder why her father loves her so much.
On every annual vacation, her father takes her to Britain as a reward for her excellent conduct.
In Britain, nothing less than medical books, journals and other materials could cash Fatima’s fancy.
Certainly, Fatima is the apple of her father’s eyes.
Khalid, her brother, attempts to imitate Fatima in her good conduct.
3.1.1 Thing - Places - Person - Habit - University - Course - Lecture hall – Medicine Hostel - Dress - Library - Instrument – Britain - Courtesy – Apple of eye – In the above table, nouns used in the text are classified into persons, places and things.
But you will notice that nouns that are in plural forms in the text are reduced to singular forms in the table e.g.
: - - - You should also take note of the fact that a noun ( ), in the text, is either a doer ( ) or object ( ).
For example: Fatima puts on dresses - The father love Fatima - Fatima buys a magazine - Fatima’s father travels to Britain - Khalid imitates Fatimah - Fatima is going to the Hostel - Fatima loves the Library - She reads essential books - Self Assessment Exercise Extract nouns from Suratu `d-Đuħā and classify them into names of persons, place or things.
44 3.2 Basically, can be or .
means solid or hard noun in terms of its structure.
For example, is so called because it is not derived from another source, and all its letters are basic and original.
The minimum original letters of cannot be less than three e.g.
.
It can be of four letters, e.g.
.
is also similar to what is known as which means it is void of any additional letters.
On the other hand, is the ( ) which is derived from a source e.g.
which is from or which is derived from .
To the extent that is not independent of additional letter, it is qualified for .
This is to say that while is similar to , there is such a similarity between and .
3.2.1 Derived and non-Derived Nouns in a table and sentences There was a torrential rainfall yesterday morning – The scholar lives in a beautiful house – Zayd is a philanthropist – Sulaiman inherited Dawud – Uthman financed the building of a mosque in his village – The teacher travelled to London – Ja’far spent a few weeks in the hospital – The philanthropist attains the pleasure of God – God always supports the wronged – Self Assessment Exercise Derive 2 from – – – and use them in sentences.
45  3.3 impacts on in a variety of ways; these include classification of into and as illustrated above.
Secondly, impacts on through .
This is by way of conjugating from (singular) to (dual) and (plural).
For example: Sulayman is an brilliant boy – Two students from Abuja attended the party – There is only one school in our village – On the University campus, there are two schools – The Lagos schools are built on modern pattern – They have eyes with which they cannot see - The secretaries are happy with their new position - 46 Analysis In the above sentences, you will see how it is easy to formulate from .
The mechanism is to add to e.g.
: with = (2 boys).
The same mechanism is applicable to all single words that are known as i.e.
the ones that can be conjugated from to to .
e.g.
: + = + = + = + = + = Regarding plural ( ), the situation changes i.e.
the mechanism differs slightly because there are different types of Jam‘.
These include: Sound masculine plural – Sound feminine plural – Broken plural – The mechanism for the is similar to that of which is by simply adding to e.g.
: + = + = + = + = + = + = Regarding the sound feminine plural, the formula is different.
The first step is to remove at the end of the word in question e.g.
.
Step two is to add + to the i.e.
= = = = = From the above, you can note that you have no difficulty in formulating and because in these three cases, the constituent letters are not disrupted.
Incidentally, the (broken plural) poses a unique case.
There is no formula or mechanism to follow or a process to adopt.
Everything is based on oral tradition called .
In this case, the original constituent letters are disrupted and sometimes with additional letters interwoven with the original ones.
47 Examples: Self Assessment Exercise State and of the following words: – – – – 4.0 Conclusion Anytime you read an Arabic text such as a verse from the Qur’ān, Hadīth, a poem, or literature, you should pay attention to broken plural.
That is the surest way to get acquainted with broken plural given the fact that there is no clear formula to use in constructing it (broken plural).
5.0 Summary Two exercises have been carried out for you in this unit; namely classification of words into Jaamid/Mujarrad and Mushtaqq/Mazid feehi.
The second exercise is Tasreef i.e.
conjugating a word into Muthanna and Jam‘from Mufrad.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment What is the difference between al-Ismul Jaamid and Mushtaqq?
Illustrate with six words and use them in sentences.
7.0 References/Further Readings 1.
Al-Maydānī, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu `th-Thaqāfatu `l- Islāmiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu `ş- Şafā.
3.
Al – Maħāsinī S. A.
(1966), Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
4.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
5.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
6.
Tarablīsī/Abu Ħarb (1967) Damascus, Al-Matba‘ah a`t – Ta‘āwuniyyah 48 7.
Abdullah al-Wuhaybī et al (1970) , Jeddah, Ministry of Education.
8.
Ali al-Jārim/Mustapha Amin, (n.d.) , Al-Qāhirah.
49 Module 3: Unit 2: (Derived Nouns) 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 3.2 continued 3.3 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction As already explained in unit one of Module 3 above, which means derivatives or the derived words play a crucial role in the enrichment of Arabic language.
This is an aspect of which is activity packed.
It empowers the learner to source appropriate words to express his/her thoughts.
This is manifest in – – – – – – 2.0 Objectives.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • derive – – – • derive – – • Make a verb out of 3.0 Main Content 3.1 In English language, you will observe that a person who teaches is a teacher and a person who sweeps is a sweeper.
In Arabic, both the teacher and sweeper are called i.e.
a derivative emanating from teaching and sweeping.
Further more, the object that is being taught or being swept is known in Arabic as which is derived from the same root.
This could be seen as a plus for Arabic because while English has the word teacher for the person teaching which is there is no other derivative in English to be taken out of teaching that can be used for the recipient of teaching.
You will note that the word student or learner is the object of teaching.
For example the teacher and the learner are both derived from in the case of Arabic.
Let us consider the following table: 50  You note in the table that the person drinking is and the liquid being drunk is .
The person writing is and what is being written is .
The person opening is and what is being opened is .
The person giving fortune is and the recipient is etc.
what makes the concept of derivation interesting in Arabic is its elasticity that is, it is very broad and dynamic.
For example, from the same rout where you have derived and , you can also derive the place of action which is called the time of action which is called the instrument of action which is called .
If this is applied to we shall have the following: Key the place the opened opener opening instrument where opening of opening takes place Library desk written document writer writing play thing field/ driveller player play playground 51  spoon something to someone lick e.g.
ice licking lick cream The interesting aspect of this derivation exercise is when you derive words such as key, library, playground and desk from the rout called in Arabic e.g.
: Examples: I am going to the playing ground to watch football match.
The Bedouin is not comfortable using spoon to eat rice.
The library is filled to the brim by the student at the approach of exam.
My uncle left the city to the winter resort.
The Dean went to the resort for relaxation.
Take note of words such as (playing ground), (spoon), (library), (winter resort) and (a resort) in the sentences above.
They are derived from , , , .
Self Assessment Exercise Derive from the following routs , , and and use them in sentences: 3.2 With and , you are given an opportunity to manipulate words to express smallness and attribute/ascribe a word to something.
In other words, is used when you want to show how small a thing or person is in the host of his or its pairs.
Similarly, you use when you want to attribute something or a person to something else.
There is a pattern i.e.
a type of you use in both cases.
In a three lettered word like , the appropriate is which gives you and in the case of a four lettered word, the pattern i.e.
is in which becomes .
In case of , you simply add a duplicated ya‘ at the end of the word which you want to attribute.
For example, if you intend attributing a person 52 to a town like (Egypt), you simply add a duplicated ya‘ and the word becomes i.e.
an Egyptian.
Or you intend attributing an action or a dress to a , you add duplicated ya‘ and it becomes i.e.
the action or dress which is that of a boy ( ).
Let us consider the following sentences: Khalid is an Egyptian student – Fawzi reads the Qur’an in an Egyptian voice – Yusuf has Nigerian behaviour – Balqis wears a male dress – You will feel in Saudi Arabia Islamic ethics and traditions.
Your entry into the country with a visa is illegal.
– Sibaway is a grammarian – I prefer a smallish loaf of bread for breakfast – Ismail bough yesterday a smallish Ṣarf book – We have sent it an Arabic Qur’an Q 12:2 – Had We sent this as a Qur’an in a language other than Arabic, they would have said: why are not its verse explained in detail?
Q 41:44 3.2.1 Analysis In the sentences above, you will note in the first sentence Khalid being attributed to Egypt, Fawzi’s voice in the second sentence being attributed to Egypt again, Yusuf’s behaviour in the third sentence being attributed to Nigeria, Balqis’ dress in four being attributed to a boy’s, Saudi’s ethics and traditions in five being attributed to Islam, entry to the country without a visa in six being attributed to illegality, Sibaway in seven being attributed to Grammar.
In sentence eight, a smallish loaf of bread is preferred.
Ismail in sentence nine bought a smallish book.
in sentence ten, the Qur’ān is attributed to Arab.
In the final sentence, the Qur’ān is attributed to non-Arabibc language.
Self Assessment Exercise Make and of the following words and use them in sentence: - - - - 53  3.3 In Arabic, can assist you to construct verbs out of noun.
This is common especially with names of cities or countries such as (Egypt), America and Nigeria.
For example, if you intend saying that someone has become an Egyptian or a Nigerian or any town or country for that matter, you can coin a verb out of the intended town or country.
In the case of for example, you could say: Abdul Wakil became an Egyptian – Incase of USA, you first of all transliterate USA thus .
Then you can say .
Nigeria can be transliterated thus and you have .
Khalid became an Egyptian – Sharif became an American – Muslim became a Nigerian – You should note that the ability to coin verbs out of names of towns, cities or countries depends largely on a very wide reading since the mechanism of the exercise is purely oral tradition known as .
Self Assessment Exercise Attempt making verb our of the following names of towns and places and use them in sentences: – – – 4.0 Conclusion Forming verbs out of towns and places should not give you sleepless nights since you do not have a definite formula to work with.
This aspect of is to show how flexible Arabic language is and indeed how dynamic and interesting is.
5.0 Summary If you take a critical look at , it becomes clear to you that is not presenting a unique formula because in English, there is the same formula as you can see in adding n to Nigeria to become Nigerian (e.g.
the Nigerian character)or to America to become American (e.g.
the American embassy).
So, duplicated ya‘ is doing in Arabic what n or ish does in English.
However, there are cases when n cannot apply e.g.
Britain or England, it is ish that is added while the last three letters are removed i.e.
and in England and you have English and ain in Britain and you have British.
You will have similar cases in Arabic where you will need more than duplicated ya‘.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 54 Explain the importance of and in and illustrate with four sentences.
8.0 References/Further Reading.
1.
Al-Maydānī, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu `th-Thaqāfatu `l- Islāmiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu `ş- Şafā.
3.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
4.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
5.
Abdullah al-Wuhaybī et al (1970) , Jeddah, Ministry of Education.
55 Module 3: Unit 3: 3.0 Introduction 4.0 Objectives 5.0 Main Content 3.1 3.2 3.3 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In modules 1 and 3 above, we treated verbs known as .
These are verbs that can transform i.e.
change from one form or shape to another with a view to creating fresh meanings, ideas or impressions.
This transformation is known as conjugation as you have seen so far.
In contrast, however, there are other verbs that constitute the subject of this unit.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should able to: • define • State • Give illustrations 3.0 Main Content 3.1 By definition, means verbs that are not amenable to conjugation.
They are not inclined to .
literally means solid or impenetrable.
These are the verbs that you cannot change from to and .
You cannot derive out of them .
Though, it is a verb, it remains in one form.
But then, it should be observed quickly the sign of it’s being a verb is the acceptance of such as in or such as in .
is of two types.
The first group is permanently structured on past tense ( ) while the second group is permanently structured on command ( ).
Members of the first group include: .
56  It should be stated that these verbs ( ) are meant for creating special impressions.
They are like what we can call occasional verbs.
Each of them has a special meaning to render.
for example is one of .
It is permanently structured on and cannot be conjugated as already explained in the general introduction above.
Interestingly though, its sisters like can be conjugated.
is to negate occurrence of an action, e.g.
: I have no fruits to break fast with – The male is not like the female (Q 3:36) – Layla is not in hijab – I don’t know either rich or poor he is – The Christians have naught to stand upon (Q 2:113) – The Jews have naught to stand upon (Q 2:117) – Not all of them are alike (Q 3:113) – In the above sentences, you will note that take a characteristic of a normal verb with in the 3rd, 5th and 6th sentences, in the 4th sentence and in the 7th sentence.
You may recall that cannot be conjugated ( ) from , and being .
3.1.1 • connotes hope/expectation of occurrence of an action or an event.
Examples: It may be that Allah will bring a solution – It may be that your Lord will raise you to a station of glory You may dislike a thing which is good for you – You may like a thing which is an evil for you – If you were to be placed in a position of authority – • Just like in , you will observe that also takes one of the characteristics of a normal verb for taking .
Again, you cannot conjugate into , and being .
• connotes appreciation and praise when someone or something has performed wonderfully well.
Examples: The best to protect, the best to help (Allah) (Q 22:78) – How excellent is the servant ever turning to (Allah) (Q 38:44) - 57 How excellent is the hero Khalid b. Walid – How excellent is the philanthropist Uthman b. Affan – How excellent is the hardworking student Abdul Karim – How excellent is the (female) devotee Rabi‘ah al-Adawiyyah is the direct opposite of .
It is to express disgust and blame.
When something or an action is distasteful and disgusting or a person does something blameworthy we use .
For example, you can say: How disgusting what invited inviting me to – What a bad/evil behaviour telling lies – What a morally bankrupt person a slanderer – What a bad evil name after faith – Terrible is the drink and an evil dwelling place – In the Qur’an we have the following examples: Hell, in which they will burn, and what an evil place to settle in (Q 14:29) Would that between me and you were the distance of the two eats – what a worst companion (Q 43:28) Self Assessment Exercise Use the following each in 2 sentences: 3.2 continued 3.2.1 The three listed above are distinct from those that are treated in 3.1.
The distinction is in timing.
While the ones treated in 3.1 are exclusively for the past tense, the latter ones are of type i.e.
futuristic.
for example means except but as it connotes forbid.
The impression being created with is no!
It cannot happen!
Or prevent it from happening!
came up twice in Surat Yusuf: 58 How perfect is Allah (or Allah forbid)!
No man is this!
This is none other than a noble angel!
(Q 12:31).
Allah forbids!
No evil know we against him!
(Q 12:51) - In an ordinary context: A scholar cannot be in want – An Imam cannot commit evil as must not commit evil – The sky cannot drop gold – A camel cannot enter the eye of the needle (Q 7:40) – In the case of or , we also have a which connotes a future event that is of utmost demand.
In other words, something fondly desirable.
This is to express expectation of occurrence of something very pleasant like yearning for a cool weather in summer.
Examples: What a brilliant boy (love him) – What a beautiful autumn weather (you love it) – What a terrible heat (hate summer weather) – Corruption!
What a dirty social system – Self Assessment Exercise Identify from the Qur’an or Arabic poems the usage of and use them in your own sentences.
4.0 Conclusion You should note that what and have in common is the issue of timing; both of them connote a feature occurrence of an event.
However, their difference is in negative and positive meanings; while connotes never to happen connotes excitement and love for the event or thing to happen.
5.0 Summary presents to us in an interesting case.
What makes them is the fact that they cannot: (a) be conjugated: (b) attract i.e.
they cannot become .
(c) Reflect – – like 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) State definition of and their characteristics.
Illustrate with any two of them.
7.0 References/Further Readings.
59 1.
Al-Maydānī, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu `th-Thaqāfatu `l- Islāmiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu `ş- Şafā.
3.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
5.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
6.
Abdullah al-Wuhaybī et al (1970) , Jeddah, Ministry of Education.
7.
Ali al-Jārim/Mustapha Amin, (n.d.) , Al-Qāhirah.
60 Module 4: Unit 1: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.
Introduction is a cluster of letters commonly referred to as in a statement which reads thus: i.e.
you asked me of them.
They are treated in this unit for further classification.
2.
Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list ; • Identify in verb and nouns.
• Illustrate with in verbs and nouns.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Huruufuz-ziyaadah are so called because of the role they play in verbs and nouns.
They provide additional letters to what is known in a verb or noun as foundation letters or constituent letters/radicals.
For example, is known as as already explained to you in the previous modules.
If you add to , you have while means (he) sat e.g.
(Mu’min sat), means (he) sat with e.g.
(Mu’min sat with Khalid) in the same token, (a pen) is a because all the letters therein are foundation radicals.
But in we have which is an additional letter.
It should be noted that are not used for mere aesthetics.
They are employed to create fresh meanings and effects.
As you can see in above, with added, changed to i.e.
from to .
In the case of and , you will note that the effect of sitting alone changed to sitting with someone else.
With the use of therefore, provides a mechanic for creating numerous verbs and nouns in response to fresh meanings and effects.
The letters are ten.
Take note of the following illustration.
3.1.1 Illustration Put off thy shoes 61 I beat my flock with it Strike with they foot I comb my hair Muhammad is the most eloquent of the Arabs Bilqis embraced Islam through Sulaiman I am going to my Lord, He will certainly guide me The killer of Hamzah is a criminal I practice body exercise everyday Allah will surely accomplish His purpose I bought a new book My brother travelled to London on vacation Zayd is in the mosque The key is with the driver My friend is in the house of Representatives I am a Muslim Junaid is an exemplary philanthropist The farmer is in the farm The cup was broken Musa and his teacher proceeded We understand not whether ill is intended for those on earth It is We Who give life and death We circumambulate around Ka‘abah The minister resigned in annoyance You are blessed Abubakr was installed as the first Caliph Feeble is the seeker and the sought I am wronged, so, help GSM is made of crude oil 62 I am a student at the Open University By degrees shall we teach thee, so thou shall not forget I shall see my Lord’s forgiveness for you We shall send down to thee a weighty word The Head of State received his visitor at the Airport When Musa prayed for drinking water for his people I will create an avenue of relaxation for you You may take note that – – are used in , , These two letters as are very rarely used.
For example, we have in the plural of (mother) which is (mothers).
Examples of in meaning (he) worshipped Allah.
Abdul Hamid is a brilliant student I love a clean environment Allah forgiveth not that partners be set up with Him; but He forgiveth anything else to whom He pleaseth 3.1.2 Observation In every underlined word in the sentences listed above, you will note .
Take a close look at every word you will see in it one or two .
The sentences are either taken from the verses of the Qur’an or from common daily usages.
The variety is to make its learning easy for you.
Self Assessment Exercise Identify from the following expression: 3.2 63 There is another set of known as .
These are known as i.e.
the letters of the present tense.
You will take note that these four letters called are already listed among .
But, for emphasis and clarification, they are repeated.
This is to remove doubt for should you come across them in another text book or reference material.
I sit on the chair I study Nahw and in order to improve my composition style I drink milk every morning I recite the Qur’an twice a week We fast in the month of Ramadan as a worship to Allah We seek success ad guidance from Allah We celebrate national day 1st day of October every year.
We live in security as long as we rely on Allah Pilgrims return from Makkah this week Allah elevates the position of learned ones Allah purifies who He wishes On that day, the faithful shall rejoice Do you intend killing me as you killed someone yesterday Fatimah is working hard to come out top at the final examination Nigeria is experiencing brain drain 64 Green Eagles win the CAF competition The letters can be graphically illustrated as follows: Self Assessment Exercise Illustrate each of the letters with two sentences.
4.0 Conclusion You should take note of the fact that the letters are basically part and parcel of known as .
Their designation as letters is for their specific usage as .
5.0 Summary It is necessary to note shaddah when are discussed.
Shaddah means a duplicated letter.
For example, .
The shaddah sign on baa mean that letter baa is doubled or duplicated.
In that case, it serves as .
If, for example, to study become to teach, letter raa’ is duplicated and the additional raa assumes the position of .
So, any other letter can play that role whenever it is duplicated.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment What is the difference between set and set?
Illustrate with six sentences.
7.0 References/Further Reading 1.
Al-Maydānī, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu `th-Thaqāfatu `l- Islāmiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu `ş- Şafā.
3.
Al – Maħāsinī S. A.
(1966), Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
4.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
5.
Tarablīsī/Abu Ħarb (1967) Damascus, Al-Matba‘ah a`t – Ta‘āwuniyyah 65 6.
Abdullah al-Wuhaybī et al (1970) , Jeddah, Ministry of Education.
66 Module 4: Unit 2: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 3.2 3.3 Illustrations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 5.0 Introduction In this unit, my intention is to do what I call a mob up presentation.
This is to recap some of the topics we have treated to give it a fresh treatment.
It is for emphasis and reinforcement.
I am particularly inclined to treating as two terms that occupy a special position in generally.
The two terms actually deserve this special mention.
Also to be treated specially is .
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • correctly use the terms .
• state the differences between and ; and • give illustration.
3.0 3.1 is the hup of .
It cuts across all aspects of Ṣarf.
Every word ( ) has a Wazn and every Wazn has mawzuun.
It is important that you know how to use the two terms appropriately.
The Wazn means the scale i.e.
the measure used in determining the status of every .
For example, is a wazn and the mawzuun is .
You can therefore, ask a question: what is the wazn of ?
Your answer is: is the wazn of .
Furthermore, you can as well ask: what is the mawzuun of ?
Its mawzuun is .
The method of determining wazn of a kalmah or mawzuun of a wazn is very simple.
The smallest size of a word in Arabic is the three lettered.
This is called thulaathi.
In other words, no Arabic word is less than three letters.
In case you see a word of two letters or one such as (say) or (save), certainly, such a word must have 67 been subjected to some structural adjournment exercise by means of elimination of one or two letters for morphological reasons which are explainable.
3.1.1 The starting point of mastering of the technique is through labeling the constituent letters.
You will recall what we term the foundation radicals.
One must reiterate, foundation radicals or constituent letters are the original letters in a verb or noun each of which cannot be removed or else, the word is rendered meaningless.
If, for example you remove a letter from , say , the remaining will be meaningless.
Or you remove a letter from , say , the remaining will be meaningless.
So, labelling is the game.
The wazn or is labelled as follows .
That of follows the same pattern i.e.
When the same pattern is applied to mawzuun, we have the following By now, you must have been able to distinguish wazn from mawzuun.
3.1.2 It should be recalled that we have wazn thulaathi and wazn rubaa‘i.
Wazn thulaathi is of six types while wazn rubaa‘i is only one.
But both of them are of mujarrad structure.
These are: Regarding Rubaa‘I al-mujarrad, its wazn is i.e.
.
But wazn rubaa‘i will also be given the same labelling as that of thulaathi.
It reads thus: 68  To apply this to mawzuun, we have the following: As you move from thulaathi mujarrad and rubaa‘i mujarrad to thulaathi mazeed and rubaa‘i mazeed feehi, you follow the same pattern.
Whatever increment that may occur in mawzuun, its equivalent in wazn will be created.
In the same vein, if there is any reduction in mawzuun, the wazn is taken through the same reduction.
For example: - - - - - - - - You should be ready to approach it either way.
In other words, you be given wazn e.g.
and be asked to supply the appropriate which in this instance will be .
Suppose, you are given the e.g.
and be asked to supply the appropriate .
In this instance, the appropriate wazn is .
In case of reduction in the mawzuun e.g.
– – the wazn is – – since has been eliminated in the mawzuun, so also in the wazn, will disappear and that’s why we have as wazn to correspond with in mawzuun.
Self Assessment Exercise What is the relationship between wazn and mawzuun?
Given illustration in four wazn and four mawzuun.
3.2 This is another language structure designed to create an effect; a special effect.
Literally, means exaggeration.
Technically though, is a special structure meant for creating a special meaning.
In this case, is attributed to it as we say which means a noun structured to connote a higher degree of i.e.
the doer e.g.
or .
While means a writer, means a worker 69 or a doer.
But when a particular writer ( ) writes at a rate faster, better more intense than an ordinary writer or when a worker ( ) works more devotedly, more diligently with an exceeding commitment, the comes up with a structure to express that higher level of handling the craft.
Then, you have or .
So or is called .
3.2.1 As usual in Ṣarf, every structure has a wazn and mawzuun.
The wazn of is numerous.
Some of the popular ones are – – – .
Examples: Fortune giver: The providence: The knower: The all knowing: The eater: The great Repentant oft-forgiving Forgiver oft-forgiving Forgiver Oft-forgiving player fond of play Merciful The all-Merciful Merciful Exceedingly merciful Conscious exceedingly intelligent God is Oft-forgiving In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful For Abraham is most tender hearted, forbearing Musaylimah is a pathological liar Zayd is a glutton (eating too much) Your brother is a rover You are very intelligent A playful baby You may take note from the examples given above that is a special morphological structure to appropriately describe some one who is involved or indulge with an action in an extraordinary manner.
Self Assessment Exercise Give any five and use them in sentences.
4.0 Conclusion Two factors can assist you to accumulate as many as possible as well as mastering of their usage in sentences.
The two are the wazn given to you above and reading of the Holy Qur’an.
is very common in the Qur’an.
5.0 Summary 70 Your attention has been drown in this concluding unit to the terms – and due to their effect on different aspects of Ṣarf.
For example, whenever you are to do conjugation, the terms and come handy.
In any conjugation exercise, normally features and that will remind you of .
You can see the interconnectedness between the terms treated in this unit and other aspects of Ṣarf.
It is like revising the whole Ṣarf note.
6.0 Tutor marked Assignment By means of conjugation, bring out and from the following verbs: - - - - .
71 References/Further Reading 1.
Al-Maydānī, A. M. (1978), , Agege, Matba’atu `th-Thaqāfatu `l- Islāmiyyah.
2.
Al – Hamlāwī, A.M.A, (1999) Al-Qāhirah, Maktabatu `ş- Şafā.
3.
Al – Maħāsinī S. A.
(1966), Damascus, Matba‘atu Mufīd al – Jadīdah.
4.
Ahmad Muhammad Shaddād, (1977) Baghdad, Matba ‘atu Tīmis.
5.
Abdul-Rauf, (1989), Lebanon, A`s-Sa‘dāwī Publications.
6.
Tarablīsī/Abu Ħarb (1967) Damascus, Al-Matba‘ah a`t – Ta‘āwuniyyah 7.
Abdullah al-Wuhaybī et al (1970) , Jeddah, Ministry of Education.
8.
Ali al-Jārim/Mustapha Amin, (n.d.) , Al-Qāhirah.
72
