ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ARA 064 COURSE TITLE: Arabic Essay Writing I 1 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 COURSE GUIDE Course Code ARA 064 Course Title Arabic Essay Writing I Course Developer/Writer Saheed Ahmad Rufai Department of Arts and Social Sciences Education, Faculty of Education,University of Lagos, Akoka, Yaba, Lagos State Course Editor Dr. A.K.T.
Otunuyi School of Arts and Social Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Prof. A.F.
Ahmad School of Arts and Social Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos 2 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street, Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites E-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL : www.nou.edu.ng 3 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 National Open University of Nigeria 2011 First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-016-6 All Rights Reserved Printed by: For National Open University of Nigeria ii 4 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 TABLE OF CONTENT PAG ES Introduction……………………………………………………………………………………..1 What you will learn in this course……………………………………………………….1 Course Aims……………………………………………………………………………………..2 Course Objectives……………………………………………………………………………..2-3 Working through this course……………………………………………………………….3 Course Materials………………………………………………………………………………..3-4 Study Units……………………………………………………………………………………….3-4 Set Textbooks…………………………………………………………………………………….4-5 Assignment File………………………………………………………………………………….5-6 Presentation Schedule………………………………………………………………………..6 Assessment……………………………………………………………………………………….6 Tutor Marked Assignments………………………………………………………………….6-7 Final Examination and Grading…………………………………………………………….7 Course Marking Scheme………………………………………………………………………7-8 Course Overview…………………………………………………………………………………9 How to get the most from this course…………………………………………………..10 Reading Section………………………………………………………………………………….10-12 Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………………………………………………12-13 Summary…………………………………………………………………………………………..13-14 5 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 INTRODUCTION ARA 064: Arabic Essay Writing 1 is a one semester 2 credit unit course.
It will be available to all students as a course in certificate, Diploma and Degree in Arabic and Islamic Studies.
The course is also suitable for anybody who is interested in acquiring the skills in Arabic Essay Writing.
There are no compulsory pre-requisites for this course.
The Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also emphasizes the need for tutor marked assignments.
Detailed information on tutor marked assignments is found in the separate file, which will be sent to you later.
There are periodic tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
What you will learn in this Course The overall aim of this ARA 064: Arabic Essay Writing 1 is to introduce you to the art of essay writing in Arabic.
You will therefore need to carefully follow this course across its various units and their contents.
The course will guide you to master necessary techniques and required skills for Arabic essay writing.
The specific instructions that will be given you in the form of self assessment exercises in every unit are intended to ensure that you do something on your own.
Therefore, you are enjoined to attempt answers to those questions from time to time in order for you not to forget what you have learnt in this course.
Course Aims 6 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: This course aims at helping the students of Arabic and Islamic Studies to understand the fundamentals of writing essay in Arabic, the various types of Arabic essay writing and the characteristics and peculiarities of each.
Course objectives To achieve the aims set above there are set overall objectives.
In addition each module and unit also has specific objectives.
The module and unit objectives are always included at the beginning of every unit; you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the module and unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the module and unit objectives after completing each section.
In this way, you can be sure that you have done what was required of you.
Stated below are the wider objectives of this course as a whole.
And by meeting these objectives, you would have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: - describe Arabic Language; - define Arabic essay writing; - identify the Components of an Arabic essay writing; -state the main objectives of studying Arabic essay writing -identify the some functional approaches to good essay writing in Arabic - enumerate the Types of Arabic essay ; - identify and explain various types of Descriptive Essay; - list and explain the Commonalities and differences in Descriptive Essays; - describe Imaginative Essay; 7 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 - attempt a Narrative Essay; and - define and explain Letter Writing in Arabic.
Working through this course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read recommended books and read other materials.
Each unit contains self assessment exercises, and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course, there is a final examination.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course you have to do.
Course materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule You must obtain the Course materials from the manager of your Study Centre.
Study Units There are fourteen study units in the course broken into 3 modules of 5, 5, and 4 units respectively.
They are as follows: MODULE 1 Unit 1 Brief description of Arabic Language 8 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Unit 2 Definition of Arabic Essay Unit 3 Basic Components of Arabic Essay Unit 4 Aims and functional approaches to the study of Arabic Essay Unit 5 Types of Arabic Essay MODULE 2 Unit 1 Descriptive Essay Unit 2 Type A (Simple Description) Unit 3 Type B (Creative Description) Unit 4 Type C (Argumentative Description) Unit 5 Commonalities in Descriptive Essays MODULE 3 Unit 1 Imaginative Essay Unit 2 Narrative Essay Unit 3 Letter Writing Unit 4 A Concluding Unit Each unit contains a number of self tests which are the questions on the materials you have just covered or require to cover.
This is meant to help you to evaluate your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the materials.
Alongside with you tutor marked assignments, these exercise will assist you in a achieving stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Set Textbooks/Other Reading Materials 9 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Abdul ‘Alim, Ibrahim (1970): Fi Turuq t-Tadris al-mawjihul – faniyy li madarisil – lughati l ‘Arabiyyah.
Darul –Ma’arif.
Al-Faakhuuri, Hannaa (1964), Al-Jadiid fi l-Inshaa’ l ’Arabii.
Beirut:Maktab al- Madrasat wa Dar al-Kutub al-Lubnaanii li Tiba’a wan Nashr, at- Tab’atuth-Thaalithah.
Al-Faakhuuri, Hannaa (1968), Al-Jadiid fi l-Inshaa’ l ’Arabii.
Beirut:Maktab al- Madrasat wa Dar al-Kutub al-Lubnaanii li Tiba’a wan Nashr, at-Tab’atul- Khaamisah.
Al-Hindawiyy, K (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-sh-Sharq.
Amuni, Olayinka K. (2009), Nigeria’s New Naira Notes and the Plot Against Arabic Language and Script, in Akintola, Is-haq et al (eds.
)CORRELATES OF ISLAM.
Zaria; The Ahmadu Bello University Press Limited.
Barihi, Adetunji et al (2009), Tara’iful- ‘Insha’il- ‘Arabi lil – Ma’ahid- il- ‘Aaliyyah: The gem of Arabic Composition for Higher Institutions.
Abeokuta: Total Qibla.
Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Bidmos, M.A.
(1996), Mustaqbal-ul-Lugatil-Arabiyyah fi Naijiria, Lagos, Islamic Publications Bureau.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
Nicholson, R.A. (1989), A Literary History of the Arabs, Cambridge, University Press.
Nicholson, R.A. (1989), A Literary History of the Arabs, Cambridge, University Press.
Otunuyi, A.K.T.
& Balogun, K.Y.
(2004), Nahwa fa’aaliyyat al-Ta’biir al-Shafahi bil-Lughatil ‘Arabiyyah, in Otunuyi, A.K.T.
et al (eds.)
Studies on Arabic Acculturation in Nigeria.
Ilorin: Taofiqullahi Publishing House.
Salahudeen, T.A.
(2000), “A Guide Towards Effective Essay Writing in Arabic”, in Seriki, I.A.
& Folorunsho, M.A.
(Eds.)
Book of Readings in Arabic and Islamic Education, Volume 1, Ijebu-Ode, Alamsek Press Ltd. Zaria, G.T.
(2009).
Kayfa Taktubul-Inshai, Zaria Darul-Ummah.
10 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and later in this course guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your Course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of Tutor Marked assignments as well as attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments as when due.
You should guard against lagging behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the Tutor Marked Assignments; second, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignments 11 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 There are eighteen (18) tutor marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The best four (i.e the highest four of the eighteen marks) will be counted.
The total marks for the best four (4) assignments will be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with TMA (tutor marked assignment) form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Assignment file.
If, however, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is done to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of ARA 064 will be of three hour duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self testing, practice exercises and tutor marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your tutor marked assignments and the comments of your tutor on them before the final examination.
Course Marking scheme 12 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Marking scheme 13 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follow them.
Module 1 Title of work Week’s Assessment activity (end of unit) Unit Course Guide 1 1 Arabic Language 1 Assignment 1 2 Definition of Arabic 2 Assignment 2 Essay 3 Components of 3 Assignment 3 Arabic Essay 4 Aims and functional 4 Assignment 4 approaches to Arabic essay 5 Types of Arabic 5 Assignment 5 Essay Module 2 Unit 1 Descriptive Essay 6 Assignment 6 2 Type A (Simple 7 Assignment 7 Description) 3 Type B (Creative 8 Assignment 8 Description) 4 Type C 9 Assignment 9 (Argumentative Description) 14 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 5 Commonalities in 10 Assignment 10 Descriptive Essays Module 3 Unit 1 Imaginative Essay 11 Assignment 11 2 Narrative Essay 12 Assignment12 3 Letter Writing 13 Assignment 13 4 A Concluding Unit 14 Assignment 14 5 Revision 15 Assignment 15 16 Examination 16 Assignment 16 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning the study units replaces the lecturer in a conventional university.
This is one of the greatest advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some readings to do, the study units tells you when to read your set books or other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provides exercise for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of 15 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be from your set of books.
Reading section Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course overview’ for moral details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your method you chose to use.
You should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the “Overview” at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
16 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you are not sure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor marked assignment form and also on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this course guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
17 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to your as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e-mail, personally discussion if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
• You have difficulty with the self tests or exercises, • You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating actively in discussions.
Summary ARA 064 intends to introduce you to the basic issues in Arabic Essay Writing.
Upon completing this course, you will be able to answer questions such as: • What is an Arabic composition?
18 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 • Identify the components of Arabic composition.
• Outline the main objectives of studying Arabic composition.
• What are the various functional approaches to Arabic composition?
• What are the types of Arabic composition?
• What are the peculiarities of each of the types of Arabic composition?
• What are the commonalities and differences in various types of Arabic composition?
• What are the elements of Arabic Letter Writing?
There are other related questions that you are expected to be able to answer.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE/TITLE Arabic Essay Writing I COURSE DEVELOPER / WRITER Saheed Ahmad Rufai Department of Arts and Social Sciences Education, Faculty of Education,University of Lagos, 19 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Akoka, Yaba, Lagos State COURSE EDITOR/ PROGRAMME LEADER Dr. A.K.T.
Otunuyi School of Arts and Social Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos I National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street, Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites 20 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 E-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL : www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2011 First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-016-6 All Rights Reserved Printed by : For National Open University of Nigeria ii TABLE OF CONTENTS MODULE 1………………………………………………………………………1 - 27 Unit 1 Brief description of Arabic Language ……………………………1 - 5 Unit 2 Definition of Arabic Essay Writing ……………………………….6 - 7 Unit 3 Basic Components of an Arabic Essay …………………….............8 - 11 Unit 4 Aims and functional approach to the study of Arabic Essay……....12 - 23 Unit 5 Types of Arabic Essay………..………………………………………24 - 27 MODULE 2…………………………………………………………………….28 - 51 Unit 1 Descriptive Essay………………………………………………28 - 33 Unit 2 Type A (Simple Description)………………………………….34 - 38 21 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Unit 3 Type B (Creative Description)………………………………..39 - 42 Unit 4 Type C (Argumentative Description)…………………………43 - 46 Unit 5 Commonalities in Descriptive Essays……………………….47 - 51 MODULE 3…………………………………………………………………52 - 70 Unit 1 Imaginative Essay…………………………………………….52 - 55 Unit 2 Narrative Essay……………………………………………….56 - 60 Unit 3 Letter Writing…………………………………………………61 - 65 Unit 4 A Concluding Unit……………………………………………66 - 70 iii 22 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 MODULE 1 Unit 1 Brief description of Arabic Language Unit 2 Definition of Arabic Essay Writing Unit 3 Basic Components of Arabic Essay Unit 4 Aims and functional approaches to the teaching of Arabic Essay Unit 5 Types of Arabic Essay Unit 1 Brief description of Arabic Language Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Arabic Language 3.2 Characteristics of Arabic Language 3.3 The Contemporary Relevance of Arabic Language 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about Arabic language which is the vehicle to Arabic Essay Writing that we are set to study.
Arabic Language is the system of communication in speech and writing that is used by the Arabs.
Arabic Language bears a reflection of the nature and environment of the Arabs who are its speakers.
A good knowledge of the nature of Arabic language will no doubt facilitate your understanding of the various dimensions of Arabic Essay Writing.
Such knowledge is, therefore, provided for you in the main content of this unit.
23 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Discuss the nature of Arabic language • Describe the environment of the original speakers of Arabic.
• Explain the characteristics of Arabic writing 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Arabic Language Arabic is a Semitic language that is spoken by the Arabs.
As speakers of the language, the Arabs themselves are regarded as Semite or Semitic, having descended from Sham, the son of prophet Nuh.
Arabic language is of two general varieties namely the Southern Arabic and Northern Arabic.
The latter, which was the language of the Southern Arabia, Sabaean, Minoan and Himyari empires, is now extant, while the former has earned itself general acceptance and recognition as the vehicle for literary works especially since the advent of Islam.
Globally, Arabic is adjudged to have more speakers than any other language in the Semitic language family.
It is spoken by more than 280 million people as a first language, most of whom live in the Middle East and North Africa.
It is obvious that Arabic occupies a very prominent place in Islam.
It is the vehicle of thought for Islamic Sciences and Muslim Thinkers and Writers all over the globe and across the ages.
Arabic language in modern time is an international language.
It is one of the official languages of the United Nations, the African Union and many international bodies.
The holy Qur’an is an Arabic revelation, the holy prophet Muhammad (S.A.W) spoke Arabic language and the same language is widely believed by Muslims to be the medium of communication on the day of judgment.
24 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What are the two generic varieties of Arabic Language 2.
Give two reasons for the importance attached to Arabic in Islam 3.2.1 Characteristics of Arabic Language One of the major characteristics of Arabic is its divine nature which derives from its symbiotic relationship with Islam.
In this regard Arabic is regarded as a siamese twin to Islam, and is therefore inseparable therefrom.
Another characteristic of Arabic lies in its status as a symbol of Arab nationalism.
In this connection, Arabic is regarded as the pivot on which the spirit of togetherness that binds the Arabs together as a nation , is grounded.
Yet another characteristic of Arabic lies in its role as a record of experiences and register of achievements of the Arabs across the ages.
Coupled with these characteristics is the availability of certain sounds in Arabic which have no equivalents in any other language.
Closely related to that is that Arabic consonants are dependent on vowels without which they (i.e the consonants) cannot function.
All these are some of the characteristics of Arabic Language that should be noted by a learner of the language.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Identify three characteristics of Arabic language.
2.
Identify two factors that make Arabic language different from English language.
3.2.2 The Relevance of Arabic in the Modern World It will interest you to note that Arabic is a language with multidimensional relevance.
For instance, it is a tool for the dissemination of political information of national interest among the Arabic literate citizens of any country.
Arabic normally fulfils such a role in a national setting in a situation where a section of the country is constituted by individuals who are capable of reading, writing and speaking Arabic.
There also is the diplomatic dimension to the relevance of 25 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Arabic in the Modern world.
This could be clearly illustrated with the volume of diplomatic exchange between a country like Nigeria and various Arab or Arabic- speaking countries.
The economic relevance of the language lies in its role as a medium of communication among individuals and corporate bodies engaging in economic transactions.
In such a situation there will be need for translation of documents to or from Arabic for the benefit of the Arabic-speaking partners involved in such transactions.
The academic relevance of Arabic is even more pronounced than the others.
There are various factors responsible for this.
One, a good mastery of Arabic enables a researcher to revive Arabic manuscripts from extinction.
Two, a good mastery of the language enables a researcher to conduct further investigation on Arabic materials of great importance.
Three, a good understanding of Arabic enables a scholar to do a comparative study of Arabic sources and others.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have been taken on an excursion into the nature, characteristics and importance of Arabic language, in order for you to have a good background in the language before learning how to make good use of it in essay writing.
5.0 SUMMARY You will notice that in this unit, we have examined the nature, characteristics, as well as social, political, religious and academic relevance of Arabic language.
In the following units, we shall examine essay writing in that language and how writing skills are developed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Describe briefly the relevance of Arabic to the Modern World?
2.
Identify two reasons for the academic relevance of Arabic to Nigeria 26 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdul ‘Alim, Ibrahim (1970): Fi Turuq t-Tadris al-mawjihul – faniyy li madarisil – lughati l ‘Arabiyyah.
Darul –Ma’arif.
Al-Faakhuuri, Hannaa (1964), Al-Jadiid fi l-Inshaa’ l ’Arabii.
Beirut:Maktab al- Madrasat wa Dar al-Kutub al-Lubnaanii li Tiba’a wan Nashr, at- Tab’atuth-Thaalithah.
Al-Faakhuuri, Hannaa (1968), Al-Jadiid fi l-Inshaa’ l ’Arabii.
Beirut:Maktab al- Madrasat wa Dar al-Kutub al-Lubnaanii li Tiba’a wan Nashr, at-Tab’atul- Khaamisah.
Al-Hindawiyy, K (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-sh-Sharq.
Amuni, Olayinka K. (2009), Nigeria’s New Naira Notes and the Plot Against Arabic Language and Script, in Akintola, Is-haq et al (eds.
)CORRELATES OF ISLAM.
Zaria; The Ahmadu Bello University Press Limited.
Bidmos, M.A.
(1996), Mustaqbal-ul-Lugatil-Arabiyyah fi Naijiria, Lagos, Islamic Publications Bureau.
Nicholson, R.A. (1989), A Literary History of the Arabs, Cambridge, University Press.
Otunuyi, A.K.T.
& Balogun, K.Y.
(2004), Nahwa fa’aaliyyat al-Ta’biir al-Shafahi bil-Lughatil ‘Arabii, in Otunuyi, A.K.T.
et al (eds.)
Studies on Arabic Acculturation in Nigeria.
Ilorin: Taofiqullahi Publishing House.
Salahudeen, T.A.
(2000), “A Guide Towards Effective Essay Writing in Arabic”, in Seriki, I.A.
& Folorunsho, M.A.
(Eds.)
Book of Readings in Arabic and Islamic Education, Volume 1, Ijebu-Ode, Alamsek Press Ltd. Zaria, G.T.
(2009).
Kayfa Taktubul-Inshai, Zaria Darul-Ummah.
Unit 2 Definition of Arabic Essay Writing Content 27 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Arabic Essay 3.2 How to develop Arabic Essay Writing Skills 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The thrust of this unit is to acquaint you with the meaning of Arabic essay and how to develop its writing skills.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define and explain the meaning of Arabic essay • Discuss how to develop Arabic essay writing skills 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Arabic Essay Essay writing (technically known in Arabic as al-Insha’) is a vital aspect of Arabic Language studies.
It is the yard-stick for measuring the amount of language vocabularies, grammatical rules and communication techniques one has acquired.
It is also a vehicle for training in speaking and writing skills which are very important for the mastery of the language.
Definition of al-Insha’ To start with, one of the criteria for man’s superiority over all other living things lies in his ability to communicate his thoughts effectively to his future generation.
28 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Moreover our arts, sciences and inventions rely much on communication skills, thus, an essay, otherwise known as composition is the expression of private thoughts and feelings often written in prose form.
The word ‘private’ here is very significant.
It implies that the writer of a composition is not duty-bound to express conventional thoughts which will be similar to those of others writing on the same topic as it is the case of other subjects like Government and Physics where you have a definite statement about any term.
Rather, the writer of a composition expresses his own personal thought based on his experience and observation.
Composition is thus sharing of experiences such as adventures, ideas, hopes and fears.
Arabic Essay, therefore, is concerned with Arabic written expressions or compositions.
This means the use of Arabic written words to represent or indicate the innermost feelings which, though hidden, are seen through the lenses of such words.
Arabic Essay Writing is therefore the use of Arabic words to paint a picture of a man, animal, place, object, feeling, experience or anything whatsoever, in a manner that makes it meaningful to the reader.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is Arabic essay?
2.
Explain briefly how to develop the essay writing skill in Arabic Unit 3: Basic Components of an Arabic Essay 1.0 Introduction 29 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Basic components of an Arabic Essay 3.2 What makes a good introduction 3.3 What distinguishes the body from the conclusion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Having studied the meaning of Arabic Essay in the last unit, you will now learn about the components of a good Arabic essay.
In this unit, therefore, you will be guided to appreciate the importance of a good introduction, meaningful body, and concise conclusion.
It is in the main content of this unit that you will learn about the specific functions of each of the three components of an Arabic essay.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Identify the basic components of an Arabic essay - Explain the function of the introduction in an Arabic essay - Distinguish between the body and the conclusion of an Arabic essay 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Components of an Arabic Essay The introduction (al-Muqaddimah) is the most important component of an Arabic essay.
It is the introduction that gives the first impression about the topic and makes the first statement about the idea.
It is important for you to develop the skill of writing of a good introduction.
This is because it is the quality of your introduction that will determine whether the reader will read on or close and 30 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 dump your essay.
The introduction is that part of the essay that constitutes the first segment of the exchange of communication between the writer and the reader of an essay.
After your introduction, you will move to the body (Salbul-mawduu’/al- Matnu) of your essay.
That is where you will reveal the essence of your essay.
As implied by its title, the body of an Arabic essay is the central part of it.
It is usually characterized by depth and comprehensiveness.
You may even call it the essay proper.
The reason for regarding it as the essay proper is that your introduction is merely a precursor to the body which itself is where lies the heart of your essay.
To further learn that the body of an Arabic essay is the essay proper it may interest you to note that the conclusion (al-Khaatimah), like the introduction, is merely a brief re-echo of the content of the body.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Identify the components of an Arabic essay 2.
Explain the function of an introduction in an Arabic essay 3.2.1 What makes a good Introduction A good introduction is that which is clear (waadih), concise (muujaz), and straight to the point .
Your introduction must be able to give your reader a clear picture of your essay.
By the time he reads your introduction , your reader must have been properly informed, at least, to an appreciable extent, about the entire idea of your essay.
Your introduction should be able to fulfill the role of your representative, at least, in your communication with your reader.
And unless, you are able to achieve this through your introduction, your essay may be regarded as “dead” and not “alive.” 3.2.2 What distinguishes the Body from the Conclusion You will recall that earlier in this unit, we described the body of an Arabic essay as the essay proper.
We also mentioned that it is usually characterized by depth and comprehensiveness.
It is of great importance for you to note that as much 31 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 as possible, the body of your Arabic essay is expected to address or touch upon every salient aspect of the central theme.
In other words, the body of the essay is where really lies the message.
However, the conclusion, as noted earlier, is merely a brief reecho or reiteration of the content of the body of the essay.
To distinguish between the body and the conclusion, you must note that the former is where lies the message or central idea in a detailed and comprehensive manner while the latter only seeks to say in brief the main point made in the entire essay.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have now learnt about the components of an Arabic essay which are the introduction, the body and the conclusion.
You have also learnt about the characteristics of a good introduction.
You have equally learnt about what distinguishes the body of an essay from the conclusion.
You have in fact been guided to learning that the body is the main part of an Arabic essay while the conclusion is merely a brief re-echo of the idea expressed in the body.
5.0 SUMMARY There is need for you to get it right as you progress on this course.
You have been guided to appreciate the interconnected nature of the various components of an Arabic essay.
Your progress in this course will depend on your ability to demonstrate a good mastery of the subject matter as well as the expected essay skills.
You are now to learn about various types of Arabic essay, in the next unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Identify and explain the major difference between the body and the conclusion of an Arabic essay.
2.
Attempt a 250 word Arabic essay taking cognizance of the main components of the essay.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 32 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Al-Hindawiyy, K (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-sh-Sharqi.
Barihi, Adetunji et al (2009), Tara’iful- ‘Insha’il- ‘Arabi lil – Ma’ahid- il- ‘Aaliyyah: The gem of Arabic Composition for Higher Institutions.
Abeokuta: Total Qibla.
Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
Salahudeen, T.A.
(2000), A Guide Towards Essay Writing in Arabic, in Seriki, I.A.
& Folorunsho, M.A.
(Eds.)
Book of Readings in Arabic and Islamic Education.
Ijebu-Ode: Alamsek Press Ltd. Zaria, G.T.
(2009), Kayfa Taktubul-Inshai, Zaria, Darul-Ummah.
33 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Unit 4: Objectives and functional approach to Arabic Essay Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Objectives of Arabic Essay 3.2 Functional approach to Arabic Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about the main objectives of writing an Arabic essay.
There, also, will be made available to you in the unit, the functional approach to Arabic essay.
In order to be a comfortable Arabic essay writer, you must follow carefully the instructions as well as the learning experiences provided here.
This will enable you acquire the required skills and demonstrate them practically on paper, thereby moving beyond the theory of Arabic essay writing and operating at a practical level.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • State the main objectives of writing an Arabic essay • Explain the functional approach to writing a good Arabic essay 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 34 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 3.1 Objectives of Arabic Essay It is of great value for you to note at this juncture that acquisition of Arabic composition or essay writing skills is one of the major goals of learning the Arabic language.
This is so because it is through such skills that you, as a learner, can demonstrate your ability to express your feelings in simple Arabic.
Yet it is common to see Arabic learners lacking in these skills even after a long time of studying the techniques of Arabic essay writing.
That explains why this course attaches importance to development of such skills in you by simplifying all the necessary concepts and paying attention to the application of rules and principles guiding the acquisition of such skills.
The main objectives of Arabic essay therefore, are : • To improve the skill of the learners with a view to arresting their negative response to writing composition which complements their verbal communication.
• To help those who are naturally creative to develop such ability.
• To bring those who lack writing ability very close to those who are endowed with creative ability.
• To encourage those who are prejudiced against themselves by imagining that they have no literary ability and develop such ability in them.
• To enable the learners meet the social demands which solely rest on them especially in the present world of modern communication technology.
• To train learners in note taking during lectures and developing points jotted down independently.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the main objectives of Arabic essay?
3.2 Functional approach to Arabic Essay In an ideal situation of writing a essay, the learner is to do the greatest percentage of the job by himself.
The teacher’s role is to guide and facilitate when and where necessary.
It is however important to note at this juncture that 35 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 there are two major categories of writings and these are functional and personal writings.
The former is a response to a real life situation and it is much related to occupation.
For instance, a teacher writing reports or comments in pupil’s exercise books or preparing lesson notes is writing functionally.
Similarly, pupils writing notes or essays for Geography, History etc, notices announcing schools activities or articles for school magazine are practicing functional writing.
A secretary responding to letters or completing official forms is equally experimenting the same thing.
Therefore, teaching of this category of writing is important as it prepares the learner for the task ahead of him in the school as well as the challenges of the society after he might have left the school.
As for the latter category i.e., personal writing, it is an expression of personal view.
Writing a diary, a short story or criticism of a play reflect personal writing which gives the learner the chance of using his imagination and the close relationship between reading and writing can be explored to train the learner in developing personal point of view.
Meanwhile, various types of exercise can be used to teach and practice the two categories of writing and below are some of the exercises.
1.
Situational Exercise: Under the situational composition exercise, the learner is provided with information.
Then the instruction set a specific task by indicating who the writer and the audience are and what the specific aims of the writing are.
The information compulsorily put the learner in the position of the imagined writer.
It may be in form of dialogue, a letter or a time-table.
The learner may be asked to consider a map, a diagram or some statistics.
Here, the learner has to make use of his knowledge of comprehension to understand the information and his composition skills to organize his ideas and put them down in clear, flawless language.
In a situational composition exercise, the teacher can give the following information: 36 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Meaning: Imagine that your name is Salman and that you have a girl with whom you have promised to marry one another but she lives in a town which is far from your own town where you live and you have a friend in that town.
One day, your friend sent you a letter in which he informed you of the bad behaviours and insincerity emanating from the girl.
The task before the learner now is to respond to the situation.
He now puts himself in the place of the imagined writer.
He also thinks of the imagined audience as well as the style that can put his writing into proper shape.
Here the teacher can ask the learners, in a classroom situation, to write two different responses, one accusing her directly of the misdeeds and bidding her farewell, and another dismissing the allegation and warning her that people are telling lies about her.
The class may be divided into two or more groups, each group or collection of groups writing on either of the areas.
The next step is for the individuals or groups to set their imaginations to work and warm up their linguistic machineries.
They come up with points and arrange them in such a manner that the audience will enjoy them.
At this juncture, the learners should be allowed to exercise their freedom without necessary interference from the teacher.
The learners now make the first draft of the essay which may not necessarily be completed during the first lesson.
Preparation class may be used to do the completion.
In the next lesson, the drafts are brought to the class for reading when spelling mistakes, slips of pen, punctuation, relevance of the contents and their 37 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 sequences are assessed and checked.
This gives room for suggestions for improvement.
The next step is to direct each learner or group to produce the final draft which is to be proof-read by individual or group leader as the case may be, to check slips of pen.
It is now that the teacher has to come in; he collects that final drafts and read them.
If he comes across any mistakes usually grammatical ones, he need not put red ink on them, rather he notes them and they will form part of a subsequent whole grammar lesson organized for the purpose.
Other forms this can take include re-writing a passage from a different point of view, changing the mode of writing a story from may be, narrative to play form where dialogue is involved, using a model to write on a similar topic (e.g.
account of a bus journey – train journey) and giving the learner relevant picture as guide for writing an essay.
Meanwhile, an objective study of the method show that it is above board though not ideal.
In the process, the learner is taken into consideration and he is allowed to do most of the activities that bring about learning.
The method makes use of the creative and imaginative abilities of the student.
Similarly, the linguistic acumen of the learner is fast improved and he is trained in self-reliance while he is relieved of embarrassment the red ink of the teacher may cause him under “write and submit for marking” system which is usually void of guidance.
However, a beginner may have problem with the method initially because giving him free hand to write leads him into making many mistakes but with control and guidance, he can quickly get over them.
2.
Parallel Passage: Parallel passage is another form of controlled composition exercise.
Under this situation, the learner is given a passage in which some words are underlined.
He is then provided with words or phrases which can be used to replace the 38 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 underlined words.
These may involve grammatical changes in the passage and they may not.
Below is an example: The learner may be asked to replace the underlined words with the following: –––-––––– 3.
Joining Sentences: Joining sentences together is another form controlled composition exercise can take.
Here, the learner is requested to join together some sentences to form a paragraph.
The sentences to be joined may be indicated and the joining words be provided or the learner may have to decide by himself, which sentences to join and which words to use.
This exercise simply aims at encouraging the learner to make use of complex sentences.
Here is an illustration of the exercise: The learner may be requested to use the following words for the joining: -––– The paragraph will now look like this: 39 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 4.
Using questions: Questions can be used in many ways a. Learner may be requested to answer a list of questions in single sentences which they write out to form a paragraph.
b.
After answering the questions in single sentences, he may be asked to join some of these sentences together when writing out the paragraph.
c. The learner may be given a set of questions to be answered in more than single sentences.
d. Questions may be grouped into paragraphs and the learner may then be made to answer them thereby building up a whole composition with the paragraphs provided.
An example of Guided Composition work based on questions Translation “Write a description of a party you recently attended.
Try to make the reader wish that he/she had been invited too.
Write at least four paragraphs./ the following questions will help you.
40 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Meanwhile, a number of questions arranged in jumbled order may be given and the learner may be asked to group them into suitable paragraphs and order them for each paragraph.
He will then answer the questions thereby building up a complete composition.
However, the questions should be designed in such a way that allows the careful oral preparation is a pre- requisite for this exercise to ensure and guarantee learners’ proper understanding of the aim of the exercise which is producing a coherent natural piece of writing.
An example of Guided Composition work based on questions arranged in jumbled order is as follows: 41 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 The questions can be re-ordered as follows: 5.
Using outlines The learner may use notes to construct a paragraph.
However the notes can be written on the basis of one note for each paragraph or can indicate a 42 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 general idea for the learner to develop it.
Notes for a single paragraph have to be arranged in jumbled order so that the learner will have to put them into correct order first before expanding them.
However, notes for several paragraphs should be given in the correct order.
Furthermore, the learner may read a passage or have it reward to him and make notes of the main ideas which he has to make use of writing the composition adding to them his own ideas where necessary.
A learner may be requested to write about the first day of the term in the school providing him with the following outlines: 5.0 CONCLUSION You have now learnt about the main objectives of writing an Arabic essay.
You have also learnt about the functional approach to Arabic essay.
You have, in fact been provided with certain instructions as well as some learning experiences in order to be a comfortable Arabic essay writer.
All these if carefully followed will, no doubt, enable you acquire the required skills and demonstrate them practically on paper.
5.0 SUMMARY 43 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 You have been guided, in this unit, to appreciate the main objectives of writing essay in Arabic.
Your progress in this course will depend on your ability to demonstrate the functional approach in writing a good Arabic essay following the basic guidelines provided in the unit.
You are now to learn about various types of Arabic Essay, in the next unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
State the main objectives of Arabic essay.
2.
Explain some of the approaches that could be used in the study and practice of Arabic essay.
3.
Attempt a 200 word Arabic essay taking cognizance of the basic approaches you have learnt.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Al-Hindawiyy, K (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-sh-Sharqi.
Al-Faakhuuri, Hannaa (1964), Al-Jadiid fi l-Inshaa’ l ’Arabii.
Beirut:Maktab al- Madrasat wa Dar al-Kutub al-Lubnaanii li Tiba’a wan Nashr, at- Tab’atuth-Thaalithah.
Al-Faakhuuri, Hannaa (1968), Al-Jadiid fi l-Inshaa’ l ’Arabii.
Beirut:Maktab al- Madrasat wa Dar al-Kutub al-Lubnaanii li Tiba’a wan Nashr, at-Tab’atul- Khaamisah.
Barihi, Adetunji et al (2009), Tara’iful- ‘Insha’il- ‘Arabi lil – Ma’ahid- il- ‘Aaliyyah: The gem of Arabic Composition for Higher Institutions.
Abeokuta: Total Qibla.
Otunuyi, A.K.T.
& Balogun, K.Y.
(2004), Nahwa fa’aaliyyat al-Ta’biir al-Shafahi bil-Lughatil ‘Arabii, in Otunuyi, A.K.T.
et al (eds.)
Studies on Arabic Acculturation in Nigeria.
Ilorin: Taofiqullahi Publishing House.
Salahudeen, T.A.
(2000), A Guide Towards Essay Writing in Arabic, in Seriki, I.A.
& Folorunsho, M.A.
(Eds.)
Book of Readings in Arabic and Islamic Education.
Ijebu-Ode: Alamsek Press Ltd. Zaria, G.T.
(2009), Kayfa Taktubul-Inshai, Zaria, Darul-Ummah.
44 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Unit 5: Types of Arabic essay CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Types of Arabic essay 3.2.1 What informs the classification 3.2.2 The characteristics of each type 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 45 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is devoted to types of Arabic essay.
You will now be introduced to the various types of essay that there are, in Arabic.
You will be guided to appreciate what makes each of them different or distinct from the others (Khasaa’is wamumayyisaat).
You will also be guided to master what informs the classification of Arabic essay as well as the features of each type.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the types of Arabic Composition.
2.
Explain the contradistinctions among the various types of Arabic essay.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Arabic essay You will recall that in the earlier units Arabic essay has been defined as a piece of creative writing on a person, animal, object, experience or anything whatsoever.
It is now of great value for you to learn that there are various types of Arabic essay and each of them has its peculiarities.
For instance, there is the Descriptive Essay (al-Inshaa’ul Wasfii).
This is the type of Arabic essay where the writer paints a creative picture about an experience, or even an individual .
There also is the Narrative Essay (al-Inshaa’ul Qasasii) which is more of a real story telling than a fictional or creative writing.
There also is the Imaginative Essay (al-Inshaa’ul Khayaalii) which is the one in which the writer relies much on his imaginative power in diluting facts with fiction.
There also is the Reflective Essay (al-Inshaa’ut-Taswiirii) which represents the writer’s opinion or viewpoint on the subject of his writing.
You must have noted from this explanation that though somehow related, the various types of Arabic Essay are of different orientations.
46 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Identify three different types of an Arabic essay.
2.
Explain the major difference between a descriptive and an imaginative essay.
3.2.1 What informs the Classification?
It is expected that you will be tempted to ask at this juncture: what informs the classification of Arabic essay into various types.
The answer to that question is that each subject must be approached in a manner that will facilitate a meaningful attainment of its goal which is why a descriptive essay may not adequately fulfill the purpose of an imaginative essay.
The same argument explains why a subject that is effectively addressed through a narrative approach may not be accorded its deserved justice through a reflective easy.
In other words, it is the nature of the subject of writing that determines the typology of approach.
What matters to you as a learner is to be able to make a good choice of approach to any given subject of writing.
This also means that you must have a good mastery of each of the various types to be able to employ any of them effectively.
There is therefore a need for you to master the characteristics or peculiarities of each of them for easy application.
You are hereby guided in that regard, in the following subsection.
3.2.2 The Characteristics of each type of Arabic essay - Descriptive Essay (al-Inshaa’ul Wasfii) The descriptive essay is the most prominent type of Arabic Essay.
One of its characteristics is its flexibility.
By flexibility is meant that it gives the writer an ample chance to describe its subject without any irrational restriction.
Another characteristic of the descriptive essay is that it relies on the writer’s memory or ability to recall the subject of his writer.
Yet another characteristic of it is the writer’s written picture of a true and not imaginary experience.
- Reflective Essay (al-Inshaa’ut-Taswiirii) The reflective essay is somehow related to the descriptive essay.
However, the main difference lies in the fact that the reflective essay represents the writer’s 47 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 view of the subject in question and allows for a dilution of facts with fiction.
One of its characteristics is that it employs imagery to express factual observations.
Another of its characteristics is that it attaches importance to choice of words in its figurative expressions.
Yet another of its characteristics is its avoidance of unnecessary or redundant words which adds no value to the essay.
- Imaginative Essay (al-Inshaa’ul Khayaalii) The imaginative essay is a piece of creative writing that is substantially fictional.
One of its own characteristics, as implied by its name, is its heavy dependence on the writer’s imagination.
Another characteristic of it is its nature as an original piece of writing which is why an essay cannot be regarded as imaginative if it is merely a repeat of what many writers have said in their essays.
Yet its characteristics also include its role as a reflection of the writer’s intellectuality.
In addition to that is that an imaginative essay normally appears and sounds scholarly.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Give a brief description of a reflective essay.
2.
Identify two similarities and two differences between a descriptive essay and an imaginative essay.
4.0 CONCLUSION You must have, by now, noticed that there are different types of Arabic compositions and that each type has its own peculiarities.
The types, reasons for classifications, as well as the characteristics of each of the various types of Arabic essay have been the focus of our lesson in this unit.
6.0 SUMMARY This course is intended to make you familiar with the various ways of acquiring Arabic essay writing skills and to enable you demonstrate such skills.
That explains why there is need for you to pay adequate attention to the various 48 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 techniques of Arabic essay writing being introduced to you.
Having learnt about the types of Arabic essay in this unit, you are now expected to progress to learning in details how to practically approach a descriptive essay.
That infact is the focus of the first unit of the next module.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe briefly the factors that inform the classification of Arabic essay into various types.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Al-Hindawiyy, K (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-sh-Sharq.
Barihi, Adetunji et al (2009), Tara’iful- ‘Insha’il- ‘Arabi lil – Ma’ahid- il- ‘Aaliyyah: The gem of Arabic Composition for Higher Institutions.
Abeokuta: Total Qibla.
Salahudeen, T.A.
(2000), A Guide Towards Essay Writing in Arabic, in Seriki, I.A.
& Folorunsho, M.A.
(Eds.)
Book of Readings in Arabic and Islamic Education.
Ijebu-Ode: Alamsek Press Ltd. Zaria, G.T.
(2009), Kayfa Taktubul-Inshai, Zaria Darul-Ummah.
49 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 MODULE 2 Unit 1 An Arabic Descriptive Essay Unit 2 Type A (Simple Description) Unit 3 Type B (Creative Description) Unit 4 Type C (Argumentative Description) Unit 5 Commonalities in Descriptive Essays UNIT 1: DESCRIPTIVE ESSAY CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 What is an Arabic descriptive essay 3.2.1 The features of descriptive essay in Arabic 3.2.2 Model example of descriptive essay in Arabic 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall focus attention on the descriptive type of Arabic Essay.
The reason for that is for us to ensure that you have not only mastered the theory but can also practically write a descriptive essay.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 50 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 1.
Identify the principles of a descriptive essay.
2.
Apply the principles of a descriptive essay by attempting to write such an essay.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 An Arabic Descriptive Essay A descriptive essay is the most common probably because it is a product of Man’s experience in his contact with his environment.
The writer attempts to paint a picture about such an experience through his descriptive essay.
Man relies on his senses of perception in his written description of such experiences or events.
To be a good writer of descriptive essay, you are expected to be very observant and deep-thinking.
You will hereby agree that there cannot be any good observation without a deep thought.
In a descriptive essay, a writer describes some of his memorable moments or experiences and seeks to make such experiences interesting to the reader.
To really make the subject of his writing interesting to the reader, he must be able to communicate his ideas and express his feelings clearly and meaningfully.
Otherwise, his reader who is supposed to be recipient of his message may not really receive anything.
Therefore, a writer of a descriptive essay is expected to be clear in thought, capable of accurate recollection and comfortable in his use of language.
So, the ability to make apt description of things in a way that the person who was not there is able to see them, imagine or feel the taste or smell as if he were near the thing being described are some qualities of a descriptive essay.
3.2.1 The features and structure of a descriptive Arabic essay The descriptive essay, like other types of essay, encompasses introduction, main body, and conclusion.
However, you must note that this type of essay does not follow a specific order or arrangement.
What should matter to you is to ensure that every major component of the essay is given its deserved attention.
You, as a writer, are at liberty to arrange the various parts of your descriptive essay in a manner that will facilitate meaningful, logical, and sequential communication of the salient idea.
There are various ways of achieving that.
51 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 One of such ways is for you to describe your subject in a normal order i.e from simple to complex by starting with the aspects that are closer to you.
An example of this is when you describe an event or experience in the order of its occurrence.
This is what happens when you describe a session and start with the introductory or opening item, and thereafter continue in that order.
An instance of this is when you say: Meaning: I rose from my sleep at 5:00 am and hastened to perform ablution, preparatory to the observance of Salat-us-Subh.
This is obviously a simple-to-complex description.
You may also approach your descriptive essay in a reverse order by starting from complex to simple.
An example of this is when you start your description from where you are expected to end it and you make it a reverse of the normal order as is the case when you say, for instance: Meaning: I watched the television programme which ended at 9:00pm.
It was full of interesting experiences and that probably explains why the viewers have always kept a date with it at 8:00pm every Friday which is the take-off time for its broadcast.
It is obvious from this example that you have started by describing the end of the programme and ended by talking about its beginning.
This kind of approach to descriptive essay takes it from complex to simple.
You may equally choose to describe only the important aspects of your subject without necessarily touching upon everything that there is.
Again, you may choose to approach your description from general to specific.
An example of this is when you start a description of a 52 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 particular leader by talking about the general qualities of good leaders and saying, for instance, Meaning: Leadership is an enviable and desirable position but the qualities of a good leader are not easily attainable.
Yet, our Grand Shaykh Adam Abdullah Al-Iluriyy possessed a handful of such enviable qualities that are expected of an exemplary leader.
It is noticeable that you have started your description in this connection from the general qualities of leadership before narrowing it down to Shaykh Al-Iluriyy.
This way, you have approached the description of your subject from general to specific.
What matters most in each of the various approaches highlighted above is for you to ensure that all the three components and features that constitute the structure of a descriptive essay are taken care of in your writing as you paint a descriptive picture of what you see, hear, or feel.
The more effective you are in expressing such experiences the more meaningful is your essay to the reader.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Identify three major tolls that facilitate a good descriptive essay writing.
2.
Identify and explain three different ways of approaching a descriptive essay.
3.2.3 A Model example of a descriptive essay 53 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Meaning A description of my experience of a sudden electric power cut The sitting room bears a reflection of various items that adorn the wall.
Such adornments make the room colourful in darkness as a result of power cut.
I rose immediately to either pick a candle or lantern in order to provide some light.
Yet I did not get the match box until after five minutes, having earlier adjusted the window blind for visibility.
I lighted the room and moved towards the power generating plant behind the door.
I started it and it illuminated the entire room.
4.0 CONCLUSION Of all the types of essay that you have learned in this course, you will find the descriptive essay easiest and most convenient to write.
You should help yourself by constantly practising its writing.
The example made available to you in this unit is just to give you a clear picture of this type of essay and to also guide you in your own personal efforts.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been guided to learn about the features and structure of a descriptive essay.
You have also been provided with an example of a descriptive essay to enable you use such an example as a guide in your own writing.
It will be of great value for you to pay attention to the techniques employed in this regard.
It will also be useful for you to learn that a descriptive essay may be simple and may also be argumentative.
You will be introduced to the simple type in the next unit.
54 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 7.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt a 250 word Arabic descriptive essay on your last ‘Id-ul-fitr holiday in your home town.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Al-Hindawiyy, K (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-sh-Sharqi.
Barihi, Adetunji et al (2009), Tara’iful- ‘Insha’il- ‘Arabi lil – Ma’ahid- il- ‘Aaliyyah: The gem of Arabic Composition for Higher Institutions.
Abeokuta: Total Qibla.
Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
Salahudeen, T.A.
(2000), A Guide Towards Essay Writing in Arabic, in Seriki, I.A.
& Folorunsho, M.A.
(Eds.)
Book of Readings in Arabic and Islamic Education.
Ijebu-Ode: Alamsek Press Ltd. Zaria, G.T.
(2009), Kawfa Taktubul-Inshai, Zaria Darul-Ummah.
55 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 UNIT 2: TYPE A – SIMPLE DESCRIPTION (al-Wasful Mujarrad) CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 A Simple Descriptive Essay 3.2.1 Characteristics of a simple descriptive essay 3.2.2 Model example of a simple description 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit revolves primarily around simple description.
In the unit, you will learn how to handle this type of descriptive essay.
You will equally be guided to appreciate what really makes it a simple description.
The knowledge you will acquire in this unit will put you in a good stead to understand the subject of the next unit which is Argumentative description.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the elements of a simple descriptive essay 2.
Attempt a 250 word simple Descriptive Essay 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 A Simple Descriptive Essay 56 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 The simple type of Descriptive Essay is that in which you describe your subject as it is without necessarily diluting your description of it with any fictional or figurative element.
The simple descriptive essay, therefore, is an ordinary description.
The writer’s concern in this type of essay is to describe his subject exactly the way he sees it.
He is not expected to use imagery.
He is not expected to be unnecessarily rhetorical.
He is not expected to dilute his facts with fiction.
All he is expected to do is to use appropriate words in painting a clear picture of the event or experience for the reader to see.
Examples of this type of description are descriptive essays on schools, festivals, or automobiles.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Identify three hints that should be noted by a simple descriptive essay writer.
3.2.1 Characteristics of a Simple Description Reality or factuality (haqiiqah): This is one of the main characteristics of a simple description.
In this connection, it is expected to be realistic and not otherwise.
It should be an expression of what could be confirmed.
It should not present about the subject a picture other than what it is in reality.
Unless an essay fulfils this condition, it may not be regarded as a simple description.
Clarity of meaning (Wuduuhu-ma’na): This is another characteristic of a simple description.
You may want to ask: is clarity of meaning or expression not a general characteristic of any good essay, be it simple description or another type?
Yes.
You are right.
However, clarity as a characteristic of a simple description requires that the writer should not only make himself understandable to the reader but also transparent.
He should not employ any word that could play the role of a double-edged sword.
And he should not entertain any element of obscurity or ambiguity.
In other words, a simple descriptive essay writer is expected to be more sensitive to the issue of clarity than other writers are.
Simplicity (al-Basaatah): This is yet another characteristic of a simple description.
As implied by the word “simple”, a simple descriptive essay should be truly 57 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 simple in idea and content.
It should not appear complex to the reader.
It should not be disjointed.
Its idea should also flow logically and sequentially.
3.2.2 Model example of a Simple Descriptive Essay ( Meaning: An experience of a Muslim pupil in an Arabic School …My experience was that I was enrolled for Arabic schooling after completing my formal primary education.
I was in my teachers’ good book and was highly appreciated by my colleagues .
That remained the case until I was sent to Arabic school while my school mates proceeded for the formal secondary education.
My own enrolment in Arabic school became an issue among my colleagues.
They wondered why Arabic school?
Why did his father choose to punish him by denying him access to western education?
Does it make sense to send such a brilliant student to an Arabic school?
Would it not have been better to enroll him for further western education that he may become a Medical doctor or university lecturer?
4.0 CONCLUSION Now you have learnt about the simple descriptive Essay and its characteristics.
You have equally been provided with a model example of it.
By now, you are 58 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 not expected to have any problem with the simple descriptive type of Arabic essay.
5.0 SUMMARY Having learnt about the simple type of descriptive essay, its characteristics and a model example of it, you are advised to practise by yourself the writing of such essay.
It is only by attempting to write that you can apply the principles and techniques that you have been guided to learn in this unit.
59 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt a 250 word descriptive essay on how you spent your ‘Id-ul-fitr holiday in your hometown.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READING Al-Hindawiyy, K. (1987).
Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-Sh-Sharqi Bidmos, M.A.
(1996).
Mustaqbalu-Lughatil-Arabiyyah fi Naijiriya.
Lagos: Islamic Publications Bureau.
Barihi, Adetunji et al (2009), Tara’iful- ‘Insha’il- ‘Arabi lil – Ma’ahid- il- ‘Aaliyyah: The gem of Arabic Composition for Higher Institutions.
Abeokuta: Total Qibla.
Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
Salahudeen, T.A.
(2000), A Guide Towards Essay Writing in Arabic, in Seriki, I.A.
& Folorunsho, M.A.
(Eds.)
Book of Readings in Arabic and Islamic Education.
Ijebu-Ode: Alamsek Press Ltd. 60 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 UNIT 3: TYPE B – CREATIVE DESCRIPTION (al-Wasful Ibdaa’ii) CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 A creative Descriptive Essay 3.2.1 Characteristics of a creative description 3.2.2 Example of a creative description 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The focus of this unit is creative descriptive essay.
This is another type of descriptive essay that is totally different from simple description.
In this unit, you will learn about this genre of descriptive essay.
You will also learn about its characteristics and how to attempt to write your own.
The unit contains learning experiences that will enable you think creatively and write a creative description.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify differences between a simple description and creative description 2.
Attempt a 250 word Creative Descriptive Essay 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 A Creative Descriptive Essay 61 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 This type of descriptive essay is one in which the writer is allowed to exercise his liberty by expressing his personal feelings, sentiments or bias for or against the subject of description.
Here the writer may even exaggerate in order to make his creative description meaningful.
The creative nature of the type of essay under discussion presupposes that it is a combination of facts and fiction.
This is in a sharp contradistinction from the simple type where, as noted in the last unit, the writer is not expected to dilute his facts with fiction.
For instance, if a writer describes his experience or feelings in a particular situation and gives, in addition to such a description, a picture of the effect of such experiences on him, alongside a picture of what the experience culminated into, in his thinking and feelings, he could be said to have written a creative description.
This is unlike the case of a simple description where the writer is expected to present the subject exactly the way he sees it.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify two kinds of liberty that may be exercised by a creative descriptive essay writer.
3.2.1 Characteristics of a Creative Description Creativity (Ruuhul-Ibdaa’ii) is among the characteristic features of a creative description.
Notwithstanding that creativity is peculiar to all types of Arabic essays, it occupies a central place in the creative type of description.
In this regard, the writer is expected to be as creative as possible.
By creativity in this context is meant originality and by this is meant what the writer is able to add to his essay to make it beyond the ordinary level of simple description.
Liberty (al-Hurriyyah) is another major characteristic of a creative description.
The writer is not placed under any serious restriction.
He is allowed to generate any constructive idea that can aid the realization of the goal of his essay as long as the idea does not make him unintelligible to the reader.
He is given a free hand to exercise his intellect and use the product of such intellectual exercise in his essay without necessarily sounding ambiguous.
Fictionality (al-Khayaaliyyah) is another main characteristics of this type of essay.
The facts and figures contained in the essay are diluted with fiction 62 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 without necessarily distorting any of them.
Fictionality in this context is closely related to creativity.
However, while creativity is broad and somehow all- embracing, fictionality primarily concerns the generation of unreal ideas that are only a product of the writer’s imagination, in building up an essay.
3.2.2 Model example of a Creative Descriptive Essay Meaning: A telephone conversation I received a surprise call on my cellphone on Thursday 2nd of September, 2009.
I picked the call and said hello, all to hear the voice of one of my teachers.
He said Salam alayk and I quickly and respectfully answered, ‘alaykumus-Salam, Sir.
I received the call on a sunny afternoon when sunlight threatened the sight and hit had on the head.
It was a day free of commercial transactions, as the holiday made the atmosphere silent and serene.
I chose to use the opportunity of people’s absence from the road and stay at their homes, to generate some ideas for creative writing, when I received the call.
The exchange of communication between my teacher and me lasted not less than three minutes and revolved around certain issues of great importance.
63 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 4.0 CONCLUSION You are now familiar with the creative type of descriptive essay.
You are also familiar with its peculiarities and what makes it different from the simple description.
Similarly have you been guided to see what exactly a creative description looks like, as provided in the example given above.
It is now left for you to attempt to write your own of such type of essay.
You should always remember that practice it is that makes perfect.
5.0 SUMMARY The focus of this unit has been the creative type of descriptive essay.
It is obvious that you are now able to distinguish between two closely related types of essay.
Yet there is another type of descriptive essay that you should learn about in order to be comfortable in treating or writing anything descriptive; that is the argumentative type and will be introduced to you in the next unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt a 300 word creative description of the rainy season in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READING Al-Hindawiyy, K. (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-Sh-Sharqi Bidmos, M.A.
(1996).
Mustaqbalu-Lughatil-Arabiyyah fi Naijiriya.
Lagos: Islamic Publications Bureau.
Barihi, Adetunji et al (2009), Tara’iful- ‘Insha’il- ‘Arabi lil – Ma’ahid- il- ‘Aaliyyah: The gem of Arabic Composition for Higher Institutions.
Abeokuta: Total Qibla.
Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
Salahudeen, T.A.
(2000), A Guide Towards Essay Writing in Arabic, in Seriki, I.A.
& Folorunsho, M.A.
(Eds.)
Book of Readings in Arabic and Islamic Education.
Ijebu-Ode: Alamsek Press Ltd. Ar-Rufa’i, A. S. (2003), Al-Mantuq wal-Maktub.
Lagos: JIMSON Press.
64 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 UNIT 4: TYPE C – ARGUMENTATIVE DESCRIPTION (al-Wasful Jadalii) CONTENT .0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is an argumentative description 3.2.1 Features of an argumentative description 3.2.2 Examples of an argumentative description 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is intended to guide you into learning about another type of descriptive essay.
This type is the argumentative description.
In this unit, you will learn about its peculiarities and how to handle such type of essay.
The unit will expose you to certain skills whose acquisition and application are capable of making you a good writer of an argumentative description.
You may wonder why an argumentative essay will be regarded as belonging to the family of the descriptive.
If you do, your worry will be taken care of as this unit progresses.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the characteristic features of an argumentative descriptive essay.
2.
Write a 300 word argumentative descriptive essay 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 65 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 3.1 An Argumentative Descriptive Essay This is another type of descriptive essay.
It is both descriptive and argumentative in nature.
What is meant by this statement is that it approaches its description in an argumentative manner.
To do so is to paint a written picture about an event or experience, with a handful of proofs and reasons as the pivot of the essay.
It does not matter whether the essay is critical, analytical or merely historical in nature.
Once a descriptive essay depends largely on the power of reason and logic and is replete with proofs and arguments, the writer is said to have written an argumentative essay.
The writer of such an essay gives facts and figures in support of his position.
Similarly does he also seek to advance convincing arguments in deflating a position other than his.
The main objective of such an essay is to convince the reader, influence his view and change his perception, in connection with the subject of the essay.
An argumentative essay, it should be noted, often takes the dimension of a debate.
3.2.1 Peculiarities of an argumentative description Some of the peculiarities of the argumentative essay have been highlighted in passing earlier in this unit.
For you to have a clear picture of them we may now identify them one after the other, at this juncture.
One of them is its reliance on logic and power of reason.
This means that the writer is expected to give proof for whatever he says in the essay.
Another peculiarity of it which itself is a product of the first, is its objective of seeking to convince the reader and change its perception of the subject of writing.
Yet another peculiarity of the argumentative essay is that it takes the posture of a debate where one side, in this case the writer, argues to deflate the argument already advanced by the other side which, in this case is the reader who already has his own view or position on the subject of writing.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the concept of an argumentative descriptive essay and highlight its peculiarities 3.2.3 Model example of an argumentative description 66 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 An argument against excessive reliance on paper qualifications – – 4.0 CONCLUSION You have now learnt about the argumentative type of essay as well as about its peculiarities.
I am sure you now know what makes an essay argumentative.
You have also been guided to read and learn the example of this type of essay, as provided you just now.
5.0 SUMMARY 67 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Now that you have learnt about the argumentative essay, you are expected to use the example provided for you in attempting to write your own and in practising the writing repeatedly.
We have continued to emphasize the need for you to practice the writing owing to our belief that it is practice that makes perfect.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write an argumentative essay of no fewer than 400 words on the need to make Religious Education compulsory at all levels of education in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READING Al-Hindawiyy, K. (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-Sh-Sharqi Ar-Rufa’i, A. S. (2003), Al-Mantuq wal-Maktub, Lagos, JIMSON Press Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
UNIT 5: THE COMMONALITIES AND VARIATIONS IN 68 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 DESCRIPTIVE ESSAYS CONTENT Introduction 1.0 Objectives 2.0 Main content 2.1 Common Features in Descriptive Essays 3.2.1 Variations in the features of Descriptive Essays 3.2.2 Other Hints to Note .0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is aimed at guiding you to learn about the commonalities in the various types of descriptive essay that you have learned.
The essence is to bail you out of any confusion that may have arisen in your contact with the different but somehow interrelated types of descriptive essay.
Now, you will learn about the commonalities as well as variations or differences in the various types of descriptive essay.
You will also learn about other important hints that are essential to descriptive essay writing as a whole.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the commonalities among the various types of descriptive essay.
2.
Identify the major differences in the different types of descriptive essay.
69 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Commonalities in the types of descriptive essay A descriptive essay writing has been described as the use of written words in painting a picture about a man, animal, object, place or anything whatsoever.
The various types of descriptive essay identified earlier include simple description, creative description and argumentative description.
Each of these types of essay has been studied alongside its peculiarities, in the earlier units.
Yet they all remain descriptive essays in their different forms.
Hence, the need for you to learn specifically about what they have in common as well as the differences in them.
As regards commonalities, they include their descriptive nature.
This means they all set out to paint a written picture about their subjects.
Another common feature of the descriptive types of essay is their reliance on the writer’s ability to recall from his memory or through his observation a picture of the subject of his writing.
The implication of this is that the writing of any type of descriptive essay whatsoever is made meaningful through the instrumentality of the writer’s senses of perception the product of which he merely describes in words.
It is also a common denominator in descriptive essay writing the writer’s wanderlust to make his reader see the subject the way he (i.e the writer) has seen it .
One may therefore say that the descriptive essay represents a raw material that is carefully processed into a finished product for onward transmission to its consumer or end-user who, in this context, is the reader.
These in brief are some of the commonalities among the various types of descriptive essay.
SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE Identify and explain three features that are common to all the different types of descriptive essay.
3.2.1 Variations in the features of a descriptive essay Now that you have learned about the common features of a descriptive essay, it will be of great importance to you to learn about the differences in them.
There should not be any strain for you in learning that in the present lesson.
All you need do is to follow our explanation attentively.
The explanation will be both 70 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 comparative and contrastive and once you get it right, there cannot be any confusion thereafter.
One of such differences is that the simple descriptive is plain and ordinary while the creative description endeavours to exhibit some elements of originality whereas the argumentative descriptive appears both critical and analytical.
The meaning of this is that the writer of a simple descriptive essay paints a picture of the subject of his writing exactly the way he sees it while the writer of the creative type endeavours to dilute his writing with other elements that may be alien to the subject, whereas the writer of an argumentative description is intent on appealing to the reader’s reason.
Another major difference is that the simple descriptive essay writer seeks to be as realistic as possible in expressing his thoughts while the creative descriptive essay writer presents a combination of facts and fiction, whereas the argumentative essay writer employs logic and proof in speaking for or against his subject, with a view to prompting his reader to reason with him.
Yet another difference lies in the fact that the simple descriptive is characterized by clarity and simplicity of both idea and expression, while the creative descriptive is normally replete with imagery and figurative expressions, whereas the argumentative type of essay is characteristically critical and analytical.
Once you are able to carefully master these differences alongside the similarities enumerated earlier, there is no likelihood of you getting confused over the various types of descriptive essay.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Make a comparative and contrastive explanation of the various types of descriptive essay.
3.2.2 Other Hints to Note Having been guided to appreciate the similarities and differences among the types of descriptive essay, it is equally important to let you know that there is no rigidity in those features.
By this statement is meant that the characteristic features identified as peculiar to a type of essay is not necessarily impermissible to another type.
For instance, clarity is identified as a characteristic feature of the simple descriptive only to the extent that the writer is expected to be as clear as possible without toying with any word that could bring about any form of 71 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 ambiguity.
Yet, clarity is a general characteristic of any good piece of writing be it descriptive or otherwise.
Another example is appeal to reason which is regarded as a peculiarity of an argumentative essay.
This does not presuppose that a creative description writer cannot resort to the use of proof and reason, if need be.
In a similar token, imagery and figurative expression that characterize the creative type of description are not unwanted elements in an argumentative essay.
You are expected to note that there is an appreciable degree of flexibility among the peculiarities of descriptive essay.
It is left to your ingenuity as a writer to determine how much of the peculiarities of another type of essay you are employing in a particular essay of yours.
The hallmark of essay writing are readability, clarity, intelligibility, creativity, flexibility and communication.
There should therefore be no room for rigidity in the application of writing techniques and principles.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt the commonalities as well as differences in the various types of Arabic essay.
You have also been guided to be familiar with other important hints, that should be noted by any good essay writer.
That indeed is what this unit set out to do.
5.0 SUMMARY Now that you are in a comfortable position to distinguish between what applies to one type of essay, and what applies to another, your concern should not be limited to your ability to identify their peculiarities or dissimilarities.
It should rather include how to have a good mastery of the skills and techniques that can make you write effortlessly on the various types of essay that you have learnt about.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 72 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Write three types of descriptive essay of 450 words each and distinguish clearly in your writing the peculiarities of each of them.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Al-Hindawiyy, K. (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-Sh-Sharqi Ar-Rufa’i, A. S. (2003), Al-Mantuq wal-Maktub, Lagos, JIMSON Press Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
73 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 MODULE 3: UNIT 1: IMAGINATIVE ESSAY (al-Inshaa’ul Khayaalii) CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Imaginative Essay 3.2.1 Peculiarities of an Imaginative Essay 3.2.2 Model Example of an Imaginative Essay 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is intended to introduce you to another type of Arabic essay that is not of the descriptive orientation.
It is called imaginative essay.
In this unit, you will not only learn about it but you will also be guided to appreciate its peculiarities.
In addition to that, you will be provided with an example of such essay in order to enable you write your own.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify and explain the features of an imaginative essay.
2.
Attempt a 400 word imaginative essay.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Imaginative Essay 74 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 An imaginative essay is somehow related to the creative type of descriptive essay.
What the two of them have in common is creativity or the use of imagination.
For instance, the writer of an imaginative essay is like a creative artist who is faced with a still picture of a man, animal or even any structure whatsoever.
To draw a true picture of what he saw, he must identify the salient parts of his subject.
He must equally jettison the insignificant parts of the subject that are not of direct concern or relevance to the central view of the subject.
The imaginative essay writer, like the creative artist, will be expected to rely on his intellect or imagination in highlighting the central features that are capable of driving home his point, in the estimation of the reader.
Accordingly, a writer drawing an imaginative picture of a wretched girl should be able to highlight what will make his reader believe that the girl is truly wretched.
Although, the wretched girl only exists in the writer’s imagination as he is not faced with any wretched girl standing physically before him, the onus is on him to imagine what a wretched girl may look like in a manner that will clearly reveal the wretchedness in her.
The heart of the matter here is that the subject of the writer of an imaginative essay exists only in his own imagination.
Yet he is intent on making his reader see clearly the unreal being that is merely a product of his own imagination.
This is what makes his task more challenging than that of a descriptive writer whose subject is an existing reality.
3.2 Peculiarities of an imaginative essay Imagination (al-Tasawwur/al-Takhayyul), realization and portrayal are the main peculiarities of an imaginative essay.
The writer imagines something and creates an image out of it.
The image so created is given a real colouring and made a creative reality by being portrayed as such through the written words of an imaginative essay writer.
In other words, by imagination is meant the writer’s fabrication of an image in his brain.
That image is developed by him into a reality though an imaginary one.
It is the outcome of his rigorous imagination which has been developed into an imaginary reality that the imaginative writer portrays as real through his written words by which he presents it to the reader.
These are the essential elements that make an imaginative essay.
Their interconnectedness is obvious and is even the more reason for you not to mix them up.
75 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 3.2.3 Model Example of an Imaginative Essay An imaginative essay on a wretched girl – 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been initiated into another area of Arabic essay writing which is the imaginative type.
You are now in a position to identify the elements that make a piece of writing imaginative as against the other types that you learnt earlier.
You are even fortunate, enough to have had access to an example of the imaginative essay.
5.0 SUMMARY 76 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 It is required of you to attach importance to practice.
The pieces of information and body of knowledge imparted into you in this unit, concerning imaginative essay are capable of stimulating you to imagine and to give the product of your imagination a meaningful colouring in order to present such a product to your reader in the form of an essay you are strongly advised to make repeated attempts at writing this type of essay.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt a 450 word imaginative essay on any idea of interest to you.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Al-Hindawiyy, K. (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-Sh-Sharqi Ar-Rufa’i, A. S. (2003), Al-Mantuq wal-Maktub, Lagos, JIMSON Press Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
77 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 UNIT 2: NARRATIVE ESSAY (al-Inshaa’ul Qisasiyy) CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Narrative Essay 3.2.1 Peculiarities of a narrative essay?
3.2.2 Model Example of Narrative Essay 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is set to further guide you to learning about another type of essay which is known as Al-Inshaaul-Qisasiyy i.e.
Narrative Essay.
You will learn about the components and features of this genre of essay.
You will thereafter be guided to attempt writing one of such a type of essay.
This is an entirely different type that you have not encountered in any of the earlier units.
And that infact is why you must be both careful and attentive in order not to mix it up with the other types that you are already familiar with.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe a narrative essay.
2.
Attempt a narrative essay on any subject of your choice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Narrative Essay 78 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 A narrative essay is a written story.
It is the writer’s objective account of any event without any addition or omission.
Accordingly, a narrative essay writing may be aptly described as story-telling where the writer seeks to give his reader a full narration of what happened, how it happened, when it happened and who is involved.
This explains why the narrative type of essay is regarded as comprising such genres as stories, short stories, novelettes, tales, history and even biographical writings.
A story is a narrative essay given its nature as a record of an event in its real form, though may also contain some fictional elements.
However, when a narrative essay tells a story concerning a past event in a short, loaded, but captivating manner it is called a short story.
A novelette is equally a storytelling but its distinction lies in its being largely fictional in nature.
The fuller form of a novelette is called a novel.
As regards history, it is a chain of narration concerning the life and times of the earlier people.
However, when a history writer focuses on a particular individual or personality it is called a biography.
Concerning tale, it is defined as a story about events that are not real.
It is a fabricated piece of writing or report that is not necessarily true.
Notwithstanding the differences among the genres of narrative essay, it is obvious from their various definitions that each of them truly fulfills the role of a narration from the writer to his reader.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify and briefly describe the various genres of a narrative essay.
3.2.1 Features of a Narrative Essay The narrative essay in any of its different genres has six features without which there cannot be any meaningful narration.
One of the features is event.
This is a group of specific experiences that constitute an incident.
There cannot be a narrative essay without an event around which the essay will be woven and developed.
Two, construction.
It is another feature of the narrative essay.
It means the use of words to transmit the specific ideas involved in the minor experiences that constitute the event.
Construction in this context is the composition of the essay by expressing one’s thoughts in words.
Three, style or approach for a narration must be given in a particular way.
The writer may choose to detach himself from his subject and tell the story as an independent 79 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 entity by saying “this writer saw”, “this writer observed”, “this writer witnessed”.
He may also choose to refer to himself in the first person singular pronoun which may even conceal totally the identity of the writer and hide his face behind a veil by giving his written narration in the form of “a tale by the moonlight”.
Four, character.
Characters are the dramatic personae around whom revolves the central idea of a narrative essay.
Five, setting.
A narration is normally given in a particular context.
It is that contextualization that is known as setting.
The setting covers both the place and time of the event.
It is in keeping with the principle of setting that a narrative is expected to be given in consonance with the tone, language, culture, tradition, character, view and even general attitude to life of the place and time where the subject of the narration is situated.
For instance, a narrative essay concerning the Sokoto Jihad is obviously set in the early 19th century Sudanese zone of West Africa and is therefore not expected to quote Shaykh Uthman dan Fodio as having asked one of his disciples for his email address for email communication was not known to the characters in that part of the world at that age.
Six, theme.
There is no narration without a central idea.
However, the idea in this context is not the theme of the essay but the writer himself who decides what he wants the reader to see, feel, or experience.
The writer in this connection is like the driver who is on the wheel to steer the car.
The outcome of his driving may be determined by his dexterity.
Similarly is the success or quality of a narrative essay determined by the quality of its writer and his ability in narrating his subject.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify and briefly explain the features of a narrative essay.
3.2.3 Model Example of Narrative Essay A tour in my car 80 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has exposed you to yet another type of essay.
This is the narrative essay.
You have learnt about its nature, features and structure.
You have equally learnt about the specific items without which there cannot be a narrative essay.
Above all is the fact that you also saw a narrative essay writing in action as you were provided with a model example of such type of essay.
5.0 SUMMARY With the knowledge of narrative essay writing that you have acquired in this unit, you are not expected to feel any discomfort whenever you are faced with the challenge of writing one.
All you need do is to follow the instruction given you about the need for you to practise essay writing as repeatedly as possible.
So, sit back, think of what to narrate, organize your thoughts, arrange your ideas constructively, pick up your pen and try to do it practically.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 81 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Write a narrative essay of about 500 words on any idea of your choice.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Al-Hindawiyy, K. (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-Sh-Sharqi Ar-Rufa’i, A. S. (2003), Al-Mantuq wal-Maktub, Lagos, JIMSON Press Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
82 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 UNIT 3: LETTER WRITING (Fannul-Muraasalah) CONTENT 0.0 Introduction 1.0 Objectives 2.0 Main content 2.1 Arabic Letter Writing 3.2.1 Types of Letters in Arabic 3.2.2 Characteristics of a good letter in Arabic 3.2.4 Model Example of Letter Writing in Arabic 3.0 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 6.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to another area of essay writing.
It covers the genre of letter writing.
You will be guided to learn about the concept of letter writing in Arabic.
You will also be guided to learn about the components as well as characteristics of letters that are known in Arabic.
After all that, you will be guided to learn exactly what a letter looks like in Arabic.
The fact that you are coming across this type of essay genre for the first time in this course is the more reason for you to carefully follow the instructions in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Mention and explain briefly the component and characteristics of Arabic letters.
2.
Attempt to write a good letter in Arabic 83 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Arabic Letter Writing Letter writing is the act and art of conversing with the absent person through the means of writing.
It is the practice of using written words to convey one’s message, feelings or instructions to the reader.
Letter writing is an exchange of communication between the writer and the reader.
It is the act of sending one’s message in a written form to the reader.
A letter is often regarded as a personal visit converted into written words.
A letter is also regarded as a reflection of the place of the addressee in the estimation of the sender.
That explains why you are expected to exercise caution in your choice of style, tone and even approach in your letter.
Such considerations go a long way in giving your reader an idea about his place in your heart.
Letters are of different types.
Yet the goal of every letter is to indicate interest, express an idea or communicate a feeling, to the reader, for a particular reason.
It may therefore not be out of place to introduce you to various types of Arabic letter writing.
3.2.1 Components of Arabic Letter Writing There are three major parts in any Arabic letter.
They are the opening (of which greeting is a part), the body of the letter and the closing (of which the conclusion is a part).
However, there are several characteristics for any good Arabic letter writing.
They include the theme or title (al-mauduu’u), the addressee (al-Mursal), greeting (al-Tahiyyah) , and closing (al-Khaatimah).
A good letter is expected to have a title or theme which makes obvious to the reader the letter’s focus or area of coverage.
A good Arabic letter is also expected to indicate the address (al’unwan) of the person for whom the letter is meant.
Thereafter comes the greeting the nature of which is normally determined by the nature of the sender’s relationship with the addressee.
The body of the letter is the heart of the matter where the main purpose is delivered or fulfilled.
The body may be composed of one, two or even three paragraphs, depending on the nature of the letter itself.
After making all the necessary points in the body of your letter, you are expected to write your closing which comprises both your conclusion and signing off.
Regardless of whatever is the type of your letter, it must have five different characteristics of a good letter.
One, your letter must be timely.
For instance 84 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 you are not expected to write a condolence letter one or two years after the bereavement, for such a letter is intended to condole or commiserate with the bereaved and such a purpose will have been defeated after a long time.
Two, your letter must be characterized by clarity, and this is self-explanatory.
Three the content of your letter must be intelligible and this characteristic, too, is self- explanatory.
Four, brevity, for a good letter is not expected to assume that the addressee has all the time in this world to read one single letter, that is excessively long and unnecessarily prosy.
Five, a good letter should portray its writer as courteous and not crude and impolite.
All these are characteristics of any good letter, irrespective of its type or purpose.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List and explain five characteristics of a good letter.
3.2.2 A Model Letter Letter to a friend who has just published a new book 85 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has introduced you into the art of letter writing.
You have equally been guided to learn about the components that make a letter as well as the characteristics of a good letter.
At the end of it all you have been guided to read and appreciate a model letter after which you can fashion or create your own.
5.0 SUMMARY The essence of the careful enlightenment that you are given on letter writing in this unit is to make you a comfortable Arabic letter writer.
You should there fore 86 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 note that one does not develop writing skills through mere reading of books on writing techniques.
It is rather through a wander-lust for writing which must be practically demonstrated through continuous and consistent effort.
You are therefore requested to write as many letters you can, in keeping with the principles introduced to you in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt an Arabic letter writing to the Head of your Department stating why you failed to write an examination scheduled for the earlier week.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Al-Hindawiyy, K. (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-Sh-Sharq Ar-Rufa’i, A. S. (2003), Al-Mantuq wal-Maktub, Lagos, JIMSON Press Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Barihi, Adetunji et al (2009), Tara’iful- ‘Insha’il- ‘Arabi lil – Ma’ahid- il- ‘Aaliyyah: The gem of Arabic Composition for Higher Institutions.
Abeokuta: Total Qibla.
Ibrahim, A.S.K.
(2001), Al-Insha’ul ‘Asri litullab al-Ma’ahid al-‘Arabiyyah wakulliyyat al-Tarbiyah wal-Jaami’aat.
Ilorin: ALMUS POLY CONSULT.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
UNIT A CONCLUDING UNIT 87 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Arabic Essay Writing 3.2.1 Genres of Arabic Essay 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall attempt to recapitulate all the central points concerning Arabic essay writing.
As you must have learnt the subject covers a wide spectrum of areas and genres that are known in Arabic essay writing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Discuss the features of Arabic Essay Writing.
- Identify and explain the various types of Arabic Essay writing.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Arabic Essay Writing 88 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Arabic essay writing is the use of written words to express an idea or paint a picture of a man, animal, object, place, event experience or anything whatsoever.
You have been made to understand that an Arabic essay is a piece of writing on any subject.
By now the concept “Arabic essay” should no longer prove any problem to you.
Arabic language is the vehicle for the conveyance of an Arabic writer’s idea.
It is the system of communication in speech and writing that is used by the Arabs.
It is a Semitic language and is of two varieties namely: the Southern Arabic and the Northern Arabic.
Among the characteristics of Arabic language are its divine nature, its status as a symbol of Arab nationalism, and its role as a record of experiences and register of achievements of the Arabs.
The language has multidimensional relevance to the modern world.
It is socially, politically, economically and educationally relevant in the world.
Arabic essay writing is concerned with Arabic words and expressions.
This, as you have learnt earlier, means the use of Arabic written words to represent one’s feelings or perception through the lenses of such words.
An Arabic essay is expected to have an introduction, a body and a conclusion, no matter how brief.
These are the components of any essay, regardless of its type, purpose or objective, as will be demonstrated in the next sub-section.
3.1.1 Genres of Arabic Essay Writing You have learnt earlier that Arabic essays are of different types.
They are the simple descriptive, the creative, the argumentative and the imaginative types of essay.
There is also another genre of Arabic essay known as verse prosification.
Yet there is letter writing which is another type of Arabic writing.
The descriptive essay is the most prominent type of Arabic essay and is characterized by flexibility, simplicity and clarity.
The reflective essay represents a dilution of facts with fiction while the imaginative essay is essentially fictional.
The argumentative essay is both critical and analytical in nature as the writer’s goal is to convince his reader.
As regards verse prosification, it means a writer’s indirect allusion to a verse or poem in his prose in a manner that does not allow the reader to distinguish between the two.
Letter writing is another genre of Arabic essay writing.
It is the act of conversing with another person through the means of writing.
The components of a good letter include the opening (the greeting inclusive) the body of the letter and the closing (of which the conclusion is a 89 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 part).
A letter, like the other types of Arabic essay writing, should be characterized by clarity, intelligibility and meaningfulness, among others.
All these are the various genres of Arabic essay writing that you have learnt in this course.
4.0 CONCLUSION This course has introduced you to the art of Arabic Essay Writing.
It also introduced you to the nature, status and characteristics of Arabic language which is the vehicle with which the writer conveys his message or idea to the reader.
The course has equally introduced you to the various types of Arabic essay alongside the peculiarities of each.
The course has also guided you to appreciate the commonalities and differences among the various genres.
5.0 SUMMARY Now that you have followed this course across its various units and their contents, you are expected to have mastered the necessary techniques, approaches and required skills for any Arabic essay writing.
The specific instructions given you in the form of self assessment exercises in every unit are intended to ensure that you do something on your own.
Therefore, you are enjoined to attempt answers to those questions from time to time in order for you not to forget what you have learnt in this course.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT - Identify and explain the main features of Arabic Essay - Mention and discuss five different genres of Arabic Essay writing 90 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdul ‘Alim, Ibrahim (1970): Fi Turuq t-Tadris al-mawjihul – faniyy li madarisil – lughati l ‘Arabiyyah.
Darul –Ma’arif.
Al-Faakhuuri, Hannaa (1964), Al-Jadiid fi l-Inshaa’ l ’Arabii.
Beirut:Maktab al- Madrasat wa Dar al-Kutub al-Lubnaanii li Tiba’a wan Nashr, at- Tab’atuth-Thaalithah.
Al-Faakhuuri, Hannaa (1968), Al-Jadiid fi l-Inshaa’ l ’Arabii.
Beirut:Maktab al- Madrasat wa Dar al-Kutub al-Lubnaanii li Tiba’a wan Nashr, at-Tab’atul- Khaamisah.
Al-Hindawiyy, K (1987), Taysir-ul-Insha, Beirut, Daru-sh-Sharq.
Amuni, Olayinka K. (2009), Nigeria’s New Naira Notes and the Plot Against Arabic Language and Script, in Akintola, Is-haq et al (eds.
)CORRELATES OF ISLAM.
Zaria; The Ahmadu Bello University Press Limited.
Barihi, Adetunji et al (2009), Tara’iful- ‘Insha’il- ‘Arabi lil – Ma’ahid- il- ‘Aaliyyah: The gem of Arabic Composition for Higher Institutions.
Abeokuta: Total Qibla.
Bamidele, S.O.
(1984), 50 Model Essays and Outlines.
Ibadan: Beuna Limited.
Bidmos, M.A.
(1996), Mustaqbal-ul-Lugatil-Arabiyyah fi Naijiria, Lagos, Islamic Publications Bureau.
Malik, S.H.A.
(2005), Al-Insha Al- ‘Arabi al-Mutaqaddim.
Ibadan: Matba’a al- Jami’a.
Nicholson, R.A. (1989), A Literary History of the Arabs, Cambridge, University Press.
Nicholson, R.A. (1989), A Literary History of the Arabs, Cambridge, University Press.
Otunuyi, A.K.T.
& Balogun, K.Y.
(2004), Nahwa fa’aaliyyat al-Ta’biir al-Shafahi bil-Lughatil ‘Arabiyyah, in Otunuyi, A.K.T.
et al (eds.)
Studies on Arabic Acculturation in Nigeria.
Ilorin: Taofiqullahi Publishing House.
Salahudeen, T.A.
(2000), “A Guide Towards Effective Essay Writing in Arabic”, in Seriki, I.A.
& Folorunsho, M.A.
(Eds.)
Book of Readings in Arabic and Islamic Education, Volume 1, Ijebu-Ode, Alamsek Press Ltd. 91 ARA064 ARABIC ESSAY WRITING 1 Zaria, G.T.
(2009).
Kayfa Taktubul-Inshai, Zaria Darul-Ummah.
92
