ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ARA011 COURSE TITLE: Arabic Grammar 1 1 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE / TITLE ARA011: Arabic Grammar 1 COURSE DEVELOPER / WRITER Mr. Adams Olufemi AKEWULA c/o Dept.
of Arabic and Islamic Studies University of Ibadan – Ibadan COURSE EDITOR / PROGRAMME LEADER: Prof. Asif Ahmed School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University, Victoria Island, Lagos 2 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2010 First Printed 2010 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii 3 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 TABLE OF CONTENTS Content Page Title Page i Publisher ii Table of Contents iii MODULE 1: THE NOUNS Unit 1: Nouns, Articles and Gender 1-7 Unit 2: Singular and Dual 8-13 Unit 3: Plurals 14-21 Unit 4: Subject and Predicate 22-27 Unit 5: Pronouns.
28-32 MUDULE 2: THE VERBS Unit 1 Importance of Verb 33-36 Unit 2 Divisions of Verb 37-41 Unit 3 The Perfect Measure of Trilateral Verbs 42-46 Unit 4 The Imperfect Measure of Trilateral Verb 47-52 Unit 5 The Imperative 53-56 MODULE 3: THE PARTICLES Unit 1 The Prepositions and the Conjunctions 57-61 Unit 2 Subjunctive Particles 62-65 Unit 3 The Jussive and Interrogative 66-69 Unit 4 The Vocative, Gerund and Complete Sentence 70-75 iii 4 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 MODULE 1: THE NOUNS Unit 1: Nouns, Articles and Gender Unit 2: Singular and Dual Unit 3: Plurals Unit 4: Subjects and Predicate Unit 5: Pronouns.
UNIT 1: Nouns, Articles and Gender CONTENT: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content: 3.1 Types of Nouns 3.2 Definite and Indefinite Articles 3.3 The Gender in Arabic 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION My dear student, Arabic Language is one of the leading languages in the world.
It is spoken by almost 200 million Arabs of the Middle East and many Muslims of the world.
It is a language spoken at interactive sessions at international forums like the African Unity, United nation, OPEC and others.
Like many other languages, the parts of Speech of Arabic are classified into noun, verb and particle called , and respectively.
This Unit introduces you to some of these features of the language which you require in order to attain proficiency in it.
They are put across to you and treated in simple and clear style.
So come along with on board.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • identify the different types of noun in Arabic language • differentiate between the Masculine and feminine genders in given Arabic names.
• identify the definite and indefinite articles in Arabic language • discuss the significance of the sun and the moon letters.
5 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
(Noun) A noun in Arabic grammar is the name of people, animals, places or things.
For example: Person: Adam Animal: lion, Place: Ibadan Thing: pen 3.1.1 Types of Nouns In Arabic grammar, names are classified as proper, common and abstract nouns.
The Proper Nouns If a noun, ‘ismu names a particular person, place or thing, then in Arabic you should know that we call such a noun a proper noun.
For example: Adam Ibrahim Muhammad Friday Sunday Kano Ibadan Lagos 3.1.2 Common Nouns Common nouns on the other hands are names of things in general.
This means that common nouns in Arabic Language are names of things as the following examples illustrate.
Table Chair Boy Girl Man Woman Dog Bread Knife 6 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Self Assessment Exercise Write five Arabic proper nouns and five Arabic common nouns.
3.1.3 (Abstract Nouns) If a noun names anything which we can only imagine and think about, but we cannot see or touch, whether it is countable or uncountable, such a noun is called abstract noun.
For examples Joy Happiness Difficulty Love Justice Advice Self assessment Exercise Define Arabic abstract noun and mention five of them.
3.2.1 Definite and Indefinite Articles Like many other languages, a noun can be in definite and indefinite form in the Arabic language.
Al’ ‘ ’ ‘the’ is the definite article.
It is used for some cases, genders, and numbers and written as prefix for the noun to be defined.
(Nunation) is the indefinite article denoting ‘a’ or ‘an’.
The noun that has any of them is in the indefinite case in Arabic.
Nunation consists of three kinds; these are: Fat-ħatān Dammatān Kasratān The table below illustrates both articles clearly Definite Indefinite al-Ma’arifatu an –nakratu The Book A book The Pen A pen The exercise book An exercise book The boy A boy The girl A girl The table A table The house A house The man A man The woman A woman The University A University, 7 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Self Assessment Exercise What are the Arabic definite and indefinite articles?
Expatiate on them with examples.
3.2.2 (Sun and Moon Letters) Meanwhile, while discussing definite article , it is pertinent to discuss the related hamzatu `l-waşl and hamzatu `l-qat’i.
The hamzat of definite article is hamzat-al-waşl, so that the ‘a’ or ‘an’ must be elided if preceded by any word e.g.
the boy and the girl .
You will notice that and of bintu are joined together because the hamzat has been elided from pronunciation.
The pronunciation of sun and moon letters when it is definite is very important my dear students.
That is why we need to introduce these letters to you.
There are twenty Arabic letters (consonants).
These letters are divided into two.
Fourteen of them are sun letters while the remaining fourteen are moon letters.
(The Sun Letters) These are the Sun Letters The crown – The cloth –– ––––––––––- The cock The wolf The man The visitor The chalk board The sun The box The weak The chalk The shade The night The light When the noun that ‘ ’ (the) is prefixed with one of the above sun letters, the ‘L’ ‘ ’ of the definite article will be assimilated to the sun letter which is written with the shadda ‘’.
The ‘ ’ of the article losing its sukūn vowel e.g.
ar-rajul Instead of al-rajul at-tayru Instead of al-tayru.
8 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 The remaining fourteen letters are Moon letters and they are pronounced with ‘ ’.
For example al-walad al-bint.
The lion – ––––––––––––– The door The university The father in law The garden The eye The cave The elephant The pen The dog The table The boy The guidance The day This rule only occurs in definite article so far indefinite article does not take al, and then the rule is not applicable to it.
Self Assessment Exercise Write out the sun letters from the Arabic consonants 3.3 ( Gender) In Arabic, most nouns have a property by which sex is distinguished.
This property is called gender.
There are two genders in Arabic grammar.
These are : Masculine and Feminine There is no neuter in Arabic language as it is found in other languages.
The feminine al-Mu’annath is formed from the masculine by suffixing taau marbuutat “ ” 9 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Let us illustrate these two genders with a table that will make it clear to you.
Feminine Masculine The poor woman The poor man The female The male teacher A female writer The male wrier A female student A Male student The female cook The male cook Look at the above examples, you will see that the feminine is derived from masculine with the suffix “ ” and there is a change in the penultimate letters vowels from ‘u’ to ‘a’ e.g.
Observation: You are aware that in any rule there is an exception, there are some feminine words which have no masculine form e.g.
A city A law Court And also there are some words without “Ö” but they are feminine in nature e.g.
Name of female person Name of female person Mother An old woman Finally, dear students, occasionally, it is very rare to find “ö” in words which are masculine e.g.
A successor Masculine personal name Self Assessment Exercises Name 5 nouns that are Masculine when written but feminine in nature.
4.0 CONCLUSION Nouns in Arabic grammar consist of names of persons, places or things.
They are either, proper, common or abstract.
Some nouns become definite by having the definite article as suffixes or indefinite by having sign of being indefinite called tanwin.
The definite article is either or .
Some Arabic nouns are also either in proper masculine or feminine in gender or in words.
10 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 4.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have treated the types of noun in Arabic, the articles and the related rules of sun and moon letters with definite article.
Genders that are masculine and feminine have also been dealt with.
You are also introduced to the feminine sign as it is derived from masculine nouns.
Other feminine nouns that are exempted are also mentioned.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Give five Arabic proper, common and abstract nouns.
2.
Write ten Arabic definite nouns of which five of them are sun letters and another five of moon letters.
3.
Write ten Arabic nouns of which five in them are masculine and another five feminine.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
11 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 2: (Singular and Dual Nouns).
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Singular form of the Arabic nouns 3.1.1 Nominatve Singular Noun 3.1.2 Accusative Singular Noun 3.1.3 Genitive Singular Noun 3.2 Dual 3.2.1 Dual Nominative Case 3.2.2 Dual Accusative and Genitive Cases 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Number is another feature of nouns.
By number we mean that nouns can occur singular, or in several units, dual and plural.
In this unit we shall treat singular and dual forms of Arabic nouns.
The plural forms will be treated in the next unit.
We want you to bear in mind that there are three declensions in Arabic.
The vast majority of nouns in singular forms belong to the three cases, nominative, accusative and genitive.
These three cases shall be discussed extensively in the main content of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: - Identify Arabic nouns in the singular and dual forms - Recognize the Arabic nouns in the singular nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
- Recognize the Arabic nouns in the dual nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
- State the similarity between dual accusative and genitive.
- Construct nouns at these three cases in Arabic.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 The Singular form of the Arabic nouns Singular, al-Mufrad in Arabic is any word that indicates a single person, animal, place or thing.
This singular can be of any gender, whether 12 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 masculine, or feminine .
The singular of any noun does not change its definite status, or indefinite, articles.
Before we proceed, we want you to know that when the three vowel marks are written double at the end of a noun, they represent the three case endings, nominative, accusative and genitive.
These are the three doubled vowels 3.1.1 Nominative Singular Nouns The singular nouns of Arabic are usually mentioned in the nominative case taking as suffixes.
The table below illustrates this clearly.
The singular A book A pen An exercise book A chair A bag A boy A man A table A mosque A school The double dammahs in all the aforementioned examples are indefinite articles.
If al, that is, the definite articles’ sign prefixes any of these nouns then the vowel will change from double to single.
Let us use the same words as examples.
The Singular The Book The pen The exercise book The chair The bag The boy The man The chair The mosque The school 13 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 3.1.2 Accusative Singular Nouns Sometimes Singular nouns are said to be in the accusative case.
will then be on it when it is indefinite but only one vowel when it is definite.
Take the following as examples.
The Singular The house A refrigerator The airport A bird The poor man The elephant A paper A moon The padlock A star Both definite and indefinite articles are used together in the above examples.
3.1.3 Genitive of Singular nouns The last of doubled vowels which is known as is used for nouns at the genitive case.
But, the single vowel is used when it is definite like we have said earlier.
See the table below The Singular A box The mountain A coffee The tea A cloth The heart The earth The minister A bride A road Self Assessment Exercise Mention the three single and double vowels that can be used for Arabic singular nominative, accusative and genitive nouns.
14 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 3.2 Dual Form Nouns Arabic is unlike some other languages that the plural forms begin from two units upwards, but Arabic has dual form which is called al-Muthana, .
This is any noun that indicates two persons, places or things.
The rule of identification will be explained in each cases.
3.2.1 Dual Nominative Case In this case, the singular noun will be suffixed by alif and nūn .
The alif will elongate the last letter that had changed from or .
For example the Singular of a book at the nominative case is , Adding to it will change it and it will become .
You will notice that alif elongates the ‘bau’ while nun is given Kasrah, let us see other examples.
The Dual Two schools The two men The two pen Two girls Two pillows The two countries Two teachers Two students The two professors There is no difference of vowels whether it is definite or indefinite as you can see in the suffixes of those nouns mentioned above.
3.2.2 Dual Accusative and Genitive Cases The accusative and genitive cases of dual nouns in the Arabic language take the same form.
The structure of a sentence will give you the understanding of which case a particular noun belongs to.
There is no problem about that; you will be acquainted with all these very soon.
As you have been told earlier, alif and nūn suffix the singular noun at the nominative case; but here it is yāu and nun .
Yāu here is diphthong and not elongation, the nūn will also take kasrah like that of the nominative.
The below examples give clarity of this statement.
The Dual Two schools (Ac c& Gen) The two men (Acc & Gen) The two pen (Acc & Gen) 15 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Two girls (Acc & Gen) The two boys (Acc & Gen) Two pillows (Acc & Gen) The two countries (Acc & Gen) Two teachers (Acc & Gen) Two students (Acc & Gen) The two professors (Acc & Gen) The accusative and genitive in dual nouns are the same in pattern but different in meaning in any Arabic given sentence.
Self Assessment Exercise How will you vocalize nun, of dual pattern 4.0 CONCLUSION In Arabic, Nouns vary from one case to the other, both at the singular and dual forms.
The last letter of Nouns sometimes has single or double dammah and described as being in the nominative case; or single or double fathah in which case they are said to be in the accusative cases.
They may also take single or double kasrah in which case they are said to be in the genitive case.
Single vowels are used for the definite articles, while the double vowels are used for indefinite articles.
Dual nouns are introduced by suffixes while the accusative and genitive cases of dual changes it to .
In English the alif of the former will be regarded as elongation while the yāu of the latter is diphthong.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit discusses various features of both the singular and the dual forms of nouns in the Arabic language.
It explains characteristics of the he singular and dual nouns when they re in the nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
The functions of single vowels as tool for definite article and those of double vowels as tools for indefinite article are highlighted.
The roles of the suffixes aaani or ayn are explained.
Copious examples are provided to explain the rules; while self assessment exercises are given learners fo self examination.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT - Explain the process of changing the suffix of Arabic nouns from singular to dual - The following nouns are in the singular forms, change them to dual nominative, accusative and genitive patterns.
- Write down the singular forms of these dual nouns 16 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
17 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 3 : (THE PLURAL) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.0 The Sound Masculine Plurals 3.1.1 The nominative Case of the sound Masculine plural 3.1.2 The Accusative and effective Cases of the sound Masculine plural 3.2.0 The Sound feminine plurals 3.2.1 The nominative case of the sound feminine plural 3.2.2 The Accusative and Genitive Cakes of the sound feminine plural 3.3.0 The Broken Plurals 3.3.1 Nominative 3.3.2 Nominative 3.3.3 Genitive 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to the study of the Arabic plurals of nouns.
In this Unit you will be introduced to the various plurals in Arabic and their uses in oral and written expression.
It is important to know the plurals in Arabic which is called and which point to people, things, animals or places that are more than two.
Further more, this is unlike other languages where the plural begins from two nouns.
It may also be interesting to let you know from the unset that the plural in Arabic are classified into Sound Plurals and Broken Plurals.
The sound plurals could also be either the sound masculine plural or the sound feminine plural.
These are the various divisions of Arabic plurals you will come across in this Unit;thus come on board and let us discuss them one by one.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this Unit you should be able to?
- Give account of kinds of plurals in Arabic language - Identify the sound masculine plurals, the sound feminine plurals and the broken plurals - Explain the rules that govern the Arabic plurals 18 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.0 (The Sound Masculine Plural) As you have been told during our discussion in the introduction to this Unit, there are different kinds of plurals in the Arabic tongue.
The first one is the sound Masculine plural, .
This is a plural whose pattern of singular never changes or be replaced.
Rather.
It is suffixed with and or and .
The noun must be given fat-hah, e.g.
Muslimūna or Muslimīna , the same meaning.
This is plural form of Muslim a male Muslim.
We shall treat this very well as we are going to another content where examples will be given to make the rules clear.
3.1.1 The Nominative Case of the Sound Masculine Plural The nominative case of the above plural will be suffixed by and i.e.
.
The will elongate the preceding consonant which is the last letter of the singular noun.
The is expected to take fat-hat vowel.
We hereby present a table to you to illustrate this clearer.
Plurals of the Sound Masculine Singular in the nominative cases Teachers A Teacher The peasants The peasant Sound men A Sound Man The believers The believer The citizens The citizen Workers A worker The Engineers The engineer The Travellers The traveler Listeners A Listener Unbelievers An Unbeliever Have you seen how we convert the singular to plural?
The above examples are sound plurals and are for masculine gender in nominative case.
Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the rules of converting singular of sound masculine gender of Arabic nouns to plurals in the nominative case.
3.1.2 The Accusative and Genitive Cases of the Sound Masculine Plurals.
The accusative and genitive cases of the sound masculine plurals share the same suffix.
It is the context in which the words are used in the sentence that will determine whether the plural noun is in accusative or genitive case.
The plurals are 19 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 suffixed with and .
Yau and nun, that is, the yāu is elongating the last letter of the singular noun which must be given kasrah, while nūn still remains unchanged with fat-hah.
For instance, the accusative and genitive singular noun of Muslim is and musliman and muslimin respectively.
Let us now change the nominative examples to accusative and then genitive.
The Plural Nouns in the Accusative Case Teachers A Teacher The peasants The peasant Sound men A sound man The believers The believer The citizens The citizen Workers A Worker The engineers The engineer The travellers The traveller Listeners A Listener Unbelievers An Unbelievers The Plural Nouns in the Genitive Case Teachers A Teacher The peasants The peasant Sound men A sound man The believers The believer The citizens The citizen Workers A Worker The engineers The engineer The travellers The traveller Listeners A Listener Unbelievers An Unbelievers Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the Accusative and Genitive Cases of the Arabic Sound Masculine Plurals.
Illustrate your answer with two examples.
3.2.0 The Sound Feminine Plural The sound feminine plural form is quite different from the masculine.
You have known in the previous Unit that if a masculine gender noun is a male Muslim, then the feminine gender will be , Muslimatun, a female Muslim, a letter , known as tau al-marbutah (closed tau), is expected to be a suffix to the last letter of masculine singular noun e.g.
feminine masculine .
The 20 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 plural form of the sound feminine noun is suffixed with alif and tau.
The tau marbutah will be changed to open tau “ ” e.g.
Singular Plural 3.2.1 The Nominative Case of the Sound Feminine Plural As we have said earlier the alif and tau ‘ ’ will be at the suffix of any feminine singular noun to form a sound feminine plural.
At the nominative case, feminine plural shares the same feature with singular nouns by possessing both single and double vowels as the case may be e.g.
Female The Female Muslims The table below will illustrate this clearer.
Nominative The Sound Feminin Plural Singular Female Teachers A female teacher The ladies The lady The female writer The female writer Sound women A sound woman Female pupils A female pupil Accusative and genitive of the sound feminine plural share the same vowels both at definite and indefinite levels.
We shall give example of both together once you have learnt the nominative, accusative and genitive of singular nouns in the previous lessons.
3.2.2 Accusative and Genitive of the Sound Feminine Plural Like you have been told that they share the same characteristics, the ‘u’ or ‘un’ of nominative changes to ‘i’ or in.
See the table below as we use the same examples above to show both accusative and genitive cases of the sound feminine plural 21 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Accusative The Sound Feminine Plural Singular Female Teachers The ladies The female writer Sound women Female pupils Genitive The sound Feminine Plural Singular Female Teachers The ladies The female writer Sound women Female pupils You will notice that simgle vowel kasrah and double vowel kasratan are both used for accusative and genitive cases of the plural.
Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the rules of converting singular of Arabic sound feminine nouns to plurals in the nominative case.
Illustrate your answer with examples.
3.3.0 (The Broken Plurals) The broken plural is one whose pattern of singular changes with an alternation, addition or removal of part of alphabets.
This plural must be learnt and memorized by consulting the Arabic dictionary.
Some common measures of jam‘u al-taksir are.
Pens Eyes Men Books Houses There are a lot of forms of measures for this plural produced by Arabic grammarians.
I advice you to read the references and further readings suggested to you especially the dictionary.
These plurals share the same things in common with singular nouns in the three cases i. e. the nominative, accusative and genitive.
Let us have more examples of this plural form.
22 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 3.1.1 Nominative Plural Singular Stars Sciences Skins Professors The students The writers The souls Flags Loaves Occupations The above examples are nominative case for broken plurals.
Self Assessment Exercise Define Arabic broken plurals.
Mention five of its measures with examples.
3.3.2 Accusative As we have said earlier, the plurals share the same things in common with singular nouns in the three cases i. e. the nominative, accusative and genitive.
Let us illustrate the accusative case with the following examples.
Men Rivers Winds Mountains Eyes Hearts Swords Roads Cities House 3.3.3 Genitive The genitive of broken plurals also follows the genitive singular in vocalization.
See the table below.
Broken Plural Singular Successors Poor men Friends 23 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Countries Youths Braves Months Commanders Schools Offices Self Assessment Exercise ‘The broken plurals follow the singular nouns in all cases’.
Examine this statement.
4.0 CONCLUSION The plurals in Arabic is called al-Jam‘u .
It points to people, things, animals or places that are more than two.
The plurals in Arabic are classified into Sound Plurals and Broken Plurals.
The sound plurals could also be either the sound masculine plural which takes waw and nun in the nominative cases or yau and nun in the accusative and genitive cases or the sound feminine plural which takes alif and open tau as suffixes; and dammah in the nominative case; and kasrah in the accusative and genitive cases.
The plural forms of Arabic broken plurals follow the singular nouns in all cases.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit explores the basic techniques of how to identify the various plurals that are available in Arabic Language.
In discusses the sound masculine and sound feminine plurals and their nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
The broken plurals is appropriately explained; its measures as produced by the grammarians briefly mentioned and what it shares in common with its singular forms highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1) Identify the plurals among the following words and state the class of plurals they belong.
2) Explain the rules guiding the sound masculine and feminine plurals 3) Write the broken plural forms of the following singular nouns and mention which case they belong to.
24 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
25 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 4 PRONOUNS ( Ađ-Đamā’ir) CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personal Pronouns 3.2 Demonstrative Pronouns 3.3 Interrogative Pronouns 3.4 Relative Pronouns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to this unit; you will be introduced to pronouns in Arabic language.
These pronouns are of different kinds like any other nouns in the different languages.
The mastery of your mother tongue pronouns will come to your aid in this unit.
Relax and start reading the contents one after the other.
You will also learn the usage of these pronouns in the Arabic language, how, when and why are they used.
The personal, the demonstrative, the relative and the interrogative pronouns are your focus in this unit.
Once again take it easy and let us advance.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the different kinds of pronouns in Arabic language • explain the grammatical rules governing pronouns in the Arabic language • illustrate how Arabic pronouns are used in oral and written expressions 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Personal Pronouns When pronouns stand for persons, they are called personal pronouns.
Personal pronouns in Arabic can be either in singular, dual or plural.
When they are in second and third person singular and plural, personal pronouns in Arabic may also indicate gender.
In other words, they may indicate masculine or feminine.
Persons are another feature of the personal pronoun.
This is another grammatical category of pronouns.
Here, let us imagine that you and another person or persons are involved in a discussion about another person or persons 26 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 who may not necessarily be present.
You are the 1st person when you talk; your listener or listeners, are the 2nd person and the one spoken about is 3rd person The following are the personal pronouns in Arabic language in nominative case.
Singular Personal Pronouns First Person (Masculine & Feminine) I Second Person (Masculine) You Second Person (Feminine) You Third Person (Masculine) He Third Person (Feminine) She Dual Personal Pronouns First person (Masc & Fem) we Second person (Masc & Fem) you Third person (Masc & Fem) they Note- There is no difference of gender in dual personal pronouns Plural Personal Pronouns First person (Masculine & Feminine) we Second person (Masculine) you Second person (Feminine) you Third person (Masculine) they Third person (feminine) they The following are the personal pronouns in Arabic language in the accusative case These personal pronouns are called contiguous pronouns, Singular First person (Masc & Fem) my book - Second person (Masculine) your book - Second person (Fem) your book - Third person (Masculine) his book - Third person (Fem) her book - Dual First person (Masc & Fem) our book - Second person (Masc & Fem) your book - Third person (Masc & Fem) their book - 27 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Plural First person (Masc & Fem) our book - Second person (Masc) your book - Second person (Fem) your book - Third person (Masc) their book - Third person (Fem) their book - Self Assessment Exercise The personal pronouns are very important in our everytime expression.Discuss them in detail with illustrations.
3.2 Demonstrative Pronouns A pronoun is demonstrative when it points to a person or thing.
Usually demonstrative pronoun can be either singular, dual or plural depending on whether the person or things they point out are singular, dual or plural.
The Demonstrative Pronouns are: This (Masculine) Singular This (Feminine) Singular These (Masculine) Dual These (Feminine) Dual These (Masc & Fem) Plural Let us use them in complete sentences This is a boy This is a girl These are two boys These are two girls These are boys (more than two) These are girls ( more than two) That (Masculine singular) That (Feminine Singular) Those (dual& plur., masc & fem) See examples in sentences below That book That bag Those men Those girls Self Assessment Exercises 28 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Define a demonstrative pronoun.
Give an example of each of them in complete sentences.
3.3 Interrogative Pronouns (asmau al-istifhamiyat) Pronouns used for the purpose of asking questions are called interrogative, al-istifham The most Common Interrogative Pronouns are: Who?
?
What?
?
Where?
?
How?
?
When?
?
How many?
?
How much?
?
Which?
?
See how we make use of these in a given sentence Who came yesterday?
What is this?
Where are you going?
How are you?
When are you returning?
How many books did you read?
How much is this pen?
Which house?
Self Assessment Exercises Enumerate the interrogative pronouns and use them in sentences of your own.. 3.4 Relative Pronouns Relative pronouns are similar to interrogate pronouns, except that relative pronouns introduce subordinate clauses, and at the same time connect them with the main phrases; e. g. (The man who came yesterday).
The relative pronouns in Arabic are: Which, that, who (Masc.
Sing) Which, that, who (Fem) The following are the dual personal relative pronouns in Arabic language in nominative case.
29 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Which, that, who (Masc.
dual) Which, that, who (Fem.
dual) Which, that, who (Masc.
Plural) Which, that, who (Fem.
Plural) After you have been introduced to the above relative pronouns let us make use of them in sentences.
The boy who went to the school The woman who returned from the market The two books that I read.
The people who traveled to their home land The female teachers who arrived yesterday .
The two girls whom I saw on the way.
Self Assessment Exercises Use five of the relative pronouns in three different sentences in which they will be in the nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
4.0 CONCLUSION Pronouns are used in place of nouns to avoid monotony.
As we have first, second and third person pronouns in the nominative, accusative and genitive cases, we lso hae them in the singular, dual and plural forms.
Other different kinds of pronouns range from the personal, demonstrative, interrogative to the relative pronouns.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit introduces you to different kinds of pronouns.
It also teaches you how to make use of some of these pronouns in a sentence.
The difference between singular, dual and plural personal pronouns surfaced while the grammatical cases in which we can find the pronouns are not left out.
The Pronouns have been used in sentences as illustrations and examples.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Write down all the personal pronouns from singular to plural.
2) Write all the interrogative pronouns that you know.
3) Mention two relative pronouns and two demonstrative pronouns and use them in a compete sentence.
30 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
31 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 5 SUBJECT AND PREDICATE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Subjects and Predicates 3.2 Adjectives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to the last unit of this module.
Here you will be introduced to subjects and predicates in Arabic Language.
You will also learn the adjectives and its various forms.
The subjects, predicates and adjectives are very important in Arabic grammar.
We hope you will take your time dealing with them diligently.
Thank you.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Discuss the Subject and predicate in Arabic language • Construct sentences consisting of subject and predicate in Arabic • Explain the adjective and its various forms in spoken and written Arabic • State the difference between subject, predicate and adjective 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Subject and Predicate Subject and predicate are nominative nouns.
The subject (al-mubtada) begins a nominal sentence while the predicate (al-khabar) complete its full meaning.
We want you to know that the subject (al-mubtada’) is always definite noun while the predicate is (al-khabar) always indefinite.
The examples below will assist you in comprehending the above explanations.
Knowledge is light The male teacher is standing The boy is present The girl is small The house is spacious The man is tall 32 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 The female teacher is sitting The woman is beautiful The blessing is a wish The female student is clever You will observe that the nouns that begin the sentences have definite articles that is what we called the subject al-mubtada’ and the nouns that complete the sentences are indefinite articles.
This is called (al-khabar).
Also, you will notice that if the subject is masculine the predicate will also be masculine and vice-versa.
You can also change the singular to dual or plural.
Once you have done that, the subject and predicate will also be either dual or plural.
Now let us change some of those examples above to dual and plural.
You will notice that if subject changes, the predicate will also change.
The two boys are present The two women are beautiful These are dual examples.
Now let us see the plural form The men are tall The female students are clever Self Assessment Exercise Explain the subject and predicate in Arabic grammar.
Illustrate your answer with two samples each.
3.2 The Adjective (aş-Şifah) In Arabic, we say adjective and the qualified (as-sifatu wa `l- mawsuuf).
.
In the Arabic tongue, adjective may be used as a noun.
Both noun and adjective share the same pattern of grammatical rules.
They must agree in singular, dual or plural pattern; so also in the definite or indefinite, masculine or feminine patterns.
Constant practice in reading and consultation of dictionary of Arabic will determine how much you can acquire as far as nouns and adjectives are concerned.
Never mind, we will give you the guideline that if you see the adjective and the qualified, you will quickly recognize them.
As you are following me in this discussion, the knowledge of subjects and predicates will assist you a lot.
Hope you have gone through and master the rules.
The adjective and the qualified (noun) are twin sisters; they do not leave each other.
They look alike; they share the same thing in common.
The examples below will showcase these latter characteristics.
Let us have them.
33 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 The small boy The fall man The beautiful woman The small girl The glorious Qur’ān The short story Now looking at the above examples, all are combination of masculine and feminine, definite and indefinite.
We must point out that there is a difference between subject and predicate and adjective because the adjective follows the qualified in all while the predicate does not follow the subject in all.
What do we mean by all is that if noun is singular form, an adjective will also be singular.
Further, if it is either dual, plural, masculine, feminine, nominative, accusative, or genitive, it should be reiterated by way of emphasis that the adjective follows the noun in all.
Let us take example one be one by using one example for masculine in all and feminine in all.
A small boy (Nominative) A small boy (Accusative) A small boy (Genitive) The small boy (nom) (Masc.)
The small boy (Acc.)
(Masc.)
The small boy (Gen.) (Masc.)
A small girl (nom) (fem) A small girl (Acc.)
(fem) A small girl (Gen.) (fem) The small girl (nom) (fem) The small girl (Acc) (fem) The small girl (Gen) (fem) You will notice that they follow each other in all ramifications.
The same thing occurs in dual form.
The only slight change is in plural where if noun is a sound plural the adjective can be either sound or broken.
At times noun can also be broken while adjective takes different form of plural.
All is well, when noun is plural adjective is also plural.
34 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Examples: The small boys The small girls Hence, you could see that nouns are broken plural while adjectives are sound plural.
It may also be other way round.
e. g. The Ignorant travelers.
The rich Muslims.
Hence, the nouns are sound plural, while the adjectives take the broken plural form.
Self Assessment Exercise The adjective must agree with the noun it qualifies in all cases.
Discuss this submission.
5.0 CONCLUSION In the Arabic language a sentence may consist of subject and predicate.
The subject and predicate as a grammatical rule differ from each other in certain characteristics.
While the subject is definite the predicate is indefinite.
On the other hand, the two are nominative nouns.
Secondly, adjectives that qualify nouns share the same features such as numbers, gender, definiteness or indefiniteness.
So also they must agree in the nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
Finally the difference between subjects and predicates and adjectives is that adjective follow the qualified in all, while the subject differs from predicate in the article.
The only area where there is a slight change is in plural form where either of the two (noun and adjective) (subject and predicate) can take the sound plural while the other take the broken plural.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been introduced to subjects and predicates.
You have also learnt the adjective and the qualified.
You have been told that the qualified is a noun described by an adjective.
In this unit also, you are acquainted with the fact that the subject, the predicate and the adjective share many things in common except in some places where they differ from one another.
35 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Explain fully what you know on the subject, the predicate and the adjective in the Arabic language.
2) Write ten sentences in Arabic subject and predicate five for the masculine gender and five others for the feminine.
3) Use these nouns and adjectives in all forms that you know.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
36 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 MUDULE 2: THE VERBS Unit 1 Importance of Verb Unit 2 Divisions of Verb Unit 3 The Perfect Measure of Trilateral Verbs Unit 4 The Imperfect Measure of Trilateral Verb Unit 5 The Imperative UNIT 1 IMPORTANCE OF VERB 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Verb 3.2 Types of Verb 3.2.1 Trilateral 3.2.2 Quadrilateral 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to the first unit of module two.
In this unit you will be introduced to the importance of verbs in Arabic language.
Type of verbs such as Trilateral and quadrilateral verbs shall also be introduced to you.
Come on board, let us move forward.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • State the importance of verbs in Arabic language grammar.
• Highlight the trilateral verbs in Arabic language grammar • Identify the quadrilateral verbs in Arabic grammar.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Verbs in Arabic Grammar Verbs in Arabic language, just like in any other languages of the world, are a most important linguistic element.
We want you to know that there is no other part of speech that could exist alone as a sentence and have meaning without a verb in it, where as sentence can be formed by a verb alone.
If we say ‘ijlis’ ‘sit’, It is a complete sentence that could portray a full meaning that a sentence with a subject, verb and object could have.
A verb could be defined as a 37 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 grammatical word that states the action(s) performed or relationship that exists between a subject and an object of a given sentence.
As the link and the presenter of the actions performed or the relationship that exist between the ‘performer’ and the ‘action performed’, the verb is then very important aspect of the grammatical parts of speech in Arabic language .
3.2.0 Types of Verbs In Arabic language there are trilateral verbs and quadrilateral verbs.
The two types have their way of measures.
We shall discuss these verbs extensively.
3.2.1 The Trilateral Verb Generally, composition of Arabic verbs is three radicals which are the root letters.
The reason why it is called trilateral verbs is that it consists of three radical letters.
For example ‘ Kataba’, he wrote.
The three radicals here are k, t, b.
The measure of the trilateral verbs is fa‘ala , fa‘ila or fa‘ula .
The first letter of trilateral verb is called fāu al-fi li, the middle or second letter is known as aynu al-fi‘il, while the last letter is Lam al- fi‘il These are explained in the following examples The meaning of is ‘to do’ because it is a doing word (action), ‘Kataba’ means ‘to write’.
sami‘a means, to hear and qaruba is to move near.
This table will illustrate our saying clearer Fa‘ula Fa‘ila Fa‘ala To be honored To play To write To be huge To hear To help To be dignified To praise To sit To be difficult To rejoice To open To move near To feel thirsty To find There are some other verbs that consist of additional letters(s) with trilateral verbs.
We do not regard them as quadrilateral.
These shall be taught in higher 38 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 level.
It should be noted that the above table is practically based on simple trilateral verbs.
Self Assessment Exercise Highlight the significance of verb as a part of speech.
Discuss the trilateral patterns of the Arabic language verbs.
3.2.2 Quadrilateral Verbs The quadrilateral verb in Arabic language is those verbs that consist of four radical letters.
For example ‘basmala’.
He began ‘with the name of Allah’.
The measure of quadrilateral verb in Arabic language is fa‘lala, to do, The examples of quadrilateral verbs are the following.
To roll To shake To laugh To say the name of God As we have told you earlier, the quadrilateral verbs in Arabic language are very few in number.
We are introducing these verbs to you so that you will identify them in any Arabic sentence.
Self Assessment Exercise How many radical letters do the quadrilateral verbs contain?
Illustrate your answer with examples.
4.0 CONCLUSION ( ) Verbs are very important parts of speech in any language including Arabic.
The trilateral and the quadrilateral are two important patterns of Arabic language verbs.
The trilateral are verbs that consist of three radical letters wile the quadrilaterals are those consisting of four radical letters.
The Arabic trilateral verbs are many while the quadrilateral verbs are in only four patterns.
5.0 SUMMARY ( ) This unit introduces you to the importance of verbs as a part of speech and its various kinds in the Arabic language.
It discusses in brief the Arabic trilateral verbs and quadrilateral verbs and an eye-birds view of their radical letters.
It provides examples and gives exercises that will help your mastery of those aspects of the Arabic language verbs.
39 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Explain the importance of verbs in Arabic language.
2) Write two trilateral verbs for each of its three patterns, that is, fa‘ala, fa‘ila and fa‘ula 3) Explain quadrilateral verbs with examples.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
40 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 2 DIVISION OF VERBS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sound Verbs 3.2 Weak Verbs 3.3 Transitive Verbs 3.4 Intransitive Verbs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Like in the English language with which you are familier, there are various divisions of verbs, regular and irregular, auxiliary, transitive and intransitive.
Also in tenses, we have past, present, future and command.
So also is the case with Arabic language.
In this unit, you will be introduced to these divisions and different kinds of verbs as taught in Arabic language grammar.
Copious examples shall be given to you to facilitate your understanding of the issues involved.
Exercises shall also be provided to test your competence.
You are welcome.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: ♦ Identify sound and weak verbs in spoken and written Arabic language.
♦ Explain transitive and intransitive verbs in Arabic grammar.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT: Division of Verbs 3.1 Sound Verb Sound verb is a verb whose three radical letters do not contain any of the weak letters.
The weak letters are, .
alif, wawu and yau.
Examples of sound verbs are kataba, to write.
qara’a, to read.
sami‘a, to hear.
The above examples showed that none of the letters is weak letter.
Sound verb is also divided into three main categories.
1) Salim, (free) This is a kind of verb that is pure of any weak letters and does not contain hamzat ‘’ or compound letters.
Examples of Sālim are as follows: To write To sit To go To help 41 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 To hear To learn 2) Mahmūz (Possessor of hamzat) This is a sound verb that contains hamzat in one of its three radical letters.
This kind of verb is very few in Arabic language.
Examples of Mahmuz are these; To take To ask To read The hamzat could be at the begin like or middle such as and last letter like 3) Muđa‘afu – (Compound) This is a kind of verb that the second and the third letters are the same but rather made as one letter.
Examples are the following: To run away To spread To do harm To be stingy To point Self Assessment Exercise Examine your self on Arabic language sound verbs and its various kinds.
3.2 Weak Verb This is a verb that contains one of the three weak letters, that is, ( It also has sub-divisions.
1) al-Mithāl : This is a verb whose first letter is one of the weak letters.
Examples are: To find To stand To inherit To dry To give charity The above verbs begin with ‘ ’ and .
These two letters are weak letters in Arabic.
2) al-ajwaf : al-ajwaf is a kind of verb whose middle letter is a weak letter.
See the example below 42 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 To say To get To sleep To come To sell You can see that the middle letter is alif () and this is one of the weak letters.
3) an-Naaqiş : an-nāqiş is a verb whose last letter is a weak letter.
Let us see the examples of this kind of verb To walk/move To judge To forbid To throw To become high You will see that the last letter of the above examples is pronounced alif ) but written with Yāu ( ).
Both alif and yāu are weak letters.
4) al-lafīfu : This is a kind of verb that possesses two weak letters in a particular verb.
Those two letters may be separated or followed each other.
a) al-lafīfu al-Mafruq (The Separated lafif) : This is a verb that its two weak letters are separated from each other.
For example to safe to be secured b) al-lafifu, al-Maqrūn (The Joint lafif).
This is a verb whose two weak letters follow each other, e. g. To iron/press (a cloth) To fold You will notice that in a separated lafif example.
It is that separated and Then, if you look well at the joint lafif, you will see that the and follow each other in and Self Assessment Exercise Explain Arabic language weak verbs and its various kinds.
Give examples for what you say.
43 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 3.3 Transitive Verb This is a verb in which the subject of a verb requires an object in a given sentence.
Examples are: To beat To help To open To praise The above examples require an object in a given sentence.
3.4 Intransitive Verb : It is a verb in which the subject of any sentence does not require object.
Examples are: To come To go To rejoice To sit To go out These are Arabic language verbs that need no object.
Let us see the example of both transitive and intransitive verb in two sentences.
Transitive Verb: (Ahmad killed the dog).
You see that Ahmad is subject, is the verb and is the object of the sentence.
Intransitive Verb: Adam came ).
You see that the sentence does not require an object.
Self Assessment Exercise ♦ Expatiate upon transitive and intransitive verbs in the Arabic language.
Provide examples for your submissions.
4.0 CONCLUSION Arabic language verbs are divided into sound and weak verbs.
The sound verbs are those whose letters are completely sound, those that have hamzah as one of its trilaterls called mahmūz and those with doubled letter called muda ‘aff.
The weak verbs are those that contain weak letter in one of its trillaterals.
The grammatical terminology for verb whose fāu `l-fi‘l is a weak letter is mithāl; the verb whose ‘aynu `l-fi‘l is week is called ajwaf while that whose lāmu `l-fi ‘l is weak is called manqūşu `l-binā.
If a verb has more than one weak verb its 44 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 terminology is lafīf which could be mafruq if separated or maqrun if unseperated.
Arabic verbs can also be transitive requiring an object or intransitive not requiring an object.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit introduces you to the divisions of verb in the Arabic language.
It discusses the division of sound verbs into Sālim (free), Mahmūz (Possessor of Hamzat) and muda‘af (compound);and the division of weak verbs into mithāl, ajwaf, nāqis and lafif.
The transitive and intransitive verbs are also treated in the Unit.
Copius examples in words and sentences are provided for illustration.
The unit also contains tests meant for your self assessment.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Define Arabic language sound verbs and illustrate them with examples.
(2) Give a list of Arabic weak verbs and their various divisions with illustrations.
3) Explain the transitive and intransitive verbs in Arabic language.
Mention five verbs for each of them and use them in sentences.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
45 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 3 The Past Tense /Perfect Verbs 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content Conjugation of the Past Tense/Perfect Trilateral Sound Verbs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References and further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be learning the conjugation of verbs in Arabic language.
The measure of the tense will cover first, second and third persons singular, dual, and plural.
You will be introduced to the easier techniques with which an Arabic grammar leaner like you could apply in conjugating perfect Arabic verbs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • Construct oral and written sentences using Arabic perfect verbs • Identify the first person singular, dual and plural measure of Arabic perfect verbs • Identify the second person singular, dual and plural measure of Arabic perfect verbs • Identify the third person singular, dual and plural measure of the Arabic perfect verbs • Identify the morphemes (suffixation) with which could be added with a verb to facilitate grammatically correct conjugation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conjugation of the Past Tense/Perfect Trillateral Sound Verbs The past tense/simple perfect trilliteral sound verb is a verb used when we want to indicate activities or state in the past without indicating any connection with the present.
The simple perfect / past tense of trilateral sound verb is conjugated according to the following paradigm .
1st person singular (Masculine & Feminine) I did 2nd person singular Masculine You did 2nd person singular feminine You did 3rd person singular masculine He did 3rd person singular feminine She did 2nd person dual (masculine & feminine) You did 46 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 3rd person dual masculine They did 3rd person dual masculine They did 1st person dual and plural (masc.
& fem.)
We did 2nd person plural masculine You did 2nd person plural feminine You did 3rd person plural masculine They did 3rd person plural feminine They did There is a change of vowel in the third letter of the radicals.
i.e.
‘⌡ ’ other letters do not change.
For example fa’ala , ‘he did’ changes to fa’altu , ‘I did’.
There is no difference in conjugation whether a verb is fa’ala or facila or fa’ala .
it is only lam ‘ ’ that will change during the conjugation.
We will give you examples of various patterns.
Example (A): To write → to do This is where the second letter is given fat-hah ‘a’ 1st person singular (masc.and fem.)
I wrote 2nd person singular masculine You wrote 2nd person singular feminine You wrote 3rd person singular masculine He wrote 3rd person singular feminine She wrote 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
You wrote 3rd person dual masculine They wrote 3rd person dual feminine They wrote 1st person dual & plural (Masc.
& fem.)
We wrote 2nd person plural Masculine You wrote 2nd person plural feminine You wrote 3rd person plural masculine They wrote 3rd person plural feminine They wrote Example (B): We now conjugate which equates pattern: 1st person singular (masculine & feminine) I played 2nd person singular masculine You played 2nd person singular feminine You played 3rd person singular masculine He played 3rd person singular feminine She played 2nd person dual (masculine and feminine) You played 3rd person dual masculine They played 3rd person dual feminine They played 47 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 1st person dual and plural (masc.
& fem.)
We played 2nd person plural masculine You played 2nd person plural feminine You played 3rd person plural masculine They played 3rd person plural feminine They played Example (C) : The third and last pattern is such as 1st person singular (masc.
& fem.)
I am dignified 2nd person singular masculine You are dignified 2nd person singular feminine You are dignified 3rd person singular masculine He is dignified 3rd person singular feminine She is dignified 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
You are dignified 3rd person dual masculine They are dignified 3rd person dual feminine They are dignified 1st person dual & plural (masc &fem.)
We aredignified 2nd person plural masculine You are dignified 2nd person plural feminine You are dignified 3rd person plural masculine They are dignified 3rd person plural feminine They are dignified Dear students you will see that the third letter changes from vowel ‘a’ to sukun , or ‘u’ at other time there are morphemes at the suffix of the verb.
There is no distinction in conjugation whether the verb is fa’ala , facila or fa’ula .
48 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Self Assessment File Conjugate these following verbs in Arabic past tense/perfect measure.
♦ to desire ♦ to go ♦ to be difficult.
4.0 CONCLUSION.
( ) We hereby remind you of the basic rules by way of enphasy: The past tense/perfect trilliteral sound verb is a verb used when we want to indicate activities or state in the past without indicating any connection with thepresent.
There is a change of vowel in the third letter of the radicals.
i.e.
‘⌡ ’ other letters do not change.
There is no difference in conjugation whether a verb is fa’ala , facila or fa’ula 5.0 SUMMARY ( ) This unit treats the rules governing the conjugation of past tense/ perfect sound trilateral verbs which constute the largest number Arabic language verbs.
The unit adequately informs you of that there are no changes regarding the second letter vowels; and that the lat leter letter’s vowel changes from __ a to sukun or u.
The unit enriches your verbal vocabulary and technique of conjugation of trilateral sound verbs through adequate explanation and examples .
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Conjugate the following verbs in perfect form.
a - to study b - to sit c - to kill d to think e - to be good f - to be honoured g - to move near h - to rejoice i - to be free j - to open 49 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
50 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 4: The Present Continuous Tense/Imperfect Verbs ( ) 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Imperfect Measure of Trilateral Sound Verbs (indicative) 3.2 Future tense 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to another unit.
In this unit you will be introduced to the Present Continuous/Imperfect verbs in Arabic language.
The conjugation of the present active indicative form of the trilateral sound verbs will also be presented for you to study, digest and comprehend.
You will also learn the future tense of the trilateral sound verbs in the unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify present continuous/imperfect tense of Arabic sound trillateral verbs • Write present continuous/imperfect tense of Arabic sound trillateral verbs in all the active indicative forms • Mention the prefixes and suffixes (morphemes) of the present continuous/imperfect tense in the Arabic language • Construct sentences using Arabic present continuous/imperfect tense trillateral sound Arabic verbs.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The imperfect measure of Arabic trilateral sound verbs As in the English language, the imperfect verb in Arabic is any verb that indicates the occurrence or state of an action in the present.
We need to introduce you to six patterns which imperfect tense form can take before we go further.
Like we have said earlier in the previous unit the perfect tense takes only three patterns which are , and .
Now let us see the patterns or forms of the imperfect verbs.
Imperfect Perfect 1B 2B e.g.
e.g.
e.g.
e.g.
e.g.
e.g.
51 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 e.g.
e.g.
e.g.
e.g.
e.g.
e.g.
Now, take note that ‘ ’ consists of three different patterns of imperfect.
The second letter of perfect verb could be vowel ‘a’ ‘i’ or ‘u’, fathah, kasrah or dammah.
You will also see that ‘ ’ has two imperfect forms that is, the letter could be either ‘a’ or ‘i’ (fat-hah or kasrah ’ remains unchanged and retains its ‘u’ (dammah) vowel.
See the examples above as we will also illustrate it further below.
- He opens / He is opening to open - He sits / He is sitting to sit - He writes / he is writing to write - He plays / he is playing to play - He thinks / he is thinking to think He moves near/ he is moving near to move near Now let us conjugate the present/imperfect tense verb of Arabic language.
We want you to know that there are four letters of imperfect verb.
These are hamzat ‘’ nun ‘ ’, yau ‘ ’ and tau ‘ ’.
These four letters are prefixed with the imperfect verbs.
1st person singular (masc.
and fem.)
I do (af ‘(a) (i) (u) lu) 2nd person singular masculine You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) lu) 2nd person singular feminine You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) līna) 3rd person singular masculine He does (yaf ‘(a) (i) (u) lu) 3rd person singular She does (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) lu) 2nd person dual (masculine and feminine) You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) lani) 3rd person dual masculine They do (yaf ‘(a) (i) (u) lu) 3rd person dual feminine They do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) lani) 1st person dual and plural (masc.
& fem.)
We do (naf ‘(a) (i) (u) lu) 2nd person plural masculine You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) luna) 2nd person plural feminine You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) lna) 3rd person plural masculine They do (yaf ‘(a) (i) (u)luna) 3rd person plural feminine They do (yaf‘(a) (i)(u)lna) 52 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 In the above paradigm, you will see that we have treated the three possible ways in which the second radical of perfect ‘ε’ can be either a, i or u (fathah, kasrah and dammah).
Now let use Yaftau “ ” he opens/is opening as example.
1st person singular masc.
& fem.
I open / am opening 2nd person singular masculine You open/ are opening 2nd person singular feminine You open/are opening 3rd person singular masculine He opens/is opening 3rd person singular She opens / is opening 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
You (two) open are opening 3rd person dual masculine They (two) open/are opening 3rd person dual feminine They (two) are pening 1st person dual & plural (masc.& fem.)
We open / are opening 2nd person plural masculine You open / are opening 2nd person plural feminine You open /are opening 3rd person plural masculine They open / are opening 3rd person plural feminine They open / are opening The above example is based on fat-hah ‘a’ vowel in the penultimate letter.
Now let us see the kasrah ‘i’ vowel in the penultimate letter also.
1st person singular (masc.
and fem.)
I sit / am sitting 2nd person singular masculine You sit / are sitting 2nd person singular feminine You sit / are sitting 3rd person singular masculine He sits / is sitting 3rd person singular She sits / is sitting 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
You sit / are sitting 3rd person dual masculine They (two) sit / are sitting 3rd person dual feminine They (two) sit / are sitting 1st person dual & plural (masc.
& fem).
We sit / are sitting 2nd person plural masculine You sit / are sitting 2nd person plural feminine You sit / are sitting 3rd person plural masculine They sit / are sitting 3rd person plural feminine They sit / are sitting The last pattern is dammah ‘u’ vowel as in ‘he studies’.
1st person singular (masc.
& fam.)
I study / am studying 2nd person singular masculine You study / are studying 2nd person singular feminine You study / are studying 3rd person singular masculine He studies / is studying 3rd person singular She studies/is studying 53 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 You (two) study / are 2nd person dual (masc.
& fem.)
studying 3rd person dual masculine They (two) are studying They (two) study / are 3rd person dual feminine studying 1st person dual &plural (masc.
& fem.)
We study / are studying 2nd person plural masculine You study / are studying 2nd person plural feminine You study / are studying 3rd person plural masculine They study / are studying 3rd person plural feminine They study / are studying This is how you will be conjugating the imperfect, simple present and present continuous tenses indicative Arabic verbs irrespective of vowel on the second letter of perfect verb.
3.2 Future Tense The imperfect indicative in Arabic language is also used to express future action, but in this case it is generally strengthened by prefixing the future particle sa… or saofa… (will or shall).
These are examples for illustratuion: The conjugation of future tense is as follows: 1st person singular (masc.
& I will/shall write fem.)
2nd person singular masculine You will/shall write 2nd person singular feminine You will/shall write (masculine) he will / shall 3rd person singular masculine write 3rd person singular She will/shall write 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
You will/shall write 3rd person dual masculine They will/shall write 3rd person dual feminine They will/ shall write 1st person dual and plural We will/shall write (masculine and feminine) 2nd person plural masculine You will/shall write 2nd person plural feminine You will/shall write 3rd person plural masculine They will/shall write 54 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 3rd person plural feminine They will/shall write Self Assessment Exercise Give an example of the six patterns of imperfect indicative verbs in Arabic.
Write them in the first, second, third, singular dual and plural forms.
5.0 CONCLUSION By way of enphasy the following rules governing the conjugation of verbs into imperfect tense can be derived from this lesson: The imperfect/present Continuous verb in Arabic is any verb that indicates the occurrence or state of an action in the present.
The imperfect/ present continuous tense form can take six patterns : ‘ ’ consists of three different patterns whereby the second letter could be vowel ‘a’ ‘i’ or ‘u’, fat-hah, kasrah or dammah.
Also ‘ ’ has two imperfect forms that is, the second letter could be either ‘a’ or ‘i’ (fat-hah or kasrah) form.
’ remains unchanged and retains its ‘u’ (dammah) vowel.
All the verbs in this category are sounds, trilateral and indicative imperfect.
The imperfect indicative in Arabic language is also used to express future action generally strengthened by prefixing the future particle sa… or saofa… (will or shall).
5.0 SUMMARY This unit treats some basic techniques of conjugation of imperfect verbs.
Specifically, it analyzes the six features that affects the vowels of the penultimate letter of the perfect tense which is the middle letter and could be vowel a, i, or u.
(fat-hah, kasrah or dammah).
It shows that these vowels do not change the paradigm.
The examples also include the four letters , , , and that are prefixed with the imperfect tense.
Examples also include thye technique of conjugating the singular, dual and plural forms of the imperfect tense.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Conjugate these verbs in imperfect forms 1. he kills 2. he plays 3. he rejoices 4. he is free 5. he is good 6. he beats 55 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 7. he looks 8. he hears 9. he thinks 10. he knows 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
56 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 5: The Imperative 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Imperative 3.2 Rule Guiding Hamzatu al-wasl 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn the command tense of Arabic grammar which is also referred to as the imperative.
You will also be introduced to the techniques of conjugating Arabic verbs into the imperative measure.
Knowledge acquired from this unit will initiate you properly to the method of conjugating Arabic verbs in the imperative form.
We implore you to revise the techniques and methods of conjugating all verbs as they were taught earlier so as to understand this unit better.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Identify the imperative verbs in Arabic grammar.
- Describe how various verbs could be conjugated into the imperative - Demonstrate the use of the imperative in oral and written Arabic.
You are now invited into the world of conjugation of verbs into the imperative.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Imperative and how to formulate it.
The Arabic imperative proper is any verb that is used to make a request or demand an action.
The action may be immediate or later.
The imperative is derived from the second persons irrespective of the number (singular, dual and plural).
So far these are the persons to be commanded or from whom actions are demanded.
The prefixed tau ‘ ’ and its vowel fat-hah, ‘ a’ are cut off, this ‘ta’ ‘ ’ and the vowel will be replaced by hamzat al-wasl ‘ ’.
There will be a change at the vowel of the last letter of the verbs.
It is only in the second person plural feminine that the vowel of the last letter will not change.
Thus, it will remain as it is.
Remember that, we have said this tense is derived from second persons of imperfect verbs.
e.g.
taktubu, ‘you write’ .
The imperative tense will be ‘uktub’ ‘write’ ‘ ’.
From the above example you will see that the prefixed tau and vowel ‘a’ have been cut off, while they are replaced by hamzatu al-waşl 57 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 and vowel ‘u’.
There is a change of vowel at the last letter’s vowel from ‘u’ to ‘sukun’.
Now let us see the operation of these following verbs.
Second person singular masculine Write Second person singular feminine Write Second person dual masculine & feminine Write Second person plural masculine Write Second person plural feminine Write You will observe that, it is only second person singular that the vowel changes from ‘u’ to ‘sukun’.
Others are omission of letters.
Now see the imperatives as they are derived from imperfects.
← ← ← ← ← 3.2 Rules Guiding Hamzat al-waşl The vowel on hamzat al-waşl will follow the penultimate letter of imperfect form to indicate which of the vowels ‘u’ or ‘i’ (dammah or kasrah) is going to be used.
If the imperative is vowel ‘a’ or ‘i’ the hamzat al-waşl will be given vowel ‘i’ but if vowel ‘u’ (dammah) is on the penultimate letter, then hamzatu al-waşl will also possess ‘u’.
Like the example above you will see that ‘tau’ is the penultimate letter of the verb ‘taktubu’ ‘ ’, you write.
The ‘tau’ is given dammah ‘u’; this results in giving hamzatu al-waşl of ‘uktub’ ‘write’ ‘ ’ dammah.
Let us illustrate the above explanations with the following examples.
Example One (tadrusu, ‘you write’ with penultimate letter given dammah ‘u’) 2nd person singular masculine Learn 2nd person singular feminine Learn 2nd person dual (masculine and feminine) Learn 2nd person plural masculine Learn 2nd person plural feminine Learn Example two ‘tajilsu’, ‘you sit’ ‘ ’ with kasrah ‘i’ at the penultimate letter.
58 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 2nd person singular masculine Sit down 2nd person singular feminine Sit down 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
Sit down 2nd person plural masculine Sit down 2nd person plural feminine Sit down Example three taftahu ‘you open’ ‘ ’ with penultimate letter possessing fat-hah ‘a’ 2nd person singular masculine Open 2nd person singular feminine Open 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
Open 2nd person plural masculine Open 2nd person plural feminine Open Self Assessment Exercise Explain in detail the imperative verb in Arabic language and the technique of con jugating it.
4.0 CONCLUSION Command or the Imperative formula can only be conjugated and applied to the second persons irrespective of the number or gender.
It is to be derived from the imperfect verbs only.
The prefixed tau ‘ ’ and its vowel fat-hah, ‘ a’ are cut off and be replaced by hamzat al-wasl ‘ ’.
Then there will be a change at the vowel of the last letter of the verbs.
It is only in the second person plural feminine that the vowel of the last letter will not change.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit explains the imperative in the Arabic language.
It explains the rule and discusses the basic techniques of conjugating verbs into imperative.
The highlight of such rules and technique is that, it is only from the second persons irrespective of number or gender that the imperative formular can be derived.
The rules guiding hamzatu-al-wasl, the end of the verbs to form imperative are also included in the Unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Conjugate the following second person's imperfect verbs onto their appropriate imperatives.
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
59 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
60 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 MODULE 3 PARTICLES Unit 1 The Prepositions and the Conjunctions Unit 2 Subjunctive Particles Unit 3 The Jussive and Interrogative Unit 4 The Vocative, Gerund and Complete Sentence UNIT 1 THE PREPOSITIONS AND CONJUNCTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Notes on the Prepositions 3.2 Arabic Prepositions.
3.3 Conjunctions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last Module ended with a study of imperative verbs.
The whole of Module Two dealt with verbs.
In this Module, you will begin another element of the sentence which is also very important in that it functions as that which joins parts of the sentence together.
You will be introduced to Arabic prepositions.
Because of the certain number of the preposition that you are about to study, you will not be given any vocabulary study for this Unit.
The prepositions and their meaning would be the words to be memorized for this unit.
You will learn conjunction in this Unit as well.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - List all the Arabic Prepositions and their meaning - Identify Conjunction words in the Arabic language and give their meaning 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Notes on the Prepositions A preposition in Arabic is a word used with a noun or pronoun to show their relationship with other words in a sentence.
Prepositions are words that are used to help substantives to express their case functions.
They are called prepositions because their position is immediately before the substantives they are associated 61 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 with.
Prepositions are to aid in expressing the case functions which are in use by the Arabic language speaker.
The meaning of the prepositions depends however on some other factors.
In order to translate the prepositions accurately, the following should be observed.
a) The basic meaning of the preposition as indicated in the Arabic usage.
b) The case construction with which preposition is used, and c) The use as indicated by the content of the passage.
i.e.
the context 3.2 ARABIC PREPOSITIONS Arabic prepositions only have impact on the nouns.
The particles are the following From On To Out of, Away from In With, in With Like For, to Since Since Except Except Until Except The last three (ta, wa, bi) are used for oath.
e.g.
By Allah Wallahi By Allah Tallahi By Allah Billahi A noun must be in genitive case (majrūr), if it is preceded by any of the above particles.
An illustration is given below.
From a school, Away from the place With the knoeldge On the table To mosques 62 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Like the light For benfit There are other types of preposition such as With Under Above After Before With the king, Under the chair Above the free.
After the party, Before the noon, Self Assessment Exercise Put the following Nominative nouns in the genitive cases A school The place, The knowledge The table A mosque, The light Benefit 3.3 Conjunction Arabic conjunction is a word whose only function is to link words, phrases, sentences etc etc.
The link can be done with the assistance of ħurūf al-‘aţf “the conjunctions”.
These are al-wāwu al-fāu and thuma .
The rule of the conjunction is that the two nouns concerned follow each other in all cases.
(nominative, accusative and genitive).
The examples below will shed more lights on this explanation – the Nominative The teacher & the students The girl & the m other The pen & the book The motor then bicycle The knowledge then Ignorance 63 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Accusative The teacher & the students The girl & the mother The pen & the book The motor then bicycle The knowledge then Ignorance Genitive The teacher & the students The girl & the mother The pen & the book The motor then bicycle The knowledge then Ignorance Self Assessment Exercise Explain the prepositions and conjunctions in Arabic language.
Mention one example each for both the preposition and conjunction.
4.0 CONCLUSION 1.
Prepositions are words that express relationships between two words.
When prepositions occur before nouns, those nouns will be in genitive cases, that is, they will be given kasrah, vowel ‘i’.
2.
Conjunctions in Arabic language are words that are used to link other words in a sentence.
Such other words that are joined together agree with each other in grammatical rules such as nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit treats grammatical issues relating to Preposition and Conjunction particules in the Arabic language.
It enumerates the particles and gives their meaning and functions.
The Conclusion highlights the grammatical rules and other relevant salient points derivable from the discussions.
Copious examples and necessary illustrations are provided as well as self assessment exercises that will help learners.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1) Explain the rule that guides the conjunction in Arabic grammar 2) List Ten Prepositions in Arabic and make use of the, in a simple sentences 3) Give two example of conjunction in a two different sentences 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS 64 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
65 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 2 SUBJUNCTIVE PARTICLES (Ħurūf an-naşb) Contents 0.0 Introduction 1.0 Objectives 2.0 Main Content 2.1 The Subjunctive Particles 2.2 Impact of Subjunctive Particles on Imperfect Verbs 2.3 Application of rule of Subjunctive Particles on Imperfect Verb 3.0 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 6.0 References and Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught grammatical rules governing verbs in the imperfect tenses in the subjunctive cases.
This will involve your recollection of some verb patterns and structures you have learnt earlier in some of the previous Units, e. g. sound verbs, the trilateral etc etc.
Subjecting imperfect verbs to the subjuctive moods is another important Arabic grammatical phenomenon.
The rules must be observed for the expressions to be adjudged grammatically perfect.
For this reason, this lesson is important - you will agree with me.
You are therefore welcomed to the study of imperfect verbs in the subjunctive mood and the rules underlying its application.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: - List the subjunctive particles - Identify the imperfect verbs having subjunctive ending - recognize imperfect verbs that should be put in the subjunctive mood.
.
- Demonstrate the techniques of putting imperfect verbs in the subjunctive moods.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 4.1 The Subjunctive Particles The following are the subjunctive particles in Arabic To Will never For instance, so that, in order Then Until So that not, 66 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 So that, 3.2 Impact of Subjunctive Particles on Imperfect Verbs Like we have told you in our introduction to this unit, the imperfect subjunctive could be compared with the present form of subjunctive tense in English.
The perfect indicative singular will change in the last letter’s vowel except the second person singular feminine that will change by omission of the letter.
Others which end with the preceded by a long vowel after the last radical lose their and if the preceding long vowel is dammah ‘u’ an extra alif is added.
e.g.
lan yaktubu (they will never write), .
The second person and the third person feminine plural will not change in their forms.
They remain as they are in indicative form.
‘lan’ is a particle of negation.
It negates the future of imperfect e.g.
(lan aktuba) I will never write.
3.3: Application of rule of Subjunctive Particles on Imperfect Verb This is the pattern to be followed in applying the rule of impact of Arabic subjunctive particles on imperfect verb forms.
Let us see how lan ‘ ’.
with the verb yaktubu ‘he writes’ as in the indicative will change in meaning and form in the subjunctive I will/shall never write You will never write (masc.)
sing.
You will never write (fem) (sing.)
He will never write She will never write You will never write (masc.
fem) dual We will/shall never write You will never write (masc.)
plural You will never write (fem.)
plural They will never write (masc) plural They will never write (fem.)
plural Let us take the subjunctive particle kay meaning ‘so that’ as another example and see how the rule is applied on another imperfect indicative to give us subjunctive mood.
The impact of this subjunctive particle on the imperfect indicative .
(yadrusu) he studies, will be as follows.
So that I study So that you study (Masc) (Sing) So that you study (fem.)
(sing) So that he studies (Masc) 67 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 So that she studies (fem.)
So that you study (masc.
and fem.)
So that they study (masc.)
dual So that they study (fem.)
dual So that we study So that you study (masc.)
plural So that you study (fem.)
So that they study (masc.)
plural So that they study (fem.)
plural We give another example of impact of subjunctive particle on imperfect indicative verb as follows by using hatta, until with the indicative verb yadh- habu he goes Until I go Until you go (masc.)
(sing) Until you go (fem) (sing) Until he goes (masc.)
sing Until she goes (fem.)
(sing) Until you go (masc.
and fem.)
dual Until they go (masc.)
dual Until they go (fem.)
dual Until we go Until you go masc.
plural Until you go fem.
plural Until they go masc.
Until they go fem.
plural From the above examples, you will see that those with radical endings change with vowels, that is, from ‘u’ to ‘a'; and those which end with lose their whenever any of the particles preceeds the imperfect verbs.
The only verb that retains the same form is second person plural feminine and the third person plural feminine.
Self Assessment Exercise Explain the rules that govern the subjunctive particles with imperfect verb.
Give one example each for your explanation.
5.0 CONCLUSION The subjunctive particles in Arabic language impacts the imperfect verbs.
(al-‘af’alu, al-mudara’at) by turning them into subjunctive mood.
68 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 The perfect indicative singular will change in the last letter’s vowel except the second person singular feminine that will change by omission of the letter.
Others which end with the preceded by a long vowel after the last radical lose their and if the preceding long vowel is dammah ‘u’ an extra alif is added.
e.g.
lan yaktubu (they will never write), .
The second person and the third person feminine plural will not change in their forms.
They remain as they are in indicative form.
6.0 SUMMARY.
In this unit, we have taught you the subjunctive particles.
We listed as many as possible of the particles for you.
How the particles govern the imperfect indicative verbs were also expatiated upon.
Copious examples were provided to make your understanding of the topic easy.
7.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) List all subjunctive particles in Arabic grammar.
2) Apply subjunctive particles on the following imperfect indicative verbs showing its grammatical impact.
a he rejoices b he understands c he kills d he decides e he sits f he cuts g he judges h he reads I he denies J he dances 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
69 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 3 Jussive and Interrogative Particles CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Jussive particles 3.2 The Impact of the Jussive particles on Imperfect Verbs 3.3 Application of the rule of the Jussive particle on the Imperfect Verb 3.4 Interrogative Particles 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be learning the rules relating to Arabic verbs in the jussive mood.
You will learn how the indicative perfect verb changes when in the jussive mood; i.e.
when preceded by jussive particles.
Various interrogative particles, their use and rules will also be taught in this unit.
These are needed to be properly digested and commited to memory to enable you to form your own sentences and conduct interrogation in Arabic as you like.
You will recall that in the last unit you have learnt the subjunctive mood.
The knowledge you have acquired there will be useful here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to • Demonstrate how to utilize jussive imperfect particles in grammatically correct Arabic sentences.
• Identify the Arabic imperfect verbs in the jussive mood • Identify the Arabic interrogative particles 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Jussive Particles The jussive particles in Arabic grammar - like the subjunctive which you studied in the last Unit - precedes and impacts the last letter of the Arabic imperfect verbs.
i.e.
by making it to take the sukūn vowel.
and sometimes change its meaning to the past.
The following are the jussive particles in Arabic (i) Did not (ii) do not (iii) if (iv) not yet (v) Let or make sure 70 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 3.2 The Impact of the Jussive particles on Imperfect Verbs The jussive particles enumerated above share some features with the subjunctive partcles.
They both cause changes in the imperfect indicative verbs which have no adjunct letters following their radical letters.
While the subjunctive particle makes the last radical loose its original vowel and take fat-hah, the Jussive particle makes it lose its final vowel ‘u’ altogether and take Sukūn ‘o’.
The others which has ‘’ ending will loose the while the second and third person plural feminine remain unchanged.
The only difference between subjunctive and jussive is that the last radicals at subjunctive take ‘a’ while that of the jussive is given Sukun ‘o’.
The others remain the same.
For example I did not write (lam aktub) 3.3 Application of the rule of the Jussive particle on the Imperfect Verb This paradigm must be followed as you apply the jussive particle rule on the imperfect verbs.
I did not sit You did not sit (masc) (sing) You did not sit (fem.)
(sing) He did not sit (masc.)
(sing) She did not sit (fem.)
(sing) You did not sit (masc.
and fem.)
(dual) They did not sit (masc.)
(dual) They did not sit (fem.)
dual We did not sit You did not sit (masc.)
plural You did not sit (fem.)
plural They did not sit (masc.)
plural They did not sit (fem.)
plural Let us look at another example of the jussive imperfect.
This illustration will be with the verb (he knows).
I do not know yet You do not know yet (masc.)
(sing) You did not know yet (fem.)
(sing) He does not know yet She does not know yet You do not know yet (masc.
and fem.)
dual They do not know yet (masc.)
dual They do not know yet (fem.)
dual We do not know yet 71 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 You do not know yet (masc.)
plural You do not know yet (fem.)
plural They do not know it (masc.)
plural They do not know it (fem.)
plural With these two examples properly digested by you you can apply the rest This is the way to conjugate the imperfect jussive verb in Arabic.
Self Assessment Exercise List all jussive particles that you know in Arabic language and use them insentenses.. 3.4 Interrogative Particles In Arabic language, the interrogative of simple sentences is made by prefixing the two particles ‘hal’ or ‘a’ ‘’ These two particles are used for interrogation in Arabic language.For example.
Is he rich?
Does Muhammad stand?
Is Zaydu a student?
Are they Nigerians?
Is she a nurse ?
Is she a traveler?
hal will become hali before hamzatu al-waşl , for example: Is the teacher present?
‘hal’ is more often used than ‘a’ Self Assessment Exercises Mention the two interrogative particles in Arabic grammar and construct ten sentences with each of them.
4.0 CONCLUSION The jussive particles are five.
They precede the Arabic imperfect verbs.
i.e.
and impact their last letter by making them take sukūn vowel and by affecting their meaning too.
Imperfect Verbs which have ‘’ ending will loose the while the second and third person plural feminine remain unchanged.
72 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 ‘Hal’ or ‘a’ ‘’ are two particles used for interrogation in Arabic language.
They do not impact the word they precede in any way.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit the the five prticles that render imperfect verbs in jussive moods and two interrogative particles are discussed.
The rules of the jussive particles whenever they precede any imperfect verb are deeply explained.
Examples were given to aid your comprehension.
The interrogative particles were also treated in this unit.
You can now put the Arabic sound imperfect verbs in the jussive mood.
Similarly, you can make interrogative sentences with its two particles.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT - Explain the rule of imperfect verb(s) that preceded by jussive particle(s).
- Conjugate the following verbs in jussive imperfect.
He goes He kills He hears He is ill He plays - Use the two interrogative particles in two sentences 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al-Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
73 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 UNIT 4 THE VOCATIVE, GERUND AND A COMPLETE SENTENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 the Vocative 3.2 Gerund 3.3 A complete sentence 3.3.1 Nominal sentence 3.3.2 Verbal sentence 3.3.3 Interrogative sentence 4.0 Conclusions 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to the last unit of the last module.
In the unit, you will be taught the vocative in Arabic language.
You will also be introduced to Gerund in Arabic grammar.
In this unit, you will learn construction of nominal, verbal and interrogative sentences.
After the completion of this unit, you will be better positioned in Arabic grammar provided you read your course material very well and you are satisfied with your self assessment exercises.
You will not have the problem with writing good sentences in Arabiclanguage.
2.0 OBJECTIVES.
After the completion of this unit, you should be able to: - Identify the vocative in Arabic grammar - Describe gerund and mention some of its patterns - Express yourself in complete nominal and verbal sentences - Convert nominal and verbal sentences to interrogative sentences.
5.0 MAIN CONTENT.
3.1 The Vocative.
( ) In the Arabic language, calls or invocations are made by the use of interjection tool O!
This is termed in Arabic grammar while ‘the vocative case’ is its English equivalent.
Vocative is nominative in mood i.e.
the invoked 74 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 noun takes the dammah vowel.
Also nunation .i.e.
double vowel is dropped as a rule in the invoked name.
Also, when you call, the definite article ‘al’ ‘ ’ will be dropped as a rule in the usage of vocative e.g.
oh boy!
Look at the following examples, you will notice that one of the last vowels is lost and there is no definite article in the sentence.
Oh man Oh student Oh girl Oh Adam Oh Ahmad This is how vocative goes about in Arabic.
Mind you, if the name you are putting in the vocative case or calling, in other words, is governed by a genitive rule or is in the possessive mood, it will be put in thhe accusative; this means that the word rabun, nās lord of people for instance will become yah rabbān –nas.
‘Oh Lord of people.
.
See more examples of this.
Oh the servant of Allah, Oh the command of the faithful, The vocative interjection can also be ayuhā, ‘oh’.
it is the same meaning with yah’ but rather it is a rhetorical and pompous way of introducing the vocative.
If it is a female we use .
For example : Oh man: Oh lady: Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the vocative in Arabic language.Give its various tools and examples.
3.2.
The Gerund or Verbal Noun ( ).
There are divergent opinions as to which one is the source between verb and gerund among the Arabic grammarians.
While some say the Gerund is source of verb, others say the verb is source of gerund.
Whatever be the case the gerund in Arabic grammar takes different patterns and consists of a lot of paradigms.
Therefore, we would just give you here the basic paradigms you need for now.
As you are furthering your reading in Arabic you will continue to know more.
The table below shows the gerund of some verbs and their pattern.
Doing Opening Hearing Praising Breaking 75 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 Beating Assistance Understanding Doing Falling Sitting Exist Entrance Returning Standing Doing Gladness Delight Arrogance Traveling There are some other gerunds which take the form of fu‘ulatun e.g difficulty .
Some are e.g honour, Knowledge of the gerund depends on extensive reading of Arabic books and dictionaries.
You should follow the advice we gave to you earlier.
Self Assessment Exercise What is the English equivalent of the word Gerund in Arabic?
Which one is the source between gerund and verb?
How many patterns has gerund?
Mention ten gerunds with examples.
3.3.0 A complete sentence A complete sentence in Arabic grammar is a word or group of words which express a complete idea as in English with which you are assumed to be familiar or any other language for that matter.
There are different types of complete sentences.
We shall introduce the nominal and verbal sentences to you here.
3.3.1 Nominal sentence Nominal sentence in Arabic language is a sentence that begins with a noun.
e.g.
al-waladu qāimun, the boy is standing .
You should remember this easily as we have been taught the subject and predicate in Module One.
If you revise unit five of module one very well, that means that you have gotten the concept of nominal sentences in Arabic.
That not withstanding the examples below can still flourish and refresh your knowledge.
76 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 The teacher is sitting in the classroom The woman went to the market The two male Muslims are going The hardworking men are successful The lesson is clear Adam is present 3.3.2 Verbal Sentence (al-jumlatu al-fi‘liyat) This is a sentence that begins with verb.
Examples are the following below.
I am going to the school Zaydu stood up The female teacher went to the class Fatimah understood the lesson The male teacher is writing on the board Thus as you could have seen from the above examples, a nominal sentence is a sentence which begins with noun while a verbal sentence is the sentence started with a verb Self Assessment Exercise.
Define .
Give five examples to illustrate what you say.
Define .
Give five examples to illustrate what you say.
3.3.3 Changing Nominal and Verbal Sentences to Interrogative Sentences An interrogative sentence is a sentence which asks a question as you have leant earlier on in the last unit.
Also, the same interrogative particles and method of their application which you learnt there and how to apply them are required here again.
Changing a nominal or verbal sentence to an interrogative one is however to be focused here.
Hence we submit that in interrogative sentence, the two particles of interrogation can prefix either nominal or verbal sentence.
Examples with sentences referring to: The masculine gender : (Nominal Sentences) Muhammad is present (Interrogative) Is Muhammad present?
(Verbal Satement) Zayd stood up (Interrogative ) Did Zayd stand up?
The feminine gender: (Nominal Sentence) Fatimah is present 77 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 (Interrogative) Is Fatimah present?
(Verbal Statement) Zaynab stood up (Interrogative) Did Zaynab stand up?
Self Assessment Exercise Write five nominal and five verbal sentences each; then convert them to Interrogative sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION Al-munādā or a`n-Nidā in Arabic grammar is the equivalent of the ‘the vocative case’ in English.
It is nominative in mood and could be accusative if the noun is genitive.
Nunation is dropped, so also is the definite article as a rule.
The most commonly used tools of the vocative are yah , ayuhā, or both If it is a female we use ‘ayatuha’ .
On al-Maşdar (the Gerund or Verbal Noun) , there are divergent opinions among the Arabic grammarians as to which one is the source between verb and gerund.
The gerund in Arabic grammar takes different patterns and consists of a lot of paradigms.
In Arabic Grammar, a complete sentence.
could either be Nominal Sentence beginning with a noun or Verbal Sentence beginning with a verb.
Both can be converted to interrogative statement with the prefixing of the interrogative particles.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit introduces the vocative in Arabic grammar and its rules.
It also discusses the gerund and the divergent opinions of Arabic grammarian related to it.
It describes a complete sentence and divides it into nominal sentence and verbal and interrogative.
These we believe will further assist you in recognizing and constructing grammatically flawless Arabic expressions.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Use the interjection of vocative in Arabic in a complete sentence 2) Construct five nominal sentences in Arabic 3) Construct five verbal sentences in Arabic 78 ARA011 Arabic Grammar 1 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic, London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini I, Yusuf I & Rufā‘ī M, (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-‘Arabiyah al-Muyassarah, vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Dhahru Hubla Ventures.
Lagos, Nigeria.
Fawzān A, Abdu `l-Khāliq M. (2007).
al-‘arabiyah lil-jamī‘ (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
79
