NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCE COURSE CODE:ARA051 COURSE TITLE:ARABIC GRAMMAR I ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I COURSE GUIDE ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Course Team Mr. Adams Olufemi Akewula (Developer/Writer) - UNI Prof. A. F. Ahmed (Editor/Programme Leader) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: All Rights Reserved iiiARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………………..…….
1 What You Will Learn in this Course …………………………….. 1 Course Aims ………………………………………………..…….. 1 Course Objectives ………………………………………………….
1 Working through This Course………………………………..….… 2 Course Materials ………………………………………………… 2 Study Units …………………………………..…………………….. 2 Textbooks and References ……………………………………….. 3 Assignment Files…………………………………….……………… 4 Tutor-Marked Assignment ………………………………………… 4 Final Examination and Grading …………………………………… 4 Presentation Schedule ……………………………………………… 5 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………………….
5 Course Overview ………………………………………………….
5 How to Get the Most from this Course …………………..……….. 6 Facilitators/Tutor and Tutorials …………………………………….
7 Conclusion ………………………………………………………….
8 Summary ………………………………………………………….
8 Introduction Welcome ARA051 Arabic Grammar 1 is a two-Credit Unit Course for the first year students in the diploma programme.
It consists of fourteen units which include Basic Components of Arabic grammar, with emphasis on the parts of speech i.e.
nouns, verbs, and particles, past, present and command.
This Course Guide provides information on what the course is all about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also tells you about assessments, and periodic tutorial classes that are available for the course.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of ARA051 Arabic Grammar 1 is to introduce you to basic components of Arabic Grammar with emphasis on the parts of speech i.e.
the noun and its kinds, verbs (past, present and other derivatives from it) and particles.
You will at the end of this course be free from Arabic grammatical errors when you speak or write in the language.
ivARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Course Aims The aims of this Course can be summarized as follows: • Introducing you to the basic components of Arabic grammar.
• Preparing you for expressing yourself in grammatically perfect spoken and written Arabic.
• Enabling you to identify various types of nouns, verbs and particles in Arabic Language.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, each unit of ARA051 has specific objectives which are stated for you at its beginning.
I advise that you read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study to check your progress.
Here are the wider objectives of ARA051 course as a whole.
By meeting the objectives, you can count yourself as having met the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Highlight the noun in Arabic language; identify and utilize its masculine and feminine; singular, dual and plural forms in written and spoken Arabic.
• Recognize the various types and tenses of Arabic language verbs in written forms and utilize them in spoken Arabic.
• State the Arabic language particles, their meaning, uses and effects in Arabic grammar.
• Use Arabic pronouns and identify correct use of them in oral and written expressions.
• Construct and recognize grammatically perfect nominal and verbal sentences.
Working through this Course To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
You will also need to undertake practical exercises for which you will need a pen, a note-book, and other materials that will be listed in this guide.
The exercises are to aid you in understanding the concepts being presented.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: vARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I i) Course guide ii) Study units iii) Text books iv) Presentation Schedule Study Units There are fourteen Units in this course broken into three modules.
They are listed below.
Module 1 Nouns Unit 1 Types of Nouns, the Article and the Gender Unit 2 Singular and Dual Unit 3 Plural in Arabic Unit 4 Pronouns Unit 5 Subject and Predicate Module 2 Verbs Unit 1 Importance of Verb Unit 2 Divisions of Verb Unit 3 The Perfect Measure of Trilateral Verb Unit 4 The Imperfect Measure of Trilateral Verb Unit 5 The Imperative Module 3 Particles Unit 1 The Preposition and the Conjunction Unit 2 The Subjunctive Particles Unit 3 The Jussive and Interrogative particles Unit 4 The Vocative, Gerund and a Complete Sentence Textbooks and References Each unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try to get as many as possible of those textbooks and materials.
They are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
In addition, you must obtain text materials which are provided by the NOUN.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text materials.
Below is a list of most of the books suggested as references and further readings.
Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: viARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini I.; Yusuf I.
& Rufā‘ī M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria: Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni A.; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Assignment File An assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the works you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the tutor marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.
Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs) Each unit contains a number of self-tests.
These self-test questions on the sections you have just covered are meant to help to evaluate your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the materials.
Alongside with your tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individuals units and of the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs) You will have to submit a specified number of Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs).
Every unit in this course has a tutor marked viiARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I assignment.
You will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the (TMAs) will be used for 30% grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor Marked Assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submissions.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a text of three hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Find time to read the unit all over before your examination.
The final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflects the kinds of self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignment you have previously encountered.
And all aspects of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the stuffy units and dates for examinations.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
Assessment Mark Assignment (Best Three Assignments out of = 30% Four Marked) Final Examination = 70% Total 100% Course Overview Weeks Assessment Unit Title work Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Week 1 Module 1 Noun viiiARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Types of Noun, the Article and the 1 Week 1 Assignment 1 Gender 2 Singular and Dual Week 2 Assignment 2 3 Plurals Week 3 Assignment 3 4 Pronouns Week 4 Assignment 4 5 Subject and Predicate Week 5 Assignment 5 Module 2 Verbs 1 Importance of Verb Week 6 Assignment 1 2 Divisions of Verb Week 7 Assignment 2 3 The Perfect Measure of Trilateral Verb Week 8 Assignment 3 The Imperfect Measure of Trilateral 4 Week 9 Assignment 4 Verb 5 The Imperative Week 10 Assignment 5 Module 3 Particles 1 The Prepositions and Conjunctions Week 11 Assignment 1 2 Subjunctive Particles Week 12 Assignment 2 3 The Jussive and Interrogative Particles Week 13 Assignment 3 The Vocative, Gerund and a Complete 4 Week 14 Assignment 4 Sentence Revision Week 15 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
ixARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 1.0 Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment 2.0 Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the Assignment relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.0 Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work if you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.0 Turn to Unit I, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.0 Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.0 Keep in touch with your centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.0 Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than due date.
8.0 Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.0 When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your stuffy so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.0 When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.0 After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit xARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I objective (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor-marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: 3 You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned reading 4 You have difficult with the exercise 5 You have a question or problems with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Conclusion ARA051 provides you a basic component of Arabic Grammar upon which you develop mastery in the use of the Arabic language structure.
It is aimed at equipping you with analytical skills to examine the nature of Arabic language by introducing you to Arabic Grammar upon which you will be able to identify types of noun, different kind of verb and particles.
Summary All features of this course guide have been designed to facilitate your learning in order that you achieve the aims and objectives of the course.
They include the aims and objectives; Course Summary, Course Overview, Self Assessment Exercises and study questions.
You should xiARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I ensure that you make maximum use of them in your study to achieve maximum results.
We hope that you will find the Course interesting and useful; and wish you success.
xiiARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Course Code ARA051 Course Title Arabic Grammar I Course Team Mr. Adams Olufemi Akewula (Developer/Writer) - UNI Prof. A. F. Ahmed (Editor/Programme Leader) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xiiiARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: All Rights Reserved xivARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 The Nouns .......……………………… QءاـUمسUلUأ 1 Unit 1 Nouns, Articles and Gender ……………………….
1 Unit 2 Singular and Dual ………………………………….
9 Unit 3 Plurals ……………………………………………… 15 Unit 4 Subject and Predicate ……………………………….
24 Unit 5 Pronouns …………………………………………….
31 Module 2 The Verbs .………………………………… لاUUعفUUUلUأ 36 Unit 1 Importance of Verb ………………………………….. 36 Unit 2 Divisions of Verb …………………………………….
40 Unit 3 The Perfect Measure of Trilateral Verbs …………….. 46 Unit 4 The Imperfect Measure of Trilateral Verb ……………51 Unit 5 The Imperative ……………………………………….
58 Module 3 Particles .…………………………………… Qف وQرQحbلا 62 Unit 1 The Prepositions and the Conjunctions ……………… 62 Unit 2 Subjunctive Particles ………………………………… 67 Unit 3 The Jussive and Interrogative ……………………….. 72 Unit 4 The Vocative, Gerund and Complete Sentence ……… 77 xvNoneARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I MODULE 1 THE NOUNS ءاـUمسUلUأ Unit 1 Nouns, Articles and Gender Unit 2 Singular and Dual Unit 3 Plurals Unit 4 Subjects and Predicate Unit 5 Pronouns UNIT 1 سbنـgجbلاUو gفيرـbعkتلا QةاUدUأ،QءاـUمسUلUا NOUNS, ARTICLES AND GENDER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Nouns 3.1.1 Types of Nouns 3.1.2 Common Nouns 3.1.3 ىـgناـUعـUملا QءاـUمـbسUأ (Abstract Nouns) 3.2 Definite and Indefinite Articles 3.2.1 ةkيgرUمUقbلاUو Qةkيgسbمkشلا QفوQرQحbلا (Sun and Moon Letters) 3.3 The Gender in Arabic 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION My dear student, Arabic Language is one of the leading languages in the world.
It is spoken by almost 200 million Arabs of the Middle East and many Muslims of the world.
It is a language spoken at interactive sessions at international forums like the African Unity, United nation, OPEC and others.
Like many other languages, the parts of Speech of Arabic are classified into noun, verb and particle called T لعف ,مbس ا and فرUح respectively.
This Unit introduces you to some of these features of the language which you require in order to attain proficiency in it.
They are put across to you and treated in simple and clear style.
So come along with on board.
1ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • identify the different types of noun in Arabic language • differentiate between the Masculine and feminine genders in given Arabic names.
• identify the definite and indefinite articles in Arabic language • discuss the significance of the sun and the moon letters.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 م=س?ل=ا (Noun) A noun in Arabic grammar is the name of people, animals, places or things.
For example: Person: Adam مUدآ Animal: lion, دUسUأ Place: Ibadan نUداUبgإ Thing: pen مUلUق 3.1.1 Types of Nouns In Arabic grammar, names are classified as proper, common and abstract nouns.
The Proper Nouns If a noun, ‘ismu (cid:131)مbسا names a particular person, place or thing, then in Arabic you should know that we call such a noun a proper noun.
For example: Adam QمUدآ Ibrahim QميgهاUرbبgإ Muhammad (cid:131)دkمUحQم Friday QةUعbمQجbلUا Sunday QدbحUلUا Kano وQناUك Ibadan bنUداUبgإ Lagos bسوQجUل 2ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.1.2 Common Nouns Common nouns on the other hands are names of things in general.
This means that common nouns in Arabic Language are names of things as the following examples illustrate.
Table (cid:131)دUعbقUم Chair (cid:139)يgسbرQك Boy (cid:131)دUلUو Girl (cid:131)تbنgب Man (cid:131)لQجUر Woman (cid:131)ةUأUرbما Dog بbلUك Bread (cid:131)زbبQخ Knife (cid:131)ني(cid:148)كgس SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Write five Arabic proper nouns and five Arabic common nouns.
3.1.3 ىـgناـUعـUملا QءاـUمـbسUأ (Abstract Nouns) If a noun names anything which we can only imagine and think about, but we cannot see or touch, whether it is countable or uncountable, such a noun is called abstract noun.
For examples Joy (cid:131)حUرUف Happiness (cid:131)روQرQس Difficulty (cid:139)مUغ Love (cid:139)بQح Justice (cid:131)لbدUع Advice (cid:131)ةUحيgصUن SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Define Arabic abstract noun and mention five of them.
3.2 ) ريـgكـنkتلاUو gفيرـbعkتلا QةاUدUأ Definite and Indefinite Articles ( Like many other languages, a noun can be in definite and indefinite form in the Arabic language.
Al’ ‘لا’ ‘the’ is the definite article.
It is used for some cases, genders, and numbers and written as prefix for the noun to be defined.
3ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I نيوbنUت (Nunation) is the indefinite article denoting ‘a’ or ‘an’.
The noun that has any of them is in the indefinite case in Arabic.
Nunation consists of three kinds; these are: gناUتUحbتUف Fat-ħatān ً gناUتkمUض Dammatān (cid:131) gناUتUرbسUك Kasratān ٍ The table below illustrates both articles clearly Definite Indefinite al-Ma’arifatu DةFف?ر=عFم=لFا an –nakratu DةFر=كNنلFا The Book QباUتgكbلا A book (cid:131)باUتgك The Pen QمUلUقbلا A pen (cid:131)مUلUق The exercise book QرUتbفUدbلا An exercise book (cid:131)رUتbفUد The boy QدUلUوbلا A boy (cid:131)دUلUو The girl Qتbنgبbلا A girl (cid:131)تbنgب The table QدUعbقUمbلا A table (cid:131)دUعbقUم The house QتbيUبbلا A house (cid:131)تbيUب The man QلQجkرلا A man (cid:131)لQجUر The woman QةbأUرbملا A woman (cid:131)ةbأUرbما The University QةUعgماUجbلا A University, (cid:131)ةUعgماUج SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the Arabic definite and indefinite articles?
Expatiate on them with examples.
3.2.1 ةkيgرUمUقbلاUو Qةkيgسbمkشلا QفوQرQحbلا (Sun and Moon Letters) Meanwhile, while discussing definite article لأ , it is pertinent to discuss the related hamzatu `l-waşl and hamzatu `l-qat’i.
The hamzat of definite article is hamzat-al-waşl, so that the ‘a’ or ‘an’ must be elided if preceded by any word e.g.
the boy and the girl .
تbنgبbلاUو QدUلUوbلUا You will notice that وandل of bintu are joined together because the hamzat has been elided from pronunciation.
The pronunciation of sun and moon letters when it is definite is very important my dear students.
That is why we need to introduce these letters to you.
There are twenty Arabic letters (consonants).
These letters are divided into two.
Fourteen of them are sun letters while the remaining fourteen are moon letters.
ةkيgسbمkشلا QفوQرQحbلا (The Sun Letters) 4ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I These are the Sun Letters The crown QجاkتلUا – ت The cloth Qبbو£ثلا – ث The cock Qكي(cid:148)دلا – د The wolf Qبbئ(cid:148)ذلا – ذ The man QلQجkرلUا – ر The visitor QرgئاkزلUا – ز The chalk board QةUرو«بkسلUا – س The sun Qسbمkشلا – ش The box QقوQدbن«صلUا – ص The weak Qفيgعkضلا – ض The chalk QروQشbبkطلا – ط The shade «ل(cid:148)ظلا – ظ The night QليkللUا – ل The light Qرو«نلUا - ن When the noun that ‘لا’ (the) is prefixed with one of the above sun letters, the ‘L’ ‘ل’ of the definite article will be assimilated to the sun letter which is written with the shadda ‘£’.
The ‘ل’ of the article losing its sukūn vowel b e.g.
ar-rajul لQجkرلUا Instead of al-rajul at-tayru رbيkطلUا Instead of al-tayru.
The remaining fourteen letters are Moon letters and they are pronounced with ‘ل’.
For example al-walad QدUلUوbلا al-bint.
Qتbنgبbلا The lion QدUسUلbا – أ The door QباUبbلUا – ب The university QةUعgماUجbلUا – ج The father in law QوbمUحbلUا – ح The garden ةQUقيgدUخbلUا – خ The eye QنيUعbلUا – ع The cave QراUغbلUا – غ The elephant QليgفbلUا – ف The pen QمUلUقbلUا – ق The dog QبbلUكbلUا – ك The table QدUعbقUمbلUا – م The boy QدUلUوbلUا – و The guidance QةUياUدgهbلUا – ـه 5ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I The day QموUيbلUا – ي This rule only occurs in definite article so far indefinite article does not take لا al, and then the rule is not applicable to it.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Write out the sun letters from the Arabic consonants 3.3 س=ن?ج=لFا (Gender) In Arabic, most nouns have a property by which sex is distinguished.
This property is called gender.
There are two genders in Arabic grammar.
These are: Masculine QرkكUذQمbلUا and Feminine QثkنUؤQمbلUا There is no neuter in Arabic language as it is found in other languages.
The feminine al-Mu’annath ثkنUؤQمbلUا is formed from the masculine by suffixing taau marbuutat “ه” Let us illustrate these two genders with a table that will make it clear to you.
Feminine DثNنFؤDم=لFا Masculine DرNكFذDم=لFا The poor woman QةUريقgUفbلUا The poor man QريgقUفbلUا The female QةUسUرbدUمbلUا The male teacher QسUرbدUمbلUا A female writer (cid:131)ةUبgتاUك The male wrier (cid:131)بgتاUك A female student (cid:131)ةUبgلاUط A Male student (cid:131)بgلاUط The female cook QةUخاUبkطلا The male cook QخاUبkطلا Look at the above examples, you will see that the feminine is derived from masculine with the suffix “ة” and there is a change in the penultimate letters vowels from ‘u’ to ‘a’ e.g.
QةUريقgUفbلUا QريgقUفbلUا Observation: You are aware that in any rule there is an exception, there are some feminine words which have no masculine form e.g.
A city (cid:131)ةUنيgدUم A law Court ةUمUكbحUم 6ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I And also there are some words without “Ö” but they are feminine in nature e.g.
Name of female person (cid:131)مUيbرUم Name of female person (cid:131)بUنbيUز Mother (cid:139)مQأ An old woman (cid:131)زوQجعU Finally, dear students, occasionally, it is very rare to find “ö” in words which are masculine e.g.
A successor ة(cid:131)UفيgلUخ Masculine personal name ةUحbلUط SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Name 5 nouns that are Masculine when written but feminine in nature.
4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) Nouns in Arabic grammar consist of names of persons, places or things.
They are either, proper, common or abstract.
Some nouns become definite by having the definite article لا as suffixes or indefinite by having sign of being indefinite called tanwin.
The definite article لا is either ةkيgسbمـUش or ةkيرUمـUق .
Some Arabic nouns are also either in proper masculine or feminine in gender or in words.
5.0SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) In this unit, we have treated the types of noun in Arabic, the articles and the related rules of sun and moon letters with definite article.
Genders that are masculine and feminine have also been dealt with.
You are also introduced to the feminine sign as it is derived from masculine nouns.
Other feminine nouns that are exempted are also mentioned.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give five Arabic proper, common and abstract nouns.
2.
Write ten Arabic definite nouns of which five of them are sun letters and another five of moon letters.
3.
Write ten Arabic nouns of which five in them are masculine and another five feminine.
7ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I; & Rufā‘ī M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria.
: Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni A. ; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
8ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 2 ىkنUثـQمbلاUو QدUرbفـQمـلأ (Singular and Dual Nouns) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Singular form of the Arabic nouns 3.1.1 عوQفbرUمـلأ Nominatve Singular Noun 3.1.2 بوQصbنـUمـلأAccusative Singular Noun 3.1.3 روQرـbجـUملأ Genitive Singular Noun 3.2 Dual 3.2.1 Dual Nominative Case 3.2.2 Dual Accusative and Genitive Cases 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Number is another feature of nouns.
By number we mean that nouns can occur singular, or in several units, dual and plural.
In this unit we shall treat singular and dual forms of Arabic nouns.
The plural forms will be treated in the next unit.
We want you to bear in mind that there are three declensions in Arabic.
The vast majority of nouns in singular forms belong to the three cases, nominative, accusative and genitive.
These three cases shall be discussed extensively in the main content of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • identify Arabic nouns in the singular and dual forms • recognize the Arabic nouns in the singular nominative, accusative and genitive cases • recognize the Arabic nouns in the dual nominative, accusative and genitive cases • state the similarity between dual accusative and genitive • construct nouns at these three cases in Arabic.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 9ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.1 The Singular Form of the Arabic Nouns Singular, al-Mufrad دUرbفQمbلUا in Arabic is any word that indicates a single person, animal, place or thing.
This singular can be of any gender, whether masculine, رkكUذQم or feminine ثkنUؤQم.
The singular of any noun does not change its definite status, ةUفgرbعUم or indefinite, ةUرbكkن articles.
Before we proceed, we want you to know that when the three vowel marks are written double at the end of a noun, they represent the three case endings, nominative, accusative and genitive.
These are the three doubled vowels ناUتkمUض gناUتUرbسUك gناUتUحbتUف 3.1.1 Nominative Singular Nouns The singular nouns of Arabic are usually mentioned in the nominative case taking ناUتkمUض as suffixes.
The table below illustrates this clearly.
The singular DدFر=فDم=لFا A book (cid:131)باUتgك A pen (cid:131)مUلUق An exercise book (cid:131)رUتbفUد A chair (cid:139)يgسbرQك A bag (cid:131)ةUبيgقUح A boy (cid:131)دUلUو A man (cid:131)لQجUر A table (cid:131)دUعbقQم A mosque (cid:131)دgجbسUم A school (cid:131)ةUسUرbدUم The double dammahs in all the aforementioned examples are indefinite articles.
If al, لا that is, the definite articles’ sign prefixes any of these nouns then the vowel will change from double to single.
Let us use the same words as examples.
The Singular DدFر=فDم=لFا The Book QباUتgكbلUا The pen (cid:131)مUلUقbلUا The exercise book QرUتbفUدbلUا The chair «يgسbرQكbلUا The bag QةUبيgقUحbلا The boy QدUلUوbلUا The man QلQجkرلا 10ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I The chair QدUعbقQمbلUا The mosque QدgجbسUمbلUا The school ةUسUرbدUمbلUا 3.1.2 Accusative Singular Nouns Sometimes Singular nouns are said to be in the accusative case.
ناUتUحbتUف will then be on it when it is indefinite but only one ةUحbتUف vowel when it is definite.
Take the following as examples.
The Singular DدFر=فDم=لFا The house UتbيUبbلUا A refrigerator ةUجkلkثلUا The airport راUطUمbلUا A bird ارbيط The poor man ريقgUفbلUا The elephant ليgفbلا A paper (cid:131)ةUقUرUو A moon اًرUمUق The padlock ةUلbفUقbلUا A star اًبUكbوUك Both definite and indefinite articles are used together in the above examples.
3.1.3 Genitive of Singular nouns The last of doubled vowels which is known as ناUتUرbسUك is used for nouns at the genitive case.
But, the single ةUرbسUك vowel is used when it is definite like we have said earlier.
See the table below The Singular DدFر=فDم=لFا A box ٍقوQدbنQص The mountain gلبUجbلUا A coffee ٍةUوbحUق The tea gياkشUلUا A cloth ٍبbوUث The heart gبلbUقbلUا The earth gضbرلUا The minister ريgزUوbلUا A bride سوQرUع A road قيgرUط SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 11ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Mention the three single and double vowels that can be used for Arabic singular nominative, accusative and genitive nouns.
3.2 Dual Form Nouns ىNنFثDم=لFا Arabic is unlike some other languages that the plural forms begin from two units upwards, but Arabic has dual form which is called al- Muthana, QىkنUثQمbلUا.
This is any noun that indicates two persons, places or things.
The rule of identification will be explained in each cases.
3.2.1 Dual Nominative Case In this case, the singular noun will be suffixed by alif and nūn .
The alif will elongate the last letter that had changed from ةkمUض or ناUتkمUض .
For example the Singular of a book at the nominative case is باتك, Adding نا to it will change it and it will become gنUابUاتgك.
You will notice that alif elongates the ‘bau’ while nun ن is given Kasrah, let us see other examples.
The Dual DىNنFثDم=لFا Two schools gناUتUسUرbدUم The two men gنUلQجUرلا The two pen نg اUمUلUقbلUا Two girls gناUتbنgب Two pillows gناUتUداUسgو The two countries gناUدUلUبbلUا Two teachers gناUس(cid:148)رUدQمbلUا Two students gناUبgلاUط The two professors gناUذاUتbسQلا There is no difference of vowels whether it is definite or indefinite as you can see in the نا suffixes of those nouns mentioned above.
3.2.2 Dual Accusative and Genitive Cases The accusative and genitive cases of dual nouns in the Arabic language take the same form.
The structure of a sentence will give you the understanding of which case a particular noun belongs to.
There is no problem about that; you will be acquainted with all these very soon.
As you have been told earlier, alif and nūn suffix the singular noun at the nominative case; but here it is yāu and nun Uنbي.
Yāu here is diphthong and not elongation, the nūn ن will also take kasrah like that of the nominative.
The below examples give clarity of this statement.
12ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I The Dual DىNنFثDم=لFا Two schools (Ac c& Gen) نbيUتUسUرbدUم The two men (Acc & Gen) gنbيUلQجUرلا The two pen (Acc & Gen) نbيUمUلUقbلUا Two girls (Acc & Gen) gنbيUتbنgب The two boys (Acc & Gen) نbيUدUلUوbلUا Two pillows (Acc & Gen) gنbيUتUداUسgو The two countries (Acc & Gen) gنbيUدUلUبbلUا Two teachers (Acc & Gen) نbيUس(cid:148)رUدQم Two students (Acc & Gen) نbيUبgلاUط The two professors (Acc & Gen) نbيUذاUتbسQلا The accusative and genitive in dual nouns are the same in pattern but different in meaning in any Arabic given sentence.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How will you vocalize nun, ن of dual pattern 4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) In Arabic, Nouns vary from one case to the other, both at the singular and dual forms.
The last letter of Nouns sometimes has single or double dammah and described as being in the nominative case; or single or double fathah in which case they are said to be in the accusative cases.
They may also take single or double kasrah in which case they are said to be in the genitive case.
Single vowels are used for the definite articles, while the double vowels are used for indefinite articles.
Dual nouns are introduced by نا suffixes while the accusative and genitive case of dual changes it to gنbي.
In English the alif of the former will be regarded as elongation while the yāu of the latter is diphthong.
5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) This Unit discusses various features of both the singular and the dual forms of nouns in the Arabic language.
It explains characteristics of the he singular and dual nouns when they re in the nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
The functions of single vowels as tool for definite article and those of double vowels as tools for indefinite article are highlighted.
The roles of the suffixes aaani or ayn are explained.
Copious examples are provided to explain the rules; while self assessment exercises are given learners for self examination.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 13ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 1.
Explain the process of changing the suffix of Arabic nouns from singular to dual.
2.
The following nouns are in the singular forms, change them to dual nominative, accusative and genitive patterns.
(cid:131)قيgفUر ،(cid:131)بوQك ،(cid:131)ةUقUعbلgم ،QروQشbبkطلUا ،QةUرو«بkسلا 3.
Write down the singular forms of these dual nouns gنbيUتUبيUقUح ،gناUبUعbلUم ،gناUتUلbوUد ،gنbيUبUتbكUم ،gناUبbلUك 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria : Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
UNIT 3 عbمUجbلUا (THE PLURAL) 14ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Sound Masculine Plurals 3.1.1 The Nominative Case of the Sound Masculine Plural 3.1.2 The Accusative and Effective Cases of the sound Masculine Plural 3.2 The Sound Feminine Plurals 3.2.1 The Nominative Case of the Sound Feminine Plural 3.2.2 The Accusative and Genitive Cakes of the Sound Feminine Plural 3.3 The Broken Plurals 3.3.1 Nominative 3.3.2 Nominative 3.3.3 Genitive 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to the study of the Arabic plurals of nouns.
In this Unit you will be introduced to the various plurals in Arabic and their uses in oral and written expression.
It is important to know the plurals in Arabic which is called عbمUجbلUا and which point to people, things, animals or places that are more than two.
Further more, this is unlike other languages where the plural begins from two nouns.
It may also be interesting to let you know from the unset that the plural in Arabic are classified into Sound Plurals and Broken Plurals.
The sound plurals could also be either the sound masculine plural or the sound feminine plural.
These are the various divisions of Arabic plurals you will come across in this Unit; thus come on board and let us discuss them one by one.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 15ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I • give account of kinds of plurals in Arabic language • identify the sound masculine plurals, the sound feminine plurals and the broken plurals • explain the rules that govern the Arabic plurals.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 مgلاkسلا gرkكUذQمbلا QعbمUج (The Sound Masculine Plural) As you have been told during our discussion in the introduction to this Unit, there are different kinds of plurals in the Arabic tongue.
The first one is the sound Masculine plural, gمgلاkسلا gرkكUذQمbلا QعbمUج.
This is a plural whose pattern of singular never changes or be replaced.
Rather.
It is suffixed with واUو and نوQن or ءاUي and (cid:131)نوQن.
The noun must be given fat-hah, ةUحbتUف e.g.
Muslimūna or Muslimīna UنيgمgلbسQم, the same meaning.
This is plural form of Muslim مgلbسQم a male Muslim.
We shall treat this very well as we are going to another content where examples will be given to make the rules clear.
3.1.1 The Nominative Case of the Sound Masculine Plural The nominative case of the above plural will be suffixed by واUو and نوQن i.e.
نو.
The واUو will elongate the preceding consonant which is the last letter of the singular noun.
The ن is expected to take fat-hat ةUحbتUف vowel.
We hereby present a table to you to illustrate this clearer.
Plurals of the Sound Masculine Singular in the nominative cases Teachers UنوQس(cid:148)رUدQم A Teacher Qس(cid:148)رUدQم The peasants UنوQحkلUفbلUا The peasant QحkلUفbلUا Sound men UنوQمgلاUس A Sound Man (cid:131)مgلاUس The believers UنوQنgمbؤQملUا The believer QنgمbؤQملUا The citizens UنوQنgطاUوUمbلUا The citizen QنgطاUوUمbلUا Workers UنوQفkظUوQم A worker QفkظUوQم The Engineers UنوQسgدbنUهQمbلUا The engineer QسgدbنUهQمbلUا The Travellers UنوQرgفاUسQمbلUا The traveler QرgفاUسQمbلUا Listeners UنوQعgمUتbسQم A Listener QعgمUتbسQم Unbelievers UنوQرgفاUك An Unbeliever (cid:131)رgفاUك Have you seen how we convert the singular to plural?
The above examples are sound plurals and are for masculine gender in nominative case.
16ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the rules of converting singular of sound masculine gender of Arabic nouns to plurals in the nominative case.
3.1.2 The Accusative and Genitive Cases of the Sound Masculine Plurals The accusative and genitive cases of the sound masculine plurals share the same suffix.
It is the context in which the words are used in the sentence that will determine whether the plural noun is in accusative or genitive case.
The plurals are suffixed with ءاي and (cid:131)نوQن.
Yau and nun, that is, نbي the yāu is elongating the last letter of the singular noun which must be given kasrah, while نوQن nūn still remains unchanged with fat- hah.
For instance, the accusative and genitive singular noun of Muslim is اًمgلbسQم and مgلbسQم musliman and muslimin respectively.
Let us now change the nominative examples to accusative and then genitive.
The Plural Nouns in the Accusative Case Teachers Uنيgس(cid:148)رUدQم A Teacher ًاس(cid:148)رUدQم The peasants gنيgحkلUفbلUا The peasant UحkلUفbلUا Sound men UنيgمgلاUس A sound man ًامgلاUس The believers UنيgنgمbؤQملUا The believer UنgمbؤQملUا The citizens UنيgنgطاUوUمbلUا The citizen UنgطاUوUمbلUا Workers UنيgفkظUوQم A Worker ًافkظUوQم The engineers UنيgسgدbنUهQمbلUا The engineer UسgدbنUهQمbلUا The travellers UنيgرgفاUسQمbلUا The traveller UرgفاUسQمbلUا Listeners UنيgعgمUتbسQم A Listener ًاعgمUتbسQم Unbelievers UنيgرgفاUك An Unbelievers اًرgفاUك The Plural Nouns in the Genitive Case Teachers Uنيgس(cid:148)رUدQم A Teacher ًاس(cid:148)رUدQم The peasants gنيgحkلUفbلUا The peasant UحkلUفbلUا Sound men UنيgمgلاUس A sound man ًامgلاUس The believers UنيgنgمbؤQملUا The believer UنgمbؤQملUا The citizens UنيgنgطاUوUمbلUا The citizen UنgطاUوUمbلUا Workers UنيgفkظUوQم A Worker ًافkظUوQم The engineers UنيgسgدbنUهQمbلUا The engineer UسgدbنUهQمbلUا The travellers UنيgرgفاUسQمbلUا The traveller UرgفاUسQمbلUا Listeners UنيgعgمUتbسQم A Listener ًاعgمUتbسQم Unbelievers UنيgرgفاUك An Unbelievers اًرgفاUك SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 17ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Discuss the Accusative and Genitive Cases of the Arabic Sound Masculine Plurals.
Illustrate your answer with two examples.
3.2 The Sound Feminine Plural The sound feminine plural form is quite different from the masculine.
You have known in the previous Unit that if a masculine gender noun is مgلb سQم a male Muslim, then the feminine gender will be (cid:131)ةUمgلb سQم, Muslimatun, a female Muslim, a letter ة(cid:131), known as tau al-marbutah (closed tau), is expected to be a suffix to the last letter of masculine singular noun e.g.
feminine ةUمgلbسQم masculine (cid:131)مgلbسQم.
The plural form of the sound feminine noun is suffixed with تا alif and tau.
The tau marbutah ة will be changed to open tau “تا” e.g.
Singular (cid:131)ةUمgلbسQم Plural (cid:131)تاUمgلbسQم 3.2.1 The Nominative Case of the Sound Feminine Plural As we have said earlier the alif and tau ‘تا ’ will be at the suffix of any feminine singular noun to form a sound feminine plural.
At the nominative case, feminine plural shares the same feature with singular nouns by possessing both single and double vowels as the case may be e.g.
Female تاUمgلbسQم The Female Muslims تاUمgلbسQمbلUا The table below will illustrate this clearer.
Nominative The Sound Feminin Plural Singular ?م?لاNسلا ?رNكFذDم=لا DعمFج cدFرفDملا A female Female Teachers (cid:131)تاUس(cid:148)رUدQم (cid:131)ةUس(cid:148)رUدQم teacher The ladies QتاUد(cid:148)يkسلUا The lady QةUد(cid:148)يkسلUا The female The female writer QتاUبgتاUكbلUا QةUبgتاUكbلUا writer A sound Sound women (cid:131)تاUمgلاUس QةUمgلاUس woman Female pupils (cid:131)تاUذيgمbلgت A female pupil (cid:131)ةUذيgمbلgت Accusative and genitive of the sound feminine plural share the same vowels both at definite and indefinite levels.
We shall give example of 18ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I both together once you have learnt the nominative, accusative and genitive of singular nouns in the previous lessons.
3.2.2 Accusative and Genitive of the Sound Feminine Plural Like you have been told that they share the same characteristics, the ‘u’ or ‘un’ of nominative changes to ‘i’ or in.
gتاUمgلbسQمbلUا ٍتاUمgلbسQم See the table below as we use the same examples above to show both accusative and genitive cases of the sound feminine plural Accusative The Sound Feminine Singular Plural DدFر=فDملا م?لاNسلا ثNنFؤDملا ع=مFج Female Teachers ٍتاUس(cid:148)رUدQم ًةUس(cid:148)رUدQم The ladies gتاUد(cid:148)يkسلUا UةUد(cid:148)يkسلUا The female writer gتاUبgتاUكbلUا UةUبgتاUكbلUا Sound women ٍتاUمgلاUس ًةUمgلاUس Female pupils ٍتاUذيgمbلgت ًةUذيgمbلgت Genitive The sound Feminine Plural Singular م?لاNسلا ثNنFؤDملا ع=مFج DدFر=فDملا Female Teachers ٍتاUس(cid:148)رUدQم ٍةUس(cid:148)رUدQم The ladies gتاUد(cid:148)يkسلUا gةUد(cid:148)يkسلUا The female writer gتاUبgتاUكbلUا gةUبgتاUكbلUا Sound women ٍتاUمgلاUس ٍةUمgلاUس Female pupils ٍتاUذيgمbلgت ٍةUذيgمbلgت You will notice that single vowel kasrah g and double vowel kasratan ٍ are both used for accusative and genitive cases of the plural.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Discuss the rules of converting singular of Arabic sound feminine nouns to plurals in the nominative case.
Illustrate your answer with examples.
3.3 ريgسـbكUت QعbمـUج (The Broken Plurals) The broken plural is one whose pattern of singular changes with an alternation, addition or removal of part of alphabets.
This plural must be learnt and memorized by consulting the Arabic dictionary.
Some common measures of jam‘u al-taksir are.
19ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Pens (cid:131)ملقUأ لاUعbفUأ Eyes QنQيbعUأ لQعbفUأ Men ل(cid:131)اUجر لاUعgف Books (cid:131)بتQك لQعQف Houses (cid:131)تويQب لوQعQف There are a lot of forms of measures for this plural produced by Arabic grammarians.
I advice you to read the References/Further Reading suggested to you especially the dictionary.
These plurals share the same things in common with singular nouns in the three cases i. e. the nominative, accusative and genitive.
Let us have more examples of this plural form.
3.1.1 Nominative عوQفbرـUملا Plural Singular Stars (cid:131)بكgاUوUك بUكbوUك Sciences (cid:131)موQلQع مbلعg Skins (cid:131)دولQج دbلgج Professors (cid:131)ةUذgتاUسgأ ذاUتbسQأ The students QبUل—طلا بلgاkطلا The writers QباتUكgلا بgتاUكلا The souls QسوQف«نلا سbفنkلا Flags (cid:131)ملbعUأ مUلعU Loaves (cid:131)ةUفgغbرUأ ةUفيغUر Occupations (cid:131)لاUمعb Uأ لUمUع The above examples are nominative case for broken plurals.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Define Arabic broken plurals.
Mention five of its measures with examples.
3.3.2 Accusative بوQصنbـUمـلأ As we have said earlier, the plurals share the same things in common with singular nouns in the three cases i. e. the nominative, accusative and genitive.
Let us illustrate the accusative case with the following examples.
Men لاUجgر لQجUر 20ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Rivers اًراحgب اًرbحUب Winds احاUيgر اًحbيgر Mountains لا(cid:3)ب(cid:5)ج لgبgج Eyes اًنQيعb Uأ اًنbيعU Hearts اًبوQلQق اًبbلUق Swords اًفوQيQس اًفbيUس Roads اًقbرUط اًقيgرUط Cities اًنbدUم ةUنيgدUم House اًتوQيQب اًتbيUب 3.3.3 Genitive The genitive of broken plurals also follows the genitive singular in vocalization.
See the table below.
Broken Plural Singular Successors QءاUفUلQخ (cid:131)ةUفيgلUخ Poor men QءاUرUقQف (cid:131)ريgقUف Friends QءاUقgدbصUأ (cid:131)قيgدUص Countries (cid:131)ناUدbلQب (cid:131)دUلgب Youths (cid:131)ناUبUش (cid:131)باUش Braves (cid:131)ناUعbجUش (cid:131)عاUجQش Months (cid:131)رQهbشUأ (cid:131)رbهUش Commanders (cid:131)ءاUرbمUأ QريgمUأ Schools (cid:131)سgراUدUم (cid:131)ةUسUرbدUم Offices (cid:131)بgتاUكUم (cid:131)بUتbكUم SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 ‘The broken plurals follow the singular nouns in all cases’.
Examine this statement.
4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) The plurals in Arabic is called al-Jam‘u عbمUجbلUا .
It points to people, things, animals or places that are more than two.
The plurals in Arabic are classified into Sound Plurals and Broken Plurals.
The sound plurals could also be either the sound masculine plural which takes waw and nun in the nominative cases or yau and nun in the accusative and genitive cases or the sound feminine plural which takes alif and open tau as suffixes; and dammah in the nominative case; and kasrah in the accusative and genitive cases.
The plural forms of Arabic broken plurals follow the singular nouns in all cases.
21ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) This unit explores the basic techniques of how to identify the various plurals that are available in Arabic Language.
In discusses the sound masculine and sound feminine plurals and their nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
The broken plurals is appropriately explained; its measures as produced by the grammarians briefly mentioned and what it shares in common with its singular forms highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Identify the plurals among the following words and state the class of plurals they belong.
مUلUق QسgبUلUم تاUمkرUكQم لاUمعU Qتbنgب QدUلUو QقgئاUدUح تاUعgماUج (cid:131)بgتاUكUم QراUحgب 2) Explain the rules guiding the sound masculine and feminine plurals.
3) Write the broken plural forms of the following singular nouns and mention which case they belong to.قيgرUط لUبUجbلا لQجUر اًدUلUو اًرbهUش 22ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria : Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
23ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 4 PRONOUNS (Ađ-Đamā’ir)QرgئاUمkضلا CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personal Pronouns 3.2 Demonstrative Pronouns 3.3 Interrogative Pronouns 3.4 Relative Pronouns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to this unit; you will be introduced to pronouns in Arabic language.
These pronouns are of different kinds like any other nouns in the different languages.
The mastery of your mother tongue pronouns will come to your aid in this unit.
Relax and start reading the contents one after the other.
You will also learn the usage of these pronouns in the Arabic language, how, when and why are they used.
The personal, the demonstrative, the relative and the interrogative pronouns are your focus in this unit.
Once again take it easy and let us advance.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the different kinds of pronouns in Arabic language • explain the grammatical rules governing pronouns in the Arabic language • illustrate how Arabic pronouns are used in oral and written expressions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Personal Pronouns When pronouns stand for persons, they are called personal pronouns.
Personal pronouns in Arabic can be either in singular, dual or plural.
When they are in second and third person singular and plural, personal pronouns in Arabic may also indicate gender.
In other words, they may 24ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I indicate masculine or feminine.
Persons are another feature of the personal pronoun.
This is another grammatical category of pronouns.
Here, let us imagine that you and another person or persons are involved in a discussion about another person or persons who may not necessarily be present.
You are the 1st person when you talk; your listener or listeners, are the 2nd person and the one spoken about is 3rd person.
The following are the personal pronouns in Arabic language in nominative case.
Singular Personal Pronouns First Person (Masculine & Feminine) I اkنUأ Second Person (Masculine) You تbنأ Second Person (Feminine) You تنأ Third Person (Masculine) He وQه Third Person (Feminine) She يgه Dual Personal Pronouns First person (Masc & Fem) we نbحUن Second person (Masc & Fem) you اUمQتbنUأ Third person (Masc & Fem) they اUمQه Note- There is no difference of gender in dual personal pronouns Plural Personal Pronouns First person (Masculine & Feminine) we نbحUن Second person (Masculine) you مQتbنأ Second person (Feminine) you نQتbنأ Third person (Masculine) they مQه Third person (feminine) they نQه The following are the personal pronouns in Arabic language in the accusative case These personal pronouns are called contiguous pronouns, ةUلgصkتQمQرgئاUمUض Singular First person (Masc & Fem) my book يgبUاتgك -ي Second person (Masculine) your book كUباUتgك -Uك Second person (Fem) your book كQباUتgك -gك Third person (Masculine) his book هQباUتgك -ه Third person (Fem) her book اUهQباUتgك -اUه 25ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Dual First person (Masc & Fem) our book ناUنQباUتgك -ان Second person (Masc & Fem) your book اUمQكQباUتgك -اUمQك Third person (Masc & Fem) their book اUمQهQباUتgك -ام(cid:3)(cid:9)ه Plural First person (Masc & Fem) our book اUنQباUتgك -اUن Second person (Masc) your book مQكUباUتgك -مQك Second person (Fem) your book نQكQباUتgك -kنQك Third person (Masc) their book مQهUباUتgك -مQه Third person (Fem) their book نQهUباUتgك -نQه SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 The personal pronouns are very important in our everytime expression.
Discuss them in detail with illustrations.
3.2 Demonstrative Pronouns ةUراUشgلbا QءاUمbسUأ A pronoun is demonstrative when it points to a person or thing.
Usually demonstrative pronoun can be either singular, dual or plural depending on whether the person or things they point out are singular, dual or plural.
The Demonstrative Pronouns are: This (Masculine) Singular اUذUه This (Feminine) Singular هgذUه These (Masculine) Dual ناUذUه These (Feminine) Dual ناUتUه These (Masc & Fem) Plural ءUلQؤUه Let us use them in complete sentences This is a boyدUلUو اUذUه This is a girlتbنgب gهgذUه These are two boys ناUدUلUو gناUذUه These are two girlsناUتbنgب gناUتUه These are boys (more than two)دUلbوUأ gءUلQؤUه These are girls (more than two)تاUنUب gءUلQؤUه 26ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I That (Masculine singular)كgلاUذ That (Feminine Singular) كbلgت Those (dual& plur., masc & fem) كgئUلوQQأ See examples in sentences below That bookباUتgكbلا UكgلاUذ That bagةUبيgقUحbلا Uكbلgت Those menلاUج(cid:148)رلا UكgئUلوQأ Those girlsتاUنUبbلا UكgئUلوQأ SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Define a demonstrative pronoun.
Give an example of each of them in complete sentences.
3.3 Interrogative Pronouns (asmau al-istifhamiyat) ءاUمbس Uأ ماUهbفgتbسgلbا Pronouns used for the purpose of asking questions are called interrogative, al-istifham gماUهbفgتbسgلbا The most Common Interrogative Pronouns are: Who?
bنUم ?
What?
اUذاUم اUم ?
Where?
UنbيUأ ?
How?
UفbيUك ?
When?
ىUتUم ?
How many?
bمUك ?
How much?
bمUكgب ?
Which?
bيUأ ?
See how we make use of these in a given sentence Who came yesterday?؟gسbمUأ UءاUج bنUم What is this?؟اUذUه اUم Where are you going?؟QبUهbذUت UنbيUأ How are you?؟UكQلاUح UفbيUك When are you returning?؟QعgجbرUت ىUتUم How many books did you read?؟QتbأUرUق اًباUتgك bمUك 27ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I How much is this pen?؟QمUلقUbلا اUذUه bمUكgب Which house?؟(cid:131)تbيUب bيUأ SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Enumerate the interrogative pronouns and use them in sentences of your own.
3.4 Relative Pronouns ةUلوQصbوUمbلا QءاUمbسUأ Relative pronouns are similar to interrogate pronouns, except that relative pronouns introduce subordinate clauses, and at the same time connect them with the main phrases; e. g. سbمUأ UءاUج يgذkلا QلQجkرلا (The man who came yesterday).
The relative pronouns in Arabic are: Which, that, who (Masc.
Sing) يgذلkا Which, that, who (Fem) يgتkلا The following are the dual personal relative pronouns in Arabic language in nominative case.
Which, that, who (Masc.
dual) ناUذلkلا Which, that, who (Fem.
dual) ناUتلkلا Which, that, who (Masc.
Plural) نيgذkلا Which, that, who (Fem.
Plural) يgتkللا After you have been introduced to the above relative pronouns let us make use of them in sentences.
The boy who went to the schoolةUسUرbدUمbلا ىUلgا UبUهUذ يgذkلا QدUلUوbلا The woman who returned from the marketقو«سلا Uنgم QتbعUجUر يgتkلا QةأbرUمbلا The two books that I read.تbأUرUق gناUذلkلا gناUبUتgكbلا The people who traveled to their home landمgهgدUلUب ىUلgإ اوQرgفاUس Uنيgذkلا Qساkنلا The female teachers who arrived yesterday .نbرUضUح يgتkلbلا QتاUسgرUدQمbلا سbمUأ The two girls whom I saw on the way.قيgرkطلا يgف اUمQهQتbيUأUر نg اUتkللا gناUتbنgبbلا SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Use five of the relative pronouns in three different sentences in which they will be in the nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) 28ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Pronouns are used in place of nouns to avoid monotony.
As we have first, second and third person pronouns in the nominative, accusative and genitive cases, we also have them in the singular, dual and plural forms.
Other different kinds of pronouns range from the personal, demonstrative, interrogative to the relative pronouns.
5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) This unit introduces you to different kinds of pronouns.
It also teaches you how to make use of some of these pronouns in a sentence.
The difference between singular, dual and plural personal pronouns surfaced while the grammatical cases in which we can find the pronouns are not left out.
The Pronouns have been used in sentences as illustrations and examples.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Write down all the personal pronouns from singular to plural.
2) Write all the interrogative pronouns that you know.
3) Mention two relative pronouns and two demonstrative pronouns and use them in a compete sentence.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria : Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A.; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
29ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 5 SUBJECT AND PREDICATE رUبUخbلاUوأUدUتbبQمbلا CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Subjects and Predicates 3.2 Adjectives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to the last unit of this module.
Here you will be introduced to subjects and predicates in Arabic Language.
You will also learn the adjectives and its various forms.
The subjects, predicates and adjectives are very important in Arabic grammar.
We hope you will take your time dealing with them diligently.
Thank you.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the Subject and predicate in Arabic language • construct sentences consisting of subject and predicate in Arabic • explain the adjective and its various forms in spoken and written Arabic • state the difference between subject, predicate and adjective.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Subject and Predicate QرUبUخbلاUوأUدUتbبQمbلا Subject and predicate are nominative nouns.
The subject (al-mubtada) begins a nominal sentence while the predicate (al-khabar) complete its full meaning.
We want you to know that the subject (al-mubtada’) is always definite noun while the predicate is (al-khabar) always indefinite.
The examples below will assist you in comprehending the above explanations.
Knowledge is light روQن Qمbلgعbلا The male teacher is standing مgئاUق Qم(cid:148)لUعQمbلا The boy is present رgضاUح QدUلUوbلا 30ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I The girl is small ةUريgغUص Qتbنgبbلا The house is spacious عgساUو QتbيUبbلا The man is tall ليgوUط QلQجkرلا The female teacher is sitting ةUسgلاUج QةUم(cid:148)لUعQمbلا The woman is beautiful ةUليgمUج QةUأbرUمbلا The blessing is a wish ةUبوQلbطUم QةUكUرUبbلا The female student is clever ةUطيgشUن QةUبgلاkطلا You will observe that the nouns that begin the sentences have definite articles that is what we called the subject al-mubtada’ and the nouns that complete the sentences are indefinite articles.
This is called (al-khabar).
Also, you will notice that if the subject is masculine the predicate will also be masculine and vice-versa.
You can also change the singular to dual or plural.
Once you have done that, the subject and predicate will also be either dual or plural.
Now let us change some of those examples above to dual and plural.
You will notice that if subject changes, the predicate will also change.
The two boys are present ناUرgضاUح gناUدUلUوbلا The two women are beautiful ناUتUليgمUج gناUتUأbرUمbلا These are dual examples.
Now let us see the plural form The men are tall نوQليgوUط QلاUج(cid:148)رلا The female students are clever تاUطيgشUن QتاUبgلاkطلا SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the subject and predicate in Arabic grammar.
Illustrate your answer with two samples each.
3.2 The Adjective (aş-Şifah) Qةkفgصلا In Arabic, we say adjective and the qualified (as-sifatu wa `l-mawsuuf).
QفوQصbوUملاUو QةUفgصلا.
In the Arabic tongue, adjective may be used as a noun.
Both noun and adjective share the same pattern of grammatical rules.
They must agree in singular, dual or plural pattern; so also in the definite or indefinite, masculine or feminine patterns.
Constant practice in reading and consultation of dictionary of Arabic will determine how much you can acquire as far as nouns and adjectives are concerned.
Never mind, we will give you the guideline that if you see the adjective and the qualified, you will quickly recognize them.
31ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I As you are following me in this discussion, the knowledge of subjects and predicates will assist you a lot.
Hope you have gone through and master the rules.
The adjective and the qualified (noun) are twin sisters; they do not leave each other.
They look alike; they share the same thing in common.
The examples below will showcase these latter characteristics.
Let us have them.
The small boy ريgغUصلا QدUلUوbلا The fall man ليgوUطلا QلQجkرلا The beautiful woman ةUليgمUجbلا QةUأbرUمbلا The small girl ةUريgغkصلا Qتbنgبbلا The glorious Qur’ān ميgرUكbلا QنآbرQقلbا The short story ةUريgصUقbلا Qةkصgقbلا Now looking at the above examples, all are combination of masculine and feminine, definite and indefinite.
We must point out that there is a difference between subject and predicate and adjective because the adjective follows the qualified in all while the predicate does not follow the subject in all.
What do we mean by all is that if noun is singular form, an adjective will also be singular.
Further, if it is either dual, plural, masculine, feminine, nominative, accusative, or genitive, it should be reiterated by way of emphasis that the adjective follows the noun in all.
Let us take example one be one by using one example for masculine in all and feminine in all.
A small boy (Nominative)ريgغUص (cid:131)دUلUو A small boy (Accusative)اًريgغUص ًادUلUو A small boy (Genitive)ريgغUص ٍدUلUو The small boy (nom) (Masc.
)ريغUkصلا دلولا The small boy (Acc.)
(Masc.
)ريgغkصلا دلولا The small boy (Gen.) (Masc.)
ريgغkصلا دلولا A small girl (nom) (fem) ةUريgغUص (cid:131)تbنggب A small girl (Acc.)
(fem) ةUريgغUص اًتbنgب A small girl (Gen.) (fem) ةUريgغUص ٍتbنgب The small girl (nom) (fem)ةUريgغkصلا Qتbنgبbلا The small girl (Acc) (fem)ةUريgغkصلا Uتbنgبلا The small girl (Gen) (fem)ةUريgغkصلا gتbنgبbلا You will notice that they follow each other in all ramifications.
The same thing occurs in dual form.
The only slight change is in plural where if noun is a sound plural the adjective can be either sound or 32ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I broken.
At times noun can also be broken while adjective takes different form of plural.
All is well, when noun is plural adjective is also plural.
Examples: The small boysنوQريgغUصلا QدUلbوUلbا The small girlsتاUريgغUصلا QتاUنUبbلا Hence, you could see that nouns are broken plural while adjectives are sound plural.
It may also be other way round.
e. g. The Ignorant travelers.لاgهUجbلا UنوQرgفاUسQمbلا The rich Muslims.ءاUيgنbغلU bا UنوQمgلbسQمbلا Hence, the nouns are sound plural, while the adjectives take the broken plural form.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 The adjective must agree with the noun it qualifies in all cases.
Discuss this submission.
4.0 CONCLUSION ( QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) In the Arabic language a sentence may consist of subject and predicate.
The subject and predicate as a grammatical rule differ from each other in certain characteristics.
While the subject is definite the predicate is indefinite.
On the other hand, the two are nominative nouns.
Secondly, adjectives that qualify nouns share the same features such as numbers, gender, definiteness or indefiniteness.
So also they must agree in the nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
Finally the difference between subjects and predicates and adjectives is that adjective follow the qualified in all, while the subject differs from predicate in the article.
The only area where there is a slight change is in plural form where either of the two (noun and adjective) (subject and predicate) can take the sound plural while the other take the broken plural.
5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) In this unit you have been introduced to subjects and predicates.
You have also learnt the adjective and the qualified.
You have been told that the qualified is a noun described by an adjective.
In this unit also, you are acquainted with the fact that the subject, the predicate and the adjective share many things in common except in some places where they differ from one another.
33ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Explain fully what you know on the subject, the predicate and the adjective in the Arabic language.
2) Write ten sentences in Arabic subject and predicate five for the masculine gender and five others for the feminine.
3) Use these nouns and adjectives in all forms that you know.
دgهUتbجQمbلا QمgلUعQمbلا ةUدgهUتbجQمbلا gةUمgلbسQمbلا 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria: Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A. ; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
MODULE 2 THE VERBS Unit 1 Importance of Verb Unit 2 Divisions of Verb Unit 3 The Perfect Measure of Trilateral Verbs Unit 4 The Imperfect Measure of Trilateral Verb Unit 5 The Imperative UNIT 1 IMPORTANCE OF VERB CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 34ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.1 Importance of Verb 3.2 Types of Verb 3.2.1 Trilateral 3.2.2 Quadrilateral 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to the first unit of module two.
In this unit you will be introduced to the importance of verbs in Arabic language.
Type of verbs such as Trilateral and quadrilateral verbs shall also be introduced to you.
Come on board, let us move forward.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the importance of verbs in Arabic language grammar.
• highlight the trilateral verbs in Arabic language grammar • identify the quadrilateral verbs in Arabic grammar.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Verbs in Arabic Grammar Verbs in Arabic language, just like in any other languages of the world, are a most important linguistic element.
We want you to know that there is no other part of speech that could exist alone as a sentence and have meaning without a verb in it, where as sentence can be formed by a verb alone.
If we say سgلbجgإ ‘ijlis’ ‘sit’, It is a complete sentence that could portray a full meaning that a sentence with a subject, verb and object could have.
A verb could be defined as a grammatical word that states the action(s) performed or relationship that exists between a subject and an object of a given sentence.
As the link and the presenter of the actions performed or the relationship that exist between the ‘performer’ and the ‘action performed’, the verb is then very important aspect of the grammatical parts of speech in Arabic language .
35ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.2 Types of Verbs In Arabic language there are trilateral verbs and quadrilateral verbs.
The two types have their way of measures.
We shall discuss these verbs extensively.
3.2.1 The Trilateral Verb Generally, composition of Arabic verbs is three radicals which are the root letters.
The reason why it is called trilateral verbs is that it consists of three radical letters.
For example ‘ Kataba’,بUتUك he wrote.
The three radicals here are ب ت ك k, t, b.
The measure of the trilateral verbs is fa‘ala لUعUف , fa‘ila لgعUف or fa‘ula UلQعUف.
The first letter of trilateral verb is called fāu al-fi li, لbعفgbلا QءاUف the middle or second letter is known as aynu al-fi‘il, لbعفgbلا QنbيعU while the last letter is Lam al-fi‘il لbعgفbلا QمUل These are explained in the following examples لUعUUف بUتUك لgعUUف UعgمUس UلQعUUف UبQرUق The meaning of لعف لعف لعف is ‘to do’ because it is a doing word (action), بتك ‘Kataba’ means ‘to write’.عمUس sami‘a means, to hear and برق qaruba is to move near.
This table will illustrate our saying clearer Fa‘ulaلQعUف Fa‘ilaلgعUف Fa‘alaلUعUف To be honored To play بgعUل To write بUتUك مQرUك To be huge مQخUض To hear عgمUس To help رUصUن To be dignified To praise دgمUح To sit سUلUج فQرUش To be difficult To rejoice حgرUف To openحUتUف بQعUص To move near To feel thirsty شgطUع To find دUجUو بQرUق There are some other verbs that consist of additional letters(s) with trilateral verbs.
We do not regard them as quadrilateral.
These shall 36ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I be taught in higher level.
It should be noted that the above table is practically based on simple trilateral verbs.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Highlight the significance of verb as a part of speech.
Discuss the trilateral patterns of the Arabic language verbs.
3.2.2 Quadrilateral Verbs The quadrilateral verb in Arabic language is those verbs that consist of four radical letters.
For example لUمbسUب ‘basmala’.
He began ‘with the name of Allah’.
The measure of quadrilateral verb in Arabic language is لUلbعUف fa‘lala, to do, The examples of quadrilateral verbs are the following.
To roll جUرbحUد To shake لUزbلUز To laugh UهUقbهUق To say the name of God UلUمbسUب As we have told you earlier, the quadrilateral verbs in Arabic language are very few in number.
We are introducing these verbs to you so that you will identify them in any Arabic sentence.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How many radical letters do the quadrilateral verbs contain?
Illustrate your answer with examples.
4.0 CONCLUSION (جاتنتسلا) Verbs are very important parts of speech in any language including Arabic.
The trilateral and the quadrilateral are two important patterns of Arabic language verbs.
The trilateral are verbs that consist of three radical letters wile the quadrilaterals are those consisting of four radical letters.
The Arabic trilateral verbs are many while the quadrilateral verbs are in only four patterns.
5.0 SUMMARY (ةUصاUلQخ) This unit introduces you to the importance of verbs as a part of speech and its various kinds in the Arabic language.
It discusses in brief the Arabic trilateral verbs and quadrilateral verbs and an eye-birds view of their radical letters.
It provides examples and gives exercises that will help your mastery of those aspects of the Arabic language verbs.
37ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Explain the importance of verbs in Arabic language.
2) Write two trilateral verbs for each of its three patterns, that is, fa‘ala,لUعUف fa‘ilaلgعUف and fa‘ulaلQعUف 3) Explain quadrilateral verbs with examples.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria : Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A. Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
38ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 2 DIVISION OF VERBS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Division of Verbs 3.1.1 Sound Verbs 3.1.2 Weak Verbs 3.1.3 Transitive Verbs 3.1.4 Intransitive Verbs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Like in the English language with which you are familier, there are various divisions of verbs, regular and irregular, auxiliary, transitive and intransitive.
Also in tenses, we have past, present, future and command.
So also is the case with Arabic language.
In this unit, you will be introduced to these divisions and different kinds of verbs as taught in Arabic language grammar.
Copious examples shall be given to you to facilitate your understanding of the issues involved.
Exercises shall also be provided to test your competence.
You are welcome.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify sound and weak verbs in spoken and written Arabic language • explain transitive and intransitive verbs in Arabic grammar.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Division of Verbs 3.1.1 Sound Verb حيgحUص Qلbعgف Sound verb is a verb whose three radical letters do not contain any of the weak letters.
The weak letters are,ى و ا) فلUا QواUو QءاUي) .
alif, wawu and yau.
39ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Examples of sound verbs are بتك kataba, to write.
أUرUق qara’a, to read.
عgمUس sami‘a, to hear.
The above examples showed that none of the letters is weak letter.
Sound verb is also divided into three main categories.
1) Salim, (free) bمgلاUس This is a kind of verb that is pure of any weak letters and does not contain hamzat ‘أ’ or compound letters.
Examples of Sālim are as follows: To write بUتUك To sit سUلUج To go بUهUذ To help حUتUف To hear عgمUس To learn مUلUع 2) Mahmūz (Possessor of hamzat)زومهم This is a sound verb that contains hamzat in one of its three radical letters.
This kind of verb is very few in Arabic language.
Examples of Mahmuz are these: To take ذUخUأ To ask لUأUس To read أUرUق The hamzat could be at the begin likeذUخUأ or middle such asلUأUس and last letter like UأUرUق 3) Muđa‘afu – (Compound)فUعUضQم This is a kind of verb that the second and the third letters are the same but rather made as one letter.
Examples are the following: To run away رف To spread دUم To do harm رUض To be stingy حUش To point لUد SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examine your self on Arabic language sound verbs and its various kinds.
40ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.1.2 Weak Verb لUتbعQم Qلbعgف This is a verb that contains one of the three weak letters, that is, ((يو ا.
It also has sub-divisions.
1) al-MithālلاUثgمbلا : This is a verb whose first letter is one of the weak letters.
Examples are: To find دUجUو To stand فUقUو To inherit ثgرUو To dry سUبUي To give charity بUهUو The above verbs begin with ‘و ’ and ي .
These two letters are weak letters in Arabic.
2) al-ajwafفUوbجUلbا : al-ajwaf is a kind of verb whose middle letter is a weak letter.
See the example below: To say لاUق To get لاUن To sleep ماUن To come ءاUج To sell عUاب You can see that the middle letter is alif (ا) and this is one of the weak letters.
3) an-Naaqişصgقاkنلا : an-nāqiş is a verb whose last letter is a weak letter.
Let us see the examples of this kind of verb: To walk/move ىUعUس To judge ىUضUق To forbid ىUهن To throw ىUمUر To become high ىلUع You will see that the last letter of the above examples is pronounced alif ا)) but written with Yāu (ي ).
Both alif and yāu are weak letters.
4) al-lafīfu فيgفkللا : This is a kind of verb that possesses two weak letters in a particular verb.
Those two letters may be separated or followed each other.
41ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I a) al-lafīfu al-Mafruq (The Separated lafif)bقوQرbفUمbلا Qفيgفkللا : This is a verb that its two weak letters are separated from each other.
For example To safe ىUعUو To be secured ىUقUو b) al-lafifu, al-Maqrūn (The Joint lafif).نوQرbقUمbلا Qفيgفkللا This is a verb whose two weak letters follow each other, e. g. To iron/press (a cloth) ىUوUك To fold ىUوUط You will notice that in a separated lafif example.
It isق that separatedو andي Then, if you look well at the joint lafif, you will see that theو and ي follow each other inىUوUك andىUوUط SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain Arabic language weak verbs and its various kinds.
Give examples for what you say.
3.1.3 Transitive Verb يgدbعUتQم Qلgعف This is a verb in which the subject of a verb requires an object in a given sentence.
Examples are: To beat بUرUض To help رUصUن To open حUتUف To praise دgمUح The above examples require an object in a given sentence.
3.1.4 Intransitive Verb لbعgف It is a verb in which the subject of any sentence does not require object.
Examples are: To come ءاUج To go بUهUذ To rejoice حgرUف To sit سUلUج To go out جUرUخ 42ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I These are Arabic language verbs that need no object.
Let us see the example of both transitive and intransitive verb in two sentences.
Transitive Verb: بbلUكbلا QدUمbحUأ لU (cid:3)ت(cid:3)ق (Ahmad killed the dog).
You see that Ahmad is subject, لUتUق is the verb and ب(cid:16)لك(cid:3) (cid:16)لا is the object of the sentence.
Intransitive Verb: ) مUدآ UءUاج Adam came ).
You see that the sentence does not require an object.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Expatiate upon transitive and intransitive verbs in the Arabic language.
Provide examples for your submissions.
4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) Arabic language verbs are divided into sound and weak verbs.
The sound verbs are those whose letters are completely sound, those that have hamzah as one of its trilaterls called mahmūz and those with doubled letter called muda ‘aff.
The weak verbs are those that contain weak letter in one of its trillaterals.
The grammatical terminology for verb whose fāu `l-fi‘l is a weak letter is mithāl; the verb whose ‘aynu `l-fi‘l is week is called ajwaf while that whose lāmu `l-fi ‘l is weak is called manqūşu `l-binā.
If a verb has more than one weak verb its terminology is lafīf which could be mafruq if separated or maqrun if unseperated.
Arabic verbs can also be transitive requiring an object or intransitive not requiring an object.
5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) This unit introduces you to the divisions of verb in the Arabic language.
It discusses the division of sound verbs into Sālim (free), Mahmūz (Possessor of Hamzat) and muda‘af (compound);and the division of weak verbs into mithāl, ajwaf, nāqis and lafif.
The transitive and intransitive verbs are also treated in the Unit.
Copius examples in words and sentences are provided for illustration.
The unit also contains tests meant for your self assessment.
43ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Define Arabic language sound verbs and illustrate them with examples.
(2) Give a list of Arabic weak verbs and their various divisions with illustrations.
3) Explain the transitive and intransitive verbs in Arabic language.
Mention five verbs for each of them and use them in sentences.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London:.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria : Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A. ; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, wizaratul al-‘a’lam.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
44ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 3 The Past Tense /Perfect Verbs ةUيgضاUمbلا QلاUعbفUلbا CONTENTS 12.0 Introduction 13.0 Objectives 14.0 Main content 3.1 Conjugation of the Past Tense/Perfect Trilateral Sound Verbs 15.0 Conclusion 16.0 Summary 17.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 18.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be learning the conjugation of verbs in Arabic language.
The measure of the tense will cover first, second and third persons singular, dual, and plural.
You will be introduced to the easier techniques with which an Arabic grammar leaner like you could apply in conjugating perfect Arabic verbs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • construct oral and written sentences using Arabic perfect verbs • identify the first person singular, dual and plural measure of Arabic perfect verbs • identify the second person singular, dual and plural measure of Arabic perfect verbs • identify the third person singular, dual and plural measure of the Arabic perfect verbs • identify the morphemes (suffixation) with which could be added with a verb to facilitate grammatically correct conjugation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conjugation of the Past Tense/Perfect Trillateral Sound Verbs The past tense/simple perfect trilliteral sound verb is a verb used when we want to indicate activities or state in the past without indicating any 45ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I connection with the present.
The simple perfect / past tense of trilateral sound verb is conjugated according to the following paradigm.
.
1st person singular (Masculine & Feminine) I did (cid:14)ت(cid:16)ل(cid:14)(cid:14)عف You 2nd person singular Masculine ?ت=لFعFف did 2nd person singular feminine You did Dت=لFعFف 3rd person singular masculine He did FلFعFف 3rd person singular feminine She did Fت=لFعFف 2nd person dual (masculine & feminine) You did اFمDت=لFعFف 3rd person dual masculine They did ًلbعgف 3rd person dual masculine They did اUتUلUعUف 1st person dual and plural (masc.
& fem.)
We did اUنbلUعUف 2nd person plural masculine You did bمQتbلUعUف 2nd person plural feminine You did kنQتbلUعUف 3rd person plural masculine They did اوQلUعUف 3rd person plural feminine They did UنbلUعUف There is a change of vowel in the third letter of the radicals.
i.e.
‘ı ’ other letters do not change.
For example fa’ala لUعUف , ‘he did’ changes to fa’altu تbلUعUف , ‘I did’.
There is no difference in conjugation whether a verb is fa’ala لUعUف or facila لgعUف or fa’ala لUعUف .
it is only lam ‘ل’ that will change during the conjugation.
We will give you examples of various patterns.
Example (A) To write بUتUك  to do لUعUف This is where the second letter is given fat-hah ‘a’ 1st person singular (masc.and fem.)
I wrote Dتب=FتFك 2nd person singular masculine You wrote Fتب=FتFك 2nd person singular feminine You wrote ?تب=FتFك 3rd person singular masculine He wrote FبFتFك 3rd person singular feminine She wrote =تبFFتFك 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
You wrote اFمDتب=FتFك 3rd person dual masculine They wrote ابFFتFك 3rd person dual feminine They wrote اFتبFFتFك 1st person dual & plural (Masc.
& We wrote انب=FتFك fem.)
2nd person plural Masculine You wrote =مDتب=FتFك 2nd person plural feminine You wrote NنDتب=FتFك 3rd person plural masculine They wrote اوبDFتFك 3rd person plural feminine They wrote Fنب=FتFك 46ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Example (B) We now conjugate بgعUل which equates لgعUف pattern: 1st person singular (masculine & I played Dت=ب?عFل feminine) 2nd person singular masculine You played Fت=ب?عFل 2nd person singular feminine You played ?ت=ب?عFل 3rd person singular masculine He played Fب?عFل 3rd person singular feminine She played =تFب?عFل 2nd person dual (masculine and You played اFمتD=ب?عFل feminine) 3rd person dual masculine They played اFب?عFل 3rd person dual feminine They played اتFFب?عFل 1st person dual and plural (masc.
& We played انF=ب?عFل fem.)
2nd person plural masculine You played =متD=ب?عFل 2nd person plural feminine You played NنتD=ب?عFل 3rd person plural masculine They played اوDب?عFل 3rd person plural feminine They played Fن=ب?عFل Example (C) : The third and last pattern is لQعUف such as فQرUش 1st person singular (masc.
& fem.)
I am dignified Dتف=DرFش 2nd person singular masculine You are dignified Fتف=DرFش 2nd person singular feminine You are dignified ?تف=DرFش 3rd person singular masculine He is dignified FفDرFش 3rd person singular feminine She is dignified =تفFDرFش 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
You are dignified اFمDتف=DرFش 3rd person dual masculine They are dignified افFDرFش 3rd person dual feminine They are dignified اFتفFDرFش 1st person dual & plural (masc We aredignified اFنف=DرFش &fem.)
2nd person plural masculine You are dignified مDتف=DرFش 2nd person plural feminine You are dignified FنDتف=DرFش 3rd person plural masculine They are dignified اوفDDرFش 3rd person plural feminine They are dignified Fنف=DرFش Dear students you will see that the third letter changes from vowel U ‘a’ to sukun b, or Q ‘u’ at other time there are morphemes at the suffix of the verb.
There is no distinction in conjugation whether the verb is fa’ala لUعUف , facila لgعUف or fa’ula لQعUف .
47ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate these following verbs in Arabic past tense/perfect measure.
• UبgغUر to desire • UبUهUذ to go • UبQعUص to be difficult.
4.0 CONCLUSION.
(جاتنتسلا) We hereby remind you of the basic rules by way of enphasy: The past tense/perfect trilliteral sound verb is a verb used when we want to indicate activities or state in the past without indicating any connection with thepresent.
There is a change of vowel in the third letter of the radicals.
i.e.
‘ı ’ other letters do not change.
There is no difference in conjugation whether a verb is fa’ala لUعUف , facila لgعUف or fa’ula UلQعUف 5.0 SUMMARY (ةصلخ) This unit treats the rules governing the conjugation of past tense/ perfect sound trilateral verbs which constute the largest number Arabic language verbs.
The unit adequately informs you of that there are no changes regarding the second letter vowels; and that the lat leter letter’s vowel changes from _U_ a to sukun b or Q u.
The unit enriches your verbal vocabulary and technique of conjugation of trilateral sound verbs through adequate explanation and examples.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Conjugate the following verbs in perfect form.
a -UسUرUد to study b - UسUلUج to sit c - UلUتUق to kill d بgسح to think e - UنQسUح to be good f - UمQرUك to be honoured g -UبQرUق to move near h -UحgرUف to rejoice i - UمgلUس to be free j - UحUتUف to open 48ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India, Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria : Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni A, Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007) al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
49ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 4 The Present Continuous Tense/Imperfect Verbs ( ةUعgراUضQمbلا QلاUعbفUلbا ) CONTENTS 1 Introduction 2 Objectives 3 Main Content 3.1 The Imperfect Measure of Trilateral Sound Verbs (Indicative) 3.2 Future tense 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to another unit.
In this unit you will be introduced to the Present Continuous/Imperfect verbs in Arabic language.
The conjugation of the present active indicative form of the trilateral sound verbs will also be presented for you to study, digest and comprehend.
You will also learn the future tense of the trilateral sound verbs in the unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify present continuous/imperfect tense of Arabic sound trillateral verbs • write present continuous/imperfect tense of Arabic sound trillateral verbs in all the active indicative forms • mention the prefixes and suffixes (morphemes) of the present continuous/imperfect tense in the Arabic language • construct sentences using Arabic present continuous/imperfect tense trillateral sound Arabic verbs.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Imperfect Measure of Arabic Trilateral Sound Verbs As in the English language, the imperfect verb in Arabic is any verb that indicates the occurrence or state of an action in the present.
We need to 50ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I introduce you to six patterns which imperfect tense form can take before we go further.
Like we have said earlier in the previous unit the perfect tense takes only three patterns which are لgعUف ,UلQعUف and لQعUف .
Now let us see the patterns or forms of the imperfect verbs.
Imperfect Perfect QحUتbفUي .e.g QلUعفUي UحUتUف .e.g UلUعUف QسgلbجUي .e.g QلgعفUي UسUلUج .e.g UلgعUف QبQتbكUي .e.g QلQعفUي UبUتUك .e.g UلQعUف QبUعbلUي .e.g QلUعفUي UبgعUل .e.g UلUعUف QبgسbحUي .e.g QلgعفUي UبgسUح .e.g UلgعUف QبQرbقUي .e.g QلQعفUي UبQرUق .e.g UلQعUف Now, take note that ‘ لUعUف ’ consists of three different patterns of imperfect.
The second letter of perfect verb could be vowel U ‘a’ g ‘i’ or ‘u’, fathah, kasrah or dammah.
You will also see that ‘ لgعUف ’ has two imperfect forms that is, the letter could be either U ‘a’ or g ‘i’ (fat-hah or kasrah) in imperfect form.
While the last pattern ‘ لQعUف ’ remains unchanged and retains its ‘u’ (dammah) vowel.
See the examples above as we will also illustrate it further below.
- He opens / He is opening حUتbفUي to open UحUتUف - He sits / He is sitting سgلbجUي to sit UسUلUج - He writes / he is writing بQتbكUي to write UبUتUك - He plays / he is playing بUعbلUي to play UبgعUل - He thinks / he is thinking بgسbحUي to think بgسUح - He moves near/ he is moving near بQرbقUي to move near بQرUق Now let us conjugate the present/imperfect tense verb of Arabic language.
We want you to know that there are four letters of imperfect verb.
These are hamzat ‘أ’ nun ‘ن’, yau ‘ي’ and tau ‘ت’.
These four letters are prefixed with the imperfect verbs.
1st person singular (masc.
and fem.)
I do (af ‘(a) (i) (u) lu) Dلعف=Fأ You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) 2nd person singular masculine Dلع=فتF lu) You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) 2nd person singular feminine Fني?لع=فتF līna) He does (yaf ‘(a) (i) (u) 3rd person singular masculine Dلع=فيF lu) She does (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) 3rd person singular Dلع=فتF lu) 2nd person dual (masculine and You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) Fلع=فتF 51ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I feminine) lani) They do (yaf ‘(a) (i) (u) 3rd person dual masculine ?نFلع=فيF lu) They do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) 3rd person dual feminine ?نFلDع=فتF lani) 1st person dual and plural (masc.
& We do (naf ‘(a) (i) (u) Dلع=فنF fem.)
lu) You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) 2nd person plural masculine FنوDلع=فتF luna) You do (taf ‘(a) (i) (u) 2nd person plural feminine Fن=لع=فتF lna) They do (yaf ‘(a) (i) 3rd person plural masculine FنوDلع=فيF (u)luna) They do (yaf‘(a) (i) 3rd person plural feminine Fن=لع=فيF (u)lna) In the above paradigm, you will see that we have treated the three possible ways in which the second radical of perfect ‘e ’ can be either a, i or u (fathah, kasrah and dammah).
Now let use Yaftau “حUتbفUي ” he opens/ is opening as example.
1st person singular masc.
& fem.
I open / am opening QحUتbفUأ 2nd person singular masculine You open/ are opening QحUتbفUت 2nd person singular feminine You open/are opening UنيgحUتbفUت 3rd person singular masculine He opens/is opening حQ UتbفUي 3rd person singular She opens / is opening حQ UتbفUت You (two) open are 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
gناUحUتbفUت opening They (two) open/are 3rd person dual masculine gناUحUتbفUي opening 3rd person dual feminine They (two) are pening gناUحUتbفUت 1st person dual & plural (masc.& We open / are opening حQ UتbفUن fem.)
2nd person plural masculine You open / are opening UنوQحUتbفUت 2nd person plural feminine You open /are opening UنbحUتbفUت 3rd person plural masculine They open / are opening UنوQحUتbفUي 3rd person plural feminine They open / are opening UنbحUتbفUي The above example is based on fat-hah ‘a’ vowel in the penultimate letter.
52ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Now let us see the kasrah ‘i’ vowel in the penultimate letter also.
1st person singular (masc.
and fem.)
I sit / am sitting QسgلbجUأ 2nd person singular masculine You sit / are sitting QسgلbجUت 2nd person singular feminine You sit / are sitting UنيgسgلbجUت 3rd person singular masculine He sits / is sitting QسgلbجUي 3rd person singular She sits / is sitting QسgلbجUت 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
You sit / are sitting gناUسgلbجUت 3rd person dual masculine They (two) sit / are sitting gناUسgلbجUي 3rd person dual feminine They (two) sit / are sitting gناUسgلbجUت 1st person dual & plural (masc.
& fem).
We sit / are sitting QسgلbجUن 2nd person plural masculine You sit / are sitting UنوQسgلbجUت 2nd person plural feminine You sit / are sitting UنbسgلbجUت 3rd person plural masculine They sit / are sitting UنوQسgلbجUي 3rd person plural feminine They sit / are sitting UنbسgلbجUي The last pattern is dammah ‘u’ vowel as in سQرbدUي ‘he studies’.
1st person singular (masc.
& I study / am studying QسQرbدUأ fam.)
2nd person singular masculine You study / are studying QسQرbدUت 2nd person singular feminine You study / are studying نيgسQرbدUت 3rd person singular masculine He studies / is studying QسQرbدUي 3rd person singular She studies/is studying QسQرbدUت You (two) study / are 2nd person dual (masc.
& fem.)
gناUسQرbدUت studying 3rd person dual masculine They (two) are studying gناسQرbدUي They (two) study / are 3rd person dual feminine ناUسQرbدUت studying 1st person dual &plural (masc.
& We study / are studying QسQرbدUن fem.)
2nd person plural masculine You study / are studying UنوQسQرbدUت 2nd person plural feminine You study / are studying نbسQرbدUت They study / are 3rd person plural masculine UنوQسQرbدUي studying They study / are 3rd person plural feminine UنbسQرbدUي studying This is how you will be conjugating the imperfect, simple present and present continuous tenses indicative Arabic verbs irrespective of vowel on the second letter of perfect verb.
53ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.2 Future Tense The imperfect indicative in Arabic language is also used to express future action, but in this case it is generally strengthened by prefixing the future particle sa… س or saofa… فbوUس (will or shall).
These are examples for illustratuion: The conjugation of future tense is as follows: 1st person singular (masc.
& DبDت=كFأس I will/shall write fem.)
DبDت=كFأ Fف=وFس DبDت=كFتFس 2nd person singular masculine You will/shall write DبDت=كFت Fف=وFس Fنيب?Dت=كFتFس 2nd person singular feminine You will/shall write Fنيب?Dت=كFت Fف=وFس (masculine) he will / shall DبDت=كFيFس 3rd person singular masculine write DبDت=كFي Fف=وFس DبDت=كFتFس 3rd person singular She will/shall write DبDت=كFت Fف=وFس ?نابتD=كFتFس 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
You will/shall write ?نابFDت=كFت Fف=وFس ?نابFDت=كFيFس 3rd person dual masculine They will/shall write ?نابFDت=كFي Fف=وFس ?نابFDت=كFتFس 3rd person dual feminine They will/ shall write ?نابFDت=كFت Fف=وFس 1st person dual and plural DبDت=كFنFس We will/shall write (masculine and feminine) DبDت=كFن Fف=وFس FنوبDDت=كFتFس 2nd person plural masculine You will/shall write FنوبDDت=كFت Fف=وFس Fنب=Dت=كFتFس 2nd person plural feminine You will/shall write Fنب=Dت=كFت Fف=وFس FنوبDDت=كFيFس 3rd person plural masculine They will/shall write FنوبDDت=كFي Fف=وFس Fنب=Dت=كFي Fس 3rd person plural feminine They will/shall write Fنب=Dت=كFي Fف=وFس SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Give an example of the six patterns of imperfect indicative verbs in Arabic.
Write them in the first, second, third, singular dual and plural forms.
4.0 CONCLUSION By way of enphasy the following rules governing the conjugation of verbs into imperfect tense can be derived from this lesson: 54ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I The imperfect/present Continuous verb in Arabic is any verb that indicates the occurrence or state of an action in the present.
The imperfect/ present continuous tense form can take six patterns: ‘ لUعUف ’ consists of three different patterns whereby the second letter could be vowel U ‘a’ g ‘i’ or Q ‘u’, fat-hah, kasrah or dammah.
Also ‘ لgعUف ’ has two imperfect forms that is, the second letter could be either U ‘a’ or g ‘i’ (fat-hah or kasrah) form.
The last pattern ‘ لQعUف ’ remains unchanged and retains its ‘u’ (dammah) vowel.
All the verbs in this category are sounds, trilateral and indicative imperfect.
The imperfect indicative in Arabic language is also used to express future action generally strengthened by prefixing the future particle sa… س or saofa… فbوUس (will or shall).
5.0 SUMMARY This unit treats some basic techniques of conjugation of imperfect verbs.
Specifically, it analyzes the six features that affects the vowels of the penultimate letter of the perfect tense which is the middle letter and could be vowel a, i, or u.
(fat-hah, kasrah or dammah).
It shows that these vowels do not change the paradigm.
The examples also include the four letters ي ,ن ,ا, and ت that are prefixed with the imperfect tense.
Examples also include thye technique of conjugating the singular, dual and plural forms of the imperfect tense.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Conjugate these verbs in imperfect forms 1.
QلQتbقUي he kills 2.
QبUعbلUي he plays 3.
QحUرbفUي he rejoices 4.
QمgلbسUي he is free 5.
QنQسbحUي he is good 6.
QبgرbضUي he beats 7.
QرQظbنUي he looks 8.
QعUمbسUي he hears 9.
QبgسbحUي he thinks 55ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 10.
QمUلbعUي he knows 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, J.M (1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria: Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A.; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
56ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 5 The Imperative رbمUلbا Qلbعgف CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Imperative 3.2 Rule Guiding Hamzatu al-wasl 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn the command tense of Arabic grammar which is also referred to as the imperative.
You will also be introduced to the techniques of conjugating Arabic verbs into the imperative measure.
Knowledge acquired from this unit will initiate you properly to the method of conjugating Arabic verbs in the imperative form.
We implore you to revise the techniques and methods of conjugating all verbs as they were taught earlier so as to understand this unit better.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the imperative verbs in Arabic grammar • describe how various verbs could be conjugated into the imperative • demonstrate the use of the imperative in oral and written Arabic.
You are now invited into the world of conjugation of verbs into the imperative.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Imperative and How to Formulate It The Arabic imperative proper is any verb that is used to make a request or demand an action.
The action may be immediate or later.
The imperative is derived from the second persons irrespective of the number (singular, dual and plural).
So far these are the persons to be commanded or from whom actions are demanded.
The prefixed tau ‘ت ’ and its vowel fat-hah, ‘ a’ are cut off, this ‘ta’ ‘ ت’ and the vowel will be 57ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I replaced by hamzat al-wasl ‘ٱ’.
There will be a change at the vowel of the last letter of the verbs.
It is only in the second person plural feminine that the vowel of the last letter will not change.
Thus, it will remain as it is.
Remember that, we have said this tense is derived from second persons of imperfect verbs.
e.g.
taktubu, ‘you write’ بQتbكUت .
The imperative tense will be ‘uktub’ ‘write’ ‘ بQتbكQأ ’.
From the above example you will see that the prefixed tau and vowel ‘a’ have been cut off, while they are replaced by hamzatu al-waşl and vowel ‘u’.
There is a change of vowel at the last letter’s vowel from ‘u’ to ‘sukun’.
Now let us see the operation of these following verbs.
Second person singular masculine Write =بDت=كDأ Second person singular feminine Write ي?بDت=كDأ Second person dual masculine & Write اFبDت=كDأ feminine Second person plural masculine Write اوDبDت=كDأ Second person plural feminine Write Fن=بDت=كDأ You will observe that, it is only second person singular that the vowel changes from ‘u’ to ‘sukun’.
Others are omission of letters.
Now see the imperatives as they are derived from imperfects.
QبQتbكUت ‹ bبQتbكQأ UنيgبQتbكUت ‹ يgبQتbكQأ gناUبQتbكUت ‹ اUبQتbكQأ UنوQبQتbكUت ‹ اوQبQتbكQأ UنbبQتbكUت ‹ UنbبQتbكQأ 3.2 Rules Guiding Hamzat al-waşl The vowel on hamzat al-waşl will follow the penultimate letter of imperfect form to indicate which of the vowels ‘u’ or ‘i’ (dammah or kasrah) is going to be used.
If the imperative is vowel ‘a’ or ‘i’ the hamzat al-waşl will be given vowel ‘i’ but if vowel ‘u’ (dammah) is on the penultimate letter, then hamzatu al-waşl will also possess ‘u’.
Like the example above you will see that ‘tau’ is the penultimate letter of the verb ‘taktubu’ ‘ بQتbكUت ’, you write.
The ‘tau’ is given dammah ‘u’; this results in giving hamzatu al-waşl of ‘uktub’ ‘write’ ‘ بQتbكQأ ’ dammah.
Let us illustrate the above explanations with the following examples.
Example One 58ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I (tadrusu, ‘you write’ سQرbدUت with penultimate letter given dammah ‘u’) 2nd person singular masculine Learn bسQرbدQأ 2nd person singular feminine Learn يgسQرbدQأ 2nd person dual (masculine and Learn اUسQرbدQأ feminine) 2nd person plural masculine Learn اوQسQرbدQأ 2nd person plural feminine Learn UنbسQرbدQأ Example Two ‘tajilsu’, ‘you sit’ ‘QسgلbجUت’ with kasrah ‘i’ at the penultimate letter.
2nd person singular masculine Sit down bسgلbجgا 2nd person singular feminine Sit down يgسgلbجgا 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
Sit down اUسgلbجgا 2nd person plural masculine Sit down اوQسgلbجgا 2nd person plural feminine Sit down Uنbسgلbجgا Example Three taftahu ‘you open’ ‘حUتbفUت ’ with penultimate letter possessing fat-hah ‘a’ 2nd person singular masculine Open bحUتbفgا 2nd person singular feminine Open يgحUتbفgا 2nd person dual (masc.
and fem.)
Open اUحUتbفgا 2nd person plural masculine Open اوQحUتbفgا 2nd person plural feminine Open UنbحUتbفgا SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain in detail the imperative verb in Arabic language and the technique of con jugating it.
4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) Command or the Imperative formula can only be conjugated and applied to the second persons irrespective of the number or gender.
It is to be derived from the imperfect verbs only.
The prefixed tau ‘ت ’ and its vowel fat-hah, ‘ a’ are cut off and be replaced by hamzat al-wasl ‘ٱ’.
Then there will be a change at the vowel of the last letter of the verbs.
It is only in the second person plural feminine that the vowel of the last letter will not change.
5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) 59ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I This unit explains the imperative in the Arabic language.
It explains the rule and discusses the basic techniques of conjugating verbs into imperative.
The highlight of such rules and technique is that, it is only from the second persons irrespective of number or gender that the imperative formular can be derived.
The rules guiding hamzatu-al-wasl, the end of the verbs to form imperative are also included in the Unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Conjugate the following second person's imperfect verbs onto their appropriate imperatives.
(i) بUهbذUت (ii) نbلQتbقUت (iii) ناUجQرbخUت (iv) نوQبUعbلUت (v) UنbحUرbفUت 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006) The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria: Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A.; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
60ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I MODULE 3 PARTICLES فوQرQحbلا Unit 1 The Prepositions and the Conjunctions Unit 2 Subjunctive Particles Unit 3 The Jussive and Interrogative Unit 4 The Vocative, Gerund and Complete Sentence UNIT 1 THE PREPOSITIONS AND CONJUNCTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Notes on the Prepositions 3.2 Arabic Prepositions.
3.3 Conjunctions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last Module ended with a study of imperative verbs.
The whole of Module Two dealt with verbs.
In this Module, you will begin another element of the sentence which is also very important in that it functions as that which joins parts of the sentence together.
You will be introduced to Arabic prepositions.
Because of the certain number of the preposition that you are about to study, you will not be given any vocabulary study for this Unit.
The prepositions and their meaning would be the words to be memorized for this unit.
You will learn conjunction in this Unit as well.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list all the Arabic Prepositions and their meaning • identify Conjunction words in the Arabic language and give their meaning 61ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Notes on the Prepositions A preposition in Arabic is a word used with a noun or pronoun to show their relationship with other words in a sentence.
Prepositions are words that are used to help substantives to express their case functions.
They are called prepositions because their position is immediately before the substantives they are associated with.
Prepositions are to aid in expressing the case functions which are in use by the Arabic language speaker.
The meaning of the prepositions depends however on some other factors.
In order to translate the prepositions accurately, the following should be observed.
a) The basic meaning of the preposition as indicated in the Arabic usage.
b) The case construction with which preposition is used, and c) The use as indicated by the content of the passage.
i.e.
the context 3.2 ARABIC PREPOSITIONS Arabic prepositions only have impact on the nouns.
The particles are the following: From bنgم On ىUلUع To ىUلgإ Out of, Away from نb Uع In يgف With, in gب With UعUم Like Uك For, to gل Since QذbنQم Since bذQم Except UلUخ Except اUدUع Until ىkتUح Except اUشاUح Uت Uو gب 62ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I The last three ’ت’ ،و’ ’ب, (ta, wa, bi) are used for oath.
e.g.
By Allah Wallahi gلاUو By Allah Tallahi gلاUت By Allah Billahi gلاgب A noun must be in genitive case (majrūr), if it is preceded by any of the above particles.
An illustration is given below.
From a school, ٍةUسUرbدUم bنgم Away from the place gلgزbنUمbلا نg Uع With the knoeldge gمbلgعbلاgب On the table gبUتbكUمbلا ىUلUع To mosques gدgجbسUمbلا ىUلgإ Like the light gرو«نلاUك For benfit ٍرbيUخgل There are other types of preposition such as With Uدbنgع Under UتbحUت Above UقbوUف After دbعUب Before UلbبUق With the king, gكbلUمbلا Uدbنعg Under the chair (cid:148)يgسbرQكbلا UتbحUت Above the free.
gةUرUجkشلا UقbوUف After the party, ةgUلbفUحbلا UدbعUب Before the noon, gرbه«ظلا UلbبUق SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Put the following Nominative nouns in the genitive cases (cid:131)ةUسUرbدUم A school لgزbنUم ,The place QمbلgعbلUا The knowledge QبUتbكUمbلUا The table (cid:131)دgجbسUم ,A mosque Qرو«نلUا The light (cid:131)رbيUخ Benefit 63ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.3 Conjunction فطعلا Arabic conjunction is a word whose only function is to link words, phrases, sentences etc etc.
The link can be done with the assistance of ħurūf al-‘aţf “the conjunctions”.
These are al-wāwu ’و) ‘QواUوbلUا) al-fāu ’ ف)‘ءQاUفbلUا) and thuma ’kمQث‘.
The rule of the conjunction is that the two nouns concerned follow each other in all cases.
(nominative, accusative and genitive).
The examples below will shed more lights on this explanation – the Nominative The teacher & the students QبgلاkطلاUو Qم(cid:148)لUعQمbلUا The girl & the m other «مQلbاUو QتbنgبbلUا The pen & the book باUتgكbلاUو QمUلUقbلUا The motor then bicycle ةUجاUرkدلاUف QةUراkيkسلUا The knowledge then Ignorance لbهUجbلا kمQث QمbلgعbلUا Accusative The teacher & the students UبgلاkطلاUو Uم(cid:148)لUعQمbلUا The girl & the mother مQلbاUو UتbنgبbلUا The pen & the book UباUتgكbلاUو UمUلUقbلUا The motor then bicycle ةUجاUرkدلاUف UةUراkيkسلUا The knowledge then Ignorance UلbهUجbلا kمQث UمbلgعbلUا Genitive The teacher & the students gبgلاkطلاUو gم(cid:148)لUعQمbلUا The girl & the mother £مQلbاUو gتbنgبbلUا The pen & the book بgاUتgكbلاUو gمUلUقbلUا The motor then bicycle ةUجاUرkدلاUف QةUراkيkسلUا The knowledge then Ignorance لbهUجbلا kمQث gمbلgعbلUا SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the prepositions and conjunctions in Arabic language.
Mention one example each for both the preposition and conjunction.
4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) 1.
Prepositions are words that express relationships between two words.
When prepositions occur before nouns, those nouns will be in genitive cases, that is, they will be given kasrah, vowel ‘i’.
64ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 2.
Conjunctions in Arabic language are words that are used to link other words in a sentence.
Such other words that are joined together agree with each other in grammatical rules such as nominative, accusative and genitive cases.
5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) This Unit treats grammatical issues relating to Preposition and Conjunction particules in the Arabic language.
It enumerates the particles and gives their meaning and functions.
The Conclusion highlights the grammatical rules and other relevant salient points derivable from the discussions.
Copious examples and necessary illustrations are provided as well as self assessment exercises that will help learners.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS تاFبـج?
اوF 1) Explain the rule that guides the conjunction in Arabic grammar 2) List Ten Prepositions in Arabic and make use of the, in a simple sentences 3) Give two example of conjunction in a two different sentences 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London.
Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria: Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A. Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
65ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 2 SUBJUNCTIVE PARTICLES (Ħurūf an-naşb) بbصkنلا فوQرQح CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Subjunctive Particles 3.2 Impact of Subjunctive Particles on Imperfect Verbs 3.3 Application of rule of Subjunctive Particles on Imperfect Verb 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught grammatical rules governing verbs in the imperfect tenses in the subjunctive cases.
This will involve your recollection of some verb patterns and structures you have learnt earlier in some of the previous Units, e. g. sound verbs, the trilateral etc etc.
Subjecting imperfect verbs to the subjuctive moods is another important Arabic grammatical phenomenon.
The rules must be observed for the expressions to be adjudged grammatically perfect.
For this reason, this lesson is important - you will agree with me.
You are therefore welcomed to the study of imperfect verbs in the subjunctive mood and the rules underlying its application.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list the subjunctive particles • identify the imperfect verbs having subjunctive ending • recognize imperfect verbs that should be put in the subjunctive mood • demonstrate the techniques of putting imperfect verbs in the subjunctive moods.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 66ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.1 The Subjunctive Particles The following are the subjunctive particles in Arabic To نb Uأ Will never نb Uل For instance, so that, in order bيUك Then bنUذgإ Until ىkتUح So that not, لUئgل ،UلbيUكgل ،UلbيUك So that, bيUكgل ،gل ،نb Uل 3.2 Impact of Subjunctive Particles on Imperfect Verbs Like we have told you in our introduction to this unit, the imperfect subjunctive could be compared with the present form of subjunctive tense in English.
The perfect indicative singular will change in the last letter’s vowel except the second person singular feminine that will change by omission of the letter.
Others which end with the preceded ’ ن‘by a long vowel after the last radical lose theirن and if the preceding long vowel is dammah ‘u’ an extra alif is added.
e.g.
lan yaktubu (they will never write), اوQبQتbكUي bنUل .
The second person and the third person feminine plural will not change in their forms.
They remain as they are in indicative form.
‘lan’ نb Uل is a particle of negation.
It negates the future of imperfect e.g.
بQتbكUأ bنUل (lan aktuba) I will never write.
3.3 Application of Rule of Subjunctive Particles on Imperfect Verb This is the pattern to be followed in applying the rule of impact of Arabic subjunctive particles on imperfect verb forms.
Let us see how lan ‘نل’.
with the verb yaktubu بQتbكUي ‘he writes’ as in the indicative will change in meaning and form in the subjunctive I will/shall never write UبQتbكUأ bنUUل You will never write (masc.)
sing.
UبQتbكUت bنUUل You will never write (fem) (sing.)
يgبQتbكUت نb UUل He will never write UبQتbكUي bنUUل She will never write UبQتbكUت bنUUUل 67ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I You will never write (masc.
fem) dual اUبQتbكUت نb UUل We will/shall never write UبQتbكUن bنUUل You will never write (masc.)
plural اوQبQتbكUت bنUUل You will never write (fem.)
plural UنbبQتbكUت bنUUل They will never write (masc) plural اوQبQتbكUي bنUUل They will never write (fem.)
plural UنbبQتbكUي bنUUل Let us take the subjunctive particle kay يUUك meaning ‘so that’ as another example and see how the rule is applied on another imperfect indicative to give us subjunctive mood.
The impact of this subjunctive particle on the imperfect indicative QسQرbدUي.
(yadrusu) he studies, will be as follows.
So that I study UسQرbدUأ bيUك So that you study (Masc) (Sing) UسQرbدUت bيUUك So that you study (fem.)
(sing) UسQرbدUت bيUUك So that he studies (Masc) UسQرbدUي bيUUك So that she studies (fem.)
UسQرbدUت bيUUك So that you study (masc.
and fem.)
اUسQرbدUت bيUUك So that they study (masc.)
dual اUسQرbدUي bيUUك So that they study (fem.)
dual اUسQرbدUت bيUUك So that we study UسQرbدUن bيUUك So that you study (masc.)
plural اوQسQرbدUت bيUUك So that you study (fem.)
UنbسQرbدUت bيUUك So that they study (masc.)
plural اوQسQرbدUي bيUUك So that they study (fem.)
plural UنbسQرbدUي bيUUك We give another example of impact of subjunctive particle on imperfect indicative verb as follows by using hatta, until ىkتح with the indicative verb yadh-habu he goes QبUهbذUي Until I go UبUهbذUأ يkتUح Until you go (masc.)
(sing) UبUهbذUت يkتUح Until you go (fem) (sing) يgبUهbذUت يkتUح Until he goes (masc.)
sing UبUهbذUي يkتUح Until she goes (fem.)
(sing) بUهbذUت يkتUح Until you go (masc.
and fem.)
dual اUبUهbذUت يkتUح Until they go (masc.)
dual اUبUهbذUي يkتUح Until they go (fem.)
dual اUبUهbذUت يkتUح Until we go UبUهbذUن يkتUح Until you go masc.
plural اوQبUهbذUت يkتUح Until you go fem.
plural UنbبUهbذUت يkتUح Until they go masc.
اوQبUهbذUي يkتUح 68ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Until they go fem.
plural UنbبUهbذUي يkتUح From the above examples, you will see that those with radical endings change with vowels, that is, from ‘u’ to ‘a'; and those which end with’ن‘ lose their ’ن‘whenever any of the particles preceeds the imperfect verbs.
The only verb that retains the same form is second person plural feminine and the third person plural feminine.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the rules that govern the subjunctive particles with imperfect verb.
Give one example each for your explanation.
4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) The subjunctive particles in Arabic language impacts the imperfect verbs.
ةUعgراUضQمbلا لاUعbفUلا (al-‘af’alu, al-mudara’at) by turning them into subjunctive mood.
The perfect indicative singular will change in the last letter’s vowel except the second person singular feminine that will change by omission of the letter.
Others which end with the preceded ’ن‘by a long vowel after the last radical lose theirن and if the preceding long vowel is dammah ‘u’ an extra alif is added.
e.g.
lan yaktubu (they will never write), اوQبQتbكUي bنUل .
The second person and the third person feminine plural will not change in their forms.
They remain as they are in indicative form.
5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) In this unit, we have taught you the subjunctive particles.
We listed as many as possible of the particles for you.
How the particles govern the imperfect indicative verbs were also expatiated upon.
Copious examples were provided to make your understanding of the topic easy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) List all subjunctive particles in Arabic grammar.
2) Apply subjunctive particles on the following imperfect indicative verbs showing its grammatical impact.
a he rejoices حUرbفUي b he understands مUهbفUي c he kills لQتbقUي d he decides مUعbزUي 69ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I e he sits سgلbجUي f he cuts عUطbقUي g he judges مQكbحUي h he reads أUرbقUي I he denies عUنbمUي J he dances ص(cid:9)ق(cid:16)ر(cid:3)ي 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria : Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A.; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
70ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 3 Jussive and Interrogative Particles (مزUجلا QفوQرQح ماUهفgتbسلاUو) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Jussive particles 3.2 The Impact of the Jussive particles on Imperfect Verbs 3.3 Application of the rule of the Jussive particle on the Imperfect Verb 3.4 Interrogative Particles 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be learning the rules relating to Arabic verbs in the jussive mood.
You will learn how the indicative perfect verb changes when in the jussive mood; i.e.
when preceded by jussive particles.
Various interrogative particles, their use and rules will also be taught in this unit.
These are needed to be properly digested and commited to memory to enable you to form your own sentences and conduct interrogation in Arabic as you like.
You will recall that in the last unit you have learnt the subjunctive mood.
The knowledge you have acquired there will be useful here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • demonstrate how to utilize jussive imperfect particles in grammatically correct Arabic sentences • identify the Arabic imperfect verbs in the jussive mood • identify the Arabic interrogative particles.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Jussive Particles (gمزUجbلا QفوQرQح) The jussive particles in Arabic grammar - like the subjunctive which you studied in the last Unit - precedes and impacts the last letter of the Arabic imperfect verbs.
i.e.
لاUعbفUلا QةUعgراUضQمbلا by making it to take the 71ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I sukūn vowel.
and sometimes change its meaning to the past.
The following are the jussive particles in Arabic (i) مUل Did not (ii) ل do not (iii)نgإ if (iv) اkمUل not yet (v) ل Let or make sure 3.2 The Impact of the Jussive particles on Imperfect Verbs The jussive particles enumerated above share some features with the subjunctive partcles.
They both cause changes in the imperfect indicative verbs which have no adjunct letters following their radical letters.
While the subjunctive particle makes the last radical loose its original vowel and take fat-hah, the Jussive particle makes it lose its final vowel ‘u’ altogether and take Sukūn ‘o’.
The others which has ‘’ن ending will loose the ’ن‘while the second and third person plural feminine remain unchanged.
The only difference between subjunctive and jussive is that the last radicals at subjunctive take ‘a’ while that of the jussive is given Sukun ‘o’.
The others remain the same.
For example I did not write (lam aktub) bبQتbكUأ bمUل 3.3 Application of the Rule of the Jussive Particle on the Imperfect Verb This paradigm must be followed as you apply the jussive particle rule on the imperfect verbs.
I did not sit bسgلbجUأ مUUل You did not sit (masc) (sing) bسgلbجUت مUUل You did not sit (fem.)
(sing) يgسgلbجUت مUUل He did not sit (masc.)
(sing) لUسgلbجUي مUل She did not sit (fem.)
(sing) bسgلbجUت مUUل You did not sit (masc.
and fem.)
(dual) اUسgلbجUت مUUل They did not sit (masc.)
(dual) لاUUسgلbجUي مUل They did not sit (fem.)
dual اUسgلbجUت مUUل We did not sit bسgلbجUي مUUل You did not sit (masc.)
plural اوQسgلbجUت مUUل You did not sit (fem.)
plural UنbسgلbجUت مUUل They did not sit (masc.)
plural اوQسgلbجUي مUUل They did not sit (fem.)
plural UنbسgلbجUي مUUل Let us look at another example of the jussive imperfect.
This illustration will be with the verb مUلbعUي (he knows).
I do not know yet bمUلbعUأ اkمUUل 72ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I You do not know yet (masc.)
(sing) bمUلbعUت اkمUUل You did not know yet (fem.)
(sing) مUلbعUت اkمUUل He does not know yet bمUلbعUي اkمUUل She does not know yet bمUلbعUت اkمUUل You do not know yet (masc.
and fem.)
dual اUمUلbعUت اkمUUل They do not know yet (masc.)
dual اUمUلbعUي اkمUUل They do not know yet (fem.)
dual اUمUلbعUت اkمUUل We do not know yet مUلbعUن اkمUUUل You do not know yet (masc.)
plural اوQمUلbعUت اkمUUل You do not know yet (fem.)
plural نbمUلbعUت اkمUUل They do not know it (masc.)
plural اوQمUلbعUي اkمUUل They do not know it (fem.)
plural نbمUلbعUي اkمUUل With these two examples properly digested by you you can apply the rest.
This is the way to conjugate the imperfect jussive verb in Arabic.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List all jussive particles that you know in Arabic language and use them insentenses.
5.4 Interrogative Particles In Arabic language, the interrogative of simple sentences is made by prefixing the two particles ‘hal’ bلUه or ‘a’ ‘أ’ These two particles are used for interrogation in Arabic language.For example.
Is he rich?
؟(cid:139)يgنUغ UوQه bلUه ؟«يgنUغ UوQهUأ Does Muhammad stand?
؟(cid:131)مgئاUق (cid:131)دkمUحQم bلUه ؟(cid:131)مgئاUق (cid:131)دkمUحQم ًأ Is Zaydu a student?
؟(cid:131)بgلاUط (cid:131)دbيUز bلUه ؟(cid:131)بgلاUط (cid:131)دbيUز Uأ Are they Nigerians?
؟UنوQيgريgجbيUن bمQه bلUه ؟UنوQيgريgجbيUن bمQه Uأ Is she a nurse?
؟(cid:131)ةUض(cid:148)رUمQم Uيgه bلUه ؟(cid:131)ةUض(cid:148)رUمQم Uيgه Uأ Is she a traveler?
؟(cid:131)ةUرgفاUسQم Uيgه bلUه ؟(cid:131)ةUرgفاUسQم Uيgه Uأ hal will become hali before hamzatu al-waşl , for example: Is the teacher present?
؟(cid:131)رgضاUح Qم(cid:148)لUعQمbلا gلUه ‘hal’ له is more often used than ‘a’ أ SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 73ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Mention the two interrogative particles in Arabic grammar and construct ten sentences with each of them.
4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) The jussive particles are five.
They precede the Arabic imperfect verbs.
i.e.
QلاUعbفUلا QةUعgراUضQمbلاand impact their last letter by making them take sukūn vowel and by affecting their meaning too.
Imperfect Verbs which have ‘’ن ending will loose the ’ن‘while the second and third person plural feminine remain unchanged.
‘Hal’ لUه or ‘a’ ‘أ’ are two particles used for interrogation in Arabic language.
They do not impact the word they precede in any way.
5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصUلـQخ) In this unit the the five prticles that render imperfect verbs in jussive moods and two interrogative particles are discussed.
The rules of the jussive particles whenever they precede any imperfect verb are deeply explained.
Examples were given to aid your comprehension.
The interrogative particles were also treated in this unit.
You can now put the Arabic sound imperfect verbs in the jussive mood.
Similarly, you can make interrogative sentences with its two particles.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT ((cid:131)تاUبـgجاو) 1.
Explain the rule of imperfect verb(s) that preceded by jussive particle(s).
2.
Conjugate the following verbs in jussive imperfect.
He goes QبUهbذUي He kills QلQتbقUي He hears QعUمbسUي He is ill QضUرbمUي He plays QبUعbلUي 3.
Use the two interrogative particles in two sentences 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 74ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria : Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A.; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
75ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I UNIT 4 THE VOCATIVE, GERUND AND A COMPLETE SENTENCE ةFل?ماFكـ=لا DةFلـ=مجD =لاFو ، DرFد=صـFمـلا ، DءاFد(cid:136)نـلا CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 the Vocative 3.2 Gerund 3.3 A complete sentence 3.3.1 Nominal sentence 3.3.2 Verbal sentence 3.3.3 Interrogative sentence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to the last unit of the last module.
In the unit, you will be taught the vocative in Arabic language.
You will also be introduced to Gerund in Arabic grammar.
In this unit, you will learn construction of nominal, verbal and interrogative sentences.
After the completion of this unit, you will be better positioned in Arabic grammar provided you read your course material very well and you are satisfied with your self assessment exercises.
You will not have the problem with writing good sentences in Arabiclanguage.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the vocative in Arabic grammar • describe gerund and mention some of its patterns • express yourself in complete nominal and verbal sentences • convert nominal and verbal sentences to interrogative sentences.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 76ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 3.1 The Vocative (ىدانملا) In the Arabic language, calls or invocations are made by the use of interjection tool ’اي‘ O!
This is termed in Arabic grammar while ‘the vocative case’ is its English equivalent.
Vocative is nominative in mood i.e.
the invoked noun takes the dammah vowel.
Also nunation .i.e.
double vowel is dropped as a rule in the invoked name.
Also, when you call, the definite article ‘al’ ‘لا’ will be dropped as a rule in the usage of vocative e.g.
دUلUو اUي oh boy!
Look at the following examples, you will notice that one of the last vowels is lost and there is no definite article in the sentence.
Oh man QلUجUر اUي Oh student QبgلاUط اUي Oh girl Qتbنgب اUي Oh Adam QمUدآ اUي Oh Ahmad QدUمbحUأ اUي This is how vocative goes about in Arabic.
Mind you, if the name you are putting in the vocative case or calling, in other words, is governed by a genitive rule or is in the possessive mood, it will be put in thhe accusative; this means that the word rabun, nās lord of people ساkنلا «بUر for instance will become yah rabbān –nas.
‘Oh Lord of people.
بUر اUي ساkنلا .
See more examples of this.
Oh the servant of Allah, gلا UدbبUع اUي Oh the command of the faithful, نيgنgمbؤQمbلا UريgمUأ اUي The vocative interjection can also be ayuhā, ’اهيأ‘‘oh’.
it is the same meaning with yah’ but rather it is a rhetorical and pompous way of introducing the vocative.
If it is a female we use’اهتيأ‘.
For example: Oh man: QلQجkرلا اUهQيUأ Oh lady: QةUأbرUمbلا اUهQتkيUأ SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the vocative in Arabic language.Give its various tools and examples.
3.2 The Gerund or Verbal Noun (QرUدbصUمbلUا) 77ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I There are divergent opinions as to which one is the source between verb and gerund among the Arabic grammarians.
While some say the Gerund is source of verb, others say the verb is source of gerund.
Whatever be the case the gerund in Arabic grammar takes different patterns and consists of a lot of paradigms.
Therefore, we would just give you here the basic paradigms you need for now.
As you are furthering your reading in Arabic you will continue to know more.
The table below shows the gerund of some verbs and their pattern.
Doing (cid:131)لbعUف Opening (cid:131)حbتUف Hearing (cid:131)عbمUس Praising (cid:131)دbمUح Breaking (cid:131)رbسUك Beating (cid:131)بbرUض Assistance (cid:131)رbصUن Understanding (cid:131)مbهUف Doing (cid:131)لوQعQف Falling (cid:131)توQكQس Sitting (cid:131)سوQلQج Exist (cid:131)جوQرQخ Entrance (cid:131)لوQخQد Returning (cid:131)عوQجQر Standing (cid:131)فوQقQو Doing (cid:131)لUعUف Gladness (cid:131)حUرUف Delight (cid:131)بUرUط Arrogance (cid:131)رUطUب Traveling (cid:131)رUفUس There are some other gerunds which take the form of fu‘ulatun ةUلوQعQف e.g ةUبوQعQص difficulty.
Some are (cid:131)ةUلاUعUف e.g honour, (cid:131)ةUماUرUك Knowledge of the gerund depends on extensive reading of Arabic books and dictionaries.
You should follow the advice we gave to you earlier.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 78ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I What is the English equivalent of the word Gerund in Arabic?
Which one is the source between gerund and verb?
How many patterns has gerund?
Mention ten gerunds with examples.
3.3 A Complete Sentence ةFدي?فDم=لا ةFل=مDج=لFا A complete sentence in Arabic grammar is a word or group of words which express a complete idea as in English with which you are assumed to be familiar or any other language for that matter.
There are different types of complete sentences.
We shall introduce the nominal and verbal sentences to you here.
3.3.1 Nominal Sentence ةNي?م=س?ل=ا ةFل=مDج=لFا Nominal sentence in Arabic language is a sentence that begins with a noun.
e.g.
al-waladu qāimun, the boy is standing مgئاUق QدUلUوbلUا .
You should remember this easily as we have been taught the subject and predicate in Module One.
If you revise unit five of module one very well, that means that you have gotten the concept of nominal sentences in Arabic.
That not withstanding the examples below can still flourish and refresh your knowledge.
The teacher is sitting in the classroom لbصUفلbا يgف (cid:131)سgلاUج Qم(cid:148)لUعQمbلUا The woman went to the market قو«سلا ىUلgإ bتUبUهUذ QةUأbرUمbلUا The two male Muslims are going ناUبgهاUذ gناUمgلbسQمbلUا The hardworking men are successful نودهتجملا نوحجان The lesson is clear حgضاUو QسbرkدلUا Adam is present رgضاUح QمUدآ 3.3.2 Verbal Sentence (al-jumlatu al-fi‘liyat) DةNي?ل=ع?ف=لا DةFل=مDج=لFا This is a sentence that begins with verb.
Examples are the following below.
I am going to the school ةUسUرbدUمbلا ىUلgإ QبUهbذUأ Zaydu stood up (cid:131)دbيUز UماUق The female teacher went to the class ىUلgإ gةUس(cid:148)رUدQمbلا gتUيUهUذ لbصUفbلا Fatimah understood the lesson سbرkدلا QةUمgطاUف bتUمgهUف The male teacher is writing on the board gةUرو«بkسلا ىUلUع Qم(cid:148)لUعQمbلا QبQتbكUي Thus as you could have seen from the above examples, a nominal sentence is a sentence which begins with noun while a verbal sentence is the sentence started with a verb 79ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Define ةNي?م=س?ل=ا ةFل=مDج=لFا.
Give five examples to illustrate what you say.
Define ةNي?ل=ع?ف=لا DةFل=مDج=لFا .
Give five examples to illustrate what you say.
3.3.3 Changing Nominal and Verbal Sentences to Interrogative Sentences An interrogative sentence is a sentence which asks a question as you have leant earlier on in the last unit.
Also, the same interrogative particles and method of their application which you learnt there and how to apply them are required here again.
Changing a nominal or verbal sentence to an interrogative one is however to be focused here.
Hence we submit that in interrogative sentence, the two particles of interrogation can prefix either nominal or verbal sentence.
Examples with sentences referring to: The masculine gender: (Nominal Sentences) رgضاUح (cid:131)دkمUحQم Muhammad is present (Interrogative) ؟(cid:131)رgضاUح (cid:131)دkمUحQم bلUه Is Muhammad present?
(Verbal Satement) دbيUز UماUق Zayd stood up (Interrogative) ؟(cid:131)دbيUز UماUق bلUه Did Zayd stand up?
The feminine gender: (Nominal Sentence) ةUرgضاUح ةUمgطاUف Fatimah is present (Interrogative) ؟ةUرgضاUح ةUمgطاUف bلUه Is Fatimah present?
(Verbal Statement) بUنbيUز bتUماUق Zaynab stood up (Interrogative) بUنيUز تUماUق bلUه Did Zaynab stand up?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Write five nominal and five verbal sentences each; then convert them to Interrogative sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION (QجاUتbنتgـbسلUأ) Al-munādā or a`n-Nidā in Arabic grammar is the equivalent of the ‘the vocative case’ in English.
It is nominative in mood and could be accusative if the noun is genitive.
Nunation is dropped, so also is the definite article as a rule.
The most commonly used tools of the vocative are yah اUي , ayuhā, ’اهيأ‘ or both If it is a female we use ‘ayatuha’ ’اهتيأ‘.
80ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I On al-Maşdar (the Gerund or Verbal Noun) , there are divergent opinions among the Arabic grammarians as to which one is the source between verb and gerund.
The gerund in Arabic grammar takes different patterns and consists of a lot of paradigms.
In Arabic Grammar, a complete sentence.
ةFدي?فDم=لا DةFل=مDج=لFا could either be Nominal Sentence ةNي?م=س?ل=ا DةFل=مDج=لا beginning with a noun or Verbal Sentence ةNي?ل=ع?ف=لا DةFل=مDج=لFا beginning with a verb.
Both can be converted to interrogative statement with the prefixing of the interrogative particles.
5.0 SUMMARY ((cid:131)ةUصلـQخ) This Unit introduces the vocative in Arabic grammar and its rules.
It also discusses the gerund and the divergent opinions of Arabic grammarian related to it.
It describes a complete sentence and divides it into nominal sentence and verbal and interrogative.
These we believe will further assist you in recognizing and constructing grammatically flawless Arabic expressions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Use the interjection of vocative in Arabic in a complete sentence 2) Construct five nominal sentences in Arabic.
3) Construct five verbal sentences in Arabic.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cowan, D. (1958).
An Introduction in Modern Literary Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, J.M.
(1960).
A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
India: Modern Language Services.
Wright, W. (1962).
A Grammar of the Arabic.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Sini, I.; Yusuf, I.
& Rufā‘ī, M. (1990).
Al-qawā‘idu al-Arabiyat al- Muyasarat vol.
1, Riyadh, ‘Imādat shu’ūn al-Maktabah.
Jibril, M. J.
(2006).
The Basic Fundamental Concepts of Arabic Grammar and Morphology.
Lagos, Nigeria : Dhaharu Hubla Ventures.
Fawzāni, A.; Abdu `l-Khaliq, M. (2007).
al-arabiyat lilijami’i (Arabic for all) vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
vol 1, Wizāratu `l-I‘ām, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
81ARA051 ARABIC GRAMMAR I 82
