 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE : ARA016 COURSE TITLE: ARABIC READER  COURSE G UIDE COURSE CODE / TITLE: ARA016 Arabic Reader COURSE DEVELOPERS / WRITERS Dr. A. G. A. Abdul-Hameed Department of Languages Al-Hikmah University Ilorin.
Dr Mustafa A. Raheem Department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, State College of Education Ikere Ekiti COURSE EDITOR Prof. Amidu Olalekan Sanni Dept.
of Foreign Languages, Lagos State University, Ojoo PROGRAMME LEADER Prof. A. F. Ahmed National Open University of Nigeria School of Arts and Social Sciences Victoria Island - Lagos i National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2010 First Printed 2010 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGES Introduction 1 What You Will Learn in this Course 1 Course Aims 1 - 2 Course Objectives 2 Working Through this Course 3 Course Materials 3 Set Text-Books/References 3 Self Assessment Exercises 4 Tutor – Marked Assignments 4 Assessment 4 Final Examination and Grading 5 Course Marking Scheme 5 Course Overview/ Presentation Schedule 5-6 How to get the most from this course 6 – 9 Tutor and Tutorials.
9 Summary 9ARA016 Arabic Reader INTRODUCTION ARA 016: Arabic Reader is a one-semester fifteen credit unit course.
It is available to all students as a course in the Certificate in Arabic and Islamic Studies programme at the National Open Univeristy of Nigeria.
The course is also suitable for any one who is interested in the study of Arabic language.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE 5ARA016 Arabic Reader The course consists of 15 units discussed under 3 modules which involve notes on features of Arabic as a language, definite and indefinite articles i.e Ma‘rifah and Nakrah.
It also involves construction of simple nominal sentences and construction of simple verbal sentences.
Texts depicting the difference between prose and poetry in Arabic are also presented with examples.
You will also come across passages relating to reading and writing ability of fully vocalized short Arabic prose texts, reading and comprehension of vocalized short Arabic poetry texts and reading and comprehension of un-vocalized short Arabic prose texts.
The course will also treat you into reading and understanding of fully vocalized short Arabic poetry texts, reading and understanding of un-vocalized short Arabic poetry texts, reading and analysis of fairly difficult words of vocalized long Arabic prose texts, and reading and comprehension of un- vocalized long Arabic prose texts.
In the last sections of the Course you will be given exposure to the reading and understanding of vocalized long Arabic poetry texts, reading and understanding of un-vocalized long Arabic poetry texts and reading and analysis of fairly difficult words from vocalized and un-vocalized long Arabic poetry texts.
The material has been especially developed for student in the African context with particular focus on Nigeria.
COURSE AIMS The overall aim of ARA052: Arabic Reader1 is to introduce you to reading and writing Arabic texts with vocalization and un-vocalization, in order to improve your reading ability and vocabulary acquisition.
6ARA016 Arabic Reader The specific aim of this course is to give you a brief on the importance of Arabic language and a comprehensive reading and understanding of Arabic passages.
This will be achieved by: • Discussing with you, some hints on the values of Arabic language.
• Introducing you to Arabic simple nominal and verbal sentences constructions.
• Exposing you to Arabic short and long vocalized and un-vocalized stories.
• Analyzing for you some fairly difficult words from both vocalized and un-vocalized Arabic texts.
• Reading and comprehension of fully vocalized and un-vocalized Arabic passages.
• Reading and understanding of Arabic passages through improving reading ability and vocabulary acquisition.
COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set out above there are overall set objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at its beginning.
You will read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
This way you can confirm whether you have done what was required of you by the unit.
Stated below are the wider objectives of this course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: 7ARA016 Arabic Reader • Mention some importance of Arabic language • differentiate between Arabic definite and indefinite articles • identify the Arabic nominal sentences and verbal sentences • build a bank of Arabic language vocabulary • read and understand vocalized and un-vocalized Arabic passages from prose and poetry texts.
• write and compose Arabic sentences WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read recommended books and read other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises, and at points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course, there is a final examination.
You will find below list of all the components of the course and what you have to do.
COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are: 1 Course Guide 2 Study Units 3 Textbooks 4 Assignment File 5 Presentation Schedule You must obtain a copy of the materials provided by the NOUN.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text-books.
SET TEXTBOOKS 1.
Al-Ghamrīwī Muhammad Husayn (1992).
Majmū‘ah mina `n-Nāzim wa -n-Nāthir, Cairo, Egypt.
8ARA016 Arabic Reader 2.
Ali Muhammad, H. & Zakī Ali, S. (1992).
Al -‘adab wa `t-Tārīkh fi `l aşrayn, Cairo, Egypt.
3.
Sa‘d Husayn, U & Abdul Majīd Muhammad (1990).
Al-Adab wa `n-Nuşūş Wa `l-Balāghah, Banghazi, Libya.
4.
Muhammad Afif, R. (1974).
Diwān Imam Shāfi’ī, Shomolu, Lagos.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) Each unit contains a number of self-tests.
In general these self- tests examine you on the material just covered or require you to apply them in some ways and thereby, help you to evaluate your progress and performance in your assignments.
The exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) This Course contains a number of tutor-marked assignments you need to submit.
The best three (i.e the highest three of the five marks) will be counted.
They will constitute 30 %, of your total course mark.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials containing in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your view point and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with Tutor- Marked Assignment (TMA) form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the assignment file.
If, however, you cannot complete your work in time, contact your tutor before the assignment is done to discuss the possibility of an examination.
FINAL ASSESSMENT There are two types of assessments in the course.
First are the Tutor- 9ARA016 Arabic Reader Marked Assignments while the second are the written examinations.
In tackling the assignment, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final two-hour examination.
This will also count for 70 % of your course mark.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination of ARA016 will be of two hours' duration and 70% have a value of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your tutor- marked assignments and the comments of your tutor on them before the final examination.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Tutor – Marked Assignment Best three marks out of five count @ 10% each = 30% marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: course marking scheme PRESENTATION SCHEDULE/ COURSE OVERVIEW The presentation Schedule given below gives you the important dates for 10ARA016 Arabic Reader the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments in good time.
You should guard against being late in submitting your work.
Units Title of work Weeks Assessment 1B activity (end of unit) 1 Features of Arabic Language 1 Assignment 1 0B 2 Definite article and indefinite Article 2 Assignment 2 3 Simple nominal sentences construction 3 Assignment 3 4 Simple verbal sentences construction 4 Assignment 4 5 The difference between prose and poetry in 5 Assignment 5 Arabic with examples.
6 Reading and writing ability of fully vocalized 6 Assignment 6 short Arabic prose texts 7 Reading and comprehension of vocalized 7 Assignment 7 short Arabic prose texts 8 Reading and comprehension of un-vocalized 8 Assignment 8 short Arabic prose texts 9 Reading and understanding of fully vocalized 9 Assignment 9 short Arabic poetry texts 10 Reading and understanding of un-vocalized 10 Assignment 10 short Arabic poetry texts 11 Reading and analysis of fairly difficult words 11 Assignment 11 of vocalized long Arabic prose texts 12 Reading and comprehension of un-vocalized 12 Assignment 12 long Arabic prose texts 13 Reading and understanding of vocalized long 13 Assignment 13 Arabic poetry text 1414 Reading and understanding of un-vocalized 14 Assignment 14 long Arabic poetry texts 1515 Reading and analysis of fairly difficult words 15 Assignment 15 from vocalized and un-vocalized long Arabic poetry texts HOW TO GET MOST FROM THIS COURSE 11ARA016 Arabic Reader In distance learning the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do.
When you have finished the units, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will scientifically improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the units guides you through the required reading from other sources.
Reading Section Remember that your tutor's job is to help you.
When you need help, don't hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1 Read this course guide thoroughly 2 Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘course overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3 Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help 12ARA016 Arabic Reader 4 Turn on unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5 Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for unit is given in the "Overview” at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
6 Work through the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7 Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you are not sure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8 When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9 When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor's comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment from and also on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10 After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this course guide).
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the 13ARA016 Arabic Reader name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter.
He will also provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor – marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutors and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e–mail, or discuss with him if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
CONTACT YOUR TUTOR IF: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
• You have difficulty with the assessment exercises.
• You have a question or problems with an assignment, with your tutor's comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a questions list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
14ARA016 Arabic Reader SUMMARY ARA016 introduces you to the basic reading of vocalized and un-vocalized Arabic texts in prose and poetry.
Upon completing this course, you will be able to read, write and understand Arabic short and long passages, moreover, you will improve in your reading ability and vocabulary acquisition.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
iii NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE / TITLE ARA016: Arabic Reader COURSE DEVELOPERS / WRITERS Dr. A. G. A. Abdu `l-Hameed Department of Languages Al-Hikmah University Ilorin 15ARA016 Arabic Reader Dr Mustafa A. Raheem Department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, State College of Education Ikere Ekiti COURSE EDITOR Prof. Amidu Olalekan Sani Deatment of Foreign Languages Lagos State University, Ojo - Lagos PROGRAMME LEADER Prof. Asif Ahmed School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University, Victoria Island, Lagos National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 16ARA016 Arabic Reader First Printed 2007 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii 17ARA016 Arabic Reader TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Title Page i Publishers ii Table of Contents iii MODULE ONE UNIT I : Historical Features of Arabic Language 1 UNIT 2 : Definite and Indefinite Articles 20 UNIT 3 : Construction of Simple Nominal Sentences 27 UNIT 4 : Simple Verbal Sentence Construction 31 UNIT 5: The Difference between Prose and Poetry with Examples 35 MODULE TWO UNIT 1: Reading and Writing Ability of Fully Vocalized Short Arabic Prose Texts 41 UNIT 2: Reading and Comprehension of Vocalized Short Arabic Prose Texts 44 UNIT 3: Reading and Understanding of Un-vocalized Short Arabic Prose Texts 48 UNIT 4: Reading and Understanding of Fully Vocalized Short Arabic Poetry Texts 54 UNIT 5: Reading and Understanding of Un-vocalized Short Arabic Poetry Texts 58 MODULE THREE UNIT 1: Reading and Understanding of Fairly Difficult Words of Vocalized Long Arabic Prose Texts 63 UNIT 2: Reading and Comprehension of Un-vocalized Long Arabic Prose Texts.
69 UNIT 3: Reading and Understanding of Vocalized Long Arabic Poetry Texts.
74 UNIT 4: Reading and Understanding of Un-vocalized Long Arabic Poetry 79 UNIT 5: Reading and Analysis of Fairly Difficult Words From Vocalized and Un-vocalized Long Arabic Poetry Texts.
84 iii 18ARA016 Arabic Reader MODULE ONE UNIT I : HISTORICAL FEATURES OF ARABIC LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Some features of Arabic Language 3.2 The place of Arabic language in Nigeria 3.3 Arabic as a Language at International Interactive Forums 3.4 Importance of Arabic Language to the practice of Islam 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit teaches you brief history of Arabic language and its relevance to the people of the world.
It discusses the importance of Arabic as an international language and its relevance to the practice of Islam.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit you will be able to • explain the relevance of Arabic language to the social and economic development of the people of the world.
• explain how important Arabic language is to the study of Islam.
• correct the wrong impression some people have about Arabic language which is being perceived as having to do exclusively with Islam.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 19ARA016 Arabic Reader 3.1 Some Features of Arabic Language : Arabic language is the language of communication and formal discussion for speakers of the various forms of the language from Morocco to Iraq.
Among Muslims, Arabic is considered sacred since it is the language through which the Qur’ān was revealed.
With the rise of Islam as a dominant religion after A.D. 622, Arabic became the most widespread of the living Semitic languages, and today, it is spoken by some 220 millions as a mother tongue, and several millions more as a second language.
Arabic exists in two main forms – classical and colloqual.
Classical Arabic has many archaic words and is the sacred language of Islam and the lingua franca of educated people throughout the Arabic-speaking world.
Standard Arabic is a slighty more modern and more-used version of classical Arabic.
It is the official language in many countries and it is learnt in schools.
Colloquial Arabic refers to the variant dialects spoken in the various parts of the Arab world.
The diverse colloquial forms of Arabic are interrelated but vary considerably among speakers from different parts of the Middle East and Africa, so much so that many are considered separate languages.
They differ from standard Arabic and from one another in pronunciation, vocabulary and grammar and are usually labeled according to major geographical areas, such as Algerian, Egyptian, and Gulf.
Within these classifications, the daily speech of urban, rural, and nomadic speakers is distinctively different.
Illiterate speakers from widely separated parts of the Arab world may not understand one another, although each is speaking a version of Arabic.
Self Assessment Exercise Identify some features of the Arabic language.
3.2 The place of Arabic Language in Nigeria: 20ARA016 Arabic Reader The teaching of Arabic Language in Nigeria started with the introduction of Islam in Kanem Borno as early as 11th century.
Islam got to Hausaland in the 14th century and later to Yorubaland in the 17th century.
Islam got to Yorubaland through Muslim traders from the North who also doubled as preachers.
Wherever they introduced Islam, they also settled there to organize Qur’anic schools where pupils were taught the reading of the Qur’ān through rote-learning system.
Thus, elements of Arabic language were also taught to the pupils.
In Nigeria, Arabic language has become an integral part of the society long before the arrival of the British colonial masters.
The language had been in use for some time in the country at least as the language of commerce before the 18th century.
Arabic is more prominently used among the people in the Northern Nigeria ;a case in point being the dialect of the Shuwa Arabs of Bornu State which derives from Arabic.
In the Southwest, especially in Yorubaland, some words of Arabic origin such as alaafia (health), wakati (time), saa (period), aleebu (defect), seria (justice), ribaa (usury), keferi (unbeliever), amin (amen), alubarika (blessing), and so on, have blended with Yoruba expressions to the extent that hardly can anyone find substitutes for them.
Self Assessment Exercise Discuss the place of Arabic language in Nigeria briefly 3.3 Arabic as a Language at International Interactive Forums: In social, economic, political and any other aspect of human life, communication plays a vital role.
People of different races, beliefs, cultures and ethnic origins do transact business with one another by means of different communication systems.
In the world today, there are innumerable languages.
Different communities within the ethnic groups speak different languages.
Even, those people regarded to be of the same tribe or race, speak different dialects.
21ARA016 Arabic Reader Some of these languages are more widely spoken in the world than others.
Arabic is one of such languages.
Others include English and French.
Thus, they are called international languages.
This is so because they are recognized by the United Nations’ Organization as its official languages of communication, and with which they transact businesses and make policies.
The relevance of Arabic is not peculiar to the religious aspect alone.
In West Africa sub-region, Arabic language contributed immensely to the understanding of the early history and civilization because it was the language first used for keeping the records of West Africa.
Self Assessment Exercise Explain the uses of Arabic language as an international language 3.4 Importance of Arabic Language to the practice of Islam : Arabic is the language of Islam.
The two are so inter-wovened that many people could not see any difference between them.
Hence, anything written in Arabic language is believed to be Islamic.
Sometime ago, some Christians in Nigeria were agitating that Arabic writings on the Nigerian currency notes should be cancelled because of the fear that they were an attempt to islamize Nigeria.
Arabic was the language spoken by Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.)
and it was in it the Qur’ān was revealed, recorded and standardized.
Hence, elementary Arabic schools are often called Qur’anic schools.
The spread of Islam facilitated the spread of Arabic Studies.
Anywhere Islam reached, Arabic language also got there.
Arabic language is therefore very popular throughout the Muslim world.
Hence, many Arabic schools were, and are still being established either by government or individuals, where the language is taught.
More so, the practice of Islam, especially the fundamental ritual prayer – şalāt, which is one of the pillars of Islam, encourages the speaking of Arabic language.
This is so because sūratu `l-fātihah, the omission of which makes a şalāt to be invalid, must be recited in 22ARA016 Arabic Reader Arabic language.
Call to prayer – adhān, is also said in no other language but Arabic.
Qur’ān is the book of law and guidance from Allah to all mankind.
It was revealed and recorded in Arabic language.
Up till today, the book still mantains its originality and uniqueness.
It is free from alteratiion, interpolation, edition or revision only because of its preservation in Arabic language which is its original language.
Many people, old and young, now study the Qur’an in its original Arabic text and many young children commit the whole of it to memory owing to the beauty of Arabic language.
People also read the Qur’ān or listen to it while being recited in Arabic, the act which is believed to be highly rewardable by Allah.
Self Assessment Exercise Examine the importance of Arabic language to the practice of Islam.
4.0 CONCLUSION : Having discussed the status of Arabic as one of the international languages, and having discovered its relevance to the practice of Islam, it may be suprising to know that the language is not being given its due recognition in Nigeria, a country with a significant Muslim population.
After English language, the teaching of French language instead of Arabic, is being favoured in Nigerian Schools.The language is so distasteful to some people that Arabic characters on the Nigerian Naira notes were protested against with the claim that it was an attempt to islamize the country.
As a corollary to this, Arabic characters are now removed in the new Naira notes recently introduced by the Central Bank of Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY : The focus of discussion in this unit has been the relevance of Arabic language to the socio-cultural, ecomic and religious life of man.
It was discussed that Arabic was one of the international languages with which various 23ARA016 Arabic Reader international organizations make policies and transact businesses.
Arabic has been employed by great scholars of various educational fields to record their research findings.
Relevant to mention here is the record of Ibnu khaldun about his exploration of Africa, which he preserved using Arabic medium.
The works of great Greek Philosophers were also translated into Arabic language which formed the basis of western civilization.
The relevance of Arabic language to the practice of Islam is also discussed.
The language is regarded as the language of Islam as it was the language of Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.).
It was also mentioned that the Qur’an which is the holy book of Islam, was revealed in Arabic.
The recitation of the book in Arabic text is regarded a highly rewardable act.
More so, the Islamic ritual worship (salat) is rendered in Arabic.
All these, as earlier discussed, showed how important Arabic language is.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the place of Arabic Language in the international arena.
2.
Of what importance is Arabic Language in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Kareem, M. A.
(2007) (ed).
Fountain Journal of Arabic and Islamic Studies (FOJAIS), vol.1, No.
1 2.
Beeston, A.F.L.(1980).
See article on “Arabic” in The Macmillan Family Encyclopaedia, New Jersey, Arete Publishing Company.
3.
Bivar, A.D.H.
and Hiskett, M. (1962).
“The Arabic Literature of Nigeria to 1804: A provisional Account” in B.S.O.A.S.
vol.
xxx, 1.
4.
Hunwick J.O.
(1964).
“The Influence of Arabic in West Africa” Transactions of the Historical Society of Ghana.
(1964) vol.vii 24ARA016 Arabic Reader UNIT 2 : ARABIC ALPHABET AND THE USE OF DEFINITE AND INDEFINITE ARTICLES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Arabic Alphabet and its Divisions 3.2 Reading of words prefixed with the definite articles 3.3 Tanwīn : the indefinite Article 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit one above, you learnt some things about Arabic language which included its features, its socio-economic relevance to the international communities and its relevance to the study of Islam.
In this unit 2, you will learn about the Arabic alphabet, the moon and the sun letters as well as identification and functions of definite and indefinite articles in Arabic sentences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit, you should be able to:  correctly pronounce each of the letters of Arabic alphabet  group the letters of Arabic alphabet under moon and sun letters  identify differences between definite and indefinite articles in Arabic sentences.
 use the Arabic definite article which corresponds to the English definite article “the” correctly.
 use the Arabic indefinite article which corresponds to the English articles “a” and “an” correctly.
25ARA016 Arabic Reader 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Arabic Alphabet and its Divisions The letters of Arabic alphabet are 28.
They are called Al-hurūf al-hijāiyyah.
These letters are divided into two groups.
The first group known as hurūf al- qamariyyah or moon letters consists of 14 letters while the other group known as hurūf sh-shamsiyyah or sun letters also consists of 14 letters.
The 14 moon letters are : ﻱ ﻭ ﻫ ﻡ ﻙ ﻕ ﻑ ﻍ ﻉ ﺥ ﺡ ﺝ ﺏ ﺃ Ya’ Waw Haw Mim Kaf Qaf Fa’ Ghain ‘Ain Kha Ha Jim Ba’ Alif The 14 sun letters are : ﻥ ﻝ ﻅ ﻁ ﺽ ﺹ ﺵ ﺱ ﺯ ﺭ ﺫ ﺩ ﺙ ﺕ Nun Lam Za’ Ta’ Dad Sad Shin Sin Zain Ra’ Dhal Dal Tha’ Ta’ Self Assessment Exercise 1 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Read and write the al-hurūf al-hijāiyyah and then group them into qamariyyah and sh-shamsiyyah letters Read and write the following words keeping in mind the rules pertaining to the sun and the moon letters: ُءْﻮﱠﻀﻟَﺍ ,ُﻥْﻮُﻔْﻠﱢﺘﻟَﺍ ,ُﻢْﻗﱠﺮﻟَﺍ ,ُﺮْﻔﱢﺼﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﻋﺎَﻤﱠﺴﻟَﺍ ,ُﺐَﻨِﻌْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﺷﺍَﺮَﻔْﻟَﺍ ,ُﻡﺎَﻗْﺭَﻷَﺍ ,ُﺹْﺮُﻘْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﺒَﺘْﻜَﻤْﻟَﺍ 3.2 Reading of words prefixed with the definite articles When ﻝﺍ «Alif and Lam» are prefixed to a noun beginning with one of the above moon letters « ُﺔﱠﻳِﺮَﻤَﻘْﻟَﺃ ُﻑْﻭُﺮُﺤْﻟَﺃ» the «lam» «ﻝ» of the word is pronounced e.g.
Al- qamar (the moon) (ُﺮَﻤَﻘْﻟَﺃ).
Other examples are : 1.
Al-Bayt The House ُﺖْﻴَﺒْﻟَﺃ 2.
Al-Qalam The Pen ُﻢَﻠَﻘْﻟَﺃ 3.
Al-Kitāb The Book ُﺏﺎَﺘِﻜْﻟَﺃ 26ARA016 Arabic Reader 4.
Al-Gurfah The Room ﺔَﻓْﺮُﻐْﻟَﺃ 5.
Al-‘Inab The Grape ﺐَﻨِﻌْﻟَﺃ 6.
Al-Farāshah The Butterfly ُﺔَﺷﺍَﺮَﻔْﻟَﺃ 7.
Al-Maktabah The Library ُﺔَﺒَﺘْﻜَﻤْﻟَﺃ 8.
Al-Khuđar The Vegetable ُﺮَﻀُﺨْﻟَﺃ 9.
Al-Jazzār The Butcher ُﺭﺍﱠﺰَﺠْﻟَﺃ 10.
Al-Ashjār The Trees ُﺭﺎَﺠْﺷَﻷَﺃ 11.
Al-Yad The Hand ﺪَﻴْﻟَﺃ But when the Alif and Lām «ﻝﺍ » is prefixed to a noun beginning with one of the sun letters « ُﺔﱠﻴِﺴْﻤﱠﺸﻟَﺃ ُﻑْﻭُﺮُﺤْﻟَﺃ» the «lām» «ﻝ» of «ﻝﺍ» «al» is assimilated into the first letter of the word i.e.
the sun letter e.g.
Ash-Shams ُﺲْﻤﱠﺸﻟﺍ.
The Assimilation means that the «lām» «ﻝ» of «Al» «ﻝﺍ» is dropped and the first letter of the word is doubled.
It is first pronounced with «as-sukun» i.e.
vowelless, then with fat- ħah _َ_, Kasrah _ِ__, or đammah __ُ__.
This is indicated in writing by placing the symbol «shaddah ّ with the fat-ħah _ﱠ__, the Kasrah ﱢ or the dammah ﱡ above the first letter of the word.
Examples : 1.
At-Tilmīdh The Pupil ُﺬْﻴِﻤْﻠﱢﺘﻟَﺍ 2.
Ad-Darājah The Bicycle ُﺔَﺟﺎَﺟﱠﺪﻟﺍ 3.
Adh-Dhayl The Tail ُﻞْﻳﱠﺬﻟﺍ 4.
Ar-Rijl The Leg ُﻞْﺟﱢﺮﻟَﺍ 5.
Az-Zujājah The Glass ُﺔَﺟﺎَﺟﱡﺰﻟَﺍ 6.
As-Samak The Fish ُﻚَﻤﱠﺴﻟَﺍ 7.
Ash-Shajar The Tree ُﺮَﺠﱠﺸﻟَﺍ 8.
Aş-Şundūq The Box ُﻕْﻭُﺪْﻨُﱡﺼﻟﺍ 9.
Ađ-Ðaw’u The Light ُءْﻮﱠﻀﻟَﺍ 10.
Aţ-Ţayyārah The Aeroplane ُﺓَﺭﺎﱠﻴﱠﻄﻟَﺍ 27ARA016 Arabic Reader 11.
Az-Zarf The Envelope ُﻑْﺮﱠﻈﻟَﺍ 12.
Al-Lahm The Flesh ُﻢْﺤﱠﻠﻟَﺍ 13.
An-Nāfidhah The Window ُﺓَﺬِﻓﺎﱠﻨﻟَﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 2 :ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ How do you read the first letter of the words prefixed with the definite article ?
Read and change the following words to indefinite nouns : ُﻦْﻴﱢﺘﻟَﺍ ,ُﺡﺎَﺒﱠﺼﻟَﺍ ,ُﺮَﻔﱠﺴﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﺟْﻭﱠﺰﻟَﺍ ,ُﻒَﻳﱢﺮﻟَﺍ ,ُﻢَﻠَﻘْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺮْﻴَﺨْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﺒْﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟَﺍ ,ُﻞْﻴِﻤَﺠْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺭﺎَﺠْﺷَﻷَﺍ 3.3 Tanwīn : the indefinite Article: In the English language “A” and “An” are two letters used as indefinite articles.
In the Arabic language, what is used as the indefinite article is called Tanwin, translated as “nunation” meaning double vowels.
The examples of this are: Tadhkiratun A ticket ٌﺓَﺮِﻛْﺬَﺗ Tufāħun An Apple ٌٌﺡﺎـﻔُﺗ Tājun A crown ٌﺝﺎَﺗ Musāfirun A traveler ﺮِﻓﺎَﺴُﻣ Kitābun A book ٌﺏﺎَﺘِﻛ Shajaratun A tree ٌﺓَﺮَﺠَﺷ Bābun A door ٌﺏﺎَﺑ Tilmīdhun A pupil ٌﺬْﻴِﻤْﻠِﺗ Maktabatun A library ٌﺔَﺒَﺘْﻜَﻣ Jazzārun A butcher ﺭﺍﱠﺰَﺟ Mudarrisun A teacher ٌﺱﱢﺭَﺪُﻣ Sūratun A picture ٌﺓَﺭْﻮُﺻ Qalamun A pen ٌﻢَﻠَﻗ ‘Ulbatun A tin ٌﺔَﺒْﻠُﻋ Tayyāratun An aeroplane ٌﺓَﺭﺎﱠﻴَﻃ Zarfun An envelope ٌﻑْﺮَﻇ Self Assessment Exercise 3 ﺚﻟﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ 28ARA016 Arabic Reader Read and write the following words with correct ending keeping in mind that masculine proper nouns end with (un) and feminine proper nouns end with (u): .ﻡﺎﱠﻤَﺣ ,ﻞْﺼَﻓ ,ﺮْﻴَﺑُﺯ ,ﺓَﺰْﻤَﺣ ,ﺖْﻴَﺑ ,ﺔَﻨِﻣﺁ ,ﺐَﻨْﻳَﺯ ,ﺔَﻤِﻃﺎَﻓ ,ﺪِﻣﺎَﺣ ,ﺔَﻓْﺮُﻏ 4.0 CONCLUSION There are 28 letters of Arabic alphabet which are called al-hurūf al-hijāiyyah.
These are divided into al-ħurūfu `sh-shamsiyyah and al-ħurūfu `l-qamariyyah i. e. the sun and the moon letters.
Furthermore, « al » «ﻝﺍ» is the Arabic definite article which corresponds to the English « the».
Tanwin “nunation” is the indefinite article and it corresponds to the English indefinite articles “a” and “an”.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has focussed on the Arabic letters, their division to the shamsiyyah and the qamariyyah, the functions of the definite and indefinite articles and their impact on the reading of Arabic words.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Read and write the following words keeping in mind the rules pertaining to the sun and the moon letters: ُءْﻮﱠﻀﻟَﺍ ,ُﻥْﻮُﻔْﻠﱢﺘﻟَﺍ ,ُﻢْﻗﱠﺮﻟَﺍ ,ُﺮْﻔﱢﺼﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﻋﺎَﻤﱠﺴﻟَﺍ ,ُﺐَﻨِﻌْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﺷﺍَﺮَﻔْﻟَﺍ ,ُﻡﺎَﻗْﺭَﻷَﺍ ,ُﺹْﺮُﻘْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﺒَﺘْﻜَﻤْﻟَﺍ 2.
Read and write the correct ending of the following words keeping in mind that masculine proper nouns end with (un) and feminine proper nouns end with (u): .ﻡﺎﱠﻤَﺣ ,ﻞْﺼَﻓ ,ﺮْﻴَﺑُﺯ ,ﺓَﺰْﻤَﺣ ,ﺖْﻴَﺑ ,ﺔَﻨِﻣﺁ ,ﺐَﻨْﻳَﺯ ,ﺔَﻤِﻃﺎَﻓ ,ﺪِﻣﺎَﺣ ,ﺔَﻓْﺮُﻏ 3.
Read and change the following words to definite nouns: .ٌﺔَﻓْﺮُﻏ ,ٌﺭﺍﱠﺰَﺟ ,ٌﺬْﻴِﻤْﻠِﺗ ,ٌﺓَﺮَﺠَﺷ ,ٌﺓَﺭْﻮُﺻ ,ٌﻦْﻴِﺗ ,ٌﺏْﻮُﻛ ,ٌﻢَﻓ ,ٌﻦَﺒَﻟ ,ٌﻥﺍَﺰْﻴِﻣ 4.
Read and change the following words to the indefinite cases: ُﻦْﻴﱢﺘﻟَﺍ ,ُﺡﺎَﺒﱠﺼﻟَﺍ ,ُﺮَﻔﱠﺴﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﺟْﻭﱠﺰﻟَﺍ ,ُﻒَﻳﱢﺮﻟَﺍ ,ُﻢَﻠَﻘْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺮْﻴَﺨْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺔَﺒْﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟَﺍ ,ُﻞْﻴِﻤَﺠْﻟَﺍ ,ُﺭﺎَﺠْﺷَﻷَﺍ 29ARA016 Arabic Reader 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Abdur Rahman, V (2005).
Key to Durūs al-lughat al ‘Arabiyyah lighayri ‘n-Nātiqīna biha Part I & II Cairo: Elnahar Printing Press.
2.
Ahmad, Ali et al (n.d.).
Muthākirat fin-Nahw waṣ-ṣarf ;Madina, Islamic University Press.
3.
El-Sayad, Y et al (2003).
Arabic by Radio ; Cairo: Gharib Press.
30ARA016 Arabic Reader UNIT 3 : THE ARABIC SIMPLE NOMINAL AND VERBAL SENTENCES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Arabic Simple Nominal Sentences 3.2 The Arabic Simple Verbal Sentences 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last lesson, you learnt about Arabic alphabet, the vowels, the definite and the indefinite articles and some marks that will assist you reading ability in Arabic language.
In this unit, you are to learn about ﺔﱠﻴِﻤﺳﺈِﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻠﻤُﺠﻟﺍ (nominal sentence) and ُﺔﱠﻴِﻠﻌِﻔﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻠﻤُﺠﻟﺃ (verbal sentence).
In Arabic a simple sentence may begin with noun or verb.
The sentence which begins with noun is called ُﺔَﻠﻤُﺠﻟﺍ ﺔﱠﻴِﻤﺳﺈِﻟﺍ while the one which begins with verb is called ُﺔﱠﻴِﻠﻌِﻔﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻠﻤُﺠﻟﺃ .
You will therefore, learn in this unit, the reading, comprehension and construction of Arabic simple nominal and verbal Arabic sentences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit you will be able to • Explain what constitutes Arabic simple nominal sentence • Explain what constitutes Arabic simple verbal sentence • Identify simple nominal sentences in Arabic texts 31ARA016 Arabic Reader • Identify simple verbal ventences in Arabic Texts • Construct simple Arabic nominal sentences • Construct simple Arabic verbal sentences 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Structure of Arabic Simple Nominal Sentences : ﺔﻴﻤﺳﻹﺍ ﻞﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﺐﻴﻛﺮﺗ In Arabic as in English or some other languages a nominal sentence ﺔﻴﻤﺳﻹﺍ ﺔﻠﻤﺠﻟﺍ is a sentence which begins with a noun ٌﻢﺳِﺇ or a pronoun ٌﺮﻴِﻤَﺿe.g.
ُﻝﱠﻭَﻷﺍ ﱡﺺﱠﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 1 ٌﺔَﻗِﺮْﺸُﻣ ُﺲْﻤﱠﺸﻟﺍ -1 ٌﺔَﻠِﺑﺍَﺫ ُﺓَﺩْﺭَﻮْﻟَﺍ -2 ٌﺓَﻮْﻠَﺣ ُﺔَﻟﺎَﻘِﺗْﺮُﺒْﻟَﺍ -3 ٌﺪِﻬَﺘْﺠُﻣ ُﺬﻴِﻤْﻠﱢﺘﻟﺍ -4 ٌﺔَﻌِﺳﺍَﻭ ُﺔَﺣﺎﱠﺴﻟﺍ -5 ﱞﺭﺎَﺣ ّﻮَﺠْﻟَﺍ -6 ٌﻞﻳِﻮَﻃ ُﻥﺎَﺒْﻌﱡﺜﻟﺍ -7 ٌﻊﻳِﺮَﺳ ُﺭﺎَﻄِﻘْﻟَﺍ -8 ٌﺪﻳِﺪَﺷ ﱡﺮَﺤْﻟَﺍ -9 ٌﺔَﻘَﻠْﻐَﻣ ُﺏﺍَﻮْﺑَﻷَﺍ -10 ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻑِﺮْﺼَﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺐَﻫْﺬَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ -1 ِﻝﻮُﺻُﻮْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻟﺎَﺻ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﻪﱠﺟَﻮَﺘَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ -2 ِﻑَﺮْﺼَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ِﺕﺍَﺭَﻻﻭﱡﺪﻟﺍ ُﻡﱢﺪَﻘُﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ -3 ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ َﺔَﻠِﻓﺎَﺣ ُﺐَﻛْﺮَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ -4 ِﺕَﻻﺎَﻳﱢﺮﻟﺍ ﺍَﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ ﻲِﻄْﻌُﻳ ِﻑَﺮْﺼَﻤْﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ -5 The Arabic nominal sentence is very often found introduced by the particle ( ﱠﻥِﺇ ) Inna after which the subject is in the nominative .
e.g ﱡﻲِﻨَﻏ ٌﻞُﺟَﺭ ِﷲﺍ ُﺪْﺒَﻋ Abdullahi is a rich man ﱡﻲِﻨَﻏ ٌﻞُﺟَﺭ ِﷲﺍ َﺪْﺒَﻋ ﱠﻥِﺇ Indeed, Abdullahi is a rich man ٌﺮِﺿﺎَﺣ ُﻞُﺟﱠﺮﻟﺍ The man is 32ARA016 Arabic Reader present ٌﺮِﺿﺎَﺣ َﻞُﺟﱠﺮﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ Indeed, the man is ٌﺓَﺮِﻫﺎَﻣ ٌﺔَﺧﺎﱠﺒَﻃ َﺓﺃﺮﻤﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ Indeed, the woman is a clever present ِﻥﺎَﻀﻳِﺮَﻣ ِﻦْﻳَﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ Verily, the two cook ٍﺮْﺴُﺧ ﻲِﻔَﻟ َﻥﺎَﺴْﻧِﻹﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ boys are sick ِﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ َﻥﻮُﻟﻮُﻐْﺸَﻣ َﻦْﻴِﺣَﻼَﻔْﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ Verily, man is at a loss ٌﺮْﻴِﺒَﻛ ٌﻢِﻟﺎَﻋ َﻮُﻫ Verily, the peasants are busy in the field He is a great scholar.
ﻞَﻤَﻌـْﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺓﱠﺪِﺠـُﻣ ٌﺔﺳﱢﺭَﺪـُﻣ َﻲِﻫ She is a hard-working female teacher Self Assessment Exercise 1 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ ﺓﺪﻴﻔُﻣ ﺔﱠﻴﻤْﺳِﺇ ٍﻞَﻤُﺟ َﺔَﺴَﻤﺧ ﻥﱢﻮَﻛ TEXT 2 ﻲـِﻧﺎﱠﺜﻟﺍ ﱡﺺﱠﻨﻟﺍ :ﺔﻴﻟﺎﺘﻟﺍ ﻞﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﺃﺮﻗﺍ Read the following Sentences ِﺓَﺮِﺋﺎﱠﻄﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ُﻝﺰْﻨَﻳ ﻲِﻠَﻋ ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ ﺔَﻠﻓِﺎَﺣ ُﺐَﻛْﺮَﻳ ﻲِﻠَﻋ ِﻝﻮُﺻُﻮْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻟﺎَﺻ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﻪﱠﺟَﻮَﺘَﻳ ﻲِﻠَﻋ ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻑَﺮْﺼَﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺐَﻫْﺬَﻳ ﻲِﻠَﻋ ِﻒَﻇَﻮُﻤْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ِﺕﺍَﺭَﻻﻭﱡﺪﻟﺍ ُﻡﱢﺪَﻘُﻳ ﻲِﻠَﻋ ﻲِﻠَﻌِﻟ ِﺕَﻻﺎَﻳﱢﺮﻟﺍ ﻲِﻄْﻌُﻳ ُﻒَﻇَﻮُﻤْﻟﺍ ِﺓَﺮِﺋﺎﱠﻄﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ُﻝِﺰْﻨَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻑَﺮْﺼَﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺐَﻫْﺬَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ -2 ِﻝﻮُﺻُﻮْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻟﺎَﺻ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﻪﱠﺟَﻮَﺘَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ ِﻑَﺮْﺼَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ِﺕﺍَﺭَﻻﻭﱡﺪﻟﺍ ُﻡﱢﺪَﻘُﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ َﺔَﻠِﻓﺎَﺣ ُﺐَﻛْﺮَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ ِﺕَﻻﺎَﻳﱢﺮﻟﺍ ًﺍﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ ﻲِﻄْﻌُﻳ ِﻑَﺮْﺼَﻤْﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ Self Assessment Exercise 2 Re- arrange the following to become complete sentences 33ARA016 Arabic Reader ﺓَﺪﻴِﻔُﻣ ًﺎَﻠُﻤﺟ َﻥﱢﻮَﻜُﺘِﻟ ﺔﻴِﺗﻵﺍ ِﺕﺎَﻤِﻠَﻜﻟﺍ ِﺐﱢﺗَﺭ -2 ﺓَﺮِﺋﺎﱠﻄﻟﺍ- ُﻝِﺰْﻨَﻳ- ﻲِﻠَﻋ – ﻦِﻣ -1 ُﻡﱢﺪَﻘُﻳ- ﻰَﻟِﺇ - ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ- ِﺕﺍَﺭَﻻﻭﱠﺪﻟﺍ- ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻤْﻟَﺍ -2 ﱢﻲِﻠَﻌِﻟ- ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻤْﻟَﺍ- ِﺕَﻻﺎَﻳﱢﺮﻟﺍ- ﻲِﻄْﻌُﻳ -3 ّﻲِﻠَﻋ- ﻰَﻟِﺇ- ُﺐَﻫْﺬَﻳ- ُﻑَﺮْﺼَﻣ ُﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟَﺍ -4 ﻝﻮﺻﻮﻟﺍ- ﻪﺟﻮﺘﻳ- ﻲﻠﻋ- ﻰﻟﺇ- ﺔﻟﺎﺻ -5 3.2 The Structure of Arabic Simple Verbal Sentence An Arabic verbal sentence ُﺔﱠﻴِﻠﻌِﻔﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻠﻤــُﺠـﻟَﺃ is the sentence which begins with verb while the subject follows e.g: ﺚﻟﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨـﻟﺍ TEXT 3 ُﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ َﺽِﺮَﻣ -1 ُﺭْﺄَﻔْﻟﺍ ُﺏُﺮْﻬَﻳ -2 ُﺪﱠﻤَﺤُﻣ َﻡﺎَﻗ -3 ُﺖْﻨِﺒﻟﺍ ِﺕَءﺎَﺟ -4 ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َِﺡَﺮﻓ -5 ُﺔَﻠْﺤﱠﻨﻟﺍ ِﺕَﺭﺎَﻃ -6 ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻚِﺤَﺿ / ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ْﺐَﻫْﺬَﻳ -7 ُﺐْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ُﺰِﻔْﻘَﻳ -8 ُﻉْﺭﱠﺰﻟﺍ ُﺞَﻀْﻨ َﻳ - 9 ُﺭﺎَﺠْﻟﺍ َﺮَﻓﺎَﺳ - 10 Self Assessment Exercise 3 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ • Form verbal sentences using the following verbs :ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ِﻝﺎَﻌْﻓَﻸِﻟ ِﻞِﻋﺎَﻓ ِﻊِﺿَﻮِﺑ ًﺔﱠﻴِﻠْﻌِﻓ ًﻼَﻤُﺟ ْﻥﱢﻮَﻛ ،َﺲَﻠَﺟ ،ُﺙُﺮْﺤَﻳ ،َﺰَﻔَﻗ ،َﺾَﻛَﺭ ،َﺾَﻬَﻧ ،َﻒَﻗَﻭ ،َﻞَﺧَﺩ ،ُﻂُﻘْﺴَﻳ ،َﻊَﻠَﻃ ،َﻉَﺭَﺯ ﻊﺑﺍﺮﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 4 Read the following Sentences َﺔَﻠِﻓﺎَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﺢِﻟﺎَﺻ َﺐِﻛَﺭ -1 Salih embarked on the bus 34ARA016 Arabic Reader ُﻪَﻘﻳِﺪَﺻ ُﻢﻴِﻫﺍَﺮْﺑِﺇ َﺭﺍَﺯ -2 Ibrahim visited his friend َﻲْﺤَﻳ ﻯَﺪَﺗْﺭﺍ -3 ُﻪَﺴِﺑَﻼَﻣ Yahya put on his clothes ِﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ َﺮَﺘْﻓﱠﺪﻟﺍ ُﺪْﻌَﺳ َﺝَﺮْﺧَﺃ -4 Sa ‘d brought out exercise book from the .
bag َﺔَﻄﻳِﺮَﺨْﻟﺍ ُﺮْﻴَﺑُﺯ َﻢَﺳَﺭ -5 Zubayr drew the map ِﺕﺎَﺒِﺟﺍَﻮْﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻤِﻃﺎَﻓ ْﺖَﺒَﺘَﻛ -6 Fatimah wrote the assignments.
َﺔَﺟﺎَﺟﱠﺪﻟﺍ ﻲِﺧَﺃ َﺢَﺑَﺫ -7 My brothe slaughtered the hen.
َءﺎَﺸَﻌْﻟﺍ ﻲﱢﻣُﺃ ْﺖَﺨَﺒَﻃ -8 My mother cooked super.
َﺔَﺣﺎَﻔﱡﺘﻟﺍ ُﻡَﺩﺁ َﻞَﻛَﺃ -9 Adam ate apple.
َﻢْﺤﱠﻠﻟﺍ ُﺔَﺠْﻳِﺪَﺧ ْﺖَﻌَﻄَﻗ -10 Khadijah cut the meat Self Assement Exercise 2 Re- arrange the following to become sentences :ﺓﺪﻴﻔﻣ ﻼﻤﺟ ﻥﻮﻜﺘﻟ ﻲﺗﺄﻳ ﺎﻣ ﺐﱢﺗﺭ ِﺏﺎَﺴِﺤْﻟﺍ – ْﻦِﻣ – ُﺬﻴِﻤَﻠﱠﺘﻟﺍ – َﺝَﺮْﺧَﺃ -ُﺮَﺘْﻓَﺩ – ُﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟَﺍ - 1 ٌﺓَﺬﻴِﻤْﻠَﺗ – َﻙﺎَﻨُﻫ – ٌﺔَﻀﻳِﺮَﻣ – ْﻞَﻫ –2 ؟ ﻰَﻟِﺇ – ﺍﻮُﺒَﻫَﺫ – ﺍَﺫﺎَﻤِﻟ – ُﻕﻮﱡﺴﻟﺍ -3 ٌﺱْﺭَﺩ – ﺍًﺪَﻏ – ُﺪﻳِﺪَﺟ – ْﻢُﻫَﺪْﻨِﻋ -4 ٌﺕﺎَﺒِﺋﺎَﻏ – َﻙﺎَﻨُﻫ – ٌﺕﺍَﺬﻴِﻤْﻠِﺗ – 5 4.0 CONCLUSION Arabic sentence may start with noun; it is then called ﺔﱠﻴِﻤﺳﺈِﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻠﻤُﺠﻟﺍ nominal sentence.
It may be very simple consisting of subject and predicate, simple in construction, reading and understanding.
The Arabic nominal sentence is very often found introduced by the particle ( ﱠﻥِﺇ ) Inna after which the subject is in the nominative.
An Arabic sentence may also start with verb after which the subject will follow.
It is then called ُﺔﱠﻴِﻠﻌِﻔﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻠﻤُﺠﻟﺃ 35ARA016 Arabic Reader 5.0 SUMMARY This unit teaches you the reading and comprehension of Arabic simple nominal and verbal sentences.
It also provides texts and tests which train you on construction of such sentences.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT :ﻲﺗﺄﻳ ﺎﻤﻴﻓ ﺇﺪﺘﺒﻣ ﱢﻞُﻜِﻟ ﺮﺒﺧ ﻊﺿﻭ ﻊﻣ ًﺔﻴﻤﺳﺍ ًﺔَﻠْﻤُﺟ ْﻥﱢﻮَﻛ -1 - ُﺭﺎَﻄِﻘْﻟَﺍ- ُﻥﺎَﺒْﻌﱡﺜﻟﺍ- ﱡﻮَﺠْﻟَﺍ- ُﺔَﺣﺎﱠﺴﻟﺍ- ُﺬﻴِﻤْﻠﱢﺘﻟﺍ- ُﺔَﻟﺎَﻘُﺗْﺮُﺒْﻟَﺍ- ُﺓَﺩْﺭَﻮْﻟَﺍ- ُﺲْﻤﱠﺸﻟﺍ .ُﺏﺍَﻮْﺑَﻷَﺍ- ﱡﺮَﺤْﻟَﺍ ﺓﺮﺋﺎﻄﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻝﺰﻨﻳ ﺪﻴﻌﺳ: ﺔﻠﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﺪﻌﺑ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﻞﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﺐّﺗَﺭ -2 ِﺓَﺮِﺋﺎﱠﻄﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ُﻝِﺰْﻨَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ -1 ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻑَﺮْﺼَﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺐَﻫْﺬَﻳ ٌﺪﻴَﻌَﺳ -2 ِﻝﻮُﺻُﻮْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻟﺎَﺻ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﻪﱠﺟَﻮَﺘَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ -3 ِﻑَﺮْﺼَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ِﺕﺍَﺭَﻻْﻭﱠﺪﻟﺍ ُﻡﱢﺪَﻘُﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ -4 ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ َﺔَﻠِﻓﺎَﺣ ُﺐَﻛْﺮَﻳ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ -5 ِﺕَﻻﺎَﻳﱢﺮﻟﺍ ًﺍﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ ﻲِﻄْﻌُﻳ ِﻑِﺮْﺼَﻤْﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ -6 -:ﻚﺋﺎﺸﻧﺇ ﻦﻣ ﺓﺪﻴﻔﻣ ﻞﻤﺟ ﻲﻓ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻞﻤﻌﺘﺳﺍ -3 Use the following words in good sentences: (ٌﺪْﻠِﺟ ،ٌﺓَﺭﺎَﻴَﺳ ٌﺔَﻓْﺮُﻏ ،ٌﺮَﻄَﻣ ،ٌﺪَﻟَﻭ) :ٍﺔَﻋﻮُﻤْﺠُﻣ ﱢﻞُﻛ ﻲِﻓ ِﺔَﺒﻳِﺮَﻐْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻤِﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ َﺖْﺤَﺗ ﺎﻄَﺧ ْﻊَﺿ -2 Underline the odd words from the following: ﺎَﻧَﺃ – ْﻦَﻣ – َﻰﺘَﻣ – ْﻞَﻫ -1 ِﺖْﻧَﺃ – َﺖْﻧَﺃ – ﺍَﺫﺎَﻤِﻟ – َﻮُﻫ -2 ْﻢُﻫ – ُﻦْﺤَﻧ – َﻦْﻳَﺃ – ﺎَﻤُﻫ -3 َﻲِﻫ – ْﻢَﻛ – ﺍَﺫﺎَﻣ – َﻒْﻴَﻛ-4 ُﺮِﻓﺎَﺴُﻳ – ُﺝُﺮْﺨَﻳ – ُﻞُﺧْﺪَﻳ – َﻢِﻠَﻋ -5 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS 1.
David Cowan (1976).
An introduction to Modern Literary Arabic New York, London.
2.
Mohammad, B,S, Salim, H., & Husainy, A, (1979).
A new Arabic course for 36ARA016 Arabic Reader Nigeria: Pupils Book 1-5, Lagos, Longman Nigeria 3.
Abdullahi bn Ahmad (ed) (1992).
Silsilatu ta‘lim lughati ‘l-Arabiyyah Book 3, Riyad, KSA 4.
Abdu `r-Rahmān, V. (2005) Key to Durūs al-lughat al Arabiyya ligairin-Nātiqīna biha Part I & II, Cairo, Egypt, Elnahar Printing Press.
UNIT 4: EXAMPLE OF ARABIC PROSE AND POETRY TEXTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Arabic Prose and its Example 3.2 The Arabic Poetry and its example 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last lesson presented to you some examples of nominal and verbal Arabic sentences.
It was there you learnt that Arabic sentences are of two types, ﺔﱠﻴِﻤﺳﺈِﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻠﻤُﺠﻟﺍ is the sentence begins with a noun while ُﺔﱠﻴِﻠﻌِﻔﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻠﻤُﺠﻟﺃ is the one beginning with a verb.
Like any other language, ideas or thoughts and intentions may be expressed in Arabic flowing smoothly long or short devoid of metres or rhymes.
This kind of expression is said to be prose language.
On the other hand those gifted or well trained may want to be emotional pouring out their ideas and thoughts in form of beautiful songs observing a metre or rhyming words.
This is called poetry.
This unit teaches you the difference between prose and poetry in Arabic language with examples 37ARA016 Arabic Reader 2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit you will be able to • Read and define what constitutes an Arabic prose • Read and describe what constitute an Arabic poetry • Identify what constitute Arabic prose • Identify what constitute Arabic poetry passages 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Arabic prose and its Example ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺮﺜﱠﻨﻟﺎِﺑ ُﻒﻳِﺮﻌﱠﺘﻟﺍ :ﻮﺤﻧ ِﺔَﻴِﻓﺎَﻘْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﻥْﺯَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ُﺔَﻴِﻟﺎَﺨْﻟﺍ ﺭﺎَﻜْﻓَﻷﺍ ِﻦَﻋ ِﺕﺍَﺮﻴِﺒﻌﱠﺘﻟﺍ َﻮُﻫ ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺮْﺜﱠﻨﻟﺍ The Village ُﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ Vocabulary ُﺕﺍَﺩَﺮْﻔُﻤْﻟﺍ Quiet; calm ُﺔﺋِﺩﺎَﻫ Palm leaf stalk ُﺪﻳِﺮَﺟ Straw ُﺶَﻗ Uproar ُﺢﻴِﺠَﺿ / ُﺔﱠﺠﺿ Crowd ُﻡﺎَﺣِﺩْﺯِﺍ Wide, Spacious ٌﺢﻴِﺴَﻓ Big, large ٌﺔَﻤْﺨَﺿ Blooming ٌﺓَﺮِﺿﺎَﻧ Garden, orchard ٌﻡْﺮَﻛ Grape vine ِﺐَﻨِﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻣْﺮَﻛ Vine yard ِﺐَﻨِﻌْﻟﺍ ُﻡْﺮَﻛ Fertility ٌﺐِﺼَﺧ Weakness, gentleness ٌٍﺔَﻋَﺩ ُﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ٌﺔﱠﻴِﻨْﺒَﻣ ﺎَﻬُﺗﻮُﻴُﺑ ،ٌﺔﱠﻴِﺤِﺻ ٌﺔَﻄﻴِﺴَﺑ ٌﺔِﺋِﺩﺎَﻫ ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘﻟﺍ ُﺓﺎَﻴَﺣ ،ٍﺓَﺮﻴِﻐَﺻ ﻯَﺮُﻗ ﻰِﻓ ِﻥﺎَﺴْﻧﻹﺍ ُﺾْﻌَﺑ ُﺶﻴِﻌَﻳ .ﺎَﻬِﻣﺎَﺣِﺩْﺯﺍَﻭ ِﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﺠَﺿ ْﻦَﻋ ٌﺓَﺪﻴِﻌَﺑ ﺎَﻬﱠﻧِﺇ ،ﱢﺶِﻘْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺪﻳِﺮَﺠﻟﺎِﺑ ٌﺔَﻔﱠﻘَﺴُﻣَﻭ ِﻦِﺒﻠﱠﻟﺎِﺑ ﺎًﻣﻭُﺮُﻛَﻭ ًﺓَﺮِﺿﺎَﻧ ٍﺕﺎﱠﻨَﺟ ﺎَﻬﻴِﻓ ﱠﻦِﻜَﻟَﻭ ٌﺔَﻤْﺨَﺿ ٌﺔَﻴِﻨْﺑَﺃَﻭ ٌﺔَﺤﻴِﺴَﻓ ُﻉِﺭﺍَﻮَﺷ ﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ َﺲْﻴَﻟ .ُﺓَﺩِﺭﺎَﺒﻟﺍ ُﺔَﺑْﺬَﻌﻟﺍ ُﻩﺎَﻴِﻤﻟﺍ ﺎَﻬْﻨِﻣ ُﺮﱠﺠَﻔَﺘَﺗ ﺎًﻧﻮُﻴُﻋَﻭ ٌﺔَﺒْﺼِﺧ ٌﺓَﺪﻴِﻌَﺳ ٌُﺔَﻋَﺩَﻭ ٌﺮِﺑﺎَﺻ ٌﻞَﻤَﻋَﻭ ،ٌﻞﻴِﻤَﺟ ٌﺮَﻬْﻈَﻣَﻭ ٌﻞﻴِﻠَﻇ ﱞﻞِﻇَﻭ ٌﻞﻴﻠﻋ ٌﻢﻴﺴَﻧ ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ ،ﺎَﻬُﻟﺎَﻔْﻃَﺃ ﺎَﻬﻴِﻓ ُﻢﱠﻠَﻌَﺘَﻳ ٌﺔَﺳَﺭْﺪَﻣَﻭ ،ﺎَﻬُﻠْﻫَﺃ ِﻪﻴِﻓ ِﻰﱢﻠَﺼُﻳ ٌﺪِﺠْﺴَﻣ ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻗ ﱢﻞُﻛ ﻰِﻓَﻭ ،ٌﺔﱠﻴِﻘَﻧ ٌءﺍَﻮْﺟَﺃَﻭ ِﺓَﺭَﻭﺎَﺠُﻤﻟﺍ ﻯَﺮٌﻘﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ُﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ِﻪْﻴَﻟِﺇ ُﺮُﻀْﺤَﻳ ِﻉﻮُﺒْﺳُﻷﺍ َﻦِﻣ ِﻡْﻮَﻳ ﻰِﻓ ُﻡﺎَﻘُﻳ ٌﻕﻮُﺳ ٍﺔَﻳْﺮَﻗ ﱢﻞُﻜِﻟَﻭ 38ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻰَﻟِﺇ ِﺡﺎَﺒﱠﺼﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ُﻕﻮﱡﺴﻟﺍ ﱡﺮِﻤَﺘْﺴَﻳَﻭ ،ﺎَﻫﻮُﻌﻴِﺒَﻴِﻟ ُﺮَﻀُﺨْﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺏﻮُﺒُﺤْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﻲِﺷﺍَﻮَﻤْﻟﺍ ُﻢُﻬَﻌَﻣَﻭ .ْﻢِﻬِﺗﻮُﻴُﺑ ﻰَﻟﺇ ُﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ُﺩﻮُﻌَﻳ ﱠﻢُﺛ ِءﺎَﺴَﻤْﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise ؟ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ َﺓﺎَﻴَﺣ ْﻒِْﺻ .ِﺓَﺮﻴِﺼَﻗ ِﻞَﻤُﺟ ﻰِﻓ َﺔَﻴِﻟﺎﱠﺘﻟﺍ َﺮﻴِﺑﺎَﻌﱠﺘﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺕﺎَﻤْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ِﻞِﻤْﻌَﺘْﺳِﺇ ٌﺔَﺋِﺩﺎَﻫ ٌﻞﻴِﻠَﻋ ٌﻢﻴِﺴَﻧ ٌﺔَﺤﻴِﺴَﻓ ُﻉِﺭﺍَﻮَﺷ ﱡﺶِﻘﻟﺍ ُﺪﻳِﺮَﺠْﻟﺍ B.
The Town - ُﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤْﻟﺍ ﺏ Vocabulary - ُﺕﺍَﺩﺍَﺮْﻔُﻤْﻟﺍ To plunder; pillage َﺐَﻬَﻧ To penetrate; pass through َﻕَﺮَﺘْﺧِﺇ Methods; ways ُﺐﻴﻟﺎَﺳﺃ ُءﺍَﺮْﻏِﺇ Instigation Bargaining ُﺔَﻣَﻭﺎَﺴُﻣ Tar ﻥﺍَﺮْﻄِﻘﻟﺎﺑ ﻰﻠﻃ /ٌﺓﱠﺪَﻌُﻣ Asphalt ﺖْﻠَﻔْﺳَﺍ /َﺖﱠﻓَﺯ ُﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤْﻟﺍ .
ٌﻞَﻤَﻋَﻭ ٌﻡﺎَﺣِﺩْﺯﺍَﻭ ٌﺔَﺒِﺧﺎَﺻ ٌﺓﺎَﻴَﺣ ﺎَﻬﱠﻧﺇ .
ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ ِﺓﺎَﻴَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﺮْﻴَﻏ ِﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ُﺓﺎَﻴَﺤْﻟﺍ َﺔﱠﻴِﺋﺎَﺑَﺮْﻬَﻜﻟﺍ ِﺮَﻄُﻘﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺕﺍَﺭﺎﱠﻴﱠﺴﻟﺍ ﻯَﺮَﺗَﻭ .ٍﻕﺎَﺒِﺳ ِﻥﺍَﺪْﻴَﻣ ﻰِﻓ ْﻢُﻬﱠﻧَﺄَﻛَﻭ ِﻉِﺭﺍَﻮﱠﺸﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ َﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻯَﺮَﺗَﻭ .َءﺎَﻀَﻔْﻟﺍ َﻕِﺮَﺘْﺨَﺗَﻭ َﺽْﺭﻷﺍ َﺐَﻬْﻨَﺗ ْﻥَﺍ ُﺪﻳِﺮُﺗ ﺎَﻬﱠﻧﺄَﻛَﻭ ًﺔﻤﺣﺍَﺰَﺘُﻣ ِﺕﺎَﺟﺍﱠﺭﱠﺪﻟﺍَﻭ ، ِءﺍَﺮْﻏِﻹﺍ ﺐﻴِﻟﺎَﺳﺃ ﺍﻮُﻨَﻘْﺗﺃ ٌﺔَﻋﺎَﺑَﻭ ،ُﻥِﺯﺎَﺨَﻣَﻭ ُﺖﻴِﻧﺍَﻮَﺣَﻭ ُﻢِﻋﺎَﻄَﻣ ٍﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻣ ﱢﻞُﻛ ﻰِﻓ .ٌﺔَﺤِﺑﺍَﺭ ٌﺓَﺭﺎَﺠِﺗ ِﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ ،ِﺔَﻣﻭﺎَﺴُﻤْﻟﺍ َﺐﻴِﻟﺎَﺳَﺃ ﺍﻮُﻨَﻘْﺗَﺃ َﻥﻭُﺮَﺘْﺸُﻣَﻭ .ﺎَﻤِﻨﻴﱢﺴﻟﺍ ُﺭﻭُﺩَﻭ ُﺡﺭﺎَﺴَﻤْﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺐَﻋﻼَﻤﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺕﺎَﻴَﻔْﺸَﺘْﺴُﻤﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺪِﺑﺎَﻌَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ ُﺮُﺜْﻜَﺗَﻭ ًﺓَﺭﺎَﺗ ،ٌﺔَﺘﱠﻗَﺰَﻣ ْﻭََﺃ ٌﺓﺪﱠﺒَﻌُﻣ ﺎَﻣِﺇ ﺎَﻬﱠﻧَﻷ ُﺭﺎَﺒُﻐﻟﺍ ﺎَﻬﻴِﻓ ﱡﻞِﻘﻳ ٌﺔَﻔﻴﻈَﻧ َﻲِﻫَﻭ .ٌﺔَﻀﻳِﺮَﻋ ِﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤْﻟﺍ ُﻉِﺭﺍَﻮَﺷَﻭ .ِﺮَﺜْﻛَﺃ ْﻭﺃ ٍﺕﺎَﻘﺒَﻃ ِﺲْﻤَﺧ ﻦـﻣ ﻥﱠﻮـﻜﺘَﻳ ًﺔَﻘِﻫﺎَﺷ ًﺔَﻤْﺨَﺿ ًﺔَﻴِﻨْﺑﺃ ِﻉِﺭﺍَﻮﱠﺸﻟﺍ ِﺐِﻧﺍَﻮَﺟ ﻰِﻓ ُﺪﺠَﺗ .ٍﺔَﻋﺮُﺴِﺑ َﻥﻭُﺮﻴِﺴَﻳ ِﻥُﺪُﻤْﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ َﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻯَﺮَﺗ َﻚِﻟَﺬِﻟﻭ .ﺔَﻋْﺮﱡﺴﻟﺎِﺑ ُﺯﺎَﺘْﻤَﺗ ﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ُﺓﺎَﻴﺤﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻘﻴِﻗَﺩ َﱢﻞُﻛ ْﻦِﻣ ِﺓَﺩﺎَﻔِﺘْﺳﻻﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋ َﻥﻮُﺻِﺮْﺤَﻳَﻭ .ٍﺔَﻋْﺮُﺴِﺑ ِﻢِﻋﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍَﻭ ﻲِﻫﺎَﻘَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ َﻥﻮُﺑَﺮْﺸَﻳَﻭ .ْﻢِﻬِﺗﺎَﻴَﺣ ِﻖِﺋﺎَﻗَﺩ ْﻦِﻣ .ﺔَﺣﺍﱠﺮﻟﺍ ِﻞِﺋََﺎﺳَﻭ ﻰَﻟﺇ َﻞَﻤَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﻊَﻤْﺠَﺗ َﻲِﻫَﻭ .
ُﺓﺎَﻴَﺤْﻟﺍ َﻲِﻫ ُﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤْﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise .
ﺯﺎﺠـﻳﻹﺎﺑ ﺔﻨـﻳﺪﻤﻠﻟ ﺎﻔﺻﻭ ﺕﺎـﻫ ؟ﺔﻨﻳﺪـﻤﻟﺍ ﺯﺎﺘﻤﺗ ﺍﺫﺎﻤﺑ ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺮْﻌﱢﺸﻟﺍ 3.2 The Arabic Poetry and its Example َﻞْﺜِﻣ ﻰِﻔْﻘَﻤْﻟﺍ ُﻥﻭُﺯﻮَﻤْﻟﺍ ُﻡَﻼَﻜْﻟﺍ َﻮُﻫ: ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺮْﻌﱢﺸﻟﺍ 39ARA016 Arabic Reader ﱡﺰِﻋ ُﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍ Meaning ﺎَﻬﻴِﻧﺎـﻌـَﻣ Vocabulary ﺕﺍَﺩَﺮْﻔُﻤْﻟﺍ Mirage ٌﻉَﺪْﻴَﺧ .ٌﺏﺍَﺮَﺳ Desert, wilderness ُﺔَﻳِﺩﺎَﺑ To deceive, cheat َﻉَﺪَﺧ ،َﻞَﺘَﺧ To inhale َﻖَﺸْﻨَﺘْﺳﺍ ،َﻖَﺸَﻨَﺗ ،َﻖِﺸَﻧ To stink َﻦَﺘﻧَﺃ ,َﻦِﺘَﻧ Stinking ٌﻦِﺘْﻨُﻣ ،ٌﻦِﺘَﻧ Subjects/people ٌﺐْﻌَﺷ ،ُﺔﱠﻴِﻋَﺭ Garment, dress ٌﺏْﻮَﺛ ،ٌﺔﱠﻠُﺣ To search, examin َﺶَﺘَﻓ To become ill ﱠﻞَﻋ ،ﱠﻞَﺘﻋﺍ To aid, succour َﺙﺎَﻏ Distress, adversity, hardship ُﺔَﻣْﺯََﺃ Disaster, calamity ٌﺔَﺛِﺭﺎَﻛ (ﻯِﻭَﻼْﻤَﺤْﻟﺍ ِﺪﱠﻤَﺤُﻣ ﻦﺑ َﺪَﻤْﺣَﺃ ِﺦﻴَﺸﻠﻟ) ﱢﺰِﻋ ُﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍ ٌﻝﺎَﺧَﻻَﻭ ﱞﻢَﻋَﻻ ِﻞْﻀَﻔﻟﺎِﺑ ُﺮْﺨَﻔﻟﺍَﻭ ٌﻝﺎَﻣ َﻻَﻭ ٌﻩﺎَﺟ َﻻ ِﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺎِﺑ ﱡﺰِﻌْﻟﺍ ٌﻝَﻼْﻗِﺇ ِﻞْﻀَﻔْﻟﺍ ِﻥﻭُﺪِﺑ ٍﺮْﺜُﻛ ﱡﻞُﻛَﻭ ٌﻊِﻄَﻘْﻨُﻣ ِﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺮْﻴَﻐِﺑ ﱢﺰِﻋ ﱡﻞُﻜَﻓ ُﻝﺎــَﺤْﻟﺍ ِﺖَﺴْﺌِﺑ ﺎَﻬﻳِﻭَﺬِﻟ ﺎَﻬﱠﻧِﺈَﻓ ﺎَﻫُﺪِﺋﺍَﺭ ُﻞْﻬَﺠْﻟﺍَﻭ ْﺖَﻠَﺣ ٍﻝﺎَﺣ ﱡﻞُﻛَﻭ ُﻝﺎَﺒْﻗِﺇَﻭ ٌﺩﺎَﻌْﺳِﺇ ِﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺓﱠﺰِﻋَﻭ ٌﺔَﺼَﻘْﻨَﻣَﻭ ٌﺭﺎَﺑْﺩِﺇ ِﻞْﻬَﺠْﻟﺍ ُﺓﱠﺰَﻌَﻣ ُﻝﺎﱠﺘَﺧ ِﺪﻴِﺒْﻟﺍ ِﻦْﻄَﺒِﺑ َﺏﺍَﺮﱠﺴﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ ٌﺮَﺛَﺃ َﻻَﻭ ٌﺮْﻛِﺫَﻻ ِﻞْﻬَﺠْﻟﺍ ِﻭَﺫ ُﺕﻮُﻤَﻳ ُﻝﺎَﻬُﺟ ِﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ ْﻢُﻬﱠﻧَﺃ ﻯَﺭَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻦْﻴَِﺑ ًﺔَﺼَﻘْﻨَﻣ ِﻦْﻳَﺭﺍﱠﺪﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ ِﻞْﻬَﺠْﻟﺍِﻭَﺫ ﻰِﻔْﻜَﻳ ُﻝَﻼْﺟِﺇَﻭ ٌﺭﻮُﻧ ْﻢِﻫِﺮِﺑﺎَﻘَﻣ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ﺍﻭُﺮِﺒُﻗ ْﻥِﺇَﻭ ٌءﺎَﻴْﺣﺃ ﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍﻮُﻟﻭُﺃ ْﻦِﻜَﻟ ُﻝﺎﱠﺘَﻗ ِﺢﻳﱢﺮﻟﺍ ُﻦْﺘَﻧَﻭ ٍﻑﺎَﺷ ُﺐﻴﱢﻄﻟﺎَﻓ ْﻢُﻬَﺗَﺮﻴِﺳ ِﻥﺎَﺤْﻳﱠﺮﻟﺎَﻛ ﱡﻞُﻜْﻟﺍ ُﻖِﺸْﻨَﺘْﺴَﻳ ُﻝﺎَﻴْﻗَﺃ ِﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍ ُﻞْﻫَﺃَﻭ ﺎَﻳﺎَﻋﱠﺮﻟﺍ ُﻢُﻫ ْﻢُﻫُﺮِﺋﺎَﻃ َﺭﺎَﻃ ﺎَﻤْﻬَﻣ ِﻥْﻮَﻜْﻟﺍ ُﺮِﺑﺎَﻛَﺃ ُﻝﺎَﻤْﺳَﺃ ِﺮْﻫﱠﺪَﻟﺍ ﺍَﺬَﻬِﻟ ْﻢُﻫﺍَﻮِﺳ ْﻦِﻜَﻟ ٌﻞَﻠُﺣ ﻯَﺪَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻝﻮُﻃ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ِﻥﺎَﻣﱠﺰﻠِﻟ ْﻢُﻫ ُﻝَﻼْﻋِﺇ َﺖْﺸﱠﺘَﻓ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ﺎَﻬﻴِﻓ َﺲْﻴَﻠَﻓ ٌﺔَﻤِﻟﺎَﺳ ِﺺْﻘﱠﻨﻟﺍ ِﺏﻮُﻴُﻋ ْﻦِﻣ ْﻢُﻬُﻟﺎَﻌْﻓَﺃ ُﻝﺁ ﻰَﻔَﻄْﺼُﻤْﻟﺍ ﱢﻲِﺒﱠﻨﻟﺍ ِﻦﻳِﺪِﻟ ْﻢُﻫَﻭ ْﺖَﻣْﺯَﺃ ٌﺔَﻣْﺯَﺃ ﺎَﻣ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ُﺙﺎَﻴِﻐْﻟﺍ ُﻢُﻫ ُﻝﻻْﺫِﺇ ﱢﻖَﺤﻟﺍ ﱢﻖَﺣَﻭ ُﻩﺍَﺮَﺘْﻋﺍ َﻻَﻭ ُﻢُﻫُﺮِﺋﺍَﺯ ﺪْﺼَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻡْﻮَﻳ َﺏﺎَﺧ ﺎَﻣ ِﷲﺎِﺑ ُﻝﺎَﻄْﺑَﺃ ِﻦﻳﱢﺪﻟﺍ ِﺮْﺼَﻨِﻟ َﻊﻴِﻤَﺠْﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ ِﻑَﺮَﺷ ﻰِﻓ ﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍ ِﻝﺎَﺟِﺭ ْﻞَﻌْﺟِﺇ ﺎَﻨُﺑَﺭ ﺎَﻳ ُﻝﺎﱠﻌَﻓ ﱢﻞُﻜْﻟﺍ َﻥﻭُﺩ َﻙَﺪْﺣَﻭ َﺖْﻧَﺄَﻓ ٍﺔَﺛِﺭﺎَﻛ ﱠﻞُﻛ ْﺝﱢﺮَﻓَﻭ ٍﺮْﻴَﺨِﺑ ْﻢِﺘْﺧﺍَﻭ 40ARA016 Arabic Reader 4.0 Self Assessment Exercise ﺓَﺪﻴِﺼَﻘﻟﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ ﻰِﻓ ُﺮِﻋﺎﱠﺸﻟﺍ ﺎَﻫَﺮَﻛَﺫ ﻰِﺘﻟﺍ ِﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺕﺎَﻔِﺻ ْﺢﱢﺿَﻭ -١ ِﻊِﺑﺎﱠﺴﻟﺍ ِﺖْﻴَﺒْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻨْﻌَﻣ ْﺮﱢﺴَﻓ -٢ ؟"ُﻝﺎَﻴْﻗَﺃ ِﻢْﻠِﻌﻟﺍ ُﻞْﻫَﺃَﻭ ﺎَﻳﺎَﻋﱠﺮﻟﺍ ُﻢُﻫ" ِﻪِﻟْﻮَﻗ ﻰَﻨْﻌَﻣ ﺎﻣ -٣ 4.0 CONCLUSION The smoothly flowing long or short Arabic expression of ideas, thoughts or intentions devoid of metres or rhyming words are called Nathr (prose).
The gifted or well trained individuals are sometimes emotional thus pouring out their ideas following particular meteric patterns and rhyming words.
Such expressions are said to be shi‘r (poetry).
Examples of this are presented in the lesson above.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit introduces you to prose and poetry in Arabic.
You are provided with interesting examples of both as illustration for your understanding.
Exercises are also given to you to test the extent of your assimilation of the topic of prose and poetry.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT ِﺔَﻠِﺜْﻣَﻷﺍ َﻊَﻣ ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺮْﺜﱠﻨﻟﺍَﻭ ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺮْﻌﱢﺸﻟﺍ َﻦْﻴَﺑ َﻕْﺮَﻔْﻟﺍ ﺎَﻨَﻟ ْﻑﱢﺮَﻋ١ ؟ْﺶِﻗﺎَﻧ "ﺮْﻴَﺨْﻟﺍ ُﺭَﺪْﺼَﻣ ُﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ" ٢ ﺓَﺮﻴِﺼَﻗ ِﻞَﻤُﺟ ﻰِﻓ َﺔَﻴِﻟﺎﱠﺘﻟﺍ َﺮﻴِﺑﺎَﻌﱠﺘﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺕﺎَﻤْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ِﻞِﻤْﻌَﺘْﺳِﺇ٣ ٌﺔَﺋِﺩﺎَﻫ ٌﻞﻴِﻠَﻋ ٌﻢﻴِﺴَﻧ ٌﺔَﺤﻴِﺴَﻓ ُﻉِﺭﺍَﻮَﺷ ﱡﺶِﻘﻟﺍ ُﺪﻳِﺮَﺠْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻕﻮُﺳ ﺎَﻬﻴِﻓ ُﻒِﺼَﺗ ِﺮُﻄْﺳَﺃ َﺔَﺴْﻤَﺧ ْﺐُﺘْﻛُﺍ ٤ ﺎَﻬَﺘْﻈَﻔَﺣ ﺎَﻤَﻛ ِﺕﺎِﻴْﺑَﻷﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ ْﻞِﻤْﻛَﺍ٥ …………………………….
ٌﺮَﺛَﺃ َﻻَﻭ ٌﺮْﻛِﺫَﻻ ِﻞْﻬَﺠْﻟﺍﻭُﺫ ُﺕﻮُﻤَﻳ ُﻝﺎَﻬُﺟ ِﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ ْﻢُﻬﱠﻧَﺃ ﻯَﺭَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻦْﻴَِﺑ ……………………………… ………………………….
ﺍﻭُﺮِﺒُﻗ ْﻥِﺇَﻭ ٌءﺎَﻴْﺣﺃ ﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍﻮُﻟﻭُﺃ ْﻦِﻜَﻟ ُﻝﺎﱠﺘَﻗ ِﺢﻳﱢﺮﻟﺍ ُﻦْﺘَﻧَﻭ ٍﻑﺎَﺷ ُﺐﻴﱢﻄﻟﺎَﻓ ……………………….. 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS.
1.
Muhammad ‘Afīf Az-zabī (ed) (1974).
Dīwān Imām Shāfi ‘ī, Lagos, 2.
Muhammad, B.S; Salim.
H; & Husaynī, A (1979).
A New 41ARA016 Arabic Reader Arabic Course for Nigeria: Pupils Book 4; Lagos, Longmans.
3.
Ibrahim Muhammad Nahās et al (1985/1405).
Al-Qirā’atu wa`l- Mahfūzāt, 6th ed.
Bahrayn.
4.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakῑ Ali, S (1992).
Al-adab wa `t-Tārῑkh fi `l- ‘aşrayn, (sic.
), Cairo.
UNIT 5: THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PROSE AND POETRY WITH EXAMPLES.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Letter writing as an example of Arabic prose 3.2 Story writing as an example of Arabic prose 3.3 Poems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The focus on the last lesson was to differentiate between Arabic prose and Arabic poetry.
Some passages were presented as examples of prose texts while some poems written in meteric and rhyming style were also given as examples of poetry texts.
Further examples of prose and poetry are hereby presented to you in this unit to further explain what constitute Arabic prose and poetry.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit you will be able to 42ARA016 Arabic Reader  read and understand letters written in Arabic language • tell short Arabic stories • compose short Arabic prose 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Letter writing.
Read the following letter written by a child who leaves in the city to his father in the village: ِﻩِﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ِﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻟﺎَﺳِﺭ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ﻮﺑﺎﻣ 33760 .ﺏ.ﺹ ﺎﻳﺮﻴﺠﻴﻧ – ﻥﺩﺎﺑﺇ ﻡ 1995 ﺮﻳﺍﺮﺒﻓ ،2 ، ِﻢﻳِﺮَﻜْﻟﺍ ﻱِﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺔﱠﺤﱢﺼﻟﺎِﺑ َﻚَﻌﱢﺘَﻤُﻳ ْﻥَﺃَﻭ َﻙِﺩﻮُﺟُﻮِﺑ ﺎَﻨَﻣﺎﱠﻳَﺃ َﺐﱢﻴَﻄُﻳ ْﻥَﺃ ﻰَﻟﺎَﻌَﺗ ُﻩﻮُﺟْﺭَﺃَﻭ ، ِﻦْﻴَﺘَﻤﻳِﺮَﻜْﻟﺍ َﻚْﻳَﺪَﻳ ُﻞﱢﺒَﻗُﺃ .ِﺕﺍﱠﺮَﺴَﻤْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٍﺾْﻴَﻔِﺑ ﺎًﻌﻴِﻤَﺟ ْﻢُﻛَﺮِﻤْﻐُﻳ ْﻥَﺃَﻭ ِﺔَﻠِﺋﺎَﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺩﺍَﺮْﻓَﺃ ِﻊﻴِﻤَﺟ َﻊَﻣ ، ِﺔَﻴِﻓﺎَﻌْﻟﺍَﻭ ٌﻡﺎﱠﻳَﺃ ﱠﻻِﺇ ِﺓَﺪﻳِﺪَﺠْﻟﺍ ﻲِﺘَﺳَﺭْﺪَﻤِﺑ ِﻕﺎَﺤِﺘْﻟِﻻْﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ِﺾْﻤَﻳ ﺎﱠﻤَﻟَﻭ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ ﻲِﺘَﻟﺎَﺳِﺭ َﻚْﻴَﻟِﺇ ُﺐُﺘْﻛَﺄَﻓ ِﺔَﺒﻴِﺒَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﺘَﻳْﺮَﻗ ْﻦَﻋَﻭ ْﻢُﻜْﻨَﻋ ٌﺪﻴِﻌَﺑ ﻲِﻨﱠﻧَﺄِﻟ ًﺔَﻤﻴِﻟَﺃَﻭ ًﺔَﻠﻳِﻮَﻃ ﻲِﻟ ﻭُﺪْﺒَﺗ ﺎَﻬِﺘﱠﻠِﻗ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ﺎَﻬﱠﻨِﻜَﻟَﻭ ُﻞِﺋَﻼَﻗ .
ُﺮﱠﺛَﺄَﺘَﻳ ْﺪَﻗَﻭ ، ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ﱢﻮَﺟ ْﻦَﻋ ُﻒِﻠَﺘْﺨَﻳ ِﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤْﻟﺍ ﱠﻮَﺟ ﱠﻥَﺃ ﻲِﻓ – ﻱِﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ﺎَﻳ – ﱠﻚَﺷ َﻻ ِﺚَﺒَﻌْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺕﺍَﻮْﻬﱠﺸﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺪِﺳﺎَﻔَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﺭﺎﱠﻴَﺗ ﻲِﻓ َﻕﺎَﺴْﻨَﻴَﻓ ، ُﻪُﻔَﻟْﺄَﻳ ْﻢَﻟ ﻱِﺬﱠﻟﺍ ﱢﻮَﺠْﻟﺍ ﺍَﺬَﻬِﺑ ﱡﺏﺎﱠﺸﻟﺍ .
ْﻢُﻬُﻓِﺮْﻋَﺃ َﻦﻳِﺬﱠﻟﺍ ِﺏﺎَﺒﱠﺸﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٍﺮﻴِﺜَﻜِﻟ َﻊَﻗَﻭ ﺎَﻤَﻛ ِﻥﻮُﺠُﻤْﻟﺍَﻭ ﺎﻴِﻓَﻭ ﺎًﻨﻴِﻣَﺃ ِﻪِﺑ َﻙِﺪْﻬَﻋ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ﱠﻞَﻇ ْﻞَﺑ ، ِﺔَﻨﻳِﺪَﻤْﻟﺍ ﱡﻮَﺟ ُﻩْﺮﱢﻴَﻐُﻳ ْﻢَﻟ َﻚَﻨْﺑﺍ ﱠﻥَﺄِﺑ ﻱِﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ﺎَﻳ ْﻖِﺛَﻭ .
ﺎَﻬْﻴَﻠَﻋ ﺎَﻨَﺘْﻌَﺒَﻃ ﻲِﺘﱠﻟﺍ ِﻢَﻴِﻘْﻟﺎِﺑ ﺎًﻜﱢﺴَﻤَﺘُﻣ ِﻪِﻘُﻠُﺧَﻭ ِﻪِﺒﻳِﺬْﻬَﺗَﻭ ِﻪِﻛﻮُﻠُﺳ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ﺎًﻈِﻓﺎَﺤُﻣ ﺎَﻨِﻟﻮُﻘُﺣَﻭ ِءﺎَﻄْﻌِﻤْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﺒِﺼَﺨْﻟﺍ ﺎَﻨِﺘَﺑْﺮُﺗ ﻲِﻓ َﻞَﻤَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺖْﻛَﺮَﺗَﻭ َﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘﻟْﺍ ُﺖْﻗَﺭﺎَﻓ ْﻥَﺃ ُﺬْﻨُﻣ ﻲِﻨﱠﻧِﺇ ُﺖْﻨُﻛ ﺎَﻤَﻛَﻭ ، ِﺔَﻓِﺮْﻌَﻤْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﻢْﻠِﻌْﻟﺍ ُﻞْﻘَﺣ َﻮُﻫ ،ِﺮَﺧﺁ ٍﻞْﻘَﺣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺖْﻬَﺠﱠﺗﺍ ، ِﺓَﺮﱢﻴَﺨْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻋﱠﺮَﻤُﻤْﻟﺍ ِﺪﻳِﺪَﺠْﻟﺍ ِﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ﺍَﺬَﻫ ﻲِﻓ ﻱِﺪْﻬُﺟ ﻲِﻓ ﺎَﻣ ﱠﻞُﻛ ُﻝُﺬْﺑَﺃ ﺍَﺬَﻧَﺃﺎﻬَﻓ ﻲِﻣَﺩَﻭ ﻲِﻗَﺮَﻌِﺑ ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ َﺔَﺑْﺮُﺗ ﻲِﻘْﺳَﺃ ﱠﺐُﺣ ٍﻼْﻔِﻃ ُﺖْﻨُﻛ ْﻥَﺃ ُﺬْﻨُﻣ ﱠﻲِﻓ َﺖْﺳَﺮَﻏ َﻚﱠﻧَﺄِﻟ َﻚِﻟَﺫ ،ِﺝﺎَﺘْﻧْﺈِﻟْﺍ َﻞَﻀْﻓَﺃَﻭ ِﺕﺍَﺮَﻤﱠﺜﻟﺍ َﻊَﻨْﻳَﺃ َﻲِﻨْﺟَﺄِﻟ .
ِﻞَﻤَﻌْﻟﺍ ، َﻢﻳِﺮَﻜْﻟﺍ ﻱِﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ْﻢِﻬِﺗَﺭْﺪُﻗَﻭ ِﺓَﺬِﺗﺎَﺳَﻷْﺍ ِﺓَﺭﺎَﻬَﻣَﻭ ِﺞِﻫﺎَﻨَﻤْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺱﻭُﺭﱡﺪﻟﺍ ِﺮْﻴَﺳ ْﻦَﻋ ًﻼﻳِﻮَﻃ َﺙﱠﺪَﺤَﺗَﺃ ْﻥَﺃ ﱡﺩَﻭَﺃ ُﺖْﻨُﻛ ﺎَﻧَﺄَﻓ ، َﻚِﻟَﺫ ﱢﻞُﻜِﻟ ِﺖْﻗَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﺎًﻌَﺴﱠﺘُﻣ ﱠﻱَﺪَﻟ ُﺪِﺟَﺃ َﻻ ﻲﱢﻨِﻜَﻟَﻭ ، ْﻢِﻬِﻠَﻤَﻌِﺑ ِﻡﺎَﻴِﻘْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ْﻢِﻬﻴِﻧﺎَﻔَﺗَﻭ ِﻆْﻔِﺤﻟْﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﻲِﺗﺎَﺒِﺟﺍَﻭ ُﺖْﻤَﻤْﺗَﺃَﻭ ﻲِﻔِﺋﺎَﻇَﻭ َﺔَﺑﺎَﺘِﻛ ُﺕْﺰَﺠْﻧَﺃ ْﻥَﺃ َﺪْﻌَﺑ َﺔَﻟﺎَﺳﱢﺮﻟﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ َﻚْﻴَﻟِﺇ ُﺐُﺘْﻛَﺃ ﺎَﻣ ﱡﻞُﻛَﻭ .
ِﻞْﻴﱠﻠﻟﺍ ِﻒَﺼَﺘْﻨُﻣ َﺪْﻌَﺑ ِﺓَﺪِﺣﺍَﻮْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺮﻴِﺸُﺗ ِﺔَﻋﺎﱠﺴﻟﺍ ﻱِﺫ َﻲِﻫ ﺎَﻫَﻭ ،ِﺭﺎَﻛْﺬِﺘْﺳِﻹْﺍَﻭ ﺎًﻗْﻮَﺷ ِﻱِﺭْﺪَﺻ ﻲِﻓ ُﺐﱠﺛَﻮَﺘَﺗ ﻲِﺘﱠﻟﺍ ِﺐْﻠَﻘﻟْﺍ ﺍَﺬَﻫ ِﻥﺎَﻘَﻔَﺧَﻭ ،ِﻢَﻠَﻘﻟْﺍ ﺍَﺬَﻫ َﺮﻳِﺮَﺻ َﻼَﺧ ُﻦِﻛﺎَﺳ ﻲِﻟْﻮَﺣ 43ARA016 Arabic Reader ، ﻱِﺩﺍَﺆُﻓ ﻯَﻮْﻬَﻣَﻭ ﻲِﺘَﻟﻮُﻔُﻃ َﻊَﺗْﺮَﻣ ِﺔَﺒﻴِﺒَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﺘَﻳْﺮَﻗ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ﺎًﻔﱡﻬَﻠَﺗَﻭ ،ِﺏﺎَﺒْﺣَﻷْﺍَﻭ ِﻞْﻫَﻷْﺍ ِءﺎَﻘِﻟ ﻰَﻟِﺇ َﻥﻮُﺘْﻔَﻣ ﻲِﻨﱠﻧِﺈَﻓ ُﻕﺍَﺮِﻔْﻟﺍ ﱠﺪَﺘْﻣﺍَﻭ ُﺪْﻌُﺒْﻟﺍ َﻝﺎَﻃ ﺎَﻤْﻬَﻣَﻭ ،ﺎَﻫﺍَﻮِﺳ ٍﺽْﺭَﺃ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ﱡﻦِﺣَﺃ َﻻ ﻲِﺘﱠﻟﺍ ﻲِﺘَﻳْﺮَﻗ .ﺎَﻬِﻠْﻫَﺃ ِﺓ َءﺍَﺮَﺑَﻭ ﺎَﻬِﻟﺎَﻤَﺟ ِﺔَﻋْﻭَﺭَﻭ ﺎَﻫِﺮْﺤِﺳ ِﻢِﻟﺎَﻌَﻤِﺑ ِﻊْﻗَﻭ ْﻦِﻣ ُﻒﱢﻔَﺨُﻳ َﻼَﻓ ، ﻲِﺴْﻔَﻧ ُﺡﺎَﺘْﺠَﺗ ٍﺔَﺸْﺣَﻮِﺑ ِﺕﺍﱠﺬﻟﺎِﺑ ِﺔَﻋﺎﱠﺴﻟﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ ﻲِﻓ ُﺮُﻌْﺷَﺃ ﻲِﻨﱠﻧِﺇ ِﺔﱠﻴِﻠِﺋﺎَﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺓﺎَﻴَﺤْﻟﺎِﺑ ِﻊﱡﺘَﻤﱠﺘﻟﺍَﻭ ، ﺎًﻌﻴِﻤَﺟ ﻲِﺗَﻮْﺧِﺇَﻭ ﻲِﺗَﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ َﻊَﻣ ْﻢُﻜِﺋﺎَﻘِﻟ ِﺏْﺮُﻘِﺑ ُﻞَﻣَﻷْﺍ ﱠﻻِﺇ ﺎَﻬِﻤَﻟَﺃ .
ِﺏﺍَﺮِﺘْﻏِﻹْﺍ ِءﺎَﻘَﺷَﻭ ِﺔَﻗْﺮُﻔﻟْﺍ َﺓَﺭﺍَﺮَﻣ َﻕﻭُﺫَﺃ ْﻥَﺃ َﻥﻭُﺩ ﺎَﻫﺎَﻴْﺣَﺃ ُﺖْﻨُﻛ ﻲِﺘﱠﻟﺍ ِﺓَﺪﻴِﻌﱠﺴﻟﺍ ، َﻚﱢﻨَﻇ ِﻦْﺴُﺣ َﺪْﻨِﻋ َﻥﻮُﻛَﺃ ْﻥَﺃَﻭ َﻚِﺋﺎَﻋُﺩَﻭ َﻙﺎَﺿِﺮِﺑ َﺯﻮُﻓَﺃ ْﻥَﺃ ﻮُﺟْﺭَﺃ ، ﺎًﻣﺎَﺘِﺧَﻭ ْﻦَﻤِﻟ ﺍﻮُﻤﱢﻠَﺳَﻭ ، ِءﺍﱠﺰِﻋَﻷْﺍ ﻲِﺗﺍَﻮْﺧَﺃَﻭ ﻲِﺗَﻮْﺧِﺇَﻭ ِﺔَﻤﻳِﺮَﻜْﻟﺍ ﻲِﺗَﺪِﻟﺍَﻮِﻟَﻭ َﻚَﻟ ِﺔَﺼِﻟﺎَﺨْﻟﺍ ﻲِﺗﺎﱠﻴِﺤَﺗَﻭ .
ْﻢُﻛﺎَﺴْﻨَﻳ َﻻ ﻲﻓﻮﻟﺍ ﻢﻛﺪﻟﻭ ﻲﺤﻳ ﻲﻟﻭﻭﻻﻮﻛ ﺪﻴﻌﺳ 3.2 Story writing: Read the following story for your understanding: ِﺚْﻳِﺪَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻗْﺮَﺳ :ﺺﻨﻟﺍ َﻊﱠﻤَﺴَﺘَﺗ َﻻ :ُﻪَﻟ ْﺖَﻟﺎَﻗَﻭ ُﻪﱡﻣُﺃ ُﻪْﺗَﺃَﺮَﻓ ,ْﻢُﻬَﺜْﻳِﺪَﺣ َﻊَﻤَﺴَﺘَﻳ ِﻪِﻧﺍَﺮْﻴِﺟ ِﺏﺎَﺑ َءﺍَﺭَﻭ َﻒِﻘَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ ُﻢْﻴِﻠَﺳ َﺩﺎَﺘْﻋِﺇ ﻲَﻟِﺇ ُﻢْﻴِﻠَﺳ ِﻎْﺼُﻳ ْﻢَﻠَﻓ .ِﻉﺎَﺘَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻗْﺮَﺴَﻛ ٌﺔَﺤْﻴِﺒَﻗ ٌﺓَﺩﺎَﻋ ِﺚْﻳِﺪَﺤْﻟﺍ َﺔَﻗْﺮَﺳ ﱠﻥِﺈَﻓ ﱠﻲَﻨُﺑ ﺎَﻳ ِﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ َﺚْﻳِﺪَﺣ ُﺐِﺣﺎَﺻ ُﻩَﺪَﻫﺎَﺸَﻓ .ُﻩَءﺍَﺭَﻭ َﻒَﻗَﻮَﻓ ﺎًﻘَﻠْﻐُﻣ ِﻥﺍَﺮْﻴِﺠْﻟﺍ َﺏﺎَﺑ ﻱَﺃَﺭ ٍﺔَﻠْﻴَﻟ َﺕﺍَﺫ ﻲِﻓَﻭ .ِﻪﱢﻣُﺃ ِﺔَﺤْﻴِﺼَﻧ ,ِﻢَﻟَﺄْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ َﺥَﺮَﺼَﻓ .ِﻪِﺳْﺃَﺭ ْﻦِﻣ ُﻡﱠﺪﻟﺍ ِﺖَﻟﺎَﺳَﺃ ًﺔَﺑْﺮَﺿ ﺎَﺼَﻌْﻟﺎِﺑ ُﻪَﺑَﺮَﻀَﻓ ﺎًﻗِﺭﺎَﺳ ُﻪﱠﻨَﻇَﻭ ِﺖْﻴَﺒْﻟﺍ .ِﻪْﻴَﻟِﺇ ْﺖَﻋَﺮْﺳَﺄَﻓ ُﻪُﻣُﺃ ُﻪَﻌِﻤَﺳَﻭ .ﻱَﺮْﺧُﺃ ًﺓﱠﺮَﻣ ِﻞَﻤَﻌْﻟﺍ ﺍَﺬَﻫ ِﻞْﺜِﻣ ﻲَﻟِﺇ ْﺪُﻌَﺗ َﻼَﻓ َﻚَﺋﺍَﺰَﺟ َﺖْﻠِﻧ ْﺪَﻘَﻟ :ُﻪُﻣُﺃ ُﻪَﻟ ْﺖَﻟﺎَﻗَﻭ ُﺮْﻴِﻐﱠﺼﻟﺍ ُﻢِﻠْﺴُﻤْﻟَﺃ :ُﺺﱠﻨﻟَﺃ ﺍًﺪﱠﻤَﺤُﻣ ﺎَﻨﱠﻴِﺒَﻧ ﱡﺐِﺣُﺃَﻭ .ٍءْﻲَﺷ ﱠﻞُﻛ َﻖَﻠَﺧَﻭ ﻲِﻨَﻘَﻠَﺧ ُﻪﱠﻧَﺄِﻟ َﻪّﻠﻟﺍ ﱡﺐِﺣُﺃ ,ٌﺮْﻴِﻐَﺻ ٌﻢِﻠْﺴُﻣ ﺎَﻧًﺃ ﺍًﺮْﻳِﺬَﻧَﻭ ﺍًﺮﱢﺸَﺒُﻣَﻭ ًﺔَﻤْﺣَﺭَﻭ ﻱًﺪُﻫ ِﻪّﻠﻟﺍ ِﺪْﻨِﻋ ْﻦِﻣ ُﺙْﻮُﻌْﺒَﻤْﻟَﺍ ,َﻢﱠﻠَﺳَﻭ ِﻪْﻴَﻠَﻋ ُﻪّﻠﻟﺍ ﻲﱠﻠَﺻ .َﻦْﻴِﻤَﻟﺎَﻌْﻠِﻟ ُﺪَﻬُﺷَﺃَﻭ ُﻪَﻟ َﻚْﻳِﺮَﺷ َﻻ ,ٌﺪِﺣﺍَﻭ ُﻪﱠﻧَﺃ ُﺪَﻬْﺷَﺃ .ِﻪِﺗﺎَﻔِﺻَﻭ ِﻪِﺋﺎَﻤْﺳَﺄِﺑ َﻮُﻫ ﺎَﻤَﻛ ِﻪﱠﻠﻟﺎِﺑ ُﺖْﻨَﻣﺁ ﺍًﺪﱠﻤَﺤُﻣ ﱠﻥَﺃ .ُﻪُﻟْﻮُﺳَﺭَﻭ ُﻩُﺪْﺒَﻋ All that are given above are examples of Arabic prose.
They also include long and short sentences like the ones below.
Simple questions and answers also fall under the category of prose.
44ARA016 Arabic Reader :ﻮﺤﻧ ِﺔَﻴِﻓﺎَﻘْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﻥْﺯَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ُﺔَﻴِﻟﺎَﺨْﻟﺍ ُﺭﺎَﻜْﻓَﻷﺍ َﻮُﻫ ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺮْﺜﱠﻨﻟﺍ ِﺐَﺘْﻜَﻤْﻟﺍ َﻡﺎَﻣَﺃ ٌﺲِﻟﺎَﺟ ﻢﻴِﻫﺍَﺮْﺑِﺇ ﻮُﺑَﺃ -1 َﺓَﺪﻳِﺮَﺠْﻟﺍ َﺃَﺮْﻘَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ ُﻢﻴِﻫﺍَﺮْﺑِﺇ ُﻝِﻭﺎَﺤُﻳ -2 ِﻪﻴِﺑَﺃ َﻞْﺜِﻣ َﻥﻮُﻜَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ ُﻢﻴِﻫﺍَﺮْﺑِﺇ ﺐِﺤُﻳ -3 ِﻩِﺪَﻳ ﻲِﻓ َﻢَﻠَﻘْﻟﺍ ُﻚِﺴْﻤَﻳ ُﻢﻴِﻫﺍَﺮْﺑِﺇ َﻥﺎَﻛ -4 ﱢﻲِﺸَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ُﻩﺎَﺑَﺃ ُﺪﱢﻠَﻘُﻳ َﻢﻴِﻫﺍَﺮْﺑِﺇ ﱠﻥِﺇ -5 ﺎًﺳِﺪْﻨَﻬُﻣ َﻥﻮُﻛَﺃ ْﻥَﺃ ﻮُﺟْﺭَﺃ -6 Self-Assessment Exercise 1 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ ؟ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺮْﺜﱠﻨﻟﺍ َﻰﻨْﻌَﻣ ﺎَﻣ Fill in each of the following blanks with a suitable expression from those in brackets.
(َﻥﻮُﻜَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ- َﻲِﺸْﻤَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ, َﺪﱢﻠَﻘُﻳ ْﻥَﺃ, َﺲِﺒْﻠَﺗ ْﻥًﺃ, َﻡﻮُﻘَﺗ ْﻥَﺃ) ﻥﺎَﺴْﻧِﻹﺍ .................. ﱡﺐِﺤُﻳ ُﺩْﺮِﻘْﻟَﺍ -1 ِﺱﱢﺭَﺪُﻤْﻟﺍ َﻞْﺜِﻣ ............... ُﺬﻴِﻤْﻠﱠﺘﻟﺍ ُﻝِﻭﺎَﺤُﻳ -2 ............ُﻝِﻭﺎَﺤُﻳ ﱠﻢُﺛ ِﺽْﺭﻷﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ُﻊَﻘَﺗ ُﺖْﻨِﺒْﻟَﺍ -3 ﺎَﻬﱢﻣُﺃ َءﺍَﺬِﺣ ..........ُﺪﻳِﺮُﺗ ُﺓَﺮﻴِﻐﱠﺼﻟﺍ ﻲِﺘْﺧُﺃ -4 .ِﺪﻳِﺮَﺒْﻟﺍ ِﺐَﺘْﻜَﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ..............ﱡﺐِﺤُﻳ َﻮُﻫ -5 On the other hand, some verses are also presented below to show what Arabic poetry looks like.
Poetry is the art of writing poem.
That is a type of writing set out in lines which usually have a regular rhythm and often rhyme.
Following are examples of Arabic poetry: 3.3 Poems ﻞَﺴَﻜْﻟﺎِﺑ َءْﺮَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻯِﺮْﻐُﻳَﻭ ﻰِﻟﺎَﻌَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻦـَﻋ ** ًﻪـَﺒِﺣﺎَﺻ ﱢﻢـَﻫ ﻰِﻨْﺜُﻳ ِﺔَﻣَﻼﱠﺴﻟﺍ ﱢﺐـُﺣ ْﻝِﺰَﺘْﻋﺎَﻓ ﱢﻮَﺠْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﺎَﻤﱠﻠُﺳْﻭَﺃ ِﺽْﺭَﻷﺍ ﻲِﻓ ** ﺎًﻘـَﻔـَﻧ ْﺬِﺨـﱠﺗﺎَﻓ ِﻪْﻴَﻟِﺇ َﺖْﺤَﻨَﺟ ْﻥِﺈـَﻓ ِﻞَﻟﱠﺬﻟﺍ ِﻖَﻨْﻳَﻷﺍ ِﻢﻴِﺳَﺭ َﺪْﻨـِﻋ ﱡﺰـِﻌـْﻟﺍَﻭ **ًﺔـَﻨَﻜْﺴَﻣ ِﺶْﻴَﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺾْﻔَﺨِﺑ َﻞﻴِﻟﱠﺬﻟﺍ ﻰَﺿْﺮَﻳ ِﻞْﻘﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﱠﺰِﻌْﻟﺍ ﱠﻥَﺃ َﺙﱠﺪَﺤـَﺗ ﺎَﻤﻴـِﻓ ** ٌﺔَﻗِﺩﺎَﺻ َﻲْﻫَﻭ ﻰﻨْﺘَﺛﱠﺪـَﺣ َﻼُﻌـْﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ 45ARA016 Arabic Reader َﺓَﺭﺍَﺩ ﺎًﻣْﻮَﻳ ُﺲْﻤﱠﺸﻟﺍ ِﺡَﺮْﺒَﺗ ﻢـَﻟ **ﻰَﻨُﻣ ُﻍﻮُﻠُﺑ ﻯَﻭْﺄَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻑَﺮَﺷ ﻲِﻓ َﻥﺎَﻛ ْﻮَﻟ ِﻞَﻤَﺤْﻟﺍ ﺎﻫﺎﻨﻌﻣ : ﺔﻤﻠﻛ ﺰﻌﻟﺍ : ّﻢﻬﻟﺍ ﻪﻌﻟﻮ ﻳ : ءﺮﻤﻟﺍ ﻯﺮﻐﻳ ِﻲْﺸَﻤْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٌﺏْﺮَﺿ : ُﻢﻴِﺳﱠﺮﻟﺍ ِﻝﺎَﻘِﺘْﻧﻻﺍ ﻰَﻨْﻌَﻤِﺑ : ُﻞْﻘﱠﻨﻟﺍ ِﺲْﻤﱠﺸﻟﺍ ِﺝﻭُﺮُﺑ ُﺪْﺣ َﺃ : ِﻞْﻤَﺤْﻟﺍ َﺓَﺭﺍَﺩ Self Assessment Exercise 2 ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ :َﻖَﺒَﺳ ﺎَﻤَﻛ ِﺺﱠﻨﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﱞﻂَﺧ ﺎَﻬِﺘْﺤَﺗ ٍﺔَﻤِﻠَﻛ ﱢﻞُﻛ َﻝَﺪَﺑ ًﺔَﻤْﻠَﻛ ِﺕﺎَﻫ -1 ِﻞْﻤَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﺓَﺭﺍَﺩ -ِﻞْﻘﱠﻨﻟﺍ -ُﻢﻴِﺳَﺭ -ُءْﺮَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻱِﺮْﻐُﻳ -ْﻢُﻫ ﺎَﻬَﺘْﻈَﻔَﺣ ﺎَﻤَﻛ ِﺕﺎِﻴْﺑَﻷﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ ْﻞِﻤْﻛَﺍ -2 ................................. ** ِﻪِﺒِﺣﺎـَﺻ ﱠﻢَﻫ ِﻰﻨـْﺜُﻳ ِﺔَﻣَﻼﱠﺴﻟﺍ ﱡﺐـُﺣ ْﻝِﺰَﺘْﻋ ﺎَﻓ ﱢﻮَﺠْﻟَﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﺎَﻤﱠﻠُﺳ ْﻭَﺃ ِﺽْﺭَﻷﺍ ﻲِﻓ **................................... .................................... **.................................... ِﻞْﻘﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﱠﺰِﻌـْﻟﺍ ﱠﻥَﺃ َﺙﱠﺪَﺤـَﺗ ﺎَﻤﻴـِﻓ ** ﺔﻗﺩﺎﺻ ﻲـﻫﻭ ﻰﻨِـْﺘَﺛﱠﺪَﺣ َﻼُﻌـْﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ .................................... **ﻰَﻨُﻣ ُﻍﻮُﻠُﺑ ﻯَﻭْﺄَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻑَﺮَﺷ ﻲِﻓ َﻥﺎَﻛ ْﻮَﻟ 4.0 CONCLUSION We have provided for you in this unit the difference between Arabic prose and poetry with texts for reading and understanding.
You could see that Arabic prose is a sort of writing which is not in verse.
It is just an ordinary writing which does not follow any special arrangement both in writing and reading.
Arabic letter writing, stories, or reports are examples of prose writing.
On the other hand, some verses are also presented in the lesson to show what Arabic poetry looks like.
Poetry is the art of writing poem.
That is a type of writing set out in lines which usually have a regular rhythm and often rhyme.
5.0 SUMMARY 46ARA016 Arabic Reader This unit was focused on the Arabic prose and poetry giving you good examples on how to differentiate between the two.
Some prose writings in the form of letter writing, stories, reports etc are given to acquaint students with the theme of the lesson.
More so, some poems written in verses were also given to educate the students.
At the end, some exercises were given to test the students on their level of comprehension of the differences between Arabic prose and poetry.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1- Explain with examples the difference between Arabic poetry and Arabic prose.
ِﺔَﻠِﺜْﻣَﻷﺍ َﻊَﻣ ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺮْﺜﱠﻨﻟﺍَﻭ ﻲِﺑَﺮَﻌْﻟﺍ ِﺮْﻌﱢﺸﻟﺍ َﻦْﻴَﺑ َﻕْﺮَﻔْﻟﺍ ﺎَﻨَﻟ ْﻑﱢﺮَﻋ 2- Fill in each of the following spaces with a suitable expression from those in Brackets.
:ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻏﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ ﻸْﻣِﺍ (َﻥﻮُﻜَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ, َﻲِﺸْﻤَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ, َﺪﱢﻠُﻘُﻳ ْﻥَﺃ, َﺲِﺒْﻠَﺗ ْﻥَﺃ ,َﻡﻮُﻘَﺗ ْﻥَﺃ ) ﻥﺎَﺴْﻧِﻹﺍ ............. ﱡﺐِﺤُﻳ ُﺩْﺮِﻘْﻟَﺍ -1 ِﺱﱢﺭَﺪُﻤْﻟﺍ َﻞْﺜِﻣ ................ ُﺬﻴِﻤْﻠﱢﺘﻟﺍ ُﻝِﻭﺎَﺤُﻳ -2 ...........ُﻝِﻭﺎَﺤُﻳ ﱠﻢُﺛ ِﺽْﺭَﻷﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ُﻊَﻘَﺗ ُﺖْﻨِﺒْﻟَﺍ -3 .ﺎَﻬﱢﻣُﺃ َءﺍَﺬِﺣ .................. ُﺪﻳِﺮُﺗ ُﺓَﺮﻴِﻐﱠﺼﻟﺍ ﻰِﺘْﺧُﺃ -4 ِﺪﻳِﺮَﺒْﻟﺍ ِﺐَﺘْﻜَﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ...................... ﱡﺐِﺤُﻳ َﻮُﻫ -5 3.
Use each of the following words in sentences.
ُﻊَﻘَﺗ – ُﻝِﻭﺎَﺤُﻳ- ُﻥﻮُﻜَﻳ – ﻮُﺟْﺭَﺃ- ُﻞْﺜِﻣ َﻖَﺒَﺳ ﺎَﻤَﻛ ِﺺﱠﻨﻟﺍ ْﻦِﻣ ﱢﻂَﺧ ﺎَﻬَﺘْﺤَﺗ ٍﺔَﻤْﻠَﻛ ِﻝَﺪَﺑ ًﺔَﻤْﻠَﻛ ِﺕﺎَﻫ -6 ﺎَﻬَﺘْﻈَﻔَﺣ ﺎَﻤَﻛ ِﺕﺎَﻴْﺑَﻷﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ ْﻞِﻤْﻛَﺍ -7 ................................. ** ِﻪِﺒِﺣﺎـَﺻ ﱠﻢَﻫ ِﻰﻨـْﺜُﻳ ِﺔَﻣَﻼﱠﺴﻟﺍ ﱡﺐـُﺣ ْﻝِﺰَﺘْﻋ ﺎَﻓ ﱢﻮَﺠْﻟَﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﺎَﻤﱠﻠُﺳ ْﻭَﺃ ِﺽْﺭَﻷﺍ ﻲِﻓ **................................... .................................... **................................... ِﻞْﻘﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﱠﺰِﻌـْﻟﺍ ﱠﻥَﺃ َﺙﱠﺪَﺤـَﺗ ﺎَﻤﻴـِﻓ ** ﺔﻗﺩﺎﺻ ﻲـﻫﻭ ﻰﻨِـْﺘَﺛﱠﺪَﺣ َﻼُﻌـْﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ .................................... **ﻰَﻨُﻣ ُﻍﻮُﻠُﺑ ﻯَﻭْﺄَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻑَﺮَﺷ ﻲِﻓ َﻥﺎَﻛ ْﻮَﻟ 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS.
1.
Muhammad ‘Afīf Az-zu‘by (Ed) (1974).
Dīwān Al-Imām Ash-shāf’i.
47ARA016 Arabic Reader Lagos, Nigeria.
2.
Muhammad, B.S; Salim.
H; & Hussainy, A.
(1979).
A New Arabic Course For Nigeria: Pupils Book 4, Lagos.
Longman Nigeria.
3.
Ibrahim Muhammad Nuhaas & Co. (1985/1405).
Al-Qirā’atu wal- mahfūzāt, 6th ed.
Bahrayn.
4.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakī Ali, S (1992).
Al-adab wa `t-Tārīkh fi `l-‘aşrayn…, (sic.
), Cairo.
MODULE 2 UNIT 1: READING AND WRITING ABILITY OF FULLY VOCALIZED SHORT ARABIC PROSE TEXTS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 ﺏﺍّﺬﻜﻟﺍ ﺪﻟﻮﻟﺍ 3.2 ﻡﻥﺯﻝﻥﺍ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 48ARA016 Arabic Reader During the last lesson, you came across letter writing, stories, speech and poems written to explain further on Arabic prose and poetry.
In this unit you shall learn how to read and write fully vocalized short Arabic prose texts.
A set of short vocalized Arabic texts are presented to you for reading and understanding.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit you should be able to read and write fully vocalized short Arabic prose texts perfectly.
You should be able to formulate some simple Arabic sentences with full vocalization.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Reading and writing of fully vocalized short Arabic prose texts TEXT 1 ﺏﺍّﺬﻜﻟﺍ ﺪﻟﻮﻟﺍ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓَﻭ.
ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٍﺐﻳِﺮَﻗ ٍﻥﺎَﻜَﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ﺎَﻬِﺑ َﺝَﺮَﺨَﻓ ،ُﻪَﻤَﻨَﻏ ﻰَﻋْﺮَﻳ ٌﺪَﻟَﻭ َﻥﺎَﻛ : " ِﻪِﺗْﻮَﺻ ﻰَﻠْﻋَﺄِﺑ َﺡﺎَﺼَﻓ ِﺔَﻳِﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ِﻞْﻫَﺃ ﻰَﻠَﻋ َﻚَﺤْﻀَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ َﺩﺍَﺭَﺃ ِﻡﺎﱠﻳَﻷﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٍﻡْﻮَﻳ ﺍﻭُﺪَﺟَﻭ ﺎَﻤَﻓ ِﻪِﺗَﺪْﺠَﻨِﻟ ِﺔَﻳِﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ُﻞْﻫَﺃ َﺝَﺮَﺨَﻓ "!
َﺓَﺪْﺠﱠﻨﻟﺍ !َﺓَﺪْﺠﱠﻨﻟَﺍ !
َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ !َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ َﺡَﺮَﺟَﻭ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﺏَﺮَﻬَﻓ ُﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ َءﺎَﺟ ﻲِﻧﺎﱠﺜﻟﺍ ِﻡْﻮَﻴْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓَﻭ .ْﻢِﻬْﻴَﻠَﻋ َﻚِﺤَﻀَﻓ َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ !َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ " ِﻪِﺗْﻮَﺻ ﻰَﻠْﻋَﺄِﺑ َﺡﺎَﺻَﻭ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻜَﺑَﻭ ،ِﻢَﻨَﻐْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﺍًﺮﻴِﺒَﻛ ﺍًﺩَﺪَﻋ ُﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ ِﺓَﺮَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ َﺏَﺬَﻛ ُﻪﱠﻧَﻷ ِِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٌﺪْﺣَﺃ ْﺝُﺮْﺨَﻳ ْﻢَﻠَﻓ !
َﺓَﺪْﺠﱠﻨﻟَﺍ !َﺓَﺪْﺠﱠﻨﻟَﺍ !َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ .ِﺔَﻴِﻧﺎﱠﺜﻟﺍ ِﺓَﺮَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ٌﺪْﺣَﺃ ُﻪْﻗﱢﺪَﺼُﻳ ْﻢَﻠَﻓ ﻰَﻟﻭُﻷﺍ ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ ؟ِﻪِﻤَﻨَﻏ َﻊَﻣ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﺝَﺮَﺧ َﻦْﻳَﺃ ﻲَﻟِﺇ -١ ؟ِﺔَﻳِﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ِﻞْﻫَﺃ ﻲَﻠَﻋ َﻚَﺤْﻀَﻴِﻟ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻞَﻌَﻓ ﺍَﺫ ﺎَﻣ -٢ ؟َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻳِﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻞْﻫَﺃ ﺍﻭُﺪَﺟَﻭ ْﻞَﻫ -٣ ؟ﻲِﻧﺎﱠﺜﻟﺍ ِﻡْﻮَﻳ ﻲِﻓ ِﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ﻲَﻟِﺇ ٌﺪْﺣَﺃ َﺝَﺮَﺧ ْﻞَﻫ -٤ .ِﺔﱠﺼِﻘْﻟﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻬِﻟ َﺐَﺳﺎَﻨُﻤْﻟﺍ َﻉْﻮُﺿْﻮَﻤْﻟﺍ ْﻥﱢﻮَﻛ -٥ ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 2 ﺎَﻨُﻟِﺰْﻨَﻣ 49ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻲِﻘﱠﺘَﻳَﻭ ،ِﻝﺎَﻤْﻋَﻷﺍ ِءﺎَﻨَﻋ ْﻦِﻣ َﺢﻳِﺮَﺘْﺴَِﻴﻟ ِﻪْﻴَﻟِﺍ ﻯِﻭﺄَﻳَﻭ ُﻥﺎَﺴْﻧﻹﺍ ِﻪﻴِﻓ ُﻦُﻜٍْﺴَﻳ ٌﻞَﺤَﻣ ِﻝْﺰَﻨْﻤﻟﺍ ْﻥَﺃ ٌﺪْﺣَﺃ َﺩﺍَﺭَﺃ ﺍَﺫﺇ ،ٌﻞِﻴَﻤﺟ ﱞﻲِﺤِﺻ ٌﻝِﺰْﻨَﻣ ﺎَﻨُﻟِﺰْﻨَﻣ ،ﺎًﻔْﻴَﺻ ِﺓَﺭَﺍﺮْﺤﻟﺍَﻭ ًءﺎَﺘِﺷ ِﺩْﺮَﺒْﻟﺍ َﻞِﺋﺍَﻮَﻏ ِﺔَﻌْﻄِﻗ ﻰِﻓ َﻢﻴِﻤْﺼَﱠﺘْﻟﺍ َﻢﻴِﻘُﻴِﻟ َﻉِﺭﺎَﺒْﻟﺍ َﺱِﺪْﻨَﻬُﻤْﻟﺍ َﺐُﻠْﻄَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ ُﻪَﻟ ﱠﺪُﺑ َﻼَﻓ َﻝِﺰْﻨَﻤْﻟﺍ َﻰِﻨْﺒَﻳ ﻰﱠﺘَﺣ ،ﺎًﺌْﻴَﺸَﻓ ﺎًﺌْﻴَﺷ ِﻪِﺋﺎَﻨِﺑ ﻰِﻓ ﱠﺮِﻤَﺘْﺴَﻳَﻭ َﺰِﺋﺎَﻛﱠﺮﻟﺍ َﻢﻴِﻘُﻳﻭ َﺲُﺳﺄْﻟﺍ َﺮِﻔْﺤَﻳ ﱠﻢُﺛ ،ِﻪِﺿْﺭَﺃ ﻰِﻓَﻭ .ًﻼﻴِﻤَﺟ ًﻻِﺰْﻨَﻣ َﺮﻴِﺼَﻳَﻭ َﻲِﻬَﺘْﻨَﻳ ﻮُﻳِﺩﺍﱠﺮﻟﺍ ُﺯﺎَﻬﺟ ﺎَﻤِﻬْﻴَﻠَﻋ ِﻥﺎَﺗَﺪَﻀْﻨِﻣ ﺎَﻬﻴِﻓ َﻥﺎَﻛَﻭ ،ِﻥﺎَﺘَﻧﺍَﺰِﺧَﻭ ِﻥﺍَﺮﻳِﺮَﺳ ﺎَﻨِﻟِﺰْﻨَﻣ ِﺔَﻓْﺮُﻏ ُﺮُﻌْﺸَﻧ ،ِﻒِﺗﺎَﻬْﻟﺍَﻭ ﺎَﻧُﺪِﻟﺍﻭ ِﻪﻴِﻓ ُﻞِﺒِﻘَﺘْﺴَﻳ ﻯِﺬﱠﻟﺍ ُﺲِﻠْﺠَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻙﺎَﻨُﻫَﻭ ،ِﻥﺎَﻣﺄْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺭﻭُﺮﱡﺴﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺔَﺠْﻬَﺒْﻟﺎِﺑ ﺎَﻨِﻟِﺰْﻨَﻣ ْﻲِﻓ ُﺕﺍَﻭَﺩَﺃ ِﻥﺍَﻮُﺨْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋَﻭ ،ٍﻥﺍَﻮُﺧ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ﻯَِﻮْﺘَﺤﺗ ﻰِﱠﺘﻟﺍ َﺎﻨِﻣﺎَﻌَﻃ ﺔَﻓْﺮُﻏ َﻙﺎَﻨُﻫَﻭ ،ُﻪَﻓﻮُﻴُﺿ ﺎَﻬِﺒِﻧﺎَﺟ ﻰَﻟِﺇَﻭ ،َﻦﻴِﻛﺎَﻜَﺳَﻭ َﻂِﻗﻼَﻣَﻭ َﻖِﻋﻼَﻣَﻭ َﺮﻳِﺭﺍَﻮَﻗَﻭ ٍﺏﺍَﻮْﻛَﺃَﻭ ٍﻕﺎًﺒْﻃَﺃ ْﻦِﻣ ِﻞْﻛَﻷﺍ .َﻑﻮُﻴﱡﻀﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺭﺍّﻭﺰﻟﺍ ﺎَﻬﻴِﻓ ُﻞِﺒْﻘَﺘْﺴَﻧ ﻰِﺘَﻟﺍ َﻰِﻫَﻭ ِﻝﺎَﺒْﻘِﺘْﺳًﻺِﻟ ٌﺔَﻓْﺮُﻏ ﱠُﻢﺛ ِﻡْﻮَّﻨﻟﺍ ُﺔَﻓْﺮُﻏ ﺲِْﻤﱠﺸﻟﺍ ِﺔﱠﻌِﺷَﻷَﻭ ﱢﻰﻔْﺨﻟﺍ ءِﺍَﻮَﻬْﻠِﻟ ُﺢَﻤْﺴَﺗ ُﺪِﻓﺍَﻮَﻧِﻭ ُﺝُﺮْﺨَﻧَﻭ ﺎَﻬْﻨِﻣ ُﻞُﺧْﺪَﻧ ٌﺏﺍَﻮْﺑَﺃ ِﻝِﺰْﻨَﻤِﻠِﻟ ﺎَﻤُﻬُﺤَﺘْﻔَﻧ ِﻥﺎَﻋﺍَﺮْﺼِﻣ ﺎَﻬْﻨِﻣ ٍﺪِﺣﺍَﻭ ِّﻞُﻜِﻟ ٌﻊﻳِﺭﺎَﺼَﻣ ِﺬِﻓﺍَﻮﱠﻨﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺏﺍَﻮْﺑَﻷﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻬِﻟَﻭ ِﻝﻮُﺧﱡﺪﻟﺎِﺑ .َﻚِﻟَﺫ ﻰَﻟِﺍ ًﺔَﺟﺎَﺣ ﺎَﻧْﺪَﺟَﻭ ﺎَﻤﱠﻠُﻛ ﺎَﻤُﻬُﻘِﻠْﻐُﻧَﻭ ﺎَﻣ ،ٌﺐﻴِﺒَﺣ ِﻪﻴِﻓ ِﻪْﺟَﻭ ﱡﻞُﻛ ٌﻞِﻴَﻤﺟ ِﻝْﺰَﻨْﻤﻟﺍ ﻰِﻓ ٍءْﻲَﺷ ﱡﻞُﻛ ،ﺎَﻨُﺒَﻌْﻠَﻣ ِﻝِﺰَْﻨْﻤﻟﺍ ِءﺎَﻨِﻓ ﻰِﻓَﻭ .ُﻩﻼْﺣَﺃَﻭ َﻝِﺰْﻨَﻤﻟﺍ َﻦَﺴْﺣَﺃ Exercises ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ -ﺃ ؟ﻝِﺰْﻨَﻤﻟﺍ َﻮُﻫ ﺎَﻣ -١ ؟ُﺱِﺪْﻨَﻬُﻤﻟﺍ ُﻞَﻌْﻔَﻳ ﺍَﺫ ﺎَﻣ -٢ ؟َﻚِﻟِﺰْﻨَﻣ ﻰِﻓ ُﺮﻌﺸﺗ ٍءْﻲَﺷ ِﻱَﺄِﺑ -٣ ؟ﻚِﻟِﺰْﻨَﻣ ﻰِﻓ ًﺔَﻓْﺮُﻏ ْﻢَﻛ -٤ ؟ﺎﻬْﻨِﻣ ﱞﻞﻛ ْﺖﱠﺼُﺧ ﺍَﺫﺎَﻤِﺑَﻭ-٥ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise ،ﺍًﺮﻴِﺒَﻛ ،ُﻚَﺤْﻀَﻳ): ﻲِﻟﺎَﺨْﻟﺍ ِﻥﺎَﻜَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ِﺔﱠﻴِﺗﻵﺍ ِﺕﺎَﻤْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٍﺔَﻤْﻠَﻛ ﱠﻞُﻛ ْﻊَﺿ (ﻰَﻋْﺮَﻳ ُﻪَﻤَﻨَﻏ .............. ُﺪَﻟَﻭ َﻥﺎَﻛ ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ِﻞْﻫَﺃ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ............... ْﻥَﺃ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﺩﺍَﺭَﺃ ِﻢَﻨَﻐْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ............... ًﺍﺩَﺪَﻋ ُﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ َﺡَﺮَﺟ 4.0 CONCLUSION 50ARA016 Arabic Reader We have given you in this unit a passage in fully vocalized Arabic prose text for you to read and write in order to increase your reading and writing ability in Arabic language.
Arabic text is vocalized by placing some diacritical marks upon or under each letter of Arabic words in the passage.
These marks are called harakāt i.e.
vowels.
They are of two groups namely: short vowels and long vowels.
The short vowels are fatiha, kasrah and dammah.
The fatiha is a short horizontal stroke “_” representing sound [a] as in [pat].
It appears only upon Arabic letters.
Kasrah is also a short horizontal stroke “_” placed only under Arabic letters to represent sound [i] as in [pit].
And dammah is a mark that appears like a coma “ﻭ” placed upon Arabic letter to represent sound [u] as in [put].
The long vowels are alif [ﺍ], yāu [ﻱ] and wāw [ﻭ] which are attached to the short vowels fatiha, kasrah and dammah respectively, to elongate them.
Other mark used in vocalization is shaddah which looks like a small double U “w”.
This sign is used to indicate that there are two identical letters with one assimilated to the other and such letter is pronounced with emphasis.
Sukun is another sign which looks like a small zero “o”.
It is placed upon any letter that carries no vowel.
All the marks mentioned above are employed to vocalize Arabic passage.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit was focused on texts of fully vocalized Arabic prose to give you good exercises in Arabic communication and sound stability in using Arabic sentences.
In the lesson, you also learnt about vowel signs like fatiha, kasrah, dammah, alif, yau, waw, shaddah and sukun which are all used in vocalizing Arabic texts in order to simplify reading.
At the end of the lesson, some self assessment exercises were put in place for students’ practice.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1- Read the following text ﻲِﻓَﻭ.
ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٍﺐﻳِﺮَﻗ ٍﻥﺎَﻜَﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ﺎَﻬِﺑ َﺝَﺮَﺨَﻓ ،ُﻪَﻤَﻨَﻏ ﻰَﻋْﺮَﻳ ٌﺪَﻟَﻭ َﻥﺎَﻛ 51ARA016 Arabic Reader : " ِﻪِﺗْﻮَﺻ ﻰَﻠْﻋَﺄِﺑ َﺡﺎَﺼَﻓ ِﺔَﻳِﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ِﻞْﻫَﺃ ﻰَﻠَﻋ َﻚَﺤْﻀَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ َﺩﺍَﺭَﺃ ِﻡﺎﱠﻳَﻷﺍ َﻦِﻣ ِﻡْﻮَﻳ ﺍﻭُﺪَﺟَﻭ ﺎَﻤَﻓ ِﻪِﺗَﺪْﺠَﻨِﻟ ِﺔَﻳِﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ُﻞْﻫَﺃ َﺝَﺮَﺨَﻓ "!
َﺓَﺪْﺠﱠﻨﻟﺍ !َﺓَﺪْﺠﱠﻨﻟَﺍ !
َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ !َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ َﺡَﺮَﺟَﻭ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﺏَﺮَﻬَﻓ ُﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ َءﺎَﺟ ﻲِﻧﺎﱠﺜﻟﺍ ِﻡْﻮَﻴْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓَﻭ .ْﻢِﻬْﻴَﻠَﻋ َﻚِﺤَﻀَﻓ َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ !َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ " ِﻪِﺗْﻮَﺻ ﻰَﻠْﻋَﺄِﺑ َﺡﺎَﺻَﻭ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻜَﺑَﻭ ،ِﻢَﻨَﻐْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﺍًﺮﻴِﺒَﻛ ﺍًﺩَﺪَﻋ ُﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ ِﺓَﺮَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ َﺏَﺬَﻛ ُﻪﱠﻧَﻷ ِِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٌﺪْﺣَﺃ ْﺝُﺮْﺨَﻳ ْﻢَﻠَﻓ !
َﺓَﺪْﺠﱠﻨﻟَﺍ !َﺓَﺪْﺠﱠﻨﻟَﺍ !َﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ .ِﺔَﻴِﻧﺎﱠﺜﻟﺍ ِﺓَﺮَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ٌﺪْﺣَﺃ ُﻪْﻗﱢﺪَﺼُﻳ ْﻢَﻠَﻓ ﻰَﻟﻭُﻷﺍ :ِﺔَﻴِﺗﻵﺍ ِﺔَﺒَﺳﺎَﻨُﻤْﻟﺍ ِﺕﺎَﻤِﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻬِﺑ َﻍﺍَﺮِﻔْﻟﺍ َﻸْﻣِﺇ (ُﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ ,َﺡﺎَﺻ ,ﻰَﻋْﺮَﻳ ،ﺍًﺮﻴِﺒَﻛ ،ُﻚَﺤْﻀَﻳ) ُﻪَﻤَﻨَﻏ .............. ُﺪَﻟَﻭ َﻥﺎَﻛ -1 ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ِﻞْﻫَﺃ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ............... ْﻥَﺃ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﺩﺍَﺭَﺃ -2 ِﻢَﻨَﻐْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ............... ًﺍﺩَﺪَﻋ ُﺐْﺋﱢﺬﻟَﺍ َﺡَﺮَﺟ -3 ..............ِﺔَﻳْﺮَﻘْﻟﺍ ُﻞْﻫَﺃ َﺪَﺟَﻭ -4 .ِﻪِﺗْﻮَﺻ ﻰَﻠْﻋَﺄِﺑ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ......................... -5 ﺓﺪﻴﻔﻣ ﻞﻤﺠﺑ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻞﻤﻌﺘﺳﺍ 3- Use the following words in good sentences َﺭﺎَﻃ ,َﺐِﻌَﺗ ,َﻊَﻗَﻭ ,َﺰَﻔَﻗ,َﻕِﺮَﻏ -1 7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS.
1.
Muhammad, B., Salim H., & Husainy (1979).
A new Arabic course for Nigeria Pupils Book 1-5, Lagos, Longman 2.
Muhammad, A., Ibrahim A., Ash Shanawiy,M.
Abul- Hasan I., (ed.)
(1975) Al- Qirā’at wa `l- Mahfūzah, Cairo, Egypt 3.
Ibrahim Muhammad Nuhaas & Co. (1985/1405).
Al-Qirā’atu wal- mahfūzah, 6th ed.
Bahrayn.
4.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakī Ali, S (1992).
Al-adab wa `t-Tārīkh fi `l- ‘aşrayn, Cairo.
52ARA016 Arabic Reader UNIT 2: FURTHER READING AND COMPREHENSION OF VOCALIZED ARABIC PROSE TEXTS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 ﺎَﻫُﺩَﻻْﻭَﺃَﻭ ُﺔﱠﻄِﻘﻟﺍ 3.2 ﻮﻧﺎﻛ ﻲﻟﺇ ﺩﻮﻤﺤﻣ ﺔﻠﺣﺭ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References /further Readings 1.0 INRODUCTION The last lesson was on vocalized short Arabic passages.
This unit is a continuation of the last lesson.
You will be taken through more vocalized prose texts.
You will come across further application of the short and long vowels in the vocalization of Arabic texts.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit, you should be able to • Read short Arabic prose passages more fluently • formulate some short Arabic passages • use short and long vowels to vocalize Arabic passages correctly.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TEXT 1 ﺎَﻫُﺩَﻻْﻭَﺃَﻭ ُﺔﱠﻄِﻘﻟﺍ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ٌﺔَﺒِﻫﺍَﺫ ﺎَﻧَﺃ َﺔَﻌَﺑْﺭَﻷﺍ ﺎَﻫِﺭﺎَﻐِﺼِﻟ ْﺖَﻟﺎَﻘَﻓ ,ِﺩَﻻْﻭَﺃ ُﺔَﻌَﺑْﺭَﺃ ُءﺎَﻀْﻴَﺑ ٍﺔﱠﻄِﻘِﻟ َﻥﺎَﻛ ِﺔَﻋِﺭْﺰَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ﺍﻮُﺑَﺮَﻫﺎَﻓ ُﺐْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ َءﺎَﺟ ﺍَﺫِﺈَﻓ ،ﺎﻨﻫ ﺎًﻌﻴِﻤَﺟ ﺍﻮُﺒَﻌْﻟِﺍ ,ِﻥﺍَﺮْﺌِﻔْﻟﺍ ِﺪْﻴَﺼِﻟ ،ُﺐْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ُﻢُﻛﺍَﺮَﻳ َﻼَﻓ ِﻉْﺭﱠﺰﻟﺍ َﻞْﺜِﻣ َﺮﻴِﺼَﺘِﻟ ْﻢُﻜَﻟﻮُﻳُﺫ ﺍﻮُﻌَﻓْﺭﺍَﻭ ,ِﺐَﺸَﻌْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ﺍﻮُﻣﺎَﻧَﻭ 53ARA016 Arabic Reader .ِﻥﺍَﺮْﺌِﻔْﻟﺍ ِﺪْﻴَﺼِﻟ ُﻡُﻷﺍ ْﺖَﺒَﻫَﺬَﻓ ِﺔَﻋَﺭْﺰَﻤﻟﺍ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ﺍﻮُﻀَﻛَﺭ ٍﺪﻴِﻌَﺑ ْﻦِﻣ ْﻢِﻬْﻴَﻟِﺇ ﻲِﺸْﻤَﻳ َﺐْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ُﺭﺎَﻐﱢﺼﻟﺍ ﻯَﺃَﺭ ﺎََﻣ َﺪْﻨِﻋَﻭ ْﺪِﺠَﻳ ْﻢَﻟَﻭ ًﺍﺭﺎَﺴَﻳَﻭ ﺎًﻨﻴِﻤَﻳ ُﺐْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ َﺮَﻈَﻨَﻓ.
ْﻢُﻬَﻟﻮُﻳُﺫ ﺍﻮُﻌَﻓَﺭَﻭ ِﺐَﺸَﻌْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ﺍﻮُﻣﺎَﻧَﻭ ْﻦِﻣ ﺍَﻮَﺠَﻧَﻭ ْﻢِﻬِﻧﺎَﻜَﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺭﺎَﻐﱢﺼﻟﺍ َﻊَﺟَﺭ ،ُﺐَﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ َﺐَﻫَﺫ ﺎَﻣ َﺪْﻨِﻋَﻭ .ِﺔﱠﻄِﻘْﻟﺍ َﺭﺎَﻐِﺻ .ْﻢُﻬﱠﻣُﺃ ﺍﻮُﻋﺎَﻃ ْﻢُﻬﱠﻧَﻷ ِﺐْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ﱢﺮَﺷ ﻊﻤﺠﻟﺍﻭ Plura l Singular ﺩﺮﻔﻤﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﻐﺼﻟﺍ ﺮﻴﻐﺼﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﺒﻜﻟﺍ ﺮﻴﺒﻜﻟﺍ ﻥﺍﺮﺌﻔﻟﺍ ﺭﺄﻔﻟﺍ ﺏﻼﻜﻟﺍ ﺐﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻝﻮﻳﺬﻟ ﺍ ﻞﻳﺬﻟﺍ ﺩﻻﻭﻷﺍ ﺪﻟﻮﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise Answer the following questions: ّﺺﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ ﻦﻋ ﺐﺟﺃ- ﺱ ؟ﻢﻬّﻣﺃ ﺔﻄﻘﻟﺍ ﺩﻻﻭﺃ ﻉﺎﻃ ﻞﻫ -1 ؟ﺎﻫﺭﺎﻐﺻ ﺖﻛﺮﺗﻭ ءﺎﻀﻴﺒﻟﺍ ﺔﻄﻘﻟﺍ ﺖﺒﻫﺫ ﺊﺷ ﻱﻷ -2 ؟ﻢﻬﻴﻟﺇ ﻲﺸﻤﻳ ﺐﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﺃﻭﺭ ﺎﻣﺪﻨﻋ ﺔﻌﺑﺭﻷﺍ ﺔﻄﻘﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﻐﺻ ﺾﻛﺭ ﻦﻳﺃ ﻰﻟﺇ -3 ؟ﺐﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻢﻫﺃﺭ ﻞﻫ -4 ؟ﺐﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﺐﻫﺫ ﺎﻣ ﺪﻨﻋ ﺔﻄﻘﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﻐﺻ ﻊﺟﺭ ﻦﻳﺃ ﻰﻟﺇ -5 ﻮﻧﺎﻛ ﻲﻟﺇ ﺩﻮﻤﺤﻣ ﺔﻠﺣﺭ ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 2 ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟَﺍ َﺔَﻠِﻓﺎَﺣ َﺐِﻛَﺭ ،ُﺓَﺮِﺋﺎﱠﻄﻟﺍ ِﺖَﻄِﺒَﻫ ْْْْْْﻥَﺃ َﺪْﻌَﺑَﻭ ﻮﻧﺎﻛ ْﻦِﻣ ُﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ َﻡِﺪَﻗ ،ِﺕﺍَﺯﺍَﻮَﺠْﻟﺍ َﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ َﻞَﺑﺎَﻘَﻓ ،ِﺔَﻠﻓِﺎَﺤْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ َﻝَﺰَﻧ ،ِﻡﻭُﺪُﻘْﻟﺍ َﺔَﻟﺎَﺻ َﻞَﺻَﻭ َﻦْﻴِﺣَﻭ َﻚِﻟَﺫ َﺪْﻌَﺑَﻭ َﺯﺍَﻮَﺠْﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻤْﻟﺍ َﺺَﺤَﻓ ِﻝﻮُﺻُﻮْﻟﺍ َﺔَﻗﺎَﻄِﺑَﻭ ِﺮَﻔﱠﺴﻟﺍ َﺯﺍَﻮَﺟ ُﻪَﻟ ﻡﱠﺪَﻗَﻭ ﻥَﺃ ِﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ ْﻦِﻣ ِﻙِﺭﺎَﻤَﺠْﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ َﺐَﻠَﻃ.
ِﻙِﺭﺎَﻤَﺠْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻟﺎَﺻ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ َﻪﱠﺟَﻭ ،ِﺐُﺘُﻜْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺲِﺑَﻼَﻤْﻟﺍ َﺾْﻌَﺑ ِﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ِﻙِﺭﺎَﻤَﺠْﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ َﺪَﺟَﻭ.
َﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ َﺢَﺘْﻔَﻳ .
ِﺝﻭُﺮُﺨْﻟﺍ ِﺔِﺑﺍَﻮَﺑ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﻪَﺠﱠﺘَﻳَﻭ َﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ َﻞَﻔْﻘَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ ِﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ ْﻦِﻣ َﺐَﻠَﻃ ﱠﻢُﺛ 54ARA016 Arabic Reader ﺓﺪﻳﺪﺠﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ (New Words) ﻉﺭﺎﻀﻣ ﺽﺎﻣ (Present tense) (Past tense) ُﻡُﺪْﻘ َﻳ َﻡِﺪَﻗ ُﺺَﺤْﻔَﻳ َﺺَﺤَﻓ ُﻂَﺒْﻬ َﻳ َﻂِﺒَﻫ ُﺐَﻛْﺮَﻳ َﺐِﻛَﺭ ُﻡُﺪْﻘ َﻳ َﻡِﺪَﻗ ُﻝِﺰْﻨ َﻳ َﻝَﺰَﻧ ُﻪﱢﺟَﻮ ُﻳ َﻪﱠﺟَﻭ Self Assessment Exercise 2 :ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ ﺐﺟﺃ Answer the following questions: ؟ُﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ َﻡِﺪَﻗ َﻦْﻳَﺃ ْﻦِﻣ -1 ؟ِﺕَﺯﺍَﻮَﺠْﻟﺍ ِﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ َﻡَﺪَﻗ ﺍَﺫﺎَﻣ -2 ؟ﺍَﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ ِﺕﺍَﺯَﻮَﺠْﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ َﻪﱠﺟَﻭ َﻦْﻳَﺃ ﻰَﻟِﺇ -3 ؟ ٍﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ ْﻦِﻣ ِﻙِﺭﺎَﻤَﺠْﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ َﺐَﻠَﻃ ﺍَﺫﺎَﻣ -4 ؟ ٍﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ ِﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺣ ﻲِﻓ ﺍَﺫﺎَﻣ -5 ؟َﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ِﻙِﺭﺎَﻤَﺠْﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ َﺺَﺤَﻓ ْﻥَﺃ َﺪْﻌَﺑ ُﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ َﻪَﺠﱠﺗﺍ َﻦْﻳَﺃ ﻰَﻟِﺇ -6 4.0 CONCLUSION We have given you in this unit, Arabic prose texts with vocalization for reading and understanding, the usage of new words in good Arabic sentences in order to increase student’s ability in Arabic reading and understanding.
Some verbs were also listed in their past and present tenses to assist students on the use of tenses.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit was focused on vocalized Arabic texts to give students good 55ARA016 Arabic Reader standard in Arabic communication and sound stability in using of Arabic sentences.
Some nouns and their plural forms were highlighted to increase students’ vocabularies.
Some Arabic verbs in their past and present tenses as used in the lesson were again highlighted to broaden the understanding of students on their usage.
Some assignments were also given to test the level of understanding of students about the items taught in the lesson.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT :ٍﺓَﺪﻴِﻔُﻣ ٍﻞَﻤُﺟ ﻲِﻓ ِﺔَﻴِﻟﺎﱠﺘﻟﺍ ِﺕﺎَﻤْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ْﻦِﻣ ٍﺔَﻤْﻠَﻛ ﱠﻞُﻛ ْﻞِﻤْﻌَﺘْﺳِﺍ : ﻻﻭﺃ (َﻝَﺰَﻧ ،َﻪﱠﺟَﻭ ،َﺐِﻛَﺭ ، َﻂَﺒَﻫ ،َﺺَﺤَﻓ ،َﻡِﺪَﻗ) .ِﺔَﻴِﻟﺎﱠﺘﻟﺍ ِﺔَﺒَﺳﺎَﻨُﻤْﻟﺍ ِﺔَﻤْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ِﺭﺎَﻴِﺘْﺧﺎِﺑ ِﺔَﻴِﺗﻵْﺍ ِﻞِﻤُﺠْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ َﻍﺍَﺮِﻔْﻟﺍ َﻸْﻣِﺇ : ﺎﻴﻧﺎﺛ (َﺐَﻠَﻃ, ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ, َﺪَﺟَﻭ, ٌﺔَﻠِﻓﺎَﺣ, ٌﺔَﺑﺍﱠﻮَﺑ) ِﺭﺎَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ........... ُﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ َﺐِﻛَﺭ -1 ِﺐُﺘُﻜْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺲِﺑَﻼَﻤْﻟَﺍ َﺾْﻌَﺑ ِﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ِﻙِﺭﺎَﻤَﺠَﻟﺍ ُﻒﱠﻇَﻮُﻣ............. -2 َﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ َﻞِﻔْﻘَﻳ ﻥْﺃ َﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ ْﻦِﻣ........... -3 َﺔَﺒﻴِﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ َﺢَﺘْﻔَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ ﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ ْﻦِﻣ ِﻙِﺭﺎَﻤَﺠْﻟﺍ .................َﺐَﻠَﻃ -4 ِﺝﻭُﺮُﺨْﻟﺍ ..........................ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺩﻮُﻤْﺤَﻣ َﻪَﺠﱠﺗﺍ -5 ؟ِﺺﱠﻨﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ِﺔَﻴِﺗﻵﺍ ِﺔَﻠِﺌْﺳَﻷﺍ ْﻦَﻋ ْﺐِﺟَﺃ :ﺎﺜﻟﺎﺛ ؟ْﻢُﻬﱠﻣُﺃ ِﺔﱠﻄِﻘْﻟﺍ ُﺩَﻻْﻭَﺃ َﻉﺎَﻃ ْﻞَﻫ -1 ؟ﺎَﻫِﺭﺎَﻐِﺻ ْﺖَﻛَﺮَﺗَﻭ ُءﺎَﻀْﻴَﺒْﻟﺍ ُﺔﱠﻄِﻘْﻟﺍ ِﺖَﺒَﻫَﺫ ٍﺊَﺷ ﱢﻱَﻷ ِ-2 ؟ْﻢِﻬْﻴَﻟِﺇ ﻲِﺸْﻤَﻳ َﺐْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ُﺃْﻭَﺭ ﺎَﻣَﺪﻨِﻋ ِﺔَﻌَﺑْﺭَﻷْﺍ ِﺔَﻄِﻘْﻟﺍ ُﺭﺎَﻐِﺻ َﺾَﻛَﺭ َﻦْﻳَﺃ ﻰَﻟِﺇ -3 ؟ُﺐْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ُﻢُﻫَﺃَﺭ ْﻞَﻫ -4 ؟ُﺐْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ َﺐَﻫَﺫ ﺎَﻣ َﺪﻨِﻋ ِﺔﱠﻄِﻘْﻟﺍ ُﺭﺎَﻐِﺻ َﻊَﺟَﺭ َﻦْﻳَﺃ ﻰَﻟِﺇ -5 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS 1.
Mohammad, B.S., Salim, H., $ Husainy, A, (1979).
A new Arabic course for Nigeria: Pupils Book 1-5 Lagos, Longman Nigeria 2.
Abdullahi bn Ahmad (Ed.)
(1992).
Silsilatut - ta‘līm Lughatil Arabiyyah Book 3, Riyad KSA 56ARA016 Arabic Reader 3.
Ibrahim Muhammad Nuhaas & Co. (1985/1405).
Al-Qirā’atu wal- mahfūzah, 6th ed.
Bahrayn.
4.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakῑ Ali, S (1992).
Al-adab wa `t-Tārῑkh fi `l- ‘aşrayn, (sic.
), Cairo.
UNIT 3: READING AND UNDERSTANDING OF UN-VOCALIZED ARABIC PROSE TEXTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 ءﺎﻤﻟﺍ ﺓﺪﺋﺎﻓ 3.2 ءﺎﻗﺪﺻﻷﺍ ﺔﻠﻔﺣ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Two vocalized passages were given in the last lesson to teach you further reading on vocalized Arabic prose.
In this unit two unvocalized passages are 57ARA016 Arabic Reader presented to acquaint you with the method of reading unvocalized Arabic passages.
The unit aims at teaching you how to perfectly read and write un- vocalized Arabic prose text; this is to ensure that you are able to read any Arabic literature passages without tears.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this Unit, you should be able to • read and understand un-vocalized Arabic prose texts • practice the writing of un-vocalized short Arabic sentences on your own.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 58ARA016 Arabic Reader ءﺎﻤﻟﺍ ﺓﺪﺋﺎﻓ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 1 ﺎﻬﻨﻣ ﻞﻴﺴﺗﻭ ﻝﺎﺒﺠﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺭﺎﻄﻣﻷﺍ ﻝﺰﻨﺗ ﻢﺛ ,ءﺎﻤﺴﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺐﺤﺴﻟﺍ ﻊﻤﺠﺘﺗ ﺾﻴﻔﻳ ﻢﺛ ,ﺔﻌﺳﺍﻭ ﺓﺮﻴﺤﺑ ﻥّﻮﻜﺗﻭ ,ﻩﺎﻴﻤﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻊﻤﺠﺘﺗ ﻢﺛ ,ﻥﺎﻳﺩﻮﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﺇ ﻩﺎﻴﻤﻟﺍ ,ﻼﻳﻮﻃ ﺍﺮﻬﻧ ﻥﻮﻜﻳﻭ ,ﺎﻬﻟﻮﺣ ﻰﺘﻟﺍ ﺽﺭﻷﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻱﺮﺠﻳﻭ ,ﺓﺮﻴﺤﺒﻟﺍ ءﺎﻣ ﻚﻟﺫ ﺮﻴﻏﻭ ,ﻦﻴﻄﻟﺍﻭ ,ﺭﺎﺠﺷﻷﺍﻭ ,ﺕﺎﺗﺎﺒﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻊﻴﻄﺘﺴﺗ ﺎﻣ ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻩﺎﻴﻣ ﻞﻤﺤﺗﻭ ﻪﻌﺒﻨﻣ ﻦﻣ ﻥﺎﻳﺩﻮﻟﺍﻭ ﻝﻮﻬﺴﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻱﺮﺠﻳﻭ ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻱﺮﺠﻣ ﻲﻓ ﺎﻬﻠﺑﺎﻘﻳ ﺎﻤﻣ ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻲﻓ ﺮّﻜﻔﻧ ﺎﻤﻨﻴﺣﻭ ,ﻥﺎﺴﻧﻹﺍﻭ ﻥﺍﻮﻴﺤﻟﺍﻭ ﺕﺎﺒﻨﻟﺍ ﻲﻘﺴﻳﻭ ﻪﺒﺼﻣ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺮﻴﺜﺘﻓ ﺡﺎﻳﺮﻟﺍ ﻞﺳﺭﺃ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﷲﺍﻭ " ﻰﻟﺎﻌﺗ ﷲﺍ ﻝﻮﻗ ﺮﻛﺬﻧ ﻥّﻮﻜﺗ ﻒﻴﻛﻭ ﻩﺪﺋﺍﻮﻓﻭ "ﺭﻮﺸﻨﻟﺍ ﻚﻟﺬﻛ ﺎﻬﺗﻮﻣ ﺪﻌﺑ ﺽﺭﻷﺍ ﻪﺑ ﺎﻨﻴﻴﺣﺄﻓ ﺖّﻴﻣ ﺪﻠﺑ ﻰﻟﺇ ﻩﺎﻨﻘﺴﻓ ﺎﺑﺎﺤﺳ ﺓﺪﻳﺪﺠﻟﺍ ﻥﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ New Words ﻩﺎﻴﻤﻟﺍ -ﻝﺎﺒﺠﻟﺍ -ﻞﻴﺴﻳ /ﻝﺎﺳ -ءﺎﻤﺴﻟﺍ -ﺐﺤﺴﻟﺍ -ﻊﻤﺠﺘﺗ / ﻊﻤﺠﺗ -ﻯﺮﺠﻣ -ﻱﺮﺠﻳ /ﻯﺮﺟ -ﻥّﻮﻜﻳ /ﻥّﻮﻛ -ﺾﻴﻔﻳ /ﺽﺎﻓ – ﺓﺮﻴﺤﺑ -ﻥﺎﻳﺩﻮﻟﺍ ّﺐﺼﻣ -ﻊﺒﻨﻣ -ﻝﻮﻬﺴﻟﺍ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 1 -:ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ ﻦﻋ ﺐﺟﺃ ؟ﺽﺎﻓ ﺍﺫﺇ ﺓﺮﻴﺤﺒﻟﺍ ءﺎﻤﻟ ﺙﺪﺤﻳ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ - 1 ؟ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻩﺎﻴﻣ ﻞﻤﺤﺗ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ - 2 ؟ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻱﺮﺠﻳ ﻦﻳ ﺃ - 3 ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﺔﻳﺍﺪﺑ ﻰﻤﺴﻧ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ - 4 ؟ﺓﺮﻴﺤﺒﻟﺍ ﻩﺎﻴﻣ ﻥﻮﻜﺘﺗ ﻒﻴﻛ - 5 ؟ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﺪﺋﺍﻮﻓ ﺎﻣ - 6 ءﺎﻗﺪﺻﻷﺍ ﺔﻠﻔﺣ ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 2 ,ءﺎﻗﺪﺼﻟﺍﻭ ﺏﺭﺎﻗﻷﺍ ﻊﻤﺘﺟﺎﻓ .ﻢﻴﻫﺍﺮﺑﻹ ﺎﻤﻳﺮﻜﺗ ﺓﺮﻴﺒﻛ ﺔﻤﻴﻟﻭ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ّﺪﻋﺃ ﺖّﻔﺻﻭ ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﺔﻓﺮﻏ ﻂﺳﻭ ﻲﻓ ﺓﺮﻴﺒﻛ ﺓﺪﺋﺎﻣ ﺖﻌﺿﻭ ,ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﺠﺣ ﻲﻓ ﺖﻋﺯﻭﻭ ,ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻔﻠﺘﺨﻣ ﻑﺎﻨﺻﺃ ﺎﻬﻗﻮﻓ ﺖﻌﺿﻭﻭ ,ﻲﺳﺍﺮﻜﻟﺍ ﺎﻬﻟﻮﺣ ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﻉﺍﻮﻧﺄﺑ ﺔﻠﻓﺎﺣ ﺓﺪﺋﺎﻤﻟﺍ ﺖﻧﺎﻛﻭ ,ﺎﻬﻟﻭﺎﻨﺗ ﻞﻬﺴﻳ ﺔﻘﻳﺮﻄﺑ ﻑﺎﻨﺻﻷﺍ 59ARA016 Arabic Reader ﺕﺍﻭﺍﺮﻀﺨﻟﺍﻭ ّﺯﺮﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻳﻮﺸﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻉﺍﻮﻧﺃﻭ ﺝﺎﺟﺪﻟﺍﻭ ﻚﻤﺴﻟﺍﻭ ﻢﻨﻐﻟﺍ ﻢﺤﻠﻛ ﺔﻬﻛﺎﻔﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻉﺍﻮﻧﺃ ﺖﻣﺪﻗ ﻢﺛ .ﺔﻴﺧﻮﻠﻤﻟﺍﻭ ﺔﻴﻣﺎﺒﻟﺍﻭ ءﺍﺮﻀﺨﻟﺍ ءﺎﻴﻟﻮﺻﺎﻔﻟﺎﻛ ﺍﻭﺪﻤﺣﻭ ﺎﻬﻨﻣ ﻊﻴﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻞﻛﺄﻓ ﺦﻴﻄﺒﻟﺍﻭ ﺐﻨﻌﻟﺍﻭ ﺯﻮﻤﻟﺍﻭ ﺡﺎﻔﺘﻟﺍﻭ ﻝﺎﻘﺗﺮﺒﻟﺎﻛ ﺍﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻢﻴﻫﺍﺮﺑﺇ ﺮﻜﺷ .ﺓﻮﻬﻘﻟﺍ ﻢﻬﻀﻌﺑ ﺏﺮﺷﻭ ﻱﺎﺸﻟﺍ ﻢﻬﻀﻌﺑ ﺏﺮﺷ ﻢﺛ ﷲﺍ ﻥﺫﺄﺘﺳﺍﻭ ﻑﺮﺼﻧﺍﻭ ﻥﺫﺄﺘﺳﺍ ﻢﺛ ﺮﻴﺨﻟﺎﺑ ﻪﻟ ﺎﻋﺩﻭ ,ﻪﺘﻓﺎﻴﺿ ﻦﺴﺣ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺍﻮﻓﺮﺼﻧﺍﻭ ﻊﻴﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻊﻤﺠﻟﺍﻭ ﺩﺮﻔﻤﻟﺍ Plural Singular ﺏﺭﺎﻗﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺮﻘﻟﺍ ءﺎﻗﺪﺻﻷﺍ ﻖﻳﺪﺼﻟﺍ ﻲﺳﺍﺮﻜﻟﺍ ﻲﺳﺮﻜﻟﺍ ﻑﺎﻨﺻﻷﺍ ﻒﻨﺼﻟﺍ ﺝﺎﺟﺪﻟﺍ ﺔﺟﺎﺟﺪﻟﺍ ﻚﻤﺴﻟﺍ ﺔﻜﻤﺴﻟﺍ ﻪﻛﺍﻮﻔﻟﺍ ﺔﻬﻛﺎﻔﻟﺍ ﺡﺎﻔﺘﻟﺍ ﺔﺣﺎﻔﺘﻟﺍ ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 2 :ﻲﻠﻳ ﺎﻤﻣ ﺔﺒﺳﺎﻨﻤﻟﺍ ﺔﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﻴﺘﺧﺎﺑ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﻞﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺎﻏﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ ﻸﻣﺍ -1 (ﻲﻔﺳﻮﻴﻟﺍ ،ﺔﻴﺧﻮﻠﻤﻟﺍ ،ﻢﻳﺮﻜﺗ ،ﻉﺯﻭ ،ﻑﺎﻨﺻﺃ ،ﻼﻓﺎﺣ ،ﺎﻔﺻ ) ﺍﺪﺣﺍﻭ ............... ﺏﻼﻄﻟﺍ ﻒﻗﻭ - 1 ﻦﻴﻛﺎﺴﻤﻟﺍﻭ ﻪﻧﺍﺮﻴﺟ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻪﺘﻴﺤﺿﺃ ﻢﺤﻟ ................ ﻥﺎﺴﺣ - 2 ﺔﺣﺍﺮﻠﻟ ﺎﺘﻗﻭ ﻪﻴﻓ ﺪﺠﻧ ﻢﻟ ﺕﺍﺭﺎﻳﺰﻟﺎﺑ ............ ﺎﻣﻮﻳ ﻥﺎﻛ - 3 ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻔﻠﺘﺨﻣ ............. ﺔﻤﻴﻟﻮﻟﺍ ﺖّﻤﺿ - 4 ﺕﺍﻭﺍﺮﻀﺨﻟﺍ ﻉﺍﻮﻧﺃ ﻦﻣ ﻉﻮﻧ ............... .
- 5 ؟.................. ﻥﻮﻟ ﺎﻣ - 6 ﺐﺟﺍﻭ ﻒﻴﻀﻟﺍ .............. .
- 7 ﺓﺪﻴﻔﻣ ﻞﻤﺟ ﻲﻓ ﺔﻴﻟﺎﺘﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ ﻞﻛ ﻞﻤﻌﺘﺳﺍ -2 ﺔﻤﻴﻟﻭ -5 ّﻒﺻ -4 ﻞﻓﺎﺣ -3 ﻉﺯﻮﻳ -2 ﻑﺎﻨﺻﺃ -1 4.0 CONCLUSION 60ARA016 Arabic Reader We have given you in this Unit, un-vocalized short Arabic prose texts for reading and understanding, and then we have analyzed some new Arabic words in other to improve your ability in Arabic reading.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit was focused on un-vocalized short Arabic prose texts to give you good standard of reading and understanding of Arabic passage.
Students are expected to practice the reading and there after vocalize the passages.
Some other exercises were also put down for students to practice to assist their comprehension of the lesson.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT : ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻊﻤﺟ ﺕﺎﻫ -1 ﺔﻬﻛﺎﻔﻟﺍ -ﺔﻜﻤﺴﻟﺍ -ﺔﺟﺎﺟﺪﻟﺍ -ﻒﻨﺼﻟﺍ -ﻲﺳﺮﻜﻟﺍ -ﻖﻳﺪﺼﻟﺍ -ﺐﻳﺮﻘﻟﺍ ) .
(ﺔﺣﺎﻔﺘﻟﺍ .ﺓﺪﻴﻔﻣ ﻞﻤﺟ ﻲﻓ ﺔﻴﻟﺎﺘﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ ﻞﻛ ﻞﻤﻌﺘﺳﺍ -2 -ﺔﻤﻴﻟﻭ -ّﻒﺻ -ﻞﻓﺎﺣ -ﻑﺎﻨﺻﺃ -ﻥﻮﻜﻳ -ﻱﺮﺠﻳ -ﺽﺎﻓ -ﻞﻴﺴﺗ -ﻊﻤﺘﺠﻳ ) .
(ﻝﺎﺒﺠﻟﺍ :ﻖﺑﺎﺴﻟﺍ ﺱﺭﺪﻠﻟ ﻚﻤﻬﻓ ﺐﺴﺣ ﺔﻴﺗﻷﺍ ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ ﻦﻋ ﺐﺟﺃ -3 ؟ﺖﺿﺎﻓ ﺍﺫﺇ ﺓﺮﻴﺤﺒﻟﺍ ءﺎﻤﻟ ﺙﺪﺤﻳ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ -1 ؟ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻩﺎﻴﻣ ﻞﻤﺤﺗ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ -2 ؟ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻱﺮﺠﻳ ﻦﻳﺃ -3 ؟ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﺔﻳﺍﺪﺑ ﻲﻤﺴﻧ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ -4 ؟ﺓﺮﻴﺤﺒﻟﺍ ﻩﺎﻴﻣ ﻥﻮﻜﺘﺗ ﻒﻴﻛ -5 ؟ﺮﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﺪﺋﺍﻮﻓ ﺎﻣ - 7 ,ءﺎﻗﺪﺼﻟﺍﻭ ﺏﺭﺎﻗﻷﺍ ﻊﻤﺘﺟﺎﻓ .ﻢﻴﻫﺍﺮﺑﻹ ﺎﻤﻳﺮﻜﺗ ﺓﺮﻴﺒﻛ ﺔﻤﻴﻟﻭ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ّﺪﻋﺃ ﺖّﻔﺻﻭ ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﺔﻓﺮﻏ ﻂﺳﻭ ﻲﻓ ﺓﺮﻴﺒﻛ ﺓﺪﺋﺎﻣ ﺖﻌﺿﻭ ,ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﺠﺣ ﻲﻓ ﺖﻋﺯﻭﻭ ,ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻔﻠﺘﺨﻣ ﻑﺎﻨﺻﺃ ﺎﻬﻗﻮﻓ ﺖﻌﺿﻭﻭ ,ﻲﺳﺍﺮﻜﻟﺍ ﺎﻬﻟﻮﺣ ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﻉﺍﻮﻧﺄﺑ ﺔﻠﻓﺎﺣ ﺓﺪﺋﺎﻤﻟﺍ ﺖﻧﺎﻛﻭ ,ﺎﻬﻟﻭﺎﻨﺗ ﻞﻬﺴﻳ ﺔﻘﻳﺮﻄﺑ ﻑﺎﻨﺻﻷﺍ ﺕﺍﻭﺍﺮﻀﺨﻟﺍﻭ ّﺯﺮﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻳﻮﺸﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻉﺍﻮﻧﺃﻭ ﺝﺎﺟﺪﻟﺍﻭ ﻚﻤﺴﻟﺍﻭ ﻢﻨﻐﻟﺍ ﻢﺤﻠﻛ ﺔﻬﻛﺎﻔﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻉﺍﻮﻧﺃ ﺖﻣﺪﻗ ﻢﺛ .ﺔﻴﺧﻮﻠﻤﻟﺍﻭ ﺔﻴﻣﺎﺒﻟﺍﻭ ءﺍﺮﻀﺨﻟﺍ ءﺎﻴﻟﻮﺻﺎﻔﻟﺎﻛ 61ARA016 Arabic Reader ﺍﻭﺪﻤﺣﻭ ﺎﻬﻨﻣ ﻊﻴﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻞﻛﺄﻓ ﺦﻴﻄﺒﻟﺍﻭ ﺐﻨﻌﻟﺍﻭ ﺯﻮﻤﻟﺍﻭ ﺡﺎﻔﺘﻟﺍﻭ ﻝﺎﻘﺗﺮﺒﻟﺎﻛ ﺍﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻢﻴﻫﺍﺮﺑﺇ ﺮﻜﺷ .ﺓﻮﻬﻘﻟﺍ ﻢﻬﻀﻌﺑ ﺏﺮﺷﻭ ﻱﺎﺸﻟﺍ ﻢﻬﻀﻌﺑ ﺏﺮﺷ ﻢﺛ ﷲﺍ ﻥﺫﺄﺘﺳﺍﻭ ﻑﺮﺼﻧﺍﻭ ﻥﺫﺄﺘﺳﺍ ﻢﺛ ﺮﻴﺨﻟﺎﺑ ﻪﻟ ﺎﻋﺩﻭ ,ﻪﺘﻓﺎﻴﺿ ﻦﺴﺣ ﻰﻠﻋ .ﺍﻮﻓﺮﺼﻧﺍﻭ ﻊﻴﻤﺠﻟﺍ Vocalise the following text ﺦﻟﺍ ............... ﺓﺮﻴﺒﻛ ﺔﻤﻴﻟﻭ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﺪﻋﺃ :ﻲﻠﻳ ﺎﻤﻣ ﺔﺒﺳﺎﻨﻤﻟﺍ ﺔﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﻴﺘﺧﺎﺑ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﻞﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺎﻏﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ ﻸﻣﺍ -5 (ﻰﻔﺳﻮﻴﻟﺍ ،ﺔﻴﺧﻮﻠﻤﻟﺍ ،ﻢﻳﺮﻜﺗ ،ﻉﺯﻭ ،ﻑﺎﻨﺻﺃ ،ﻼﻓﺎﺣ ،ﺎﻔﺻ ) ﺍﺪﺣﺍﻭ ............... ﺏﻼﻄﻟﺍ ﻒﻗﻭ - 1 ﻦﻴﻛﺎﺴﻤﻟﺍﻭ ﻪﻧﺍﺮﻴﺟ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻪﺘﻴﺤﺿﺃ ﻢﺤﻟ ................ ﻥﺎﺴﺣ - 2 ﺔﺣﺍﺮﻠﻟ ﺎﺘﻗﻭ ﻪﻴﻓ ﺪﺠﻧ ﻢﻟ ﺕﺍﺭﺎﻳﺰﻟﺎﺑ ............ ﺎﻣﻮﻳ ﻥﺎﻛ - 3 ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻔﻠﺘﺨﻣ ............. ﺔﻤﻴﻟﻮﻟﺍ ﺖّﻤﺿ - 4 ﺕﺍﻭﺍﺮﻀﺨﻟﺍ ﻉﺍﻮﻧﺃ ﻦﻣ ﻉﻮﻧ ............... .
- 5 ؟.................. ﻥﻮﻟ ﺎﻣ - 6 ﺐﺟﺍﻭ ﻒﻴﻀﻟﺍ .............. .
- 7 7.0 REFERENCE/ FURTHER READINGS 1.
Abdjullahi bn.
Ahmad (ed) (1992).
Sililatu ta ‘līmil-lughati `l-‘Arabiyya Book 1, Riyadh, KSA 2.
Muhammad, B. S., Salim, H., & Husain, A.
(1979) A New Arabic Course for Nigeria:Pupils Book1-5.
Lagos, Longman Nigeria.
3.
Ibrahim Muhammad Nuhaas & Co. (1985/1405).
Al-Qirā’atu wa `l- mahfūzah, 6th ed.
Bahrayn.
4.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakī Ali, S (1992).
Al-Adab wa `t-Tārīkh fi `l‘aşrayn , (sic.
), Cairo.
62ARA016 Arabic Reader UNIT 4: READING AND UNDERSTANDING OF FULLY VOCALIZED ARABIC POETRY TEXTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Poem 1 3.2 Poem 2 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/ further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last unit took you through the reading and writing of vocalized passages.
Some difficult Arabic words were explained to increase your vocabularies.
As a continuation of the previous lessons, this unit teaches you how to read and understand short Arabic poetry texts with vocalization; this is to ensure that you are equipped with basic standard requirements for the Arabic reading in all aspects of literature, especially in Arabic poetry.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this Unit, you should be able to • read and understand Arabic poetry texts.
• compose vocalized short Arabic poetry texts.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Poem 1 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXTS َﻢْﺘﱠﺸﻟﺍ ِﻖﱠﺘَﻳ َﻻ ْﻦَﻣَﻭ ُﻩْﺮِﻔـَﻳ ** ِﻪِﺿْﺮِﻋ ِﻥﻭُﺩ ْﻦِﻣ َﻑﻭُﺮْﻌَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻞَﻌْﺠَﻳ ْﻦـَﻣَﻭ ِﻢـَﺘْﺸُﻳ 63ARA016 Arabic Reader ِﻢـَﻣْﺬُﻳَﻭ ُﻪْﻨَﻋ َﻦْﻐَﺘْﺴُﻳ ِﻪِﻣْﻮَﻗ ﻰَﻠـِﻋ ** ِﻪـِﻠْﻀَﻔـِﺑ ْﻞَﺨْﺒَﻴَﻓ ٍﻞْﻀَﻓ ﺍَﺫ ُﻚَﻳ ْﻦـَﻣَﻭ ِﻢـﱠﻠُﺴِﺑ ِءﺎَﻤﱠﺴﻟﺍ َﺏﺎَﺒْﺳَﺃ َﻕْﺮـَﻳ ْﻥِﺇَﻭ ** ُﻪـَﻨْﻠَﻨـَﻳ ﺎَﻳﺎَﻨَﻤـْﻟﺍ َﺏﺎَﺒْﺳَﺃ َﺏﺎَﻫ ْﻦـَﻣَﻭ ُﻡَﺪـْﻨَﻳَﻭ ِﻪْﻴَﻠَﻋ ﺎﻣَﺫ ُﻩُﺪْﻤَﺣ ْﻦُﻜـَﻳ **ِﻪـِﻠْﻫَﺃ ِﺮـﻴَﻏ ﻲِﻓ َﻑﻭُﺮْﻌَﻤْﻟﺍ َﻊَﻨْﺼَﻳ ْﻦـَﻣَﻭ ِﻢـِﺴْﻨَﻤِﺑ ﺄَﻃﻮُﻳَﻭ ِﺏﺎَﻴْﻧَﺄِﺑ ُﺱﱠﺮَﻀـُﻳ ** ٍﺓَﺮـﻴـِﺜَﻛ ِﺭﻮُﻣُﺃ ﻲِﻓ ْﻊِﻧﺎَﺼُﻳ ْﻢـَﻟ ْﻦـَﻣَﻭ ِﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ﻰَﻔْﺨَﺗ ﺎَﻬَﻟﺎَﺧ ْﻥِﺇَﻭ ** ٍﺔَﻘﻴِﻠَﺧ ْﻦِـﻣ ٍﺉِﺮْﻣﺍ َﺪْﻨِﻋ ْﻦُﻜَﺗ ﺎَﻤﱠﻬـَﻣَﻭ ِﻢَﻠْﻌُﺗ (Meaning) ﺎﻫﺎﻨﻌﻣ (Word) ﺔﻤﻠﻛ ُﻪُﻈِﻔْﺤَﻳ ُﻩْﺮِﻔَﻳ ٍﺮﻴِﺜَﻛ ِﻝﺎَﻣ ُﺐِﺣﺎَﺻ ٍﻞْﻀَﻓ َﺍﺫ ُﺕْﻮَﻤْﻟﺍ َﻲِﻫَﻭ ،ٍﺔﱠﻴِﻨَﻣ ُﻊْﻤَﺟ ﺎَﻳﺎَﻨَﻤْﻟَﺍ ُﻖﻳِﺮﱠﻄﻟﺍ ﺎَﻨُﻫ ُﺩﻮُﺼْﻘَﻤْﻟﺍَﻭ ،ُﺐَﺒَﺳ ُﻊْﻤَﺟ َﺏﺎَﺒْﺳَﺃ ﻱِﺭﺎَﺠُﻳَﻭ ﻯِﺭﺍَﺪُﻳ ُﻊِﻧﺎَﺼُﻳ ِﺮﻴِﻌَﺒْﻟﺍ ﻒَﺣ ﻢَﺴْﻨِﻤْﻟَﺍ ًﺔَﺌﱢﻴَﺳ ْﻭَﺃ ْﺖَﻧﺎَﻛ ًﺔَﻨَﺴَﺣ ،ُﺔَﻔﱢﺼﻟَﺍ ﺔَﻘﻴِﻠَﺨْﻟَﺍ ﺎَﻬﱠﻨَﻇ ﺎَﻬَﻟﺎَﺧ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise ﺎًﻴِﻓﺍَﻭ ﺎًﺣْﺮَﺷ ِﺕﺎَﻤْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ َﺡَﺮْﺷِﺍ Explain the meaning of the following words (َﺏﺎَﺒْﺳَﺃ ،ﺎَﻳﺎَﻨَﻤْﻟﺍ ،ٍﻞْﻀَﻓ ﺍَﺫ ،ُﻩْﺮُﻔَﻳ ،ﺎَﻬَﻟﺎَﺧ ،ُﺔَﻘﻴِﻠَﺨْﻟَﺍ ،ُﻢَﺴْﻨِﻤْﻟَﺍ ،ُﻊِﻧﺎَﺼُﻳ) - 1 ﻰَﻨْﻌَﻤْﻟَﺍ َﻚِﻟَﺫ ﻱِﺩْﺆَﻳ ﻱﱠﺬَﻟﺍ َﺖْﻴَﺒْﻟﺍ ِﺕﺎَﻫ ,ِﺭَﺪَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﻰَﺠﻨُﻳ َﻻ َﺭَﺬَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻥ ِﺇ - 2 3.2 Poem 2 ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 2 ﻪـِﺻﻮُﺗ َﻻَﻭ ﺎًﻤﻴِﻜـَﺣ ْﻞِﺳْﺭَﺄـَﻓ ** ًﻼـِﺳْﺮُﻣ ٍﺔـَﺟﺎَﺣ ﻲِﻓ َﺖْﻨـُﻛ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ﻪـِﺼْﺤُﺗ ْﻢَﻟ َﺖْﻧَﺃ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ﺎًﺜﻳﺪِـَﺣ ** ٍﺲِﻠْﺠـَﻣ ﻲِﻓ َﺮْﻫﱠﺪـﻟﺍ ِﺮُﻛْﺬـَﺗ َﻻَﻭ ِﻪـﱢﺼَﻧ ﻲـِﻓ َﺔَﻘﻴِﺛَﻮـْﻟﺍ ْﻥِﺈـَﻓ ** ِﻪـِﻠـْﻫَﺃ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ِﺚﻳِﺪَﺤـْﻟﺍ ﱡﺺـَﻧَﻭ ِﻪـِﺻْﺮِﺣ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ٍﻉﺎَﻀُﻣ ٍﺺﻳِﺮَﺣ ** ٍﺉﺮِـْﻣﺍ ﱠﺏُﺮـَﻓ ﱠﻦَﺻِﺮـْﺤـَﺗ َﻻَﻭ ﻪِـِﺼْﺨَﺷ ْﻦِﻣ ُﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ُﺐَﻌْﺼَﻳ ْﺪَﻗَﻭ ** ُﻪُﻠْﻘـَﻋ ٌﻂِﻗﺎَﺳ ﻰَﺘَﻓ ْﻦـِﻣ ْﻢـَﻛَﻭ ﻪـّﺼَﻓ ْﻦِﻣ ِﺮْﻣَﻷ ﺎِﺑ َﻚـﻴِﺗْﺄـَﻳَﻭ ** ﺎـًﻘِﺋﺎَﻣ ُﻪـَﺘْﻠـِﺧ ٍﺉِﺮـْﻣﺍ ﱠﺏُﺭَﻭ 64ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻩﺎﻌﻨﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ Meaning Words ِﻱْﺃﱠﺮﻟﺍ ُﺐْﻠَﺻ ,ُﺏﱠﺮَﺠُﻤْﻟَﺍ ُﺮﻴِﺒَﺨْﻟَﺍ ُﻢﻴِﻜَﺤْﻟَﺍ ِﺔﻴَﺤِﺼﱠﻨِﻠﻟ ﺝٍﺎَﺘْﺤُﻣ ﺮْﻴَﻏ ُﻪﱠﻧَﻷ ُﻪَﺤَﺼْﻨَﺗَﻻ ِﻪِﺻﻮُﺗ َﻻ ِﻪِﺗَﺮْﺒِﺨِﻟ ِﺮْﻫﱠﺪﻟﺍ َﻝﻮُﻃ ُﺪُﺼْﻘَﻳ ُﺮْﻫﱠﺪﻟَﺍ ِﺮْﻛِﺬِﻟ ُﺽَﺮْﻌَﺘَﺗَﻻ :ﻰَﻨْﻌَﻤْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﻪِﺑ ﱡﻂِﺤُﺗ ْﻢَﻟ ﻪﺼْﺤُﺗ ْﻢَﻟ ﺎَﻄﻴِﺤُﻣ َﺖْﻨُﻛ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ﱠﻻِﺇ ِﺦﻳِﺭﺎﱠﺘﻟﺍ ِﺙِﺩﺍَﻮَﺣ ﺎﻤِﻠُﻣ ﺎَﻬِﺑ ﺎَﻬِﻠﻴِﺻﺎَﻔَﺘِﺑ َﺖْﻠَﻘَﻧ َﻦﻳﱠﺬﻟﺍ ِﻪِﻠْﻫَﺃ ﻰَﻟِﺇ َﺚﻳِﺪَﺤْﻟَﺍ ِﺐِﺴْﻧَﺍ ِﺚﻳِﺪَﺤْﻟَﺍ ﱡﺺَﻧَﻭ ْﻢُﻬْﻨَﻋ ْﻢُﻫَءﺎَﻤْﺳَﺃ ْﺮُﻛْﺫﺍَﻭ ُﺓﱠﻮُﻘْﻟَﺍ ُﺔَﻘﻴِﺛَﻮْﻟَﺍ ِﻉﺎَﺘَﻣ ﻲِﻓ ِﻊْﻤﱠﻄﻟﺍ َﺪﻳِﺪَﺷ ْﻦُﻜَﺗَﻻ ﱠﻦَﺻِﺮْﺤَﺗ َﻻ ﺎَﻴْﻧﱡﺪﻟﺍ ﻚﻟﺎَﻫ ُﻉﺎَﻀُﻣ ِﻞْﻘَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺪِﺳﺎَﻓ ُﻖَﻤْﺣَﺃ ُﻖِﺋﺎَﻣ ًﺄﻴَﺷ َﻪَﺒْﻨُﻣ ُﻙُﺮْﺘَﻳ َﻻ ُﻪُﻠْﺻَﺃ ُﻪِﺼَﻓ Self Assessment Exercise 2 ﺖﺳﺭﺩ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻞﻤﻛ ﺍ - 1 ................................. ** ًﻼـِﺳْﺮُﻣ ٍﺔـَﺟﺎَﺣ ﻲِﻓ َﺖْﻨـُﻛ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ﻪـِﺼْﺤُﺗ ْﻢـَﻟ َﺖْﻧَﺃ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ﺎًﺜـﻳﺪِـَﺣ ** ............................... ِﻪـﱢﺼَﻧ ﻲـِﻓ َﺔَﻘـﻴِﺛَﻮـْﻟﺍ ْﻥِﺈـَﻓ ** ............................... ِﻪـِﺻْﺮِﺣ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ٍﻉﺎَﻀُﻣ ٍﺺﻳِﺮـَﺣ ** ٍﺉﺮِـْﻣﺍ ﱠﺏُﺮـَﻓ ﱠﻦَﺻِﺮـْﺤـَﺗ َﻻَﻭ ................................. ** ُﻪُﻠْﻘـَﻋ ٌﻂِﻗﺎَﺳ ﻰَﺘَﻓ ْﻦـِﻣ ْﻢـَﻛَﻭ ﻪـّﺼَﻓ ْﻦـِﻣ ِﺮـْﻣَﻷﺎِﺑ َﻚـﻴِﺗْﺄـَﻳَﻭ ** ............................... .َﻖَﺒَﺳ ﺎَﻤَﻛ ِﺺﱠﻨﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﱞﻂَﺧ ﺎَﻬِﺘْﺤَﺗ ٍﺔَﻤْﻠَﻛ َﻝَﺪَﺑ َﺔَﻤْﻠَﻛ ِﺕﺎَﻫ -2 4.0 CONCLUSION We have given you in this Unit two different poems in full vocalized 65ARA016 Arabic Reader Arabic.
After each of the poems, some difficult words were highlighted with their meanings given.
This was done in other to improve your ability of perfect reading and understanding of Arabic passages.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit was focused on the Arabic poetry texts with full vocalization to give student good standard in Arabic reading and communication.
In the passages given, some difficult words and their meanings were tabulated for students’ understanding.
This will assist the students to understand the passage easily and will also assist them to form simple Arabic sentences on their own without tears.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT :ِﺔَﻴِﺗﻵﺍ ِﺕﺎَﻤْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ ﻰَﻨْﻌَﻣﺎَﻣ -1 ﻭُﺫ ،ﺎَﻳﺎَﻨَﻤْﻟَﺍ ،ُﻢَﺴْﻨِﻤْﻟَﺍ ،ُﺔَﻘﻴِﻠَﺨْﻟَﺍ ،ُﻖِﺋﺎَﻤْﻟَﺍ ،ُﻉﺎَﻀُﻤْﻟَﺍ ،ُﺔَﻘﻴِﺛَﻮْﻟَﺍ ،ُﺮْﻫﱠﺪﻟﺍ ،ُﻢﻴِﻜَﺤْﻟَﺍ) (ُﺏﺎَﺒْﺳَﻷَﺍ ،ٍﻞْﻀَﻓ ﻰَﻨْﻌَﻤْﻟﺍ َﻚِﻟَﺫ ﻱِﺩْﺆُﻳ ﻱﱠﺬﻟﺍ َﺖْﻴَﺒْﻟﺍ ِﺕﺎَﻫ .ِﺭَﺪَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﻲِﺠْﻨُﻳ َﻻ َﺭَﺬَﺤْﻟﺍ ْﻥ ِﺇ - 2 ﺎَﻬَﺘْﺳَﺭَﺩ ﺎَﻤَﻛ ِﺕﺎَﻴْﺑَﻷﺍ ِﻩِﺬَﻫ ْﻞِﻤْﻛ َﺃ - 3 ................................. ** ًﻼـِﺳْﺮُﻣ ٍﺔـَﺟﺎَﺣ ﻲِﻓ َﺖْﻨـُﻛ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ﻪـِﺼْﺤُﺗ ْﻢـَﻟ َﺖْﻧَﺃ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ﺎًﺜـﻳﺪِـَﺣ ** ............................... ِﻪـﱢﺼَﻧ ﻲـِﻓ َﺔَﻘـﻴِﺛَﻮـْﻟﺍ ْﻥِﺈـَﻓ ** ............................... ِﻪـِﺻْﺮِﺣ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ٍﻉﺎَﻀُﻣ ٍﺺﻳِﺮـَﺣ ** ٍﺉﺮِـْﻣﺍ ﱠﺏُﺮـَﻓ ﱠﻦَﺻِﺮـْﺤـَﺗ َﻻَﻭ ................................. ** ُﻪُﻠْﻘـَﻋ ٌﻂِﻗﺎَﺳ ﻰَﺘَﻓ ْﻦـِﻣ ْﻢـَﻛَﻭ ﻪـّﺼَﻓ ْﻦـِﻣ ِﺮـْﻣَﻷﺎِﺑ َﻚـﻴِﺗْﺄـَﻳَﻭ ** ............................... 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakῑ Ali, S (1992).
Al-adab wa `t-Tārīkh fi `l- ‘Aşrayn, (sic.
), Cairo.
2.
Muhsin, A.B; Jamil, A.A; Ahmed, R.H. (1991).
An- Nuşūşu `l- Adabiyya, Jeddah, KSA.
66ARA016 Arabic Reader 3.
Al- Ghamrāwī, Muhammad Husayn (1992).
Majmū’ah mina `n-Nazm wa `n-Nathr, Cairo.
4.
Ali, Mohammed & Zakī, Ali.
(1974).
Al-‘Adab wat-Tā’rīkh fi `l-‘Aşrayn… Azhar:Cairo UNIT 5: READING AND UNDERSTANDING OF UN-VOCALIZED ARABIC POETRY TEXTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Poem 1 3.2 Poem 2 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References \ further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The focus of our lesson in the last unit was the reading of vocalized Arabic poetry where two vocalized Arabic poems were given as examples.
In this 67ARA016 Arabic Reader unit, you will be taught how to read un-vocalized short Arabic poetry passages without tears.
It is the advanced continuation of the last lesson.
Unlike the last lesson where you were taken through some vocalized passages, the focus in this lesson centers on un-vocalized passages which you are expected to read and comprehend.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of the unit, you should be able to • read and understand fully un-vocalized Arabic poetry texts perfectly.
• explain the meaning and message of some Arabic poems 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Poem 1 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 1 ﻪـﻴﺻﻮﺗﻻﻭ ﺎﻤﻴﻜﺣ ﻞﺳﺭﺄـﻓ ** ﻼـﺳﺮﻣ ﺔﺟﺎـﺣ ﻲـﻓ ﺖﻨـﻛ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻪﺼﻘـٌﺗ ﻻﻭ ﻪﻨـﻋ ﺄﻨـﺗﻼـﻓ ** ﺎﻧﺩ ﺎﻣﻮـﻳ ﻚﻨـﻣ ﺢـﺻﺎـﻧ ﻥﺇﻭ ﻪﺼﻌـﺗﻻﻭ ﺎﺒﻴـﺒﻟ ﺭﻭﺎـﺸـﻓ ** ﻯﻮﺘﻟﺍ ﻚـﻴﻠـﻋ ﺮـﻣﺃ ﻥﺎـﺑ ﻥﺇﻭ ﻪﺼﻘﻧ ﻲـﻓ ﺔﻌﻴـﻄﻘـﻟﺍ ﻥﺈـﻓ ** ﻪﱠﻘـﺣ ﻦﺼﻘﻨـﺗﻻ ّﻖﺤـﻟﺍ ﻭﺫﻭ ﺎﻫﺎﻨﻌﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ ﻱﺃﺮﻟﺍ ﺐﻠﺻ _ ﺏّﺮﺠﻤﻟﺍ ﺮﻴﺒﺨﻟﺍ : ﻢﻴﻜﺤﻟﺍ ﻪﺗﺮﺒﺨﻟ ﺔﺤﻴﺼﻨﻠﻟ ﺝﺎﺘﺤﻣ ﺮﻴﻏ ﻪﻧﻷ ﻪﺤﺼﻨﺗ ﻻ : ﻪﻴﺻﻮﺗ ﻻ ﺪﻌﺘﺒﺗ ﻻ : ﺄﻨﺗﻻ ﻪﻨﻣ ﺪﻴﻔﺘﺴﺘﻟ ﻚﻨﻋ ﻩﺪﻌﺒﺗ ﻻ : ﻪﺼﻘﺗ ﻻ ﻪّﻠﺣ ﻰﺼﻌﺘﺴﺗﺍ : ﻯﻮﺘﻟﺍ ﻪﻤﻠﻈﺗ ﻻ : ﺺﻘﺘﻨﺗ ﻻ 68ARA016 Arabic Reader ﺓّﺩﻮﻤﻟﺍ ﻊﻄﻗﻭ ﺮﺠﻬﻟﺍ : ﺔﻌﻴﻄﻘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 1 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻪﻴﻟﺎﺘﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻞﻜﺷﺍ -ﺱ ﻪـﻴﺻﻮﺗﻻﻭ ﺎﻤﻴﻜﺣ ﻞﺳﺭﺄـﻓ ** ﻼـﺳﺮﻣ ﺔﺟﺎـﺣ ﻲـﻓ ﺖﻨـﻛ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻪﺼﻘـٌﺗ ﻻﻭ ﻪﻨـﻋ ﺄﻨـﺗﻼـﻓ ** ﺎﻧﺩ ﺎﻣﻮـﻳ ﻚﻨـﻣ ﺢـﺻﺎـﻧ ﻥﺇﻭ ﻪﺼﻌـﺗﻻﻭ ﺎﺒﻴـﺒﻟ ﺭﻭﺎـﺸـﻓ ** ﻯﻮﺘﻟﺍ ﻚـﻴﻠـﻋ ﺮـﻣﺃ ﻥﺎـﺑ ﻥﺇﻭ ﻪﺼﻘﻧ ﻲـﻓ ﺔﻌﻴـﻄﻘـﻟﺍ ﻥﺈـﻓ ** ﻪﱠﻘـﺣ ﻦﺼﻘﻨـﺗﻻ ّﻖﺤـﻟﺍ ﻭﺫﻭ 3.2 Poem 2 ﻰﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 2 ﻪﺒﻠﻃ ﻲﻓ ّﺪﺠـﻳ ﻢﻠﻌـﻟﺎـﺑ ﻻﺇ ** ﻪﺑﺭﺃ ﻰﻬﺘـﻨﻣ ءﺮﻤـﻟﺍ ﻎﻠﺒـﻳ ﻻ ﻪﺒﻠﻘﻨﻣ ءﻮـﺳ ﻦﻣ ﺎًﻨﻴﻣﺃ ﺎﺸﻴـﻋ ** ﺍًﺪﻏﺭ ﺶﻌـﺗ ﻪّﻠـﻇ ﻰﻟﺇ ﻯﻭﺄﻓ ﻪﺒﻌﺗ ﻰﻨﺟ ﻦﻣ ءﺮﻤـﻟﺍ ﺔﺣﺍﺮـﻓ ** ًﺍﺪﺑﺃ ﻪﺑ ﺡﺮﺘﺴﺗ ﻪـﻟ ﺐﻌـﺗﺍﻭ ﻪﺑﺮﺿ ﻦﻋﻭ ﻩﺪﻬﺷ ﻦﻋ ﺏﺮﺿﺃ ** ﺎﻬـﻗﱠﻭﺬـﺗ ﻦﻣ ﻢﻠﻌـﻟﺍ ﺓّﺬـﻟﻭ ﻪﺒﻄﻗ ﻲﻓ ﺭﻭﺪﺗ ﻰﻟﺎﻌﻤـﻟﺍ ﻞـﻛ ** ﺎﻜﻠـﻓ ﻼﻌـﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﻢﻠﻌـﻠﻟ ﻥِﺍﻭ ﺎﻫﺎﻨﻌﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ (Meaning) (Word) ﻩﺪﺼﻘﻣ ﻪﺑﺭﺃ ﻊﺴﺗﺍﻭ ﺏﺎﻃ ﻪﺸﻴﻋ ﺪﻏﺭ ﺮﻤﺛ ﻰﻨﺟ ﻆﻴﻠﻐﻟﺍ ﺾﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻞﺴﻌﻟ ﺍ ﺪﻬﺸﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 2 ﻰﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ ﺖﻈﻔﺣ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻞﻤﻛﺍ -ﺱ ..…………………… ** ﻪﺑﺭﺃ ﻰﻬـﺘﻨﻣ ءﺮﻤـﻟﺍ ﻎﻠﺒـﻳ ﻻ ﻪﺒﻠﻘﻨـﻣ ءﻮﺳ ﻦﻣ ﺎًﻨﻴـﻣﺃ ﺎﺸﻴـﻋ ** .............................. ﻪﺒﻌﺗ ﻰﻨـﺟ ﻦﻣ ءﺮﻤـﻟﺍ ﺔﺣﺍﺮـﻓ ** ﺍًﺪﺑﺃ ﻪﺑ ﺡﺮﺘﺴـﺗ ﻪـﻟ ﺐﻌـﺗﺍﻭ ............................... ** .............................. 69ARA016 Arabic Reader .............................. ** ﺎﻜﻠﻓ ﻼﻌـﻟﺍ ﻲـﻓ ﻢﻠﻌـﻠﻟ ﻥﺇﻭ 4.0 CONCLUSION We have given you in this unit un-vocalized Arabic poetry texts to improve your reading ability and understanding.
Students can gain proficiency in un-vocalized texts by reading over and over the texts and by asking questions.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit was focused on the un-vocalized short Arabic poetry texts to give students good standard reading and understanding of un-vocalized Arabic poetry texts.
Some seemingly difficult words were pinpointed with their meanings given to assist students’ understanding of the lesson.
Assignments were also given to test their understanding.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT.
.
ﺔﻴﻟﺎﺘﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻰﻨﻌﻣ ﺎﻣ (1) ،ﻰﻨﺟ ،ﺔﻌﻴﻄﻘﻟﺍ ،ﺺﻘﺘﻨﺗ ﻻ ،ﻯﻮﺘﻟﺍ ، ﻪﺼﻘﺗ ﻻ ،ﺄﻨﺗ ﻻ ،ﻪﻴﺻﻮﺗ ﻻ) (ﻪﺸﻴﻋ ﺪﻏﺭ ،ﺪﻬﺸﻟﺍ ، ﺏﺭﻷﺍ ﺎﻬﺘﻈﻔﺣ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻞﻤﻛﺍ (2) ﻪﻴﺻﻮـﺗ ﻻﻭ ﺎﻤﻴﻜﺣ ﻞـﺳﺭﺄﻓ ** ﻼـﺳﺮﻣ ﺔﺟﺎﺣ ﻲﻓ ﺖﻨـﻛ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻪﺼﻘـﺗ ﻻﻭ ﻪﻨـﻋ ﺄﻨـﺗ ﻼـﻓ ** ............................. ﻪﺼﺤـﺗ ﻢﻟ ﺖﻧﺍ ﺍﺬﻏ ﺎﺜﻳﺪـﺣ ** ............................. ﻪـﺼﻘـﺗ ﻻﻭ ﻪﻨﻋ ﺄﻨـﺗ ﻼـﻓ ** ............................. ............................ ** ﻪـّﻘـﺣ ﻦﺼﻘـﻨﺗﻻ ﻖﺤﻟﺍ ﻭﺫﻭ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻴﻟﺎﺘﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻞﻜﺷ ﺍ (2) ﻪﺒﻠﻃ ﻲﻓ ّﺪﺠـﻳ ﻢﻠﻌـﻟﺎـﺑ ﻻﺇ ** ﻪﺑﺭﺃ ﻰﻬﺘـﻨﻣ ءﺮﻤـﻟﺍ ﻎﻠﺒـﻳ ﻻ ﻪﺒﻠﻘﻨﻣ ءﻮـﺳ ﻦﻣ ﺎًﻨﻴﻣﺃ ﺎﺸﻴـﻋ ** ﺍًﺪﻏﺭ ﺶﻌـﺗ ﻪّﻠـﻇ ﻰﻟﺇ ﻯﻭﺄﻓ 70ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻪﺒﻌﺗ ﻰﻨﺟ ﻦﻣ ءﺮﻤـﻟﺍ ﺔﺣﺍﺮـﻓ ** ًﺍﺪﺑﺃ ﻪﺑ ﺡﺮﺘﺴﺗ ﻪـﻟ ﺐﻌـﺗﺍﻭ ﻪﺑﺮﺿ ﻦﻋﻭ ﻩﺪﻬﺷ ﻦﻋ ﺏﺮﺿﺃ ** ﺎﻬـﻗﱠﻭﺬـﺗ ﻦﻣ ﻢﻠﻌـﻟﺍ ﺓّﺬـﻟﻭ ﻪﺒﻄﻗ ﻲﻓ ﺭﻭﺪﺗ ﻰﻟﺎﻌﻤـﻟﺍ ﻞـﻛ ** ﺎﻜﻠـﻓ ﻼﻌـﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﻢﻠﻌـﻠﻟ ﻥِﺍﻭ 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS 1.
Ali, Mohammed; & Zakī, Ali (1974).
Al-Adab wa tarikhuhu fi `l- Aşrayn, al- Azhar, Cairo 2.
Muhsin, A.B; Jamil, A.A; Ahmed, R.H. (1991).
An- Nuşūşu `l- Adabiyyah.
Jeddah, KSA.
3.
Al- Ghamrāwī, Muhammad Husayn (1992).
Majmū’ah mina `n-Nazm wa `n-Nathr, Cairo.
4.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakī Ali, S (1992).
Al-Adab wa `t-Tārīkh fi `l- ‘aşrayn, (sic.
), Cairo.
71ARA016 Arabic Reader MODULE 3 UNIT 1: READING AND UNDERSTANDING OF FAIRLY DIFFICULT WORDS OF VOCALIZED LONG ARABIC PROSE TEXTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 ِﺪْﻬُﺠْﻟﺍ ُﻞْﻀَﻓ 3.2 ﱡﻲِﻛﱠﺬﻟﺍ ُﻚْﻳﱢﺪﻟﺍ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/ further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You learnt in the last lesson the reading of unvocalized Arabic passages.
It is certain that you might have come across some seemingly difficult words which were explained in the previous lessons.
This unit is a gradual graduation from seemingly simple section, to little more complex ones.
During the course of the lesson, you will come across some more words that you will perceive to be difficult either in meaning or in pronunciation.
You should not allow these words to scare you rather you should practice the pronunciation over and over until you become familiar with them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit, you should be able to • read and understand vocalized long Arabic prose texts • examine the uses of difficult words in the texts.
• compose long vocalized Arabic passages with ease.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 72ARA016 Arabic Reader 3.1 ِﺪْﻬُﺠْﻟﺍ ُﻞْﻀَﻓ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 1 ُﺮُﺜْﻨَﻳَﻭ ،َﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﺙِﺮْﺤَﻳ ٍﻡﺎَﻋ ﱢﻞُﻛ ﻲِﻓَﻭ ،ًﻼْﻘَﺣ ُﻚِﻠْﻤَﻳ ٌﺮﻴِﺒَﻛ ٌﺦْﻴَﺷ ُﻥﺎَﻤْﻴَﻠُﺳ ُﺪُﺼْﺤَﻳ ُﻉْﺭﱠﺰﻟﺍ ُﺞُﻀْﻨَﻳ ﺎَﻣ َﺪﻨِﻋَﻭ .ُﻉْﺭﱠﺰﻟﺍ ُﺖُﺒْﻨَﻴَﻓ ُﺮَﻄَﻤْﻟﺍ ُﻂُﻘْﺴَﻳ ﱠﻢُﺛ ,ﱠﺐَﺤْﻟﺍ َﺮَﺧﻵﺍ َﻢْﺴِﻘْﻟﺍ ُﻙُﺮْﺘَﻳَﻭ ِﺢْﻤَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﺎًﻤْﺴِﻗ ُﻊﻴِﺒَﻴَﻓ ِﺖْﻴَﺒْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻟِﺇ َﺢْﻤَﻘْﻟﺍ ُﺐِﻠﺠَﻳَﻭ ُﻥﺎَﻤْﻴَﻠُﺳ .ِﻞْﻛَﻸِﻟ ِﻡﺎَﻳَﻷﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٍﻡْﻮَﻳ ﻲِﻓَﻭ .ُﻩَﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺪِﻋﺎَﺴُﻳَﻻَﻭ ُﻞَﻤْﻌَﻳ َﻻ ٌﺪَﻟَﻭ ِﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ َﺪْﻨِﻋ َﻥﺎَﻛَﻭ َﺕﻮُﻣَﺃ ْﻥَﺃ ُﻑﺎَﺧَﺃَﻭ ُﺖْﻔِﻌَﺿ ﻲﱢﻧِﺇ ﻱِﺪَﻟَﻭﺎَﻳ " :َﻝﺎَﻗَﻭ ﻩَﺪَﻟَﻭ ﻰَﻋَﺪَﻓ ُﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ َﺽِﺮَﻣ ْﻊَﻤْﺳﺎَﻓ ،ُﻪْﻨِﻣ ُﺶْﻴِﻌَﺗ ٌﻝﺎَﻣ َﻙَﺪْﻨِﻋ َﺲْﻴَﻟَﻭ ًﺔَﻌْﻨُﺻ ُﻑِﺮْﻌَﺗ َﻻَﻭ ُﻞَﻤْﻌَﺗ َﻻ َﺖْﻧَﺃَﻭ ﻲِﺗْﻮَﻣ َﺪْﻌَﺑ ِﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ْﺐَﻫْﺫِﺇ ،ُﻪَﻧﺎَﻜَﻣ ُﻑِﺮْﻋَﺃ َﻻ ٌﺰْﻨَﻛ ِﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ :ﻲِﺘَﺤﻴِﺼَﻧ ".َﺰْﻨَﻜْﻟﺍ ِﺝِﺮْﺧَﺃَﻭ ُﻪْﺛِﺮْﺣﺍَﻭ ِﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻰَﻟِﺇ َﺐَﻫَﺫَﻭ ،ِﻩِﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻥِﺰَﺣَﻭ ، ُﻥﺎَﻤْﻴَﻠُﺳ ُﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ َﺕﺎَﻣ " :َﻝﺎَﻘَﻓ ,ﺍًﺰْﻨَﻛ ْﺪِﺠَﻳ ْﻢَﻠَﻓ ،ِﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ٍﻥﺎَﻜَﻣ ﱠﻞُﻛ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﺙَﺮَﺣ ِﺰْﻨَﻜْﻟﺍ ْﻦَﻋ َﺶﱢﺘْﻔَﻴِﻟ ُﻉْﺭﱠﺰﻟﺍ َﺖَﺒَﻧَﻭ ،ﱠﺐَﺤْﻟﺍ َﺮَﺜَﻨَﻓ ،ﻱِﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ َﻞْﺜِﻣ ُﻪَﻋَﺭْﺯَﺃ ْﻥَﺃ ُﺐِﺠَﻴَﻓ َﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﺖْﺛَﺮَﺣ ِﺪَﻘَﻟ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻢِﻬَﻓَﻭ ِﻞْﻛَﻸِﻟ َﺮَﺧﻵﺍ َﻢْﺴِﻘْﻟﺍ َﻙَﺮَﺗَﻭ ُﻪْﻨِﻣ ﺎًﻤْﺴِﻗ َﻉﺎَﺑَﻭ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ُﻩَﺪَﺼَﺤَﻓ ،َﺞَﻀَﻧَﻭ َﺪَﺼَﺣَﻭ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻉَﺭَﺯ .َﻞَﺴَﻜْﻟﺍ َﻙُﺮْﺘَﻳَﻭ َﻞَﻤْﻌَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ ِﻪِﺘَﺤﻴِﺼَﻧ ﻲِﻓ ُﻪْﻨِﻣ َﺩﺍَﺭَﺃ ُﻩَﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ﱠﻥَﺃ "ِﺓَﺩﺎَﻌَﺳ ﻲِﻓ َﺵﺎَﻋَﻭ َﻉﺎَﺑَﻭ Following are some words and their meanings as used in the passage above: A garden ًﻼْﻘَﺣ He cultivates ُﺙِﺮْﺤَﻳ He grows ُﺮُﺜْﻨَﻳ Germinates ُﺖُﺒْﻨَﻳ Crops ِﻉْﺭﱠﺰﻟﺍ Mature ُﺞُﻀْﻨَﻳ The grains ُﺢْﻤَﻘْﻟَﺃ He helps ﺪِﻋﺎَﺴُﻳ A skill ٌﺔَﻌْﻨُﺻ He became dejected َﻥِﺰَﺣ To search َﺶِﺘْﻔَﻴِﻟ The treasure ُﺰْﻨَﻜْﻟَﺃ 73ARA016 Arabic Reader Laziness ُ ﻞْﺴَﻜْﻟَﺃ He harvested َﺪَﺼَﺣ He sold َﻉﺎَﺑ ﻲﺿﺎﻣ ﻉﺭﺎﻀﻣ Past tense Present tense َﻚَﻠَﻣ ُﻚِﻠْﻤَﻳ َﺙِﺮَﺣ ُﺙِﺮْﺤَﻳ َﺮَﺜَﻧ ُﺮُﺜْﻨَﻳ َﻂَﻘَﺳ ُﻂُﻘْﺴَﻳ َﺖَﺒَﻧ ُﺖُﺒْﻨَﻳ َﺞَﻀَﻧ ُﺞِﻀْﻨَﻳ َﺪَﺼَﺣ ُﺪُﺼْﺤَﻳ َﺐَﻠَﺟ ُﺐِﻠْﺠَﻳ َﻒَﻌَﺿ ُﻒُﻌْﻀَﻳ َﺽِﺮَﻣ ُﺽُﺮْﻤَﻳ َﻥِﺰَﺣ ُﻥِﺰْﺤَﻳ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 1 :ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻦﻋ ﺐﺟﺃ -ﺃ ؟ ُﻥﺎَﻤْﻴَﻠُﺳ ُﻚِﻠْﻤَﻳ ﺍَﺫ ﺎَﻣ -1 ؟َﻉْﺭﱠﺰﻟﺍ ُﻥﺎَﻤْﻴَﻠُﺳ ُﺪُﺼْﺤَﻳ ﻰَﺘَﻣ -2 ؟ُﺰْﻨَﻜْﻟﺍ ُﺪَﺟﻮُﻳ َﻦْﻳَﺃ -3 ؟ًﺔَﻌْﻨَﺻ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ُﻑِﺮْﻌَﻳ ْﻞَﻫ -4 ؟ِﻩِﺪَﻟَﻮِﻟ ُﺪِﻟﺍَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻝﺎَﻗ ﺍَﺫ ﺎَﻣ -5 ؟ِﺰْﻨَﻜْﻟﺍ ِﻦَﻋ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﺶﱠﺘَﻓ َﻒْﻴَﻛ -6 ؟ِﻩِﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻥِﺰَﺣ ْﻞَﻫ -7 ؟َﻞَﺴَﻜْﻟﺍ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﻙَﺮَﺗ ْﻞَﻫ -8 ؟ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ َﺵﺎَﻋ َﻒْﻴَﻛ -9 74ARA016 Arabic Reader -:ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﻞﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻲِﻟﺎَﺨْﻟﺍ ِﻥﺎَﻜَﻤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﺎًﻴِﺿﺎَﻣ ًﻼْﻌِﻓ ْﻊَﺿ -ﺏ (ُﻙُﺮْﺘَﻳ ,ُﻊﻴِﺒَﻳ ,ُﺞُﻀْﻨَﻳ ,ُﺮُﺜْﻨَﻳ ,ُﺙُﺮْﺤَﻳ ,ُﻚِﻠْﻤَﻳ ) ٍﻡْﻮَﻳ ﱢﻞُﻛ ﻲِﻓ َﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ ................. -1 ﱠﺐَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ............... -2 ﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ ُﻩُﺪُﺼْﺤَﻴَﻓ ﻉْﺭﱠﺰﻟﺍ ............. -3 ًﻼْﻘَﺣ ُﻥﺎَﻤْﻴَﻠُﺳ ............. -4 َﻞَﺴَﻜْﻟﺍ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ............... -5 ِﺢْﻤَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﺎًﻤْﺴِﻗ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ............ -6 Text 2 ﱡﻲِﻛﱠﺬﻟﺍ ﺍّﻝﺩﻱﻙ ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ٍﻦﻴِﻜْﺴِﻣ ٍﺦْﻴَﺷ َﻞْﺜِﻣ ِﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﻰَﺸَﻣَﻭ ًﺔَﺤْﺒُﺳ َﻞِﻤَﺣَﻭ ًﺔَﻣﺎَﻤِﻋ ُﺐَﻠْﻌﱠﺜﻟﺍ َﺲِﺒَﻟ َﻥﱢﺫَﺆُﻴَﻓ ِﺓَﺮَﺠﱠﺸﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ َﻝِﺰْﻨَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ َﻚﻳﱢﺪﻟﺍ ﺍﻭُﺮِﺒْﺧَﺃ" -:ِﺭﺎَﻤِﺤْﻟﺍﻭ ِﺭْﻮﱠﺜﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺓَﺮَﻘَﺒْﻠِﻟ ُﻝﻮُﻘَﻳ َﺪْﻴَﺻ ُﺖْﻛَﺮَﺗَﻭ ًﺍﺪْﺣَﺃ َﻥﻭﱡﺮُﻀَﻳ َﻻ َﻦْﻳِﺬﱠﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ُﺖَﺤَﺒْﺻَﺃ ْﺪَﻘَﻠَﻓ ،ِﺢْﺒﱡﺼﻟﺍ ِﺓَﻼَﺼِﻟ ﺎَﻨﻴِﻓ ﻲِﻓ ِﻝﺎَﻘِﺗْﺮُﺒْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺯْﻮَﻤْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺦﻴِﻄَﺒﻟﺍ ِﻞْﻛَﺃ ﻰَﻠَﻋ َﻥﻵﺍ ُﺶﻴِﻋَﺃ ﻲﱢﻧِﺇَﻭ ،ِﺭﻮُﻴﱡﻄﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺝﺎَﺟﱠﺪﻟﺍ .ِﻝﻮُﻘُﺤْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﻉَﺭْﺰَﻤْﻟﺍ َﺲِﺒَﻟ َﺐَﻠْﻌﱠﺜﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺈَﻓ ﻲِﻘﻳِﺪَﺻﺎَﻳ ْﻝِﺰْﻧِﺇ " :ُﻪَﻟ َﻝﺎَﻗَﻭ ِﻚﻳﱢﺪﻟﺍ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﺭْﻮﱠﺜﻟﺍ َﺐَﻫَﺬَﻓ .ِﺭﺎَﻤْﺛَﻷﺍ َﺮْﻴَﻏ ًﺄْﻴَﺷ ُﻞُﻛْﺄَﻳ َﻻ َﺭﺎَﺻَﻭ ِﺭﻮُﻴﱡﻄﻟﺍ َﻞْﻛَﺃ َﻙَﺮَﺗَﻭ َﺔَﺤْﺒﱡﺴﻟﺍ َﻞِﻤَﺣَﻭ َﺔَﻣﺎَﻤِﻌْﻟﺍ َﻻ َﺔَﻣﺎَﻤِﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺲَﺒْﻠَﻳ ﻱِﺬﱠﻟﺍ َﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇ .
"ﻲِﻗِﺪَﺻﺎَﻳ ْﻕﱢﺪَﺼُﺗ َﻻ" :ُﻚﻳﱢﺪﻟﺍ ُﻪَﻟ َﻝﺎَﻘَﻓ ﻱِﺪِﻟﺍَﻭ ْﻦَﻋ ُﺖْﻌِﻤَﺳ ﻲﱢﻧِﺇَﻭ .ُﺏِﺬْﻜَﻳ َﻻ َﺔَﺤْﺒﱡﺴﻟﺍ ُﻞَﻤْﺤَﻳ ﻱِﺬﱠﻟﺍ َﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ ﱠﻥِﺇَﻭ ُﺏِﺬْﻜَﻳ َﺪْﻨِﻋ ُﺢﻴِﺻَﺃَﻭ ِﺓَﺮَﺠﱠﺸﻟﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ﺎَﻨُﻫ ﻰَﻘْﺑَﺄَﺳَﻭ .ُﻪُﻌْﻄُﺗ َﻻ ُﻉﺍﱠﺪَﺧ َﺐَﻠْﻌﱠﺜﻟﺍ ﱠﻥَﺃ ﻱﱢﺪَﺟَﻭ ِﻥﱢﺫَﺆُﻤْﻟﺍ َﺕْﻮَﺻَﻭ ﻲِﺗْﻮَﺻ ﺍﻮُﻌَﻤْﺴَﺗ ْﻥَﺃ َﺪْﻌَﺑ َﻥﻮﱡﻠَﺼُﺗ ْﻢُﺘْﻧَﺃَﻭ ﻲِﺗَﺩَﺎﻋ َﻞْﺜِﻣ ِﺮْﺠَﻔْﻟﺍ .ِﻪِﻠْﻘَﺣ ْﻦِﻣ ُﻩَﺩَﺮََﻃ َﺐَﻠْﻌﱠﺜﻟﺍ ِﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﺐِﺣﺎَﺻ ﻯَﺃَﺭ ﺎَﻤَﻟَﻭ Following are some words and their meanings as used in the passage above: Fox ُﺐَﻠْﻌَﺜﻟﺍ Turban ُﺔَﻣﺎَﻤَﻋ Poor/needy ﻦْﻴِﻜْﺴِﻣ Cow ُ ﺓَُﺮَﻘَﺒْﻟَﺃ Bull ُﺭْﻮﱠﺜﻟَﺃ Ass ُﺭﺎَﻤِﺤْﻟَﺃ Cock ُﻚْﻳﱢﺪﻟَﺃ Tree ُﺓَﺮَﺠﱠﺸﻟَﺃ 75ARA016 Arabic Reader Hunting ُﺪْﻴَﺻ Banana ُﺯْﻮَﻤْﻟَﺃ Orange ُﻝﺎَﻘُﺗْﺮُﺒْﻟَﺃ Birds ُﺭْﻮُﻴﱡﻄﻟَﺃ Hen ُﺝﺎَﺟﱠﺪﻟَﺃ Fruits ُﺭﺎَﻤْﺛﻻَﺃ Shrewd ٌﻉﺍﱠﺪَﺧ Habit ٌﺓَﺩﺎَﻋ Chased away َﺩَﺮَﻃ ﻊﻤﺟ ﺩﺮﻔﻣ Singular Plural ُﻝﻮُﻘُﺤْﻟَﺍ ُﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟَﺍ ِﺝﺎَﺟﱠﺪﻟَﺍ ُﺔَﺟﺎَﺟﱠﺪﻟﺍ ِﺭﻮَﻴﱡﻄﻟﺍ ُﺮْﻴﱠﻄﻟﺍ ُﻉِﺭﺍَﺰَﻤْﻟَﺍ ُﻉَﺭْﺰَﻤْﻟَﺍ ُﺥﻮُﻴﱡﺸﻟﺍ ُﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ 76ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 2 ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻦﻋ ﺐﺟﺃ -ﺃ ؟ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﺲﺒﻟ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ -1 ؟ ﻩﺪﻴﺑ ﻞﻤﺣ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ -2 ؟ﻲﺸﻤﻳ ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﻥﺎﻛ ﻦﻳﺃ -3 ؟ﻞﻘﺤﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﺪﺟﻭ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ -4 ؟ﻚﻳﺪﻟﺍ ﻥﺫﺆﻳ ﻥﺃ ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﺩﺍﺭﺃ ﻰﺘﻣ -5 ؟ﻞﻘﺤﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﻲﺸﻤﻳ ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﻥﺎﻛ ﻒﻴﻛ -6 ؟ﻞﻘﺤﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﺩﺮﻃ ﻦﻣ -7 ؟ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﻡﻼﻛ ﻚﻳﺪﻟﺍ ﻕّﺪﺻ ﻞﻫ -8 ﺓﺪﻴﻔﻣ ﻼﻤﺟ ﻥﻮﻜﺘﻟ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﺐّﺗﺭ -ﺏ ًﺔﺤﺒﺳ ُﺐَﻠْﻌﱠﺜﻟﺍ ﻞﻤﺣ -1 ﺓﺮﺠﺸﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ُﻚﻳﺪﻟﺍ ُﻝِﺰْﻨَﻳ ﻻ -2 ًﺔَﻣﺎَﻤِﻋ ُﺐﻠﻌﱠﺜﻟﺍ ﺲﺒﻟ -3 ﺭﻮُﻴﱡﻄﻟﺍ ُﻞْﻛَﺃ ُﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﻙﺮﺗ -4 ﻚﻳﺪﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﺇ ُﺭْﻮﱠﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻫﺫ -5 ﻞﻘﺤﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ُﺐَﻠْﻌﱠﺜﻟﺍ ﻲﺸﻣ -6 4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt in this unit how to read and understand Arabic vocabulary from long Arabic prose texts.
Some difficult words in the two passages given were explained to you by giving their meanings.
This is done to aid your comprehension of the passages.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit teaches you how to read and understand vocalized long Arabic prose texts perfectly.
From the two passages given, you have learnt some vocabularies and their meanings.
You should practice all the assignments given you and check from Arabic dictionary, the meaning of any difficult word you 77ARA016 Arabic Reader may come across.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ِﺕﺎَﻤْﻠَﻜْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ٍﺔَﻤْﻠَﻛ ﱢﻞُﻛ َﺩَﺮْﻔُﻣ ِﺕﺎَﻫ -1 (ُﺦْﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ -ُﻉَﺭْﺰَﻤْﻟَﺍ -ﺮْﻴﱠﻄﻟﺍ -ﺔَﺟﺎَﺟﱠﺪﻟﺍ -ُﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟَﺍ ) :ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﻞﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻲﻟﺎﺨﻟﺍ ﻥﺎﻜﻤﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ًﺎﻴﺿﺎﻣ ًﻼﻌﻓ ﻊﺿ -2 ﻡﻮﻳ ﻞﻛ ﻲﻓ َﻞْﻘَﺤْﻟَﺍ ُﺦﻴﺸﻟﺍ .............. -1 ﱠﺐﺤﻟَﺍ ُﺪَﻟَﻮْﻟﺍ ................-2 ﺦﻴﺸﻟﺍ ﻩﺪﺼَﺤَﻓ َﻉْﺭﱠﺰﻟﺍ ............ -3 ًﻼْﻘَﺣ ﻥﺎﻤﻴﻠُﺳ ................. -4 َﻞَﺴَﻜﻟﺍ ُﺪﻟﻮﻟﺍ .......... -5 ﺢْﻤَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻦِﻣ ﺎًﻤْﺴِﻗ ﺪﻟﻮﻟﺍ ............... -6 ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻦﻋ ﺐﺟﺃ ﻢﺛ ﻖﺑﺎﺴﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ﺃﺮﻗﺇ -ـﺟ (ﺃ) ؟ ﻥﺎﻤﻴﻠﺳ ﻚﻠﻤﻳ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ - 1 ؟ ﻥﺎﻤﻴﻠﺳ ﺪﺼﺤﻳ ﻰﺘﻣ - 2 ؟ﻩﺪﻟﻮﻟ ﺪﻟﺍﻮﻟﺍ ﻝﺎﻗ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ - 3 ﺰﻨﻜﻟﺍ ﻦﻋ ﺪﻟﻮﻟﺍ ﺶﺘﻓ ﻒﻴﻛ - 4 ﺰﻨﻜﻟﺍ ﻦﻋ ﺪﻟﻮﻟﺍ ﻥﺰﺣ ﻞﻫ - 5 (ﺏ) ؟ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﺲﺒﻟ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ -1 ؟ﻲﺸﻤﻳ ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﻥﺎﻛ ﻦﻳﺃ -2 ؟ﻚﻳﺪﻟﺍ ﻥﺫﺆﻳ ﻥﺃ ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﺩﺍﺭﺃ ﻰﺘﻣ -3 ؟ﻞﻘﺤﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﻲﺸﻤﻳ ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﻥﺎﻛ ﻒﻴﻛ -4 ؟ﺐﻠﻌﺜﻟﺍ ﻡﻼﻛ ﻚﻳﺪﻟﺍ ﻕﺪﺻ ﻞﻫ -5 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS 1.
Muhammad, B.S; Salim.
H; & Husainy, A (1979): A New Arabic Course for Nigeria: Pupils Book 4, Lagos Longman, Nigeria.
2.
Abdjullahi bn.
Ahmad (ed) (1992).
Silsilatu ta ‘līmi `l-lughati `l- 78ARA016 Arabic Reader ‘Arabiyyah Book 1: Riyadh, KSA 3.
Muhammad, B. S., Salim, H., & Husayn, A.
(1979) A New Arabic Course for Nigeria:Pupils Book1-5, Lagos, Longman Nigeria.
3.
Ibrahim Muhammad Nuhaas & Co. (1985/1405).
Al-Qirā’atu wal- mahfūzah, 6th ed.
Bahrayn.
4.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakī Ali, S (1992).
Al-Adab wa `t-Tārīkh fi `l- ‘aşrayn, (sic.
), Cairo.
UNIT 2: READING AND COMPREHENSION OF UN-VOCALIZED LONG ARABIC PROSE TEXTS.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 ِﺪْﻳِﺮَﺒْﻟﺍ ِﺓَﺮِﺋﺍَﺩ ﻲِﻓ ِﺪِﻟﺎَﺧ ُﺓَﺮْﺒِﺧ 3.2 ُﻢِﺋﺎﱠﺼﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺝﺎﱠﺠَﺤْﻟَﺃ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References / further Readings.
79ARA016 Arabic Reader 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last lesson, you will recall that you were taken through some difficult Arabic words, the meanings of which were explained after each of the two passages given.
In this unit, you will be taught how to read and understand un- vocalized long Arabic prose text without tear.
The unit is to teach you how to be competent in reading and understanding the un-vocalized long Arabic prose texts perfectly.
2.0 OBJECTIVES.
It is hoped that by the end of this unit, you should be able to • master how to read and understand un-vocalized long Arabic prose texts fluently.
• read and write fairly long Arabic prose texts in form of letter writing, stories, reports etc.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT : 3.1 Text 1 ِﺪْﻳِﺮَﺒْﻟﺍ ِﺓَﺮِﺋﺍَﺩ ﻲِﻓ ِﺪِﻟﺎَﺧ ُﺓَﺮْﺒِﺧ ﻝﻭﻷ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻝﺎﻘﻓ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻪﻘﻳﺪﺻ ﻪﻘﻳﺮﻃ ﻲﻓ ﻲﻘﻟﻭ ﺪﻳﺮﺒﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﺋﺍﺩ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﺐﻫﺫ ﺪﻌﺑ ﻲﺗﺄﻳ ﻑﻮﺳﻭ ﺐﺋﺎﻏ ﻒّﻇﻮﻤﻟﺍ ﻦﻜﻟ ﺔﺣﻮﺘﻔﻣ ﺓﺮﺋﺍﺪﻟﺍ ﻥﺇ " :ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻪﻘﻳﺪﺼﻟ ".ﺩﻮﺟﻮﻣ ﺪﻋﺎﺴﻤﻟﺍ ﻥﺇ " :ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻝﺎﻗ "ﻞﻴﻠﻗ ﻒّﻇﻮﻤﻟﺍ ﺮﻈﺘﻨﻳ ﺍﺬﻴﻤﻠﺗ ﺪﺟﻮﻓ ﺓﺮﺋﺍﺪﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺐﻫﺫﻭ ﻪﻘﻳﺪﺻ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻙﺮﺘﻓ ﻥﺃ ﺖﻤﻠﻋ" :ﺬﻴﻤﻠﺘﻟﺍ ﻝﺎﻘﻓ ؟ﻒﻇﻮﻤﻟﺍ ﻦﻋ ﺎﺌﻴﺷ ﻢﻠﻌﺗ ﻞﻫ" : ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻪﻟﺄﺴﻓ .
"ﻡﺩﺎﻗ ﺪﻋﺎﺴﻤﻟﺍ ﻦﻜﻟ ﺾﻳﺮﻣ ﻒﻇﻮﻤﻟﺍ ,ﺓﺮﻴﻨﺑ ﺪﻳﺮﺑ ﻊﺑﺎﻃ ﻲﻨﻴﻄﻌﺗ ﻥﺍ ﻮﺟﺭﺃ " :ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻪﻟ ﻝﺎﻗ ﺪﻋﺎﺴﻤﻟﺍ ءﺎﺟ ﺎﻤﻟﻭ ﻲﻓ ﺔﻟﺎﺳﺮﻟﺍ ﻊﺿﻭﻭ ﺔﻟﺎﺳﺮﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻪﻌﺿﻮﻓ ﻊﺑﺎﻄﻟﺍ ﺪﻋﺎﺴﻤﻟﺍ ﻩﺎﻄﻋﺄﻓ ﺎﺴﻠﺟﻭ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﺖﻴﺑ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺐﻫﺫﻭ ﻩﺮﻈﺘﻨﻳ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﺪﺟﻮﻓ ﻊﺟﺭ ﻢﺛ ,ﺪﻳﺮﺒﻟﺍ ﻕﻭﺪﻨﺻ .ﺔﻘﻳﺪﺤﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻲﻓ ﺎﻨﻌﻣ ﺲﻟﺎﺟ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻥﺃ ﺖﻴﻨﻤﺗ :ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻝﺎﻘﻓ ,ﺔﻠﻴﻤﺟ ﺔﻘﻳﺪﺤﻟﺍ ﺖﻧﺎﻛ ﻦﻜﻟ " ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻝﺎﻗ ﻩﺭﺍﺩ ﻙﺮﺘﻳ ﻻﻭ ﺪﻬﺘﺠﻣ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻥﺇ :ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻝﺎﻗ ،ﻞﻴﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻥﺎﻜﻤﻟﺍ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﻮﻫ ﺢﺟﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺬﻴﻤﻠﺘﻟﺍﻭ ،ﻩﺰﻨﺘﻟﺍ ﺔّﻠﻗﻭ ﺱﺭﺪﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﺜﻛ ﻦﻣ ﻒﻴﻌﺿ ﻪﻤﺴﺟ ﺐﻫﺬﻧ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻝﺎﻗ.
"ﺔﺣﺍﺮﻟﺍﻭ ﺐﻌﻠﻟ ﺖﻗﻮﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻼﻴﻠﻗ ﻙﺮﺘﻳﻭ ﻩﺰﺘﻨﻳﻭ ﺱﺭﺪﻳ ﻉْﺯﺮﻟﺍ ﻯﺮﻧﻭ ﻝﻮﻘﺤﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺐﻫﺬﻧﻭ ﺖﻴﺒﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻪﺟﺮﺨﻧﻭ ﺪﻤﺤﻣ ﻖﻳﺪﺻ ﻰﻟﺇ 80ARA016 Arabic Reader "ﺔﺳﺍﺭﺪﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺃﺪﺒﻧﻭ ﺎﻨﺗﻮﻴﺑ ﻰﻟﺇ ﻊﺟﺮﻧ ﻢﺛ ﺕﺎﻧﺍﻮﻴﺤﻟﺍﻭ ﺭﺎﺠﺷﻷﺍﻭ :ﻢّﻠﻌﺘﻟﺍﻭ ﺓءﺍﺮﻘﻟﺍ .ﻖﻳﺮﻄﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻪﻘﻳﺪﺻ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻲﻘ ﻟ - 1 .ﺔﺣﻮﺘﻔﻣ ﺪﻳﺮﺒﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﺋﺍﺩ ﻥﺇ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻝﺎ ﻗ - 2 "ﻒﻇﻮﻤﻟﺍ ﻦﻋ ﺎﺌﻴﺷ ﻢﻠﻌﺗ ﻞﻫ " ﻝﺎﻘﻓ ﺬﻴﻤﻠﺘﻟﺍ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻝﺄﺳ - 3 ﺾﻳﺮﻣ ﻒﻇﻮﻤﻟﺍ ﻥﺇ ﺬﻴﻤﻠﺘﻟﺍ ﻝﺎ ﻗ - 4 ﺪﻳﺮﺒﻟﺍ ﻊﺑﺎﻃ ﻪﻴﻄﻌﻳ ﻥﺃ ﺪﻋﺎﺴﻤﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﺎﺟﺭ - 5 ﻩﺮﻈﺘﻨﻳ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﻪﻘﻳﺪﺻ ﺪﺟﻮﻓ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻊﺟﺭ - 6 ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﺖﻴﺑ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﻊﻣ ﺪﻤﺣﺃ ﺐﻫﺫ - 7 ﺱﺭﺪﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﺜﻛ ﻦﻣ ﻒﻴﻌﺿ ﺪﻤﺣ ﺃ - 8 ﻩﺰﻨﺘﻟﺍ ﺔﻠﻗ ﻦﻣ ﺐﻌﺗ ﺪﻤﺤﻣ - 9 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 1 ؟ﺪﻳﺮﺒﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﺋﺍﺩ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﺐﻫﺫ ﺍﺫﺎﻤ ﻟ - 1 ؟ﺪﻳﺮﺒﻟﺍ ﻒﻇﻮﻣ ﺪﻟﺎﺧ ﺪﺟﻭ ﻞﻫ - 2 ﺱﺭﺪﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺐﻌﺘﻟﺍ ﺪﻌﺑ ﻩﺰﻨﺗ ﻞﻫ - 3 ؟ﺮﻄﻤﻟﺍ ﺔﻠﻗ ﻦﻣ ﻉﺭﺰﻟﺍ ﺲﺒﻴﻳ ﻞﻫ - 4 ؟ﺱﺭﺪﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﺜﻛ ﻦﻣ ﺬﻴﻤﻠﺘﻟﺍ ﺐﻌﺘﻳ ﻞﻫ - 5 ﻡﻮﻨﻟﺍ ﺔﻠﻗ ﻦﻣ ﻢﺴﺠﻟﺍ ﺽﺮﻤﻳ ﻞﻫ - 6 ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 2 ﻢﺋﺎﺼﻟﺍﻭ ﺝﺎﺠﺤﻟﺍ ﺎﻋﺩﻭ ،ءﺎﻣ ﻦﻴﻋ ﺏﺮﻗ ﻝﺰﻨﻓ ،ﺞﺤﻟﺍ ﺔﻀﻳﺮﻓ ءﺍﺩﻷ ،ﺝﺎﺠﺤﻟﺍ ﺐﻫﺫ ،ﺮﻣﻷﺍ ﺾﻌﺑ ﻦﻋ ﻪﻟﺄﺳﺃﻭ ،ﻲﻌﻣ ﻯﺬﻐﺘﻳ ﻦﻣ ﺮﻈﻧﺍ ،ﻪﺒﺟﺎﺤﻟ ﻝﺎﻘﻓ ءﺍﺪﻐﻟﺎﺑ ﺖﺋﺍ :ﻝﺎﻗﻭ ﻪﻈﻘﻳﺄﻓ ،ﺮﻌﺷ ﻦﻣ ﻦﻴﺘﻠﻤﺷ ﻲﻓ ﻢﺋﺎﻧ ﻲﺑﺍﺮﻋﺃ ﺍﺫﺈﻓ ﺐﺟﺎﺤﻟﺍ ﺮﻈﻨﻓ ﻦﻣ ﻲﻧﺎﻋﺩ ﻪﻧﺇ :ﻝﺎﻗ .ﻲﻌﻣ ّﺬﻐﺗﻭ ﻚﻳﺪﻳ ﻞﺴﻏﺍ :ﺝﺎﺠﺤﻟﺍ ﻪﻟ ﻝﺎﻘﻓ ،ﻩﺎﺗﺄﻓ ،ﺮﻴﻣﻷﺍ ﻲﻧﺎﻋﺩ ﻰﻟﺎﻌﺗ ﷲﺍ :ﻝﺎﻗ ؟َﻙﺎَﻋَﺩ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ :ﺝﺎﺠﺤﻟﺍ ﻝﺎﻘﻓ :ﻪﺘﺒﺟﺄﻓ ﻚﻨﻣ ﺮﻴﺧ ﻮﻫ ّﺮﺣﺃ ﻡﻮﻴﻟ ﺖﻤﺻ .ﻢﻌﻧ :ﻝﺎﻗ ؟ﺭﺎﺤﻟﺍ ﻡﻮﻴﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻲﻓ ﺃ :ﻝﺎﻗ .ُﺖﻤﺼﻓ ﻡﻮﺼﻠﻟ :ﻝﺎﻗ ،ﺪﻐﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﺇ ءﺎﻘﺒﻟﺍ ﻲﻟ َﺖﻨﻤﺿ ﻥﺇ :ﻝﺎﻗ .ﺍﺪﻏ ﻡﻮﺼﺗﻭ ﺮﻄﻓﺃ :ﻝﺎﻗ ،ﻪﻨﻣ ﻪﻧﺇ :ﻝﺎﻗ ؟ﻪﻴﻠﻋ ﺭﺪﻘﺗ ﻻ ﻞﺟﺂﺑ ًﻼِﺟﺎَﻋ ﻲﻨﻟﺄﺴﺗ ﻒﻴﻜﻓ :ﻝﺎﻗ .ّﻲﻟِﺇ ﻚﻟﺫ ﺲﻴﻟ ُﺔﻴﻓﺎﻌﻟﺍ ُﻪْﺘﺒّﻴﻃ ﻦﻜﻟﻭ ،ﺥﺎﺒﻄﻟﺍ ﻻﻭ ﻪْﺒﱢﻴﻄُﺗ ﻢﻟ َﻚﱠﻧِﺇ :ﻝﺎﻗ .ٌﺐﱢﻴﻃ ٌﻡﺎﻌﻃ 81ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 2 ؟ﻪﺒﺟﺎﺣ ﻦﻣ ﺐﻠﻃ ﺍﺫﺎﻣﻭ ؟ ﺝﺎﺠﺤﻟﺍ ﺐﻫﺫ ﻦﻳﺃ ﻰﻟﺇ -1 ؟ﻞﺟﺮﻟﺍ ﺝﺎﺠﺤﻟﺍ ﺎﻋﺩ ﺊﺷ ﻱﺃ ﻰﻟﺇ -2 ﻪﻠﺋﺎﻀﻓ ﺎﻣﻭ ؟ ﻡﻮﺼﻟﺍ ﺎﻣ -3 ءﺍَﺬِﻐْﻟﺍﻭ ءﺍَﺬَﻐﻟﺍ ﻦﻴﺑ ﻕﺮﻔﻟﺍ ﺎﻣ -4 ﺔﻴﻓﺎﻌﻟﺍ ﻪﺘﺒﻴﻃ ﻰﻨﻌﻣ ﺎﻣﻭ ؟ﻡﺎﻌﻄﻟﺍ ﺐﻴﻄﻳ ﻢﺑ -5 ﻢﺋﺎﺼﻟﺍﻭ ﺝﺎﺠﺤﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻞﻛ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻢﻜﺤﺗ ﻢﺑ -6 :ﺔﺼﻘﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺎﻫﺩﻭﺭﻭ ﺐﺴﺣ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺍﺮﻘﻔﻟﺍ ﺐﺗﺮﺗ ﺎﻣﺎﻗﺭﺃ ﻊﺿ -ﺏ ﻡﻮﺼﻟﺎﺑ ﻪﺑﺭ ﺓﻮﻋﺩ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺏﺎﺠﺘﺳﺍ ﻪﻧﻷ ﺮﻄﻔﻳ ﻥﺃ ﻲﺑﺍﺮﻋﻷﺍ ﺾﻓﺭ - ﻦﻴﻌﺳﺍﻭ ﻦﻴﺑﻮﺛ ﻲﻓ ﻢﺋﺎﻧ ﻲﺑﺍﺮﻋﺃ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺐﺟﺎﺤﻟﺍ ﺮﻈﻧ - ﻪﻌﻣ ﻯﺬﻐﺘﻴﻟ ﻪﻳﺪﻳ ﻞﺴﻐﻳ ﻥﺃ ﻲﺑﺍﺮﻋﻷﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺝﺎﺠﺤﻟﺍ ﺐﻠﻃ - ﺔﻴﻓﺎﻌﻟﺍ ﻪﺘﺒﻴﻃ ﻦﻜﻟﻭ - ﻪﻌﻣ ﻯﺬﻐﺘﻳ ﻦﻣ ﻪﻟ ﺮﻀﺤﻳ ﻥﺃ ﻪﺒﺟﺎﺣ ﻦﻣ ﺝﺎﺠﺤﻟﺍ ﺮﻣﺃ - 4.0 CONCLUSION As stated at the beginning, this unit is meant to teach you the reading and understanding of un-vocalized long Arabic passages.
Two different long passages were given in this lesson.
After the first passage, each sentence was again repeated line by line for students to really practice the reading and to ponder upon the meaning.
5.0 SUMMARY You have been able to practice reading of long un-vocalized passages in this lesson.
When you read the passages over and over, then you become perfect in the art of reading.
And the more you read them over, the more you understand the meaning.
The questions following the passages are prepared to test the understanding of the students on the lesson.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT :ﺔﻴﻟﺎﺘﻟﺍ ﺔﻠﺌﺳﻷﺍ ﻦﻋ ﺐﺟﺃ ﻢﺛ (ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ) ﻖﺑﺎﺴﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ﺃﺮﻗﺍ :ﻚﻟﺫ ﻰﻨﻌﻳ .ﻪﻨﻣ ﺮﺣﺃ ﻡﻮﻴﻟ ُﺖﻤﺻ -1 82ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻒﻴﺼﻟﺍ ﻞﺼﻓ ﻲﻓ ﻡﻮﻴﻟﺍ ﻚﻟﺫ ﻦﻣ ﺓﺭﺍﺮﺣ ﺪﺷﺃ ﻡﻮﻳ -ﺃ ﺩﺭﺎﺒﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻒﺼﺘﻨﻣ -ـﺟ .ﺔﻣﺎﻴﻘﻟﺍ ﻡﻮﻳ -ﺏ ﻡﺎﻌﻃ -ـﺟ ﺓﺮﻴﻬﻈﻟﺍ ﻡﺎﻌﻃ -ﺏ ﺭﻮﻄﻔﻟﺍ ﻡﺎﻌﻃ -ﺃ :ﻰﻨﻌﻳ ءﺍﺬﻐﻟﺍ -2 ﻞﻴﻠﻟﺍ ﻰﻨﻌﻳ .ﻞﺟﺎﻌﻟﺍ -3 ﻖﺑﺎﺴﻟﺍ -ﺄﺟ ﺮﺿﺎﺤﻟﺍ -ﺏ ﻲﺿﺎﻤﻟﺍ -ﺃ :ﻲﻨﻌﻳ ﻞﺟﻵﺍ -4 ﺮﺑﺎﻐﻟﺍ -ـﺟ ﻲﻟﺎﺤﻟﺍ -ﺏ ﻞﺒﻘﺘﺴﻤﻟﺍ -ﺃ : ﻡﻮﺼﻟﺍ -5 ﺓﺩﺎﺒﻋﻭ ﺪﻴﻔﻣ -ـﺟ ﺮﻀﻣ -ﺏ ﺪﺴﻔﻣ -ﺃ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Muhammad, B.S; Salim.
H; & Husaynī, A (1979).
A New Arabic Course for Nigeria: Pupils Book 4, Lagos, Longman Nigeria.
2.
Ibrahim Muhammad Nahhaas & Co (1985/1405).
Al- qirā’atu wa `l- mahfūzah 6th ed.
Bahrayn.
3.
Muhsin, A.B; et al.
(1991).
An-Nusūsul-‘dabiyya, Jeddah, KSA.
4.
Abdullahi Ahmad (ed) (1992).
Silsilatu `t-ta‘līm `l-lughati ‘l-‘Arabiyyah Book 1, Riyad, KSA 83ARA016 Arabic Reader UNIT 3: READING AND UNDERSTANDING OF VOCALIZED LONG ARABIC POETRY TEXTS.
CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Poem 1 3.2 Poem 2 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/ further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are already familiar with the reading of short passages as you learnt in the previous lessons.
In this unit, you are to learn more on how to read and understand vocalized long Arabic poetry texts.
Do not allow the length of the texts you will come across in this unit frighten you.
You should build up courage and determination to overcome whatever challenges you may face during the lesson.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit you should be able to • fluently read and understand vocalized long Arabic poetry texts.
• start composing some texts of Arabic poetry on your own.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Poem 1 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 1 ِﻪِﺑﺎَﻫِﺇ ُﺊْﻠـَﻣ ﻞْﺨُﺒْﻟﺍَﻭ َﺍﺪَﻏ ْﻦَﻣ ﻯَﻮِﺳ ** ﻢـِﻬﻴِﻓ َﺭَﺃ ْﻢَﻟَﻭ ﺎَﻴْﻧﱡﺪﻟﺍ ﻲِﻨَﺑ ُﺕْﻮَﻠـَﺑ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺑُﺬِﺑ ُﻢُﻬﻨْـِﻣ ﻲِﺋﺎـَﺟَﺭ ُﺖْﻌَﻄـَﻗ ** ﺎَـﻣِﺭﺎَﺻ ِﺔَﻋﺎَﻨَﻘْﻟﺍ ِﺪْﻤَﻏ ْﻦِﻣ ُﺕْﺩﱠﺮَﺠَﻓ 84ARA016 Arabic Reader ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺑ َﺪْﻨِﻋ ًﺍﺪِﻋﺎـَﻗ ﻲـِﻧﺍَﺮـَﻳ ﺍَﺫ َﻻَﻭ ** ِﻪِﻘﻳِﺮَﻃ ﻲِﻓ ﺎًﻔﻗِﺍَﻭ ﻲِﻧﺍَﺮـَﻳ ﺍَﺫ َﻼـَﻓ ِﻪِﺑَﻻ ﺊﻴﱠﺸﻟﺍ ِﻦَﻋ ﱠﻻِﺇ ﻰَﻨِﻐْﻟﺍ َﺲْﻴـَﻟَﻭ ** ْﻢِﻬﱢﻠـُﻛ ِﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ِﻦَﻋ ِﻝﺎَﻣ َﻼِﺑ ﱞﻲِﻨـِﻏ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺴِﺘْﻛِﺍ ِﺢﻴِﺒـَﻗ ﻲِﻓ ًﺍّﻮُﺘـُﻋ ﱠﺞـَﻟَﻭ ** ﺎَﺒَﻫْﺬَﻣ َﻢْﻠﱡﻈﻟﺍ َﻦَﺴْﺤَﺘْﺳِﺍ ِﻢِﻟﺎَﻈِﻟ ﺎَﻣ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺴِﺣ ﻲِﻓ ْﻦُﻜَﻳ ْﻢَﻟﺎَﻣ ُﻪَﻟ ﻲَﻋْﺪُﺘَﺳ ** ﺎَﻬﱠﻧِﺈَﻓ ﻲِﻟﺎَﻴﱠﻠﻟﺍ ِﻑْﺮـَﺻ ﻰَﻟِﺇ ُﻪْﻠَﻜـَﻓ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﻛِﺭ ﱢﻞِﻇ َﺖْﺤَﺗ ﺎًﻬﻴِﺗ ُﻢْﺠﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻯَﺮَﻳ ** ًﺍﺩِﺮَﻤَﺘُﻣ ًﺎﻤـِﻟﺎَﻇ ﺎَﻨْﻳَﺃَﺭ ْﺪـَﻗ ْﻢَﻜـَﻓ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺒِﺑ ِﺕﺎَﺛِﺩﺎَﺤْﻟﺍ ُﻑﻭُﺮـُﺻ ْﺖَﺧﺎَﻧَﺃ ** ِﻪـِﺗَﻼْﻔَﻏ ﻲِﻓ َﻮـَﻫَﻭ ٍﻞﻴِﻠـَﻗ ﺎﱠﻤَﻌـَﻓ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺘِﻛ ﻲِﻓ ﻲِﻘـَﺘْﻠـَﺗ ِﺕﺎَﻨَﺴَﺣَﻻَﻭ ** ﻲِﺠَﺗْﺮَﻳ َﻩﺎَﺟَﻻَﻭ َﻝﺎـَﻣَﻻ َﺢَﺒـْﺻَﺄَﻓ ِﻪِﺑﺍَﺬَﻋ َﻁﻮْـَﺳ ُﷲﺍ ِﻪْﻴَﻠَﻋ ﱠﺐـَﺻَﻭ ** ًﻼِﻋﺎَﻓ َﻥﺎـَﻛ ﻱِﺬﱠﻟﺍ ِﺮْﻣَﻷﺎِﺑ ﻱِﺯﻮُﺟَﻭ ﻩﺎﻨﻌﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ Meaning Word ﺖﺑّﺮﺟﻭ ﺕﺮﺒﺘﺧﺍ ُﺕْﻮَﻠَﺑ -1 ْﻎَﺑْﺪَﻳ ْﻢَﻟ ﺎَﻣ ْﻭَﺃ ِﺪْﻠِﺠْﻟﺍ ِﺏﺎَﺘِﻛ ِﻥْﺯَﻭ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ُﺏﺎَﻫِﻹَﺍ -2 ْﻊِﻃﺎَﻘْﻟﺍ ُﻒْﻴﱠﺴﻟﺍ ُﻡِﺭﺎﱠﺼﻟﺍ -3 ُﻪُﻓﺍَﺮْﻃَﺃَﻭ ُﻩﱡﺪَﺣ ﻪُﺑﺎَﺑُﺫ -4 ﺮﱡﺒَﺠﱠﺘﻟﺍَﻭ ﺭُﺎَﺒْﻜِﺘْﺳﻻَﺍ ﱡﻮُﺘُﻌْﻟَﺍ -5 ﺎَﻬُﺒِﺋﺎَﺼَﻣَﻭ ﺎَﻬُﺒِﺋﺍَﻮَﻧ ﻲِﻟﺎَﻴﱠﻠﻟﺍ ُﻑْﺮَﺻ -6 ﺮﱡﺒَﺠَﺗَﻭ ٌﺮﱡﺒَﻜَﺗ :ﺎًﻬﻴِﺗ ُﻪﻴﺘَﻳ َﻩﺎَﺗ ْﻦِﻣ ﺎًﻬﻴِﺗ -7 ﻪﻛﺮﺑﺃ ﺔَﻗﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ َﺥﺎَﻧ :ُﻞْﺻَﻷﺍَﻭ ْﺖَﺴَﻠَﺟَﻭ ْﺖﱠﻠَﺣ ْﺖَﺧﺎَﻧَﺃ -8 ﺎﻬﺴﻠﺟﺃ ﺏﺍَﺬَﻌْﻟﺍ ّﺪَﺷَﺃ ﺏﺍَﺬَﻋ َﻁْﻮَﺳ -9 Self Assessment Exercise 1 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ ﺎﻴﻓﺍﻭ ﺎﺣﺮﺷ ﻪﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﺡﺮﺷﺍ (ِﺏﺍَﺬَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﻁْﻮَﺳ -ﻲِﻟﺎَﻴﱠﻠﻟﺍ ُﻑْﺮَﺻ -ّﻮُﺘُﻌْﻟَﺍ -َﺏﺎَﺑﱡﺬﻟَﺍ -ُﻡِﺭﺎﱠﺼﻟَﺍ -ُﺏﺎَﻫِﻹَﺍ ) ﺎَﻬَﺘْﻈَﻔَﺣ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺎﻏﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ َﻸْﻣِﺇ ................................ ** ﻢـِﻬﻴِﻓ َﺭَﺃ ْﻢَﻟَﻭ ﺎَﻴْﻧﱡﺪﻟﺍ ﻲِﻨَﺑ ُﺕْﻮَﻠـَﺑ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺑُﺬِﺑ ُﻢُﻬﻨْـِﻣ ﻲِﺋﺎـَﺟَﺭ ُﺖْﻌَﻄـَﻗ ** ﺎَﻣِﺭﺎَﺻ ِﺔَﻋﺎَﻨَﻘْﻟﺍ ِﺪْﻤَﻏ ْﻦِﻣ ُﺕْﺩﱠﺮَﺠَﻓ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺑ َﺪْﻨِﻋ ﺍًﺪِﻋﺎَﻗ ﻲـِﻧﺍَﺮـَﻳ ﺍَﺫ َﻻَﻭ ** ِﻪِﻘﻳِﺮَﻃ ﻲِﻓ ﺎًﻔﻗِﺍَﻭ ﻲِﻧﺍَﺮـَﻳ ﺍَﺫ َﻼـَﻓ ................................ ** ................................. ............................... ** ﺎَﺒَﻫْﺬَﻣ َﻢْﻠﱡﻈﻟﺍ ﻦﺴﺤﺘﺳﺍ َﻢِﻟﺎَﻈِﻟ ﺎَﻣ ﺍَﺫِﺇ 85ARA016 Arabic Reader ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺴِﺣ ﻲِﻓ ْﻦُﻜَﻳ ْﻢَﻟﺎَﻣ ُﻪَﻟ ﻲَﻋْﺪـُﺘَﺳ ** ................................ 3.2 Poem 2 ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 2 ُءﺎَﻀـَﻘْﻟﺍ َﻢَﻜَﺣ ﺍَﺫَﺇ ﺎًﺴْﻔـَﻧ ْﺐـِﻃَﻭ ** ُءﺎَﺸـَﺗﺎَﻣ ُﻞَﻌْﻔـَﺗ َﻡﺎـﱠﻳَﻷﺍ ِﻉَﺩ ُءﺎَﻘَﺑ ﺎـَﻴـْﻧﱡﺪـﻟﺍ ِﺙِﺩﺍَﻮَﺤـِﻟ ﺎَﻤـَﻓ ** ﻲِﻟﺎَﻴﱠﻠﻟﺍ ِﺔَﺛِﺩﺎَﺤـِﻟ ْﻉَﺰْﺠـَﺗ َﻻَﻭ ُءﺎَﻓَﻮـْﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺔـَﺣﺎَﻤﱠﺴـﻟﺍ َﻚُﺘـَﻤﻴِﺷَﻭ ** ًﺍﺪْﻠَﺟ ِﻝﺍَﻮْﻫَﻷﺍ ﻰَﻠَﻋ ًﻼُﺟَﺭ ْﻦُﻛَﻭ ُءﺎَﻄـِﻏ ﺎَﻬـَﻟ َﻥﻮُﻜـَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ َﻙﱡﺮـَﺳَﻭ ** ﺎَﻳﺍَﺮَﺒْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ َﻚُﺑﻮُﻴُﻋ ْﺕَﺮُﺜـَﻛ ْﻥِﺇَﻭ ُءﺎَﺨﱠﺴﻟﺍ َﻞـﻴـِﻗ ﺎَﻤـَﻛ ِﻪـﻴِﻄَﻐـُﻳ ** ٍﺐْﻴَﻋ ُﻞُﻜَﻓ ِءﺎَﺨﱠﺴﻟﺎِﺑ ْﺮـﱠﺘَﺴـَﺗ ُءَﻼـَﺑ ﺍَﺪـْﻋَﻷﺍ َﺔَﺗﺎـَﻤـَﺷ ﱠﻥِﺈـَﻓ ** ّﻻُﺫ ُﻂـَﻗ ﻱِﺩﺎـَﻋَﻸِﻟ َﺮـَﺗَﻻَﻭ ُءﺎَﻣ ِﻥﺂـﻤﱠﻈـِﻠﻟ ِﺭﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﻲـِﻓ ﺎَﻤـَﻓ ** ٍﻞﻴِﺨَﺑ ْﻦِﻣ َﺔَﺣﺎَﻤﱠﺴﻟﺍ ُﺝْﺮـَﺗَﻻَﻭ ُءﺎَﻨَﻌْﻟﺍ ِﻕْﺯﱢﺮـﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ُﺪْﻳِﺰـَﻳ َﺲْﻴـَﻟَﻭ ** ﻲِﻧْﺄَﺘﻟﺍ ُﻪُﺼُﻘْﻨَﻳ َﺲـْﻴَﻟ َﻚـُﻗْﺯِﺭَﻭ ُءﺎـَﺧَﺭَﻻَﻭ َﻚـْﻴَﻠـَﻋ ٌﺱﺆـُﺑَﻻَﻭ ** ٌﺭﻭُﺮُﺳَﻻَﻭ ُﻡﻭُﺪـَﻳ ُﻥْﺰـُﺣَﻻَﻭ ُءﺍَﻮَﺳ ﺎَﻴـْﻧﱡﺪـﻟﺍ ُﻚِﻟﺎَﻣَﻭ َﺖْﻧَﺄـَﻓ ** ٍﻉﻮُﻨَﻗ ٍﺐْﻠَﻗ َﺍﺫ َﺖْﻨـُﻛ ﺎـَﻣ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ُءﺎـَﻤـَﺳَﻻَﻭ ِﻪﻴِﻘـَﺗ ٌﺽْﺭَﺃ َﻼـَﻓ ** ﺎَﻳﺎَﻨَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻪِﺘَﺣﺎَﺴِﺑ ْﺖَﻟَﺰـَﻧ ْﻦـَﻣَﻭ ُءﺎَﻀَﻔـْﻟﺍ َﻕﺎـَﺿ ُءﺎَﻀَﻘـْﻟﺍ َﻝَﺰَﻧ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ** ْﻦِﻜَـﻟَﻭ ٌﺔـَﻌـِﺳﺍَﻭ ِﷲﺍ ُﺽْﺭَﺃَﻭ ُءﺍَﻭﱠﺪﻟﺍ ِﺕْﻮَﻤْﻟﺍ ِﻦَﻋ ﻲـِﻨْﻐـُﻳ ﺎَﻤـَﻓ ** ٍﻦْﻴِﺣ ﱠﻞُﻛ ُﺭُﺪْﻐـَﺗ َﻡﺎﱠـﻳَﻷﺍ ِﻉَﺩ ﻩﺎﻨﻌﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ Meaning Word ّﺬﻟ ﻰﻨﻌﻤﺑ ﺎﺑﺎﻴﻄﺗﻭ ﺔﺒﻴِﻃَﻭ ُﺐﻴِﻄَﻳ ،َﺏﺎَﻃ ْﻦِﻣ ْﺐِﻃ -1 ُﺲْﻔﱠﻨﻟﺍ ْﺖَﺑﺎَﻃ :ﻝﺎﻘﻳﻭ ،ﺩﺎَﺟَﻭ ٌﻦُﺴُﺣﻭ ٌﺓَﻭَﻼَﺣَﻭ ﺍﺬﻜﺑ ْﺖَﺣَﺮَﺸْﻧِﺍ ﺊﺸﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻉﺰﺟ ﻝﺎﻘﻳﻭ ،َﺏِﺮَﻃ ُﻪُﺑﺎﺑَﻭ ِﺮْﺒﱠﺼﻟﺍ ﱡﺪِﺿ ُﻉَﺰَﺠْﻟَﺍ -2 ﻩﺮﻴﻏ ﻪﻋﺰﺟﺃﻭ ﺎَﻬُﺒِﺋﺎَﺼَﻣ ﻲِﻟﺎَﻴﱠﻠﻟﺍ ُﺔَﺛِﺩﺎَﺣ - 3 ُﻑِﻭﺎَﺨَﻤْﻟَﺍ : ًﻻْﻮَﻫ ،ُﻝﻮُﻬَﻳ َﻝﺎَﻫ ْﻦِﻣ ُﻝْﻮَﻫ :ﻊﻤﺠﻟﺍ ﻝﺍﻮﻫﻷﺍ -4 ُﺐِﺋﺎَﺼَﻤْﻟﺍَﻭ ِﺪْﻠَﺟ ْﻦِﻣ ﺎﻳِﻮَﻗ ًﺍﺪﻳِﺪَﺷ ًﺍﺪْﻠَﺟ -5 ُﻖُﻠُﺨْﻟَﺍ :ُﺔَﻤﻴﱢﺸﻟﺍَﻭ :َﻚُﻘُﻠُﺧ َﻚُﺘَﻤﻴِﺷ -6 86ARA016 Arabic Reader ﺔﻳﺮﺑ ﺎﻫﺩﺮﻔﻣﻭ :ِﺕﺎَﻗْﻮُﻠْﺨَﻤْﻟَﺍ ﺎَﻳﺍَﺮَﺒْﻟَﺍ -7 ُﺩْﻮُﺠْﻟَﺍ :ءﺎﺨﺴﻟﺍ -8 ّﺪﺿ ﻮﻫﻭ ،ءﺍﺪﻋﻷﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻊﻤﺠﺗﻭ ، ﻭﺪﻋ ﺩﺮﻔﻣ ﻱِﺩﺎَﻋَﻷَﺍ -9 ﻖﻳﺪﺼﻟﺍ ﺓﺭﻭﺮﻀﻟ ُﺓَﺰْﻤَﻬْﻟﺍ ِﺖَﻓِﺬُﺣَﻭ ءﺍﺪﻋﻻﺍ ﻞﺻﻷﺍ ﺍﺪﻋﻷﺍ -10 ﺮﻌﺸﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻲﻫﻭ ،ﻞﻀﻔﻟﺍﻭ ﺢﻔﺼﻟﺍﻭ ءﺎﻄﻌﻟﺍﻭ ُﺩﻮُﺠْﻟَﺍ ﺔﺣﺎﻤﺴﻟﺍ -11 ﺢﻤﺳ ﻩﺎﻄﻋﺃ ﻪﻟ ﺢﻤﺳﻭ ،ﺩﺎﺟ ﻱﺃ ﺔﺣﺎﻤﺳﻭ ﺎﺣﺎﻤﺳ ءﺎﻨﻋ ﺭﺪﺼﻤﻟﺍﻭ ﻲﻨﻋ ﻞﻌﻔﻟﺍﻭ ،ُﺐْﺼﱠﻨﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺐْﻌﱠﺘﻟَﺍ ُءﺎَﻨَﻌْﻟَﺍ -12 ُﺏﺍَﺬَﻌْﻟﺍ ُﺱﺄَﺒْﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺮْﻘَﻔْﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺔَﺟﺎَﺤْﻟَﺍ ُﺱْﺆُﺒْﻟَﺍ -13 ِءﺎَﻓَﻮْﻟﺍ ُﻙْﺮَﺗ ُﺭْﺪَﻐْﻟَﺍ -14 87ARA016 Arabic Reader Self Assessment Exercise ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ :ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ ﻞﻛ ﺩﺮﻔﻣ ﺕﺎﻫ -1 (ﺕﺎﻗﻮﻠﺨﻤﻟﺍ -ﺍﺪﻋﻷﺍ -ﻱﺩﺎﻋﻷﺍ -ﺎﻳﺍﺮﺒﻟﺍ -ﻝﺍﻮﻫﻷﺍ) :ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻰﻨﻌﻣ ﺡﺮﺷﺍ -ﺱﺆﺒﻟﺍ -ﺭﺪﻐﻟﺍ -ءﺎﻨﻌﻟﺍ – ﺔﺣﺎﻤﺴﻟﺍ -ﺎﻳﺍﺮﺒﻟﺍ -ﻝﺍﻮﻫﻷﺍ -ﺔﻤﻴﺸﻟﺍ -ﻉﺰﺠﻟﺍ) (ءﺎﺨﺴﻟﺍ 4.0 CONCLUSION Like the vocalized short poetry texts that you were taken through in the earlier lessons, you have been able to learn in this lesson how to read and understand vocalized long Arabic poetry texts.
There is no difference in the procedure and method used in reading both the long and the short texts only that it takes a longer period to read through the long passages.
Close monitoring and careful placement and pronunciation of the vowels on each letter of the words that make up the texts will make the reading smooth and correct.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been able to practice the reading of some vocalized long Arabic poetry texts.
The lesson is a continuation of the earlier one on vocalized short poetry texts.
Meanings of some seemingly difficult words were given to increase students’ vocabularies.
Some exercises given at the end of the lesson are for students to practice so as to aid their understanding on how poems are composed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT :ﺎﻴﻓﺍﻭ ﺎﺣﺮﺷ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﺡﺮﺷﺍ -1 -ﺎَﻳﺍَﺮَﺒْﻟَﺍ ُﻝﺍَﻮْﻫَﻷَﺍ -ُﺔَﻤﻴﱢﺸﻟﺍ -ُﻉَﺰَﺠْﻟﺍ -ﱡﻮُﺘُﻌْﻟَﺍ -ُﺏﺎَﺑﱡﺬﻟَﺍ -ُﻡِﺭﺎﱠﺼﻟَﺍ -ُﺏﺎَﻫِﻹَﺍ ) (ُﺱْﺆُﺒﻟﺍ -ُﺔَﺣﺎَﻤﱠﺴﻟﺍ ﺎَﻬَﺘْﻈَﻔَﺣ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺎﻏﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ َﻸْﻣِﺇ ................................. ** ﻢـِﻬﻴِﻓ َﺭَﺃ ْﻢَﻟَﻭ ﺎَﻴْﻧﱡﺪﻟﺍ ﻲِﻨَﺑ ُﺕْﻮَﻠـَﺑ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺑُﺬِﺑ ُﻢُﻬﻨْـِﻣ ﻲِﺋﺎـَﺟَﺭ ُﺖْﻌَﻄـَﻗ ** ﺎـَﻣِﺭﺎَﺻ ِﺔَﻋﺎَﻨَﻘْﻟﺍ ِﺪْﻤَﻏ ْﻦِﻣ ُﺕْﺩﱠﺮَﺠَﻓ 88ARA016 Arabic Reader ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺑ َﺪْﻨِﻋ ًﺍﺪِﻋﺎـَﻗ ﻲـِﻧﺍَﺮـَﻳ ﺍَﺫ َﻻَﻭ **ِﻪـِﻘﻳِﺮَﻃ ﻲِﻓ ﺎًﻔﻗِﺍَﻭ ﻲِﻧﺍَﺮـَﻳ ﺍَﺫ َﻼـَﻓ .................................. ** ................................. .................................. ** ﺎَﺒَﻫْﺬَﻣ َﻢْﻠﱡﻈﻟﺍ ﻦﺴﺤﺘﺳﺍ َﻢِﻟﺎَﻈِﻟ ﺎَﻣ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ِﻪِﺑﺎَﺴِﺣ ﻲِﻓ ْﻦُﻜَﻳ ْﻢَﻟﺎَﻣ ُﻪـَﻟ ﻲَﻋْﺪـُﺘَﺳ ** .................................. ................................... ** ُءﺎـَﺸـَﺗ ﺎَﻣ ُﻞـَﻌْﻔـَﺗ َﻡﺎـﱠﻳَﻷﺍ ِﻉَﺩ ................................. **.................................. ُءﺎَﻓَﻮـْﻟﺍَﻭ ُﺔـَﺣﺎَﻤﱠﺴـﻟﺍū ُءﺎَﻄـِﻏ ﺎَﻬـَﻟ َﻥﻮُﻜـَﻳ ْﻥَﺃ َﻙﱡﺮـَﺳَﻭ ** ................................. .................................. ** ٍﺐـْﻴـَﻋ ُﻞُﻜَﻓ ِءﺎَﺨـﱠﺴﻟﺎِﺑ ﺮﱠﺘَﺴـَﺗ :ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ ﻞﻛ ﺓﺩﺮﻔﻣ ﺕﺎﻫ (ِﺕﺎَﻗﻮُﻠْﺨَﻤْﻟَﺍ -ُءﺍَﺪْﻋَﻷﺍ -ﺎَﻳَﺮَﺒْﻟﺍ -ُﻝﺍَﻮْﻫَﻷَﺍ - ﻲِﻟﺎَﻴﱠﻠﻟﺍ) 7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS 1.
Muhammad ‘Afīf, R. (1974).
Dīwān Imām Shāfiī, Shomolu, Lagos 2.
Abdullahi Ahmad (ed) (1992).
Silsilatu `t-Ta‘limi ` l-lughati `l- ‘Arabiyyah Book 1, Riyad, KSA 3.
Muhammad, A., Ibrahim A., Ash-shanawiy, M. Abul-Hasan I.
(ed.
), (1975).
Al-qirā’ah wa `l-Mahfūzah, Cairo, Egypt.
4.
David Cowan (1976).
An Introduction to Modern Literary Arabic, New York, London UNIT 4: READING AND UNDERSTANDING OF UN-VOCALIZED LONG ARABIC POETRY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 89ARA016 Arabic Reader 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Poem 1 3.2 Poem 2 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The attention in the last unit was focused on the reading of vocalized long Arabic passages.
Two long vocalized poetry passages were presented for study.
In this, students will be taught how to read and understand un-vocalized long Arabic poetry texts.
It is meant to ensure that the students are equipped with basic standard requirements for the Arabic reading in all aspects of literature especially Arabic poetry.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit, you should be able to • read Arabic un-vocalized long poetry • explain the meanings of some new Arabic words.
3.0``MAIN CONTENT 3.1``Poem 1 ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 1 ﺮﻫﺪﻟﺍ ﺙﺪﺣﺃ ﺎﻣ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺎﺣﻮﻧﻭ ** ﺍﺮّﺠـﻬـﺗﻭ ﺔﻋﺎﺳ ﺎﺟﻮﻋ ﻲﻠﻴﻠﺧ - 1 90ARA016 Arabic Reader ﺍﺭﺫﻭﺃ ﺍﺮﻗ ﻭﺃ ﺙﺩﺍﻮﺤﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻋﻭﺮﻟ ﺎّﻔﺨـﻓ ** ﺔّﻣﺬـﻣ ﺓﺎﻴـﺤـﻟﺍ ﻥﺇ ﺎﻋﺰﺠﺗﻻﻭ - 2 ﷲﺍ ﻰﻀﻗ ﺎﻤـﻣ ﺎﻋﺰﺠﺗ ﻼﻓ **ﻪﻌـﻓﺩ ﻥﺎﻘﻴﻄـﺗ ﻻ ﺮﻣﺃ ءﺎﺟ ﻥﺇﻭ - 3 ﺍﺮﺒﺻﺍﻭ ﺍﺮﱢﻴﻧ ﺓّﺮﺠﻤـﻟﺎﻛ ﺎﺑﺎﺘﻛ ﻮﻠـﺘـﻳﻭ ** ﻯﺪﻬﻟﺎﺑ ءﺎـﺟ ﺫﺇ ﷲﺍ ﻝﻮﺳﺭ ﺖﻴﺗ ﺃ - 4 ﺖﻤﺛ ﺡﻻ ﺎﻣ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻼـﻴﻬـﺳ ** ﻲﻌﻣ ﻦﻣﻭ ّﺲﺣﺃ ﺎﻣ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺕﺪﻫﺎﺟﻭ - 5 ﺍﺭﱠﻮﻏ ﺔﻓﻮﺨﻤـﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺖﻨﻛﻭ ** ﺎﻬﻠﻌﻔﺑ ﻰـﺿﺭﺃﻭ ﻯﻮﻘﺘﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻢﻴﻗ ﺃ - 6 ﺍﺭﺬﺣﺃ ﺍﺮﻔﻨﺗﻭ ﺪﻴﺤـﺗ ﻥﺃ ﺎﻨﻴﻘﺘـﻟﺍ ﺎﻣ ﺫﺇ ** ﺎـﻨﻠﻴـﺧ ﺩﻮﻌـﺗ ﺎـﻣ ﻡﻮﻘﻟ ﺎﻧﺇﻭ - 7 ﺍﺮﻬﻈﻣ ﻚﻟﺫ ﻕﻮـﻓ ﻮﺟﺮﻨـﻟ ﺎﻧﺇﻭ ** ﺎﻧﺩﻭﺪـﺟﻭ ﺎﻧﺪﺠـﻣ ءﺎﻤﺴﻟﺍ ﺎﻨﻐﻠ ﺑ - 8 ﺍﺭّﺪﻜُﻳ ﻥﺃ ﻩﻮﻔﺻ ﻲﻤﺤـﺗ ﺭﺩﺍﻮـﺑ ** ﻪﻟ ﻦﻜﺗ ﻢـﻟ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻢﻠﺣ ﻲﻓ ﺮﻴﺧ ﻻﻭ - 9 ﺮﻣﻷﺍ ﺩﺭﻭﺃ ﺎـﻣ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻢﻴﻠـﺣ ** ﻪﻟ ﻦﻜﻳ ﻢـﻟ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻞﻬﺟ ﻲﻓ ﺮﻴﺧ ﻻﻭ - 10 ﺍﺭﺪﺻﺃ ﺎﻫﺎﻨﻌﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ Meaning Word ﺢﻳﺮﺘﺴﻨﻟ ﺔﻋﺎﺳ ﻼﻴﻣ ﺎﺟﻮﻋ ﺪﻳﺪﺸﻟﺍ ﺮﺤﻟﺍ ﻲﻫﻭ ﺓﺮﺟﺎﻬﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺍﺮﻴﺳ ﺍﺮﺠﻬﺗ ﺎﻴﻜﺑﺍ ﺎﺣﻮﻧ ﺎﻛﺮﺗﺍ ﺍﺭﺫ ﺮﺒﺼﻟﺍ ﺍﺪﻘﻔﺗ ﺎﻋﺰﺠﺗ ﺭﺎﻗﻮﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ -ﺎﺘﺒﺛﺃ ﺍﺮﻗ ﺐﻛﺍﻮﻜﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻋﻮﻤﺠﻣ ﺓﺮﺠﻤﻟﺍ ﺏﺎﻏ ﻢﺠﻨﻟﺍ ﺭﻮﻏ ﺭﻮﻏ ﻑﻮﺧﺃ ﺍﺭﺬﺣﺃ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 1 ﺮﻋﺎﺸﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﺮﻌﺷ ﻲﻓ ﻡﻼﺳﻹﺍ ﺮﺛﺃ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ءﻮﺿ ﻲﻓ ﻦﻴﺑ -1 ﺍﺮﻴﻧ ﺓّﺮﺠـﻤـﻟﺎﻛ ﺎﺑﺎﺘﻛ ﻮﻠﺘـﻳﻭ ** ﻯﺪﻬـﻟﺎﺑ ءﺎﺟ ﺫﺇ ﷲﺍ ﻝﻮﺳﺭ ﺖﻴﺗﺃ ﺍﺭﻮﻏ ﺖﻤﺛ ﺡﻻ ﺎـﻣ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻼﻴﻬـﺳ ** ﻲﻌﻣ ﻦﻣﻭ ّﺲﺣﺃ ﺎﻣ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺕﺪﻫﺎﺟﻭ ﺍﺭﺬﺣﺃ ﺔﻓﻮﺨﻤﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺖﻨـﻛﻭ ** ﺎﻬﻠﻌﻔـﺑ ﻰﺿﺭﺃﻭ ﻯﻮﻘﺘﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻢﻴﻗﺃ 91ARA016 Arabic Reader ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻲﻧﺎﻌﻣ ﺕﺎﻫ - 2 -ﺭﻮﻏ -ﺓﺩﺮﺠﻤﻟﺍ -ﺍﺮﻗ -ﺎﻋﺰﺠﺗ -ﺍﺭﺫ -ﺎﺣﻮﻧ -ﺍﺮﺠﻬﺗ -ﺎﺟﻮﻋ ) (ﺍﺭﺬﺣﺃ 3.2 Poem 2 ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ TEXT 2 ﺏﻮﻄﺨﻟﺍﻭ ,ﻊﻗﺮـﻳ ﻞﻈﻳﻭ ** ﻕﺮﻔﻳ ﻥﺎﻣﺰـﻟﺍﻭ ﻊﻤﺠـﻳ ءﺮﻤـﻟ ﺍ - 1 ﻕﺰﻤﺗ ﻖﻳﺪﺻ ﻪﻟ ﻥﻮﻜﻳ ﻥﺃ ﻦـﻣ ** ﻪـﻟ ﺮﻴﺧ ﻼـﻗﺎﻋ ﻯﺩﺎﻌـﻳ ﻥﻷﻭ - 2 ﻖﻤﺣﺃ ﻖﻳﺪﺼﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻖﻳﺪﺼﻟﺍ ﻥﺇ ** ﺎﻘﻤﺣﺃ ﻕﺩﺎﺼﺗ ﻥﺃ ﻚﺴﻔﻨﺑ ﺐﻏﺭﺎ ﻓ - 3 ﻕﺪﺼﻣ ﻝﻮﻘﻌﻟﺍ ﻯﻭﺫ ﺏﻮﻴﻋ ﻯﺪﺒﻳ ** ﺎﻤـﻧﺈﻓ ﺖﻘﻄﻧ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻡﻼـﻜﻟﺍ ﻥﺯﻭ - 4 ﻖﻄﻨﻤﻟﺍ ﺮﻴﺸﺘﺳﺍ ﺍﺫﺇ ﺭﺎﺸﺘﺴﻳ ﻦـﻣ ** ﻢﻬﻣﻼﺣﺃ ﺕﻮﺘﺳﺍ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻝﺎﺟﺮﻟﺍ ﻦﻣﻭ - 5 ﻕﺮﻄﻴﻓ ﻖﻄﻨﻴﻓ ﻝﻮﻘﻳ ﺎﻣ ﻑﺮﻌﻳﻭ ﻯﺮﻴـﻓ ** ﻪـﺒﻠـﻗ ﺩﺍﻭ ﻞﻜﺑ ﻝﻮﺠﺘﻳ ﻰـﺘﺣ - 6 - ﻞﺒﺣ ﺮﺠﻳ ﻦﻴﺣ - ﻪﺘﻛﺮﺗ ** ﺓﺮﻣ ﻰﻌﻓﺃ ﻪﺘـﻌﺴـﻟ ﺅﺮـﻣﺍ ﻥﺃﻭ - 7 ُﻕَﺮْﻔَﻳ ﺮﺧﺁﻭ ﺶﻄﻋ ﻦﻣ ﺕﺎﻣ ﺪـﻗ ** ﻞـﻣﺎﻌـﻓ ﻥﻼﻣﺎـﻋ ﻻﺇ ﺱﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺎﻣ - 8 ﻕﺮﻐﻳ ﻦﻣ ﻢﻬﻨﻣ ﻕﺯﺮُﻳ ﺪـﺠـﻟﺎﺑ ** ﺎﻤـﻧﺇﻭ ﺵﺎﻌﻤﻟﺍ ﺐﻠﻃ ﻲﻓ ﺱﺎﻨﻟﺍﻭ -9 ﻕﺯﺮﻳ ﻖﻴﻀﻣﻭ ﻊﺳﻮـﻣ ﻪـﻴﻠـﻋ ﺍﺬـﻫ ** ﻢﻬﻴﻠﻋ ﻚﻴﻠـﻤـﻟﺍ ﻞﻀـﻓ ﻪﻨﻜﻟ -10 ﻖﻓﺮﺘﻳ ﻱﺬـﻟﺍ ﻻﺇ ﺎﻬﻀﻘـﻳ ﻢـﻟ ** ﺔﺟﺎﺣ ﻲﻓ ﺞﺟﺪـﻣ ﻒـﻟﺃ ﺭﺎﺳﻮﻟ -11 ﻖـﻓﻭﺃ ﻖﻓﺮـﺘﻟﺎـﻓ ﺮﻓﺎﺴـﻳ ﺍﺫﺇﻭ ** ﻖـﻓﺍﻮﺘﻣ ﻢﻴﻘـﻤـﻠﻟ ﻖﻓﺮﺘـﻟﺍ ﻥﺇ -12 ﺎﻫﺎﻨﻌﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ Word Meaning ﺙﺩﺍﻮﺤﻟﺍ ﺏﻮﻄﺨﻟﺍ 92ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻞﻘﻌﻟﺍ ﻞﻴﻠﻗ ﻖﻤﺣﻷﺍ ﻖﻄﻨﻟﺍ ﻖﻄﻨﻤﻟﺍ ءﺎﺤﻟﺍ ﺮﺴﻜﺑ ﻢﻠﺣ ﺎﻫﺩﺮﻔﻣ ﻝﻮﻘﻌﻟﺍ ﻡﻼﺣﻷﺍ ﻞﻘﺘﻨﻳﻭ ﻑﻮﻄﻳ ﻝﻮﺠﻳ ﻰﻋﺎﻓﺃ ﻊﻤﺠﻟﺍﻭ ﺔﺜﻴﺒﺧ ﺔﻴﺣ ﻰﻌﻓﻷﺍ ﻉﺰﻔﻳ ﻕﺮﻔﻳ ﻆﺤﻟﺍﻭ ﺖﺨﺒﻟﺍ– ﻢﻴﺠﻟﺍ ﺢﺘﻔﺑ ّﺪﺠﻟﺍ ﺡﻼﺴﻟﺍ ﻞﻣﺎﺣ :ﺎﻬﺤﺘﻓﻭ ﻰﻟﻭﻷﺍ ﻢﻴﺠﻟﺍ ﺮﺴﻜﺑ ﺞﺟﺪﻣ ﻪﺘﺟﺎﺣ ءﺎﻀﻗ ﻲﻓ ﻒﻄﻠﻨﻳ ﻕﺮﻔﻨﻳ ﻲﻧﺎﺘﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 2 ﺖﺳﺭﺩ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺎﻤﻧ ﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ ﻸﻣﺍ -1 ................................. ** ﻕﺮـﻔﻳ ﻥﺎﻣﺰـﻟﺍﻭ ﻊﻤﺠـﻳ ءﺮﻤـﻟﺍ ................................. ** ﺎﻤﻧﺈﻓ ﺖـﻘﻄـﻧ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻡﻼـﻜﻟﺍ ﻥﺯﻭ ﻕﺮﻄﻴﻓ ﺮﻴﺸﺘﺳﺍ ﺍﺫﺇ ﺭﺎﺸﺘﺴﻳ ﻦـﻣ ** ................................. ﻖﻄﻨﻴﻓ ﻝﻮﻘﻳﺎﻣ ﻑﺮﻌـﻳﻭ ﻯﺮـﻴـﻓ ** ................................. ﻕﺮﻔﻳ - ﻞﺒﺣ ﺮﺠﻳ ﻦﻴﺣ - ﻪﺘﻛﺮـﺗ ** ﺓﺮﻣ ﻰﻌﻓﺃ ﻪــﺘﻌﺴـﻟ ﻭﺮـﻣﺍ ﻥﺇﻭ ................................. ** ﻞﻣﺎﻌـﻓ ﻥﻼﻣﺎﻋ ﻻﺇ ﺱﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺎـﻣ ﻕﺯﺮﻳ ﻦﻣ ﻢﻬﻨﻣ ﻕﺯﺮـﻳ ﺪﺠـﻟﺎـﺑ ** ................................. :ﺔﻴﻧﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ ﻞﻛ ﺩﺮﻔﻣ ﺕﺎﻫ - 3 (ﻲﻋﺎﻓﻷﺍ-ﻡﻼﺣﻷﺍ-ﻖﻃ ﺎﻨﻤﻟﺍ-ﺏﻮﻄﺨﻟﺍ) 1.0 CONCLUSION We have given you in this unit various un-vocalized long Arabic poetry texts for reading and understanding in order to increase your reading ability in Arabic texts.
Un-vocalized text is a graduation from simple reading to complex reading.
When a student is familiar with the rules guiding the reading of un- vocalized texts, he needs not wait for a passage to be vocalized before reading and understanding it.
2.0 SUMMARY 93ARA016 Arabic Reader This unit was focused on the various kind of un-vocalized Arabic poetry texts to give student good standard in Arabic and sound ability in using of Arabic sentences.
Some difficult words were explained to assist students’ understanding of the passage.
It is expected that students should do some exercises to assist their comprehension of the lesson.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT.
ﺮﻋﺎﺸﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﺮﻌﺷ ﻲﻓ ﻡﻼﺳﻹﺍ ﺮﺛﺃ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ءﻮﺿ ﻲﻓ ﻦﻴﺑ -1 ﺍﺮﻴﻧ ﺓّﺮﺠﻤـﻟﺎﻛ ﺎﺑﺎﺘـﻛ ﻮﻠﺘـﺑﻭ ** ﻯﺪﻬـﻟﺎﺑ ءﺎـﺟﺫﺇ ﷲﺍ ﻝﻮـﺳﺭ ﺖﻴﺗﺃ ﺍﺭﻮﻏ ﺖﻤﺛ ﺡﻻ ﺎـﻣ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻼﻴﻬـﺳ **ﻲﻌﻣ ﻦﻣﻭ ّﺲﺣﺃ ﺎﻣ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺕﺪـﻫ ﺎـﺟﻭ ﺍﺭﺬﺣﺃ ﺔﻓﻮﺨﻤﻟﺍ ﺭﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﻦـﻣ ﺖﻨﻛﻭ ** ﺎﻬﻠﻌﻔـﺑ ﻰﺿﺭﺃﻭ ﻯﻮـﻘﺘـﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻢﻴﻗﺃ ﺎﻬﺘﺳﺭﺩ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻲﻧﺎﻌﻣ ﺕﺎﻫ -2 (ﺍﺭﺬﺣﺃ -ﺭﻮﻏ– ﺩﺮﺠﻤﻟﺍ-ﺍﺮﻗ-ﺎﻋﺰﺠﺗ-ﺍﺭﺫ– ﺎﺣﻮﻧ -ﺍﺮﺠﻬﺗ -ﺎﺟﻮﻋ) :ﺔﺒﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ ﺩﺮﻔﻣ ﺕﺎﻫ -3 (ﻰﻋﺎﻓﻷﺍ-ﻡﻼﺣﻷﺍ-ﻖﻃﺎﻨﻤﻟﺍ– ﺏﻮﻄﺨﻟﺍ) ﺎﻬﺘﺳﺭﺩ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺎﻏ ﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ ﻸﻣﺍ -4 .............................. ** ﻕﺮﻔـﻳ ﻥﺎﻣﺰـﻟﺍﻭ ﻊﻤﺠﻳ ءﺮﻤـﻟﺍ .............................. ** ﺎﻤﻧﺈﻓ ﺖﻘﻄﻧ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻡﻼـﻜـﻟﺍ ﻥﺯﻭ ﻕﺮﻄﻴﻓ ﺮﻴﺸﺘﺳﺍ ﺍﺫﺇ ﺭﺎﺸﺘﺴﻳ ﻦـﻣ ** ................................ ﻖﻄﻨﻴﻓ ﻝﻮﻘﻳ ﺎﻣ ﻑﺮﻌـﻳﻭ ﻯﺮﻴـﻓ **................................. ﻕﺮﻔﻳ - ﻞﺒﺣﺮﺠﻳ ﻦﻴـﺣ-ﻪﺘـﻛﺮﺗ ** ﺓﺮﻣ ﻰﻌﻓﺃ ﻪﺘﻌﺴـﻟ ﺅﺮـﻣﺍ ﻥﺇﻭ ................................. ** ﻞﻣﺎﻌـﻓ ﻥﻼﻣﺎـﻋﻻﺇ ﺱﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺎـﻣ ﻕﺯﺮﻳ ﻦﻣ ﻢﻬﻨﻣ ﻕﺯﺮﻳ ﺪﺠـﻟﺎـﺑ **................................ 7.0 REFERENCES/FUTHER READINGS 1.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakī Ali, S (1992).
Al-adab wa `t-Tārīkh fi `l- ‘Aşrayn… Cairo: Egypt.
2.
Sa'ad Husayn, U & ‘Abdu `l-Majīd Muhammad (1990).
Al-Adab wa `n- Nuşūş wa `l-Balāghah, Banghāzī: Libya.
3.
Shaykh Ahmad Galadanci (1973) Ħarakatu `l-Lughati ‘l-‘Arabiyyah wa 94ARA016 Arabic Reader Adabihā fi Nayjiriya.
Cairo, Daru’l Ma‘arif.
4.
Muhammad Al-Jazīrī et al (1972).
Al-Adab al- ‘Arabī wa tārikhuhū (n.p.
), Saudi Arabia UNIT 5: READING AND ANALYSIS OF FAIRLY DIFFICULT WORDS FROM VOCALIZED AND UN-VOCALIZED LONG ARABIC POETRY TEXTS.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocalized Poem 3.2 Un-vocalized Poem 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In some of the earlier lessons, you have been taken through difficult 95ARA016 Arabic Reader Arabic words as appeared in some passages presented.
This was treated under two distinct units.
However, this unit presents to you both the vocalized and the un-vocalized Arabic passages side by side at a glance.
This will give you an opportunity to move from simple (the vocalized) to the complex (the un- vocalized) at a stretch.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit, you should be able to • compose Arabic poem.
• read and understand the meaning of some difficult Arabic poetry texts.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocalized poem ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ﻲﱢﻨِﻣ َﻥﺎـَﻛ ْﺪـَﻗ ﻱِﺬﱠﻟﺎـِﺑ ﱞﺮِﻘـُﻣ ** ﻲـﱢﻧِﺈَﻓ ﻲـِﻨْﺑﱢﺬَﻌـُﺗَﻻ ﻰِﻬـَﻟِﺇ ﻲﱢﻨَﻇ ُﻦْﺴُﺣَﻭ َﺕْﻮَﻔَﻋ ْﻥِﺇ َﻙُﻮْﻔَﻌـَﻟ ** ﻰِﺋﺎـَﺟَﺭ ﱠﻻِﺇ ٌﺔَﻠﻴـِﺣ ﻰِﻟﺎـَﻤَﻓ ﱢﻦﻣَﻭ ٍﻞْﻀـَﻓ ﻭُﺫ ّﻲَﻠـَﻋ َﺖـْﻧَﺃَﻭ ** ﺎَﻳﺎَﻄَﺨْﻟﺍ ﻲِﻓ ﻲِﻟ ٍﺔﱠﻟَﺯ َﻦِﻣ ْﻢـَﻛَﻭ ﻲﱢﻨِﺳ ُﺖْﻋَﺮَﻗَﻭ ﻲﻠـﻣﺎﻧﺃ ُﺖْﻀَﻀـَﻋ ** ﺎﻬﻴﻠﻋ ﻲﻣﺪـﻧ ﻲِﻓ َﺕْﺮﱠﻜـَﻓ ﺍَﺫِﺇ ﻰِﻨَﻤﱠﺘﻟﺎِﺑ ﻱِﺮْﻤـُﻋ َﻝﻮـُﻃ ُﻊَﻄـْﻗَﺃَﻭ ** ﺎَﻧﻮـُﻨُﺟ ﺎَﻴْﻧﱡﺪﻟﺍ ِﺓَﺮْﻫَﺰـِﺑ ﱡﻦـُﺟَﺃ ﱢﻦﺠﻤﻟﺍ َﺮْﻬـَﻇ ﺎـﻬﻠـﻫﻷ ُﺖْﺒَﻠـَﻗ ** ﺎَﻬْﻨـَﻋ َﺪْﻫﱡﺰﻟﺍ ُﺖْﻗَﺪَﺻ ﻰﱢﻧَﺃ ْﻮَﻟَﻭ ﱢﻦَﻋ ُﻒْﻌَﺗ ْﻢـَﻟ ْﻥِﺇ ِﻖْﻠَﺨـْﻟﺍ ﱡﺮَﺸـَﻟ ** ﻲﱢﻧِﺇَﻭ ًﺍﺮْﻴَﺧ ﻰـِﺑ ﺱﺎﱠﻨﻟﺍ ﱡﻦُﻈـَﻳ ﺎﻫﺎﻨﻌﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ Meaning Word ﻡﺎﻌﻧﻹﺍ ﻦﻤﻟﺍ ﺎﻬﻨﺴﺣﻭ ﺎﻬﺗﺭﺎﻀﻧﻭ ﺎﻬﺘﺠﻬﺑ ﺎﻴﻧﺪﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﻫﺯ 96ARA016 Arabic Reader ﺢﺘﻓﻭ ﻢﻴﻤﻟﺍ ﺮﺴﻜﺑ ﻦﺠﻤﻟﺍ ﺱﺮﺘﻟﺍ-ﻢﻴﺠﻟﺍ ﻡﺪﻨﻟﺍ ﺓﺪﺷ ﻦﻋ ﻥﺎﻳﺎﻨﻛ ﻰﻨﺳ ﺖﻋﺮﻗﻭ ﻰﻠﻣﺎﻧﺃ ﺖﻀﻀﻋ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise ﺎﻬﺘﻈﻔﺣ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻦﻣ ﺕﺎﻏﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ ﻞﻤﻛﺃ (1) .............................. ** ﻲـﻧﺈﻓ ﻲﻨﺑﺬﻌـﺗﻻ ﻰﻬـﻟﺇ ﻲﻨﻇ ﻦﺴﺣﻭ ﺕﻮﻔﻋ ﻥﺇ ﻙﻮﻔﻌـﻟ **ﻰﺋﺎـﺟﺭ ﻻﺇ ﺔﻠﻴﺣ ﻰﻟﺎﻤـﻓ ............................... ** ......................... ﻲﻨﺳ ﺖﻋﺮﻗﻭ ﻲﻠﻣﺎﻧﺃ ﺖﻀﻀـﻋ ** ﺎﻬﻴﻠﻋ ﻲﻣﺪـﻧ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺮﻜﻓ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻰﻨﻤﺘﻟﺎﺑ ﻱﺮﻤـﻋ ﻝﻮـﻃ ﻊﻄﻗﺃﻭ ** .......................... ﻦﺠﻤـﻟﺍ ﺮﻬـﻇ ﺎﻬﻠـﻫﻷ ﺖﺒﻠﻗ ** ﺎﻬﻨﻋ ﺪﻫﺰﻟﺍ ﺖﻗﺪﺻ ﻰﻧﺃ ﻮﻟﻭ .............................. ** ﻲﻧﺇﻭ ﺍﺮـﻴﺧ ﻰﺑ ﺱﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻈـﻳ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻰﻧﺎﻌﻣ ﺕﺎﻫ -2 ﻰﻨﺳ ﺖﻋﺮﻗﻭ ﻲﻠﻣﺎﻧﺃ ﺖﻀﻀﻋ -ﻦﺠﻤﻟﺍ -ﺎﻴﻧﺪﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﻫﺯ -ﻦﻤﻟﺍ 3.2 un-vocalized Poem Text 2 ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺺﻨﻟﺍ ِﻞَﺴَﻜْﻟﺎِﺑ َءﺮﻤﻟﺍ ﻱِﺮْﻐـُﻳَﻭ ﻲِﻟﺎَﻌَﻤـْﻟﺍ ِﻦـَﻋ ** ِﻪِﺒِﺣﺎَﺻ ﱠﻢـَﻫ ﻰِﻨْﺜُﻳ ِﺔَﻣَﻼﱠﺴـﻟﺍ ّﺐـُﺣ ﻝﺰﺘﻋﺎﻓ ﻮﺠﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺎﻤﻠـﺳﻭﺃ ِﺽْﺭَﻷﺍ ﻲـِﻓ ** ﺎًـﻘَﻔـَﻧ ْﺬِﺨـﱠﺗﺎَﻓ ِﻪْﻴَﻟِﺇ َﺖْﺤـَﻨَﺟ ْﻥِﺈَﻓ ﻖﻨـﻳﻷﺍ ﻢﻴـﺳﺭ ﺪﻨـﻋ ﺰﻌـﻟﺍﻭ ** ﺔﻨﻜﺴﻣ ﺶﻴﻌﻟﺍ ﺾﻔﺨﺑ ﻞﻴﻟﺬﻟﺍ ﻰﺿﺮـﻳ ﻞﻟﺬﻟﺍ ﻞﻘـﻨﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺰﻌـﻟﺍ ﻥﺃ ﺙﺪﺤـﺗ ﺎﻤﻴـﻓ ** ﺔﻗﺩﺎﺻ ﻲـﻫﻭ ﻲﻨﺘـﺛﺪﺣ ﻼﻌـﻟﺍ ﻥﺇ ﺓﺭﺍﺩ ﺎﻣﻮﻳ ﺲﻤﺸﻟﺍ ﺡﺮـﺒﺗ ﻢـﻟ **ﻰَﻨُﻣ ُﻍﻮُﻠُﺑ ﻯﻭﺄﻤﻟﺍ ﻑﺮﺷ ﻲﻓ ﻥﺎﻛ ﻮـﻟ ﻞﻤﺤﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻢﻬـﺒﺤﺻﺍﻭ ﺱﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺭﺫﺎﺤـﻓ ** ﻪـﺑ ﺖﻘﺛﻭ ﻦﻣ ﻰﻧﺩﺃ ﻙﻭﺪﻋ ﻯﺪـﻋﺃ ﻞﺧﺩ ﻞﺟﻭ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺎﻬﻨـﻣ ﻦـﻛﻭ ﺍﺮـﺷ ﻦﻈـﻓ ** ﺓﺰﺠـﻌﻣ ﻡﺎـﻳﻷﺎﺑ ﻚﻨﻇ ﻦﺴـﺣﻭ ﻞﺟﺭ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺎﻴﻧﺪـﻟﺍ ﻲـﻓ ﻝّﻮﻐـﻳ ﻻ ﻦـﻣ ** ﺎـﻫﺪـﺣﺍﻭﻭ ﺎﻴﻧﺪـﻟﺍ ﻞﺟﺭ ﺎﻬـﻧﺈﻓ (Meaning) ﺎﻫﺎﻨﻌﻣ ﺔﻤﻠﻛ (Word) 97ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻡﺰﻌﻟﺍ ّﻢﻬﻟﺍ -1 ﻪﺑ ﻪﻌﻟﻮﻳ ءﺮﻤﻟﺍ ﻯﺮﻐﻳ -2 ﻲﺸﻤﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺏﺮﺿ ﻢﻴﺳﺮﻟﺍ -3 ﺭﺎﻔﺳﻷﺍ ﻲﻓ ﻝﺎﻘﺘﻧﻻﺍ ﻰﻨﻌﻤﺑ ﻞﻘﻨﻟﺍ -4 ﺲﻤﺸﻟﺍ ﺝﻭﺮﺑ ﺪﺣﺃ ﻞﻤﺤﻟﺍ ﺓﺭﺍﺩ -5 ﺖﻠﻣ ﺖﺤﻨﺟ -6 ﻥﺎﻜﻣ ﻰﻟﺇ ﺺﻠﺤﻣ ﻪﻟ ﺽﺭﻷﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺏﺮﺳ ﺎﻘﻔﻧ -7 ﺔﻌﻳﺪﺨﻟ ﻩﻭﺮﻜﻤﻟﺍ ﻱﺃ ءﺎﺨﻟﺍ ﺢﺘﻔﺑ ﻞﺧﺩ -8 ﺪﻤﺘﻌﻳ ﻝّﻮﻌﻳ -9 ﻲﻧﺎﺜﻟﺍ ﺐﻳﺭﺪﺘﻟﺍ Self Assessment Exercise 2 ﺎﻬﺘﺳﺭﺩ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻦﻣ ﺕﺎﻏﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ ﻞﻤﻛﺃ (1) ............................. ** ﻪﺒﺣﺎﺻ ﻢﻫ ﻰﻨﺜـﻳ ﺔﻣﻼﺴﻟﺍ ﺐـﺣ ﻝﺰﺘﻋﺎﻓ ﻮﺠﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺎﻤﻠﺳﻭﺃ ﺽﺭﻷﺍ ﻲﻓ ** ﺎﻘﻔﻧ ﺬﺨـﺗﺎﻓ ﻪـﻴﻟﺇ ﺖﺤـﻨﺟ ﻥﺈـﻓ ............................... **................................... ................................ **ﺔﻨﻜﺴﻣ ﺶﻴﻌﻟﺍ ﺾﻔﺨﺑ ﻞﻴﻟﺬﻟﺍ ﻰﺿﺮـﻳ ﺓﺭﺍﺩ ﺎﻣﻮﻳ ﺲﻤﺸﻟﺍ ﺡﺮﺒﺗ ﻢـﻟ ** ﻰﻨﻣ ﻍﻮﻠﺑ ﻯﻭﺄﻤﻟﺍ ﻑﺮﺷ ﻲﻓ ﻥﺎﻛ ﻮـﻟ ﻞﻤﺤﻟﺍ ................................. ** ................................... ................................. **ﻪﺑ ﺖﻘﺛﻭ ﻦﻣ ﻰـﻧﺩﺃ ﻙﻭﺪـﻋ ﻯﺪـﻋﺃ ﻞﺟﻭ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺎﻬﻨﻣ ﻦـﻛﻭ ﺍﺮﺷ ﻦﻈـﻓ ** ﺓﺰﺠﻌـﻣ ﻡﺎـﻳﻷﺎـﺑ ﻚﻨﻇ ﻦﺴـﺣﻭ .................................. ** ﺎﻫﺪـﺣﺍﻭﻭ ﺎﻴﻧﺪـﻟﺍ ﻞـﺟﺭ ﺎﻤـﻧﺈﻓ -:ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻰﻨﻌﻣ ﺡﺮﺷﺍ (2) (ﻞﺧﺪﻟﺍ -ﻖﻔﻨﻟﺍ -ﻞﻘﻨﻟﺍ -ﻢﻴﺳﺮﻟﺍ -ﻢﻬﻟﺍ) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have seen a combination of both long vocalized and un-vocalized Arabic poetry texts.
The lesson has presented to you at a glance, a comparison between the two.
It could be seen that vocalized texts are easier read than the un- vocalized ones.
However, a constant practice of the reading of un-vocalized texts will facilitate its comprehension within a short period of time.
98ARA016 Arabic Reader 5.0 SUMMARY This unit teaches you how to read and understand long vocalized and un- vocalized Arabic poetry texts without tears.
You came across vocalized and un- vocalized passages which are aimed at guiding your reading ability.
The reason behind bringing the two together is to graduate the students from the simple to the complex.
Some difficult words in the passages were singled out and explained.
The exercises given are to ensure that students gain proficiency in the reading of vocalized and un-vocalized Arabic passages.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT ﺕﺎﻤﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻲﻧﺎﻌﻣ ﺕﺎﻫ -1 ﺓﺭﺍﺩ -ﻞﺧﺪﻟﺍ -ﻖﻔﻨﻟﺍ -ﻞﻘﻨﻟﺍ -ﻢﻴﺳﺮﻟﺍ -ﻢﻬﻟﺍ -ﻦﺠﻤﻟﺍ -ﺎﻴﻧﺪﻟﺍ ﺓﺮﻫﺯ – ﻦﻤﻟﺍ) (ﻞﻤﺤﻟﺍ ﺎﻬﺘﺳﺭﺩ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺔﻴﺗﻵﺍ ﺕﺎﻴﺑﻷﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺎﻏﺍﺮﻔﻟﺍ ﻸﻣﺇ -2 ................................... ** ﻲـﻧﺈﻓ ﻲـﻨﺑﺬﻌـﺗﻻ ﻲـﻬـﻟﺇ ﻲﻨﻇ ﻦﺴﺣﻭ ﺕﻮﻔـﻋ ﻥﺇ ﻙﻮﻔـﻌـﻟ ** ﻰﺋﺎـﺟﺭ ﻻﺇ ﺔﻠﻴـﺣ ﻰﻟﺎـﻤـﻓ .................................... ** ............................. ﻲﻨﺳ ﺖﻋﺮـﻗﻭ ﻲﻠـﻣﺎﻧﺃ ﺖﻀـﻀﻋ ** ﺎﻬﻴﻠﻋ ﻲﻣﺪﻧ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺮﻜـﻓ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻰﻨـﻤﺘـﻟﺎﺑ ﻱﺮﻤﻋ ﻝﻮـﻃ ﻊـﻄﻗﺃﻭ **.............................. ﻦـﺠـﻤـﻟﺍ ﺮﻬـﻇ ﺎﻬﻠﻫﻷ ﺖﺒﻠـﻗ ** ﺎﻬﻨﻋ ﺪﻫﺰـﻟﺍ ﺖﻗﺪﺻ ﻰﻧﺃ ﻮـﻟﻭ ................................... ** ﻲﻧﺇﻭ ﺍﺮﻴـﺧ ﻰﺑ ﺱﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﻦـﻈـﻳ .................................... ** ﻪﺒﺣﺎﺻ ﻢﻫ ﻰﻨﺜﻳ ﺔﻣﻼّﺴﻟﺍ ﺐـﺣ ﻝﺰﺘـﻋﺎﻓ ﻮﺠﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺎﻤﻠﺳﻭﺃ ﺽﺭﻷﺍ ﻲـﻓ ** ﺎﻘﻔﻧ ﺬﺨـﺗﺎﻓ ﻪﻴﻟﺇ ﺖﺤﻨﺟ ﻥﺈـﻓ ..................................... ** ............................... ..................................... **ﺔﻨﻜﺴﻣ ﺶﻴﻌﻟﺍ ﺾﻔﺨﺑ ﻞﻴﻟﺬﻟﺍ ﻰﺿﺮﻳ ﺓﺭﺍﺩ ﺎﻣﻮﻳ ﺲﻤﺸﻟﺍ ﺡﺮـﺒﺗ ﻢـﻟ **ﻰﻨﻣ ﻍﻮﻠﺑ ﻯﻭﺄﻤﻟﺍ ﻑﺮﺷ ﻲﻓ ﻥﺎﻛ ﻮﻟ ﻞﻤﺤﻟﺍ ..................................... ** ............................... ..................................... ** ﻪﺑ ﺖﻘﺛﻭ ﻦﻣ ﻰﻧﺩﺃ ﻙﻭﺪﻋ ﻯﺪﻋﺃ 99ARA016 Arabic Reader ﻞﺟﻭ ﻰﻠـﻋ ﺎﻬﻨﻣ ﻦـﻛﻭ ﺍﺮﺷ ﻦﻈـﻓ ** ﺓﺰﺠﻌﻣ ﻡﺎﻳﻷﺎـﺑ ﻚﻨﻇ ﻦﺴـﺣﻭ .................................... ** ﺎﻫﺪﺣﺍﻭﻭ ﺎﻴﻧﺪﻟﺍ ﻞـﺟﺭ ﺎﻤـﻧﺈﻓ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Al- Ghamrāwī Muhammad Hussayn (1992).
Majmū’ah mi `n-Nāzim Wa `n-Nāthir.
Cairo: Egypt.
2.
Ali Muhammad, H & Zakī Ali, S (1992).
Al-adab wa `t-Tārīkh fi `l- ‘Aşrayn… Cairo: Egypt.
3.
Sa'ad Husayn, U & ‘Abdu `l-Majīd Muhammad (1990).
Al-Adab wa `n- Nuşūş wa `l-Balāghah, Banghāzī: Libya.
4.
Badawi M.M.
(1975).
A Critical Introduction to Modern Arabic Poetry , London, C.U.P.
100
