NoneCFR 011 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION I Course Developer Edna Ifere Nigeria French Language Village Badagry – Lagos State.
Course Writer Edna Ifere Nigeria French Language Village Badagry – Lagos State.
Course Editor Boniface Igbeneghu Department of European Languages University of Lagos.
Course Co-ordinator Lucy Jummai Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
iiCFR 011 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-435-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCFR 011 COURSE GUIDE ivCFR 011 COURSE GUIDE TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction.............................................................................. 1 What you will learn in this Course............................................ 1 Course Aims............................................................................... 1 Course Objectives...................................................................... 1-2 Working through this Course.................................................... 2 Course Materials........................................................................ 2 Study Units ............................................................................... 2 - 3 Textbooks and References ........................................................ 3 Assignment File........................................................................ 4 Presentation Schedule............................................................... 4 Assessment................................................................................ 4 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) ....................................... 4 - 5 Examination and Grading.................................................. 5 Course Marking Scheme............................................................ 5 Course Overview……………………………………………… 6 How to Get the Best from This Course .................................... 7-8 Tutors and Tutorials .................................................................. 8-9 Summary ................................................................................ 9 iiiNoneIntroduction CFR 011 Aural and Oral Expression I is the first part of a two-semester intensive course in the first year of study.
It is a three [3] credit unit course of twenty units.
The course is designed for foundation and pre degree levels of study.
It introduces you to aural and oral expression in French.
The aim of this course is to equip you with the basic skills of communication with emphasis on oral expression.
By the end of the course, you should be able to confidently express yourself and understand simple expressions in French.
This Course Guide gives you a brief overview of the course content, course duration, and course materials.
What you will learn in this course The main purpose of this course is to provide the necessary tools for communication.
It makes available terms and expressions that will enable you to make proper and accurate expressions whenever the need arises.
This, we intend to achieve this through the following: Course Aims i.
Create dialogues that illustrate true events; ii.
Provide a detailed vocabulary that gives you the meanings of the terms and expressions used; iii.
Give several alternatives to some of the expressions used in the dialogues; and iv.
Point out acts of speech where applicable.
Course Objectives Certain objectives have been set out to ensure that the course achieves its aims.
Apart from the course objectives, every unit of this course has set objectives.
In the course of the study, you will need to confirm, at the end of each unit, if you have met the objectives set at the beginning of each unit.
By the end of this course you should be able to: i.
Read the dialogues fluently; ii.
Pronounce correctly the vocabulary and ensure that you understand what you have read iii.
Read and understand communicative alternatives offered; iv.
Create as many simple situations as possible by making simple and varied sentences; and v. Provide answers to the prescribed exercises.CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION vi.
Put your knowledge into practice, by making use of every opportunity that comes your way to speak and make use of acquired terms and expressions.
Working Through This Course In order to have a thorough understanding of the course units, you will need to read and understand the contents, practice vocabulary and dialogues, and be committed to learning and implementing your knowledge.
This course is designed to cover approximately sixteen weeks, and it will require your devoted attention.
You should do the exercises in the Tutor-Marked Assignments and submit to your tutors.
Course Materials These include: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Recommended Texts 4.
A good dictionary 5.
A file for your assignments and for records to monitoring your progress.
Study Units There are twenty study units in this course: Module1 Unit 1 A l'ecole Unit 2 Au resto!
Unit 3 La nouvelle fille Unit 4 Ala plage Unit 5 Dîner en famille Module 2 Unit 1 Dans la classe Unit 2 Pour te depanner!
Unit 3 Un anniversaire Unit 4 Un devoir difficile Unit 5 Quelle ville!
iiCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Module 3 Unit 1 En vacances Unit 2 A droite ou a gauche Unit 3 En voiture Unit 4 C'est bon marché Unit 5 Comme ene est gentille, ma grand-mere Module 4 Unit 1 Un jour chargé Unit 2 Une journée typique Unit 3 Bon anniversaire maman!
Unit 4 À Londre en été Unit 5 Fou de joie!
The dialogues are written in simple everyday French.
From learning how to greet, to introducing yourself to another person and initial steps in conversation, you will progress to more detailed and more involving aspects of conversation.
You will learn to differentiate between levels of conversation depending on the relationship between the conversants, and so on.
Make use of the course materials, do the exercises to enhance your learning.
Textbooks and References Berger D. and Merieux, R. 1994.
Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier Capelle, Guy et Grellet, 1982.
Francaise C'est Facile il Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de fa Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
iiiCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Assignments File These are of two types: the self-assessment exercises and the Tutor- Marked Assignments.
The self-assessment exercises will enable you monitor your performance by yourself, while the Tutor-Marked Assignment is a supervised assignment.
The assignments take a certain percentage of your total score in this course.
The Tutor-Marked Assignments will be assessed by your tutor within a specified period.
The examination at the end of this course will aim at determining the level of proficiency of your spoken French through oral and written methods.
This course includes twenty Tutor-Marked Assignments and each must be done and submitted accordingly.
Your best scores however, will be recorded for you.
Be sure to send these assignments to your tutor before the deadline to avoid loss of marks.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against lagging behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the tutor marked assignments; second, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAS) There are twenty tutor marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The total marks for the best four (4) assignments will be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, ivCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION reading and study units.
However, you may wish to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given.
If, however, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is done to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Examination and Grading The final examination for the course will carry 70% percentage of the total marks available for this course.
The examination will cover every aspect of the course, so you are advised to revise all your corrected assignments before the examination.
This course endows you with the status of a teacher and that of a learner.
This means that you teach yourself and that you learn, as your learning capabilities would allow.
It also means that you are in a better position to determine and to ascertain the what, the how, and the when of your language learning.
No teacher imposes any method of leaming on you.
The course units are similarly designed with the introduction following the table of contents, then a set of objectives and then the dialogue and so on.
The objectives guide you as you go through the units to ascertain your knowledge of the required terms and expressions.
The dialogues which set the pace for the study units, guide you through the necessary vocabulary and steer your performance in the desired direction.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Marking Scheme vCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Course Overview Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Week 1 Module 1 1 A l'ecole Week 1 Assignment 1 2 Au resto!
Week 2 Assignment 2 3 La nouvelle fille Week 2 4 Ala plage Week 3 Assignment 3 5 Dîner en famille Week 3 Module 2 1 Dans la classe Week 4 Assignment 4 2 Pour te depanner!
Week 4 3 Un anniversaire Week 5 Assignment 5 4 Un devoir difficile Week 5 5 Quelle ville!
Week 6 Assignment 6 Module 3 1 En vacances Week 7 Assignment 7 2 A droite ou a gauche Week 8 Assignment 8 3 En voiture Week 9 Assignment 9 4 C'est bon marché Week 10 Assignment10 5 Comme ene est gentille, ma grand-mere Week 11 Assignment 11 Module 4 1 Un jour chargé Week 12 Assignment 12 2 Une journée typique Week 12 3 Bon anniversaire maman!
Week 13 Assignment 13 4 À Londre en été Week 14 Assignment 14 5 Fou de joie!
Week 15 Assignment 15 Revision Week 16 Examination Week 17 Total 17 weeks viCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION How to get the best from this course In distance learning the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set books or other material.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives enable you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to assist you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course Overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should decide on it and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they lag behind in their course work.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
viiCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10.After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail or submit your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, or e-mail if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, viiiCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION • you have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, • you have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary Aural and Oral Expression in French introduces you to basic conversational skills greetings, introducing a person taking your leave, expressing wishes, requesting for something, refusing or accepting an assistance, an offer, an invitation, a suggestion, etc, are intended to be acquired in this course.
The attached vocabularies are therefore designed to ensure that you acquire the proper terms for the appropriate situations.
Real-life situations have been created to enable you identify with and create some of your own.
The essence is to get you to acquire communicative competence, and by equipping you with the necessary tools, we hope to have achieved that.
I wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
MAIN COURSE ixCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Course Code CFR 011 Course Title Aural and Oral Expression I Course Developer Mrs Edna Ifere Nigeria French Language Village Badagry – Lagos State.
Course Writer Mrs Edna Ifere Nigeria French Language Village Badagry – Lagos State.
Course Editor Boniface Igbeneghu Department of European Languages University of Lagos.
Course Co-ordinator Lucy Jummai Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-435-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE xiCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Module 1 ……………………………………………......... 1 Unit 1 A l'ecole …………………………………….
1 - 6 Unit 2 Au Resto …………………………………….
7 - 13 Unit 3 La Nouvelle Fille …………………………… 14 - 20 Unit 4 A La Plage ………………………………….
21 - 28 Unit 5 Dîner En Famille …………………………... 29 - 35 Module 2 ………………………………………………....... 36 Unit 1 Dans La Classe ……………………………… 36 - 41 Unit 2 Pour te Depanner!
…………………………… 42 - 47 Unit 3 Un Anniversaire …………………………….. 48 - 53 Unit 4 Un Devoir Difficile ………………………….
54 - 59 Unit 5 Quelle Ville!
………………………………… 60 - 65 Module 3 ………………………………………………........ 66 Unit 1 En Vacances ………………………………… 66 - 71 Unit 2 A Droite Ou A Gauche ……………………… 72 - 78 Unit 3 En Voiture …………………………………... 79 - 84 Unit 4 C’est Bon Marché …………………………… 85 - 90 Unit 5 Comme Elle Est Gentille, Ma Grand-Mere ….
91 - 95 Module 4 ………………………………………………........ 96 Unit 1 Un Jour Chargé ……………………………... 96 - 101 Unit 2 Une Journée Typique ………………………... 102 - 107 Unit 3 Bon Anniversaire, Maman!
………………….. 108 - 113 Unit 4 A Londres En Eté …………………………….
114 - 119 Unit 5 Fou De Joie!
………………………………….
120 - 125 xiiCFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION MODULE 1 Unit 1 A lécole Unit 2 Au resto Unit 3 La Nouvelle Fille Unit 4 A La Plage Unit 5 Dîner En Famille UNIT 1 A L'ECOLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Other ways to greet 3.4 Time of the day 3.5 Saying it differently 3.6 Taking leave of 3.7 Samples 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we begin with a simple conversation among three friends who meet at school, and greet one another.
You will meet and learn the vocabulary associated with greetings and equally how to reply to greetings.
In addition, you will learn forms of address i.e how to address a man or a woman in French.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you will be able to: • Greet properly in French; • Address a man or woman, married or unmarried correctly; and • Carry out a simple conversation in French.
1CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue A L'ecole Jacque: Salut, Sylvie.
Sylvie: Salut, Jacques, ça va?
Jacques: Qui ça va?
Et toi?
Sylvie: Très bien merci Jacques: Bonjour Anne, comment vas-tu?
Anne: Je vais très bien, et toi?
Jacques: Pas mal, merci.
(And the three of them to a teacher passing by) Jacques, Anne, Sylvie: Bonjour monsieur.
George.
M. George: Bonjour les enfants, comment allez-vous?
Jacques, Anne, Sylvie: Bien merci monsieur, et vous?
M. George: Ça va tres bien, merci.
Jacques.
Anne, Sylvie: Au revoir monsieur M. George: Au revoir 3.2 Vocabulary The conversation is among three friends Jacques, Sylvie et Anne, who meet and greet one other at school.
Bonjour (Good Morning) Comment vas-tu/comment allez-vous?
(How are you) Salut (Hi, Hello) Oui (Yes) Très bien (Very well) Ça va?
(How?)
Merci (Thank you) Je vais très bien (I'm doing very well) Et toi (And you) Pas mal (Not bad) Monsieur (Sir/Ma) Les enfants (Children) Au revoir (Good bye) 2CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.3 Other Ways To Greet In the above conversation you have seen how to greet in the morning and how to address a man, but you also need to know how to address a woman and how to greet in the evening and afternoon.
Below, you have some necessary terms and then sample conversations.
Bonsoir monsieur (Good Evening, sir) Bonsoir madame (Good Evening, ma) Bonsoir madame (Good Evening, lady) 3.4 Time of the Day Bonjour monsieur (Good Morning Good aftemoon, sir) Bonsoir monsieur (Good evening sir) Note that French uses "bonjour" for "good morning" and "good afternoon”.
“Bonjour" is also used sometimes in the evening if it's the first meeting for that day between the conversants.
Discussants There are two levels of conversation in French.
One is the tu level, the other is vous.
Tu and vous mean “you”.
While tu is used when addressing family members, friends and people with whom you may be familiar like a younger person and so on, vous is used in formal situations when speaking with strangers, acquaintances a boss, a teacher and people with whom you are not familiar etc.
It is this last group that should be addressed as monsieur (when it’s a man), madame (a married lady) or mademoiselle (an unmarried lady).
Vous is also used when addressing two or more persons.
The first group may be addressed in name e.g.
(Anne) or title e.g (papa).
It is therefore of utmost importance to determine your relationship with the person you are addressing from the start; is it a tu or a vous relationship?
3.5 Saying It Differently How are you can be said in different ways: Comment allez-vous?
(To a "vous" person) Comment vas-tu?
(To a "tu" person) Comment ça va?
(How are things going!
how are you getting along) Comment tu te portes?
(To a "tu" person) Comment vous vous portez?
(To a "vous" person) Ça va bien?
(are things getting on smoothly?)
Ça va?
(are things okay?)
3CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Like wise, other ways of replying include: Bien, merci (fine, thank you) Très bien (very wel1/fine, thank you) Pas mal, merci (not bad, thank you) Comme ci, comme ça (so so/ not too good, not too bad) Super!
(Great) Merveilleux (Wonderful) 3.6 Taking Leave of Au revoir (Good bye) A plus tard (See you later) A bientôt (See you soon) A tout à l’heure (See you shortly) A la prochaine (See you next time) Bonne nuit (Good night) Bonne journée (Have a good day) A jeudi (See you Thursday/ Till Thursday) 3.7 Samples 1 X : Salut chéri Y : Salut chéri.
Tu vas bien ?
X : Oui, très bien, et toi?
Y: Merveilleux 2 A : Salut Anne B : Salut Sylvie, ca va?
A : Ça va bien, et toi?
B: Ça va très bien, merci.
3 M : Bonjour Mademoiselle Boula.
Mille: Bonjour Monsieur Charles, comment ça va?
M: Ça va bien, et vous?
Mlle: Pas mal, merci.
M: Je vais au restaurant.
A bienrot mademoiselle Mlle : A bientot monsieur.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) Good afternoon, Madam!
b) Good morning Sir!
4CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION c) Hi!
d) Good evening, Madam!
4.0 CONCLUSION By now, you should be able to greet anyone [monsieur, madame or mademoiselle or even papa (dad) maman (mum)] at anytime of the day (bonjour, bonsoir) and also take your leave (au revoir, à bientôt, etc.).
You should have also learnt reply to greetings appropriately.
You will need to answer questions and to test your knowledge of the subject.
5.0 SUMMARY You were taught how to greet different category of people in French, in this unit, and also how to take your leave, you have also learned how to respond.
Subsequent unit will be built on this.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Bon après midi,madam b) Bonjour monsieur!
c) Hi!
d) Bonsoir, madam!
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Respond to the following: 1.
Bonjour monsieur 2.
Ça va?
3.
Je vais au restaurant, it bientot.
4.
Salut, Charles.
5.
Comment tu te portes?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R., 1994.
Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise, 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
5CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie, 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
6CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 2 AU RESTO CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Talking about yourself 3.4 Having someone say his/her name 3.5 Masculine?
/ Feminine?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn to introduce yourself to someone.
You will learn to begin a conversation in French without much difficulty.
Saying your name and surname as well as saying your profession is all part of introducing yourself, and will be part of what you learnt in this unit.
You will encounter new words and expressions many of which will be explained in the vocabulary section.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Introduce yourself to a stranger • Make a person introduce himself/herself • Say your profession, your marital status, your nationality, etc in French.
• Talk about yourself Now listen, read the following passages and enrich your knowledge.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue Mme Xavier: Bonjour monsieur M. Johnson: Bonjour madame.
Comment allez-vous ?
7CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Mme Xavier: Très bien merci, monsieur, et vous ?
M. Johnson: Très bien madame Mme Xavier: Vous êtes monsieur... ?
M. Johnson: Je suis monsieur Jacques Johnson.
Mme Xavier: Qu’est-ce que vous faites ?
M. Johnson: Je suis ingénieur privé, je suis à Paris, pour assister au Conférence Nationale d’Ingénieurs.
Et vous madame?
Mme Xavier: Moi, c’est madame Xavier.
Je suis avocate.
M. Johnson: Enchanté Mme Xavier: Je suis là pour interroger un client.
Je suis content de faire votre connaissance.
Vous êtes Americain ?
M. Johnson: Non, je suis francaise mais j’habite en Amérique.
Mme Xavier: Vous êtes marié ?
M. Johnson: Oui, avec deux enfants Mme Xavier: Vous parlez bien l’anglais alors, j’imagine M. Johnson: Oui et non.
Aux française, oui, mais aux Américains.
Non, Je me débrouille.
Et vous madame.
Mme Xavier: Ah, voilà mon client arrive.
Au revoir M. Johnson M. Johnson: Au revoir madame Xavier, à la prochaine fois.
3.2 Vocabulary Mrs Xavier (Mme Xavier) and Mr Johnson (M. Johnson) meet at a restaurant.
They exchange greetings and introduce one another, talk about their professions and nationalities.
Below is a lot of new words and expression: Mme (madame) Mrs, Madam M. (monsieur) Mr, Sir Ingénieur Engineer Vous êtes/tu es You are Je suis I am Pour To, for Assister To attend Qu’est-ce vous faites ?
What do you do ?
Conference Nationale National Conference for Engineers d’Ingénieurs Je m’appelle My name is Moi, c’est I am Avocat Lawyer Vous êtes mariê Are you married Là Here, There Intêrroger To question Je suis contente de faire I’m pleased to make your acquaintance 8CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION votre connaissance Enchanté Pleased (To meet) Americain American Non No Français French J’habite I live in Amêrique America Vous parlez You speak L’anglais English Alors Then J’imagine I think, I believe Aux Francais To the French (people) Aux Americains To the Americans Je me dêbrouille I manage Voilà mon client qui arrivé There’s my client coming 3.3 Talking About Yourself Talking about yourself is a popular activity and sets you well on your way to eloquence in French.
There are several things to be talked about: - Nationality - Marital status family status - Religion - Profession - Hobbies - Residence Here's a sample “je suis” speech.
Je m'appelle Corinner.
J'habite Abuja Je suis étudiante Je suis Chrétienne et je suis célibataire Je suis Nigériane et je suis fille unique dans ma famille Here are few terms to assist you speak about yourself: Nationality Nigérian (Nigériane) Nigerian Africain (Africaine) African Togolais (Togolaise) Togolese Camérounais (camerounaise) Camerounian Béninois (Beninoise) Beninois 9CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION MaritaI/Family Status Célibataire Spinter Marié Married Divorcé Divorced Fille unique Only daughter Fils unique Only son Le premier (la premiere) The first (child) Le demier (la demiere) The last (child) Le/la deuxième enfant The second child Le/la troisieme enfant The third child Religion Chrétien (chrétienne) A christian Musulman (musulmane) A muslim Athée Anatheist Profession Un étudiant (une étudiante ) A student Un avocat A lawyer Un medecin A doctor Un architecte An architect Une infinniere A nurse Un professeur A teacher Un cultivateur (une cultivatrice) A farmer Un/une fonctionnaire A civil servant Un mécanicien A mechanic Un cordonnier A cobbler/ shoe maker Un ouvrier/une ouvriere A worker Un/une journaliste A journalist Un/une secretaire A secretary Un phannacien (une phannacienne) A pharmacist Un psychiatre A psychiatrist Un dentiste A dentist Un boulanger (une boulangére) A baker Un menuisier A carpenter Un pompier A fire man Un (une) pilote A pilot Un agent de policier A policeman Un soldat A soldier Un coiffeur (une coiffeuse) A barber/a hair dresser Un biblothécaire A librarian 10CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.4 Having A Person Say Or Her Name There are several ways of asking a person his name.
In English, we say “I don’t believe we’ve met”, “May I know whom I have the pleasure of speaking with", etc.
In French, to establish a relationship, one may begin "Vous êtes monsieur...
."
to prompt the other person give a name.
3.5 Masculine/Feminine Words?
By now, you have probably noticed that there are two options for saying one thing.
For example "un etudiant, une etudiante' which both mean a student.
In, French, every noun is marked for gender.
Gender occurs in English language only as what is known as natural gender.
“A man” is naturally masculine whi1e “a woman”, “an aunt”, are naturally feminine.
French ascribes a gender to every noun.
Gender in French is of two forms.
The first one is the Natural Gender (as in English) while the second one is called grammatical gender.
It is important to learn the gender of the noun along with the noun itself.
This is the fastest way to learn the gender of nouns.
In our examples above, the initial words are masculine while the attached words in brackets are feminine.
Therefore we have: Je suis étudiante (I am a – male - student) Je suis étudiante (I am a -female -student) The words which occur alone may be used for either gender.
The adjective in French copies the gender of the noun it is qualifying.
For instance “africain/africaine” and "marié/mariée" are adjectives the first being masculine and the second ones being feminine.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Introduce yourself in three sentences in French stating: a) your name b) your profession c) your nationality 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you should have learnt to introduce yourself to someone and to respond when someone introduces himself/herself to you.
You should have also learnt to speak about yourself.
This exercise should hopefully lead you to speak about others.
Hopefully, you should be able to carry 11CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION out a successful conversation.
Several combinations are now open to you.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught you various ways of introducing yourself, your profession, your nationality etc when you meet someone.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a) Je suis professeur, je suis le premier enfant de ma famille.
Je suis musulman et je suis nigériance.
Je sills mane avec deux enfants.
b) Vous êtes medecin et vous habitez au Nigéria mais vous etes togolais.
Vous êtes chrétiens mais je suis musulman.
Vous êtes célibataire mais je suis marié.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Say and write in French: 1.
I’m pleased to meet you.
2.
Say you are a student, a Nigerian and a bachelor (remember the gender).
3.
I speak English well.
4.
I live in Kaduna and my name is Sani.
5.
Are you an engineer?
No I am a nurse.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R., 1994.
Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie, 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
12CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
13CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 3 LA NOUVELLE FILLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn to introduce two strangers to each other.
You will be introduced to the necessary vocabulary to introduce one person to another, to identify persons and things.
In this unit, you will also encounter expressions used when asking questions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Introduce someone to another; • Ask about persons and objects; • Identify persons and objects ; and • Ask other questions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue Alain: Salut Martin.
Martin: Salut Alain, ça va?
Alain: Formidable!
Et toi, ça va?
Martin: Qui, ça va Alain: Voila Barbara.
Attends!
Mais non, ce n'est pas Barbara.
Qui est-ce?
Martin: C’est la nouvelle-arrivée, c’est la soeur de Michel.
Elle est chic, eh.
Alain: J’ai les yeux pour elle.
Allez, on y va Martin: Bonjour, tu es nouvelle ici?
14CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Alain: Oui, je viens d’arriver.
Martin: Alors, on est la pour te guider si tu as besoin d’informations.
Moi, je m’appelle Martin, voici mon amie, Alain.
Et toi ?
tu t’appelles comment?
Brigitte : Moi, je m’appelle Brigitte Farouk.
Enchantée Martin et Alain : Enchantés Alain: Tu habites ou?
Brigitte: J’habite Yola.
Martin: Qui est ton musicien préféré Brigitte: Moi, j’aime ‘African China’ Alain: Et quel est ton re pas favouri?
Brigitte : C’est du riz.
Martin: Brigitte, on est content de te connaître.
On doit repartir.
Bonne journée et a bientôt.
Brigitte: D’accord, à bientôt 3.2 Vocabulary There’s a new girl at the school who we later get to know as Brigitte.
Alain and Martin want to meet her.
They walk up to her and Martin introduces himself and his friend (Alain) as well.
Then they ask some questions and take their leave.
Below are some of the new words and expressions.
Formidable Great Voilà There’s Ce n’est pas It’s not Qui est-ce?
Who’s she/he C’est It’s La soeur The sister De Michel of Michel C’est la nouvelle arrivée It’s the new comer J’ai I have Les yeux Eyes Pour elle For her Allez Come on On y va Let’s go Nouveau (Nouvelle) New Ici Here Je viens de I (have) just Commencer To start On One, They, We Guider To guide Si If Avoir besoin de To need Mon ami (mon amie) My friend 15CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Vous vous appelez comment?
What is your name?
Quel (quelle) Which, what Où Where De From Votre Your Musicien préféré I like, I love Repas favori Favourite meal Du riz Rice On doit partir One (we) has to leave now D'accord Okey, agreed Introducing Another Person Here are a few more expressions associated with introducing someone else.
C ' est Martin He's Martin Voici Martin Here's Martin Lui, c’est George, et moi, Charles He is George, I am Charles Vous connaissez Lucien Do you know/have you met Lucien?
Typical context Vous connaissez Lucien?
Lucien, voici Jean, Jean, c'est Lucien Questions Questions are a part of daily life.
Did you see, should I go to, why didn't you ... , etc are an integral part of conversation and the earlier you are equipped with the necessary terms and expressions, the sooner you will be able to express yourself in French.
Let us look at some typical question formats.
Pourquoi Why Qui est-ce?
Who’s this/who’s that Qu’est-ce c’est What’s it ?/what’s the matter Quel (quelle) Which Comment How Ou Where Quand When Let’s take a few examples of each : Quel (quelle) Quelle heure est-il?
What time is it?
Quel livre voulex-vous Which book do you want?
16CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Quelle ville habitez-vous?
Which town do you live?
Vous venez do quel etat ?
You are/you come from which state?
Quel fruit est-ce que vous préféréz Which fruit do you prefer?
Comment Comment vas-tu?
How are you ?
Comment est-ce que vous faites cela How do you do that ?
Comment est-ce que vous trouvez la How do you see (find) the new nouvelle voiture ?
car?
Comment est-ce que vous savez?
How do you know?
Comment est-ce qu’elle danse How does she dance?
Comment faites-vous ce travail?
How do you do this work?
Où Je déscends où?
Where do I get down?
Vous mangez où?
Where do you eat?
Où est-ce que je suis?
Where am I?
Où est-ce que vous allez?
Where are you going?
Vous habitez où?
Where do you live?
Elle est où?
Where is she?
Vous allez où?
Where are you going?
Quand Quand est-ce que vous partez ?
When are you leaving?
Quand arrivez-vous le matin?
When do you get here in the morning?
Vous voyagez quand?
When are you travelling?
Quand est-ce qu'il arrive?
When is he coming?
Le train arrive quand?
When is the train coming?
Vous faites la cuisine quand?
When do you cook?
Quand est-ce que vous mangez?
When do you eat?
Vous mangez quand?
When do you eat?
Pourquoi Tu pleures pourquoi?
Why are you crying?
Pourquoi est-ce que tu pleures?
Why are you crying?
Pourqoi êtes-vous triste?
Why are you sad?
Pourquoi est-ce que vous êtes triste?
Why are you sad?
Vous êtes triste pourquoi?
Why are you sad?
17CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION There are three ways of asking, questions in French: first by simply turning a stament into a question; as can be done in English when we say "you live here" as a statement, and "you live here?"
as a question.
Examples Vous habitez ici?
(you live here?)
Vous parlez anglais?
(you speak English?)
Vous êtes ingénieur?
(you're an engineer?)
Vous mangez du riz?
(you're eating rice?)
Vous aimez Paris?
(you like Paris?)
Second, by inverting the subject and the object, that is, exchanging their positions.
In English language, this subject-verb inversion is obvious in auxiliary-type statements and questions and questions.
Take for instance, “you are living here” (as a statement) and “are you living here” (as a question).
Examples Habitez-vous ici?
Etes-vous ingenieur?
Mangez-vous du riz?
Aimez-vous Paris?
Examples Est-ce que vous habitez ici?
Est-ce que vous aimez Paris?
Est-ce que vous managez du riz ?
Est-ce que vous aimez Paris?
Qu'est-ce que c'est?
qui est When asking about persons or objects, i.e seeking information about a person or an object which you know little of, you may use “qu est-ce que c’est” (what is it/what's this?/what's that?/what's the matter) or “qui est-ce?
(Who is it?/who is this?
Who is that?)
For example: A X: Qù'est-ce que c'est?
Y: Où?
X: Là, dans (in) la voiture (car) Y: C'est unjouet (toy) 18CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION B M: Allô, bonjour Pierre.
P: Qui est-ce?
M: C'est moi, Martin, tu ne viens pas à l'ecole?
P: Si, je suis presque la.
Qui est-ce?
C'est mon frère (my brother) Qui est-ce?
C'est l’ami de Joseph.
Qui est-ce?
C'est l'amie de Sylvie SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Say in French: a) I am the new student b) I live in Ikoyi c) I am pleased to meet you.
d) Where are we going?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you should have learnt to introduce one person to another, in many ways.
You should have also learnt to ask about persons, about objects and to give appropriate responses to same.
In addition, you have learnt to ask many kinds of questions.
Begin to apply all you have learnt through the conversations of all kinds, because any language can mainly be acquired through practice.
Here is a tutor-marked assignment to test your knowledge.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit has equipped you with diverse ways of telling people about yourself and getting information about others.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a) Je suis le nouveau(la nouvelle) étudiant/étudiante.
b) J’habite Ikoyi.
c) Enchantée de vous renconter.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Find the appropriate question to the following reponses: 1.
……………………………………………?
19CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION J'habite Lagos: 49, me Adeniyi, Surulere 2.
....................................................................?
Je m'appelle Gbenga Joseph.
3.
.................................................................. ?
Non, je suis ghaneen.
4.
................................................................... ?
Oui, je suis marié 5.
.............................................................. ?
C’est monsieur Farouk.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
20CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 4 A LA PLAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 I Have Twenty Years 3.4 Situations 3.5 Hobbies 3.6 Negation 3.7 The Other Person 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to saying your age and asking another person for his/her age.
This involves leaning numbers.
You will learn to talk about hobbies, things you like to do, and those you don’t like to do.
Two young ladies meet at the beach and gather information about each other.
You will learn from their conversation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this course unit, you are expected to be able to: • Start a conversation with anyone, anywhere; • Ask someone his/her age, and say yours; • Say things you like to do; and • Talk about a third person, other than yourself and the person you are speaking with.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue: A La Plage Agnès: Bonjour.
Angèle: Bonjour, ça va?
Agnès: Bien et toi?
Angèle: Ça va merci.
Comment tu t’appelles 21CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Agnès: Agnès.
Angèle: Moi, c’est Angèle.
Agnès: Tu as quel âge ?
Angèle: J’ai vingt ans.
Et toi?
Agnès: Moi, j’ai dix-huit ans.
Tu es étudiante?
Angèle: Non, je travaille.
Et toi, tu travailles?
Agnès: Non, je suis étudiante.
Qu’est-ce que tu fais?
Angèle: Secrétaire.
Je suis secrétaire.
Agnès: Tu es mariée?
Angèle: Oui, avec un fils qui a sept ans Agnès: Non, je suis célibataire.
Angèle: Tu vas terminer tes etudes avant le mariage?
Agnès: Je ne sais pas!
Parle-moi de tes loisirs.
Angèle: J’aime la lecture, le sport, les voyages, écouter la radio.
Agnès: Moi, je déteste écouter la radio mais j’aime regarder la télévision et j’adore le cinéma.
Angèle: Je n’aime pas le cinéma, je préfère le théâtre.
3.2 Vocabulary The conversation is between two young girls at the beach.
They begin a conversation.
In the course of the conversation, they talk about their age, their hobbies and so on.
Here are some of the words and expressions used: Tu as quel âge?
[How old are you] J’ai vingt ans [I’m 20 years old] dix-huit ans [18 years old] toi [you] moi [me] qu’est-ce que tu fais [what do you do] fils [son] terminer [complete, finish, round up] le marriage [marriage] je ne sais pas [I don’t know] parles-moi de [tell me about] tes loisirs [hobbies] mes loisirs [my hobbies] ses loisirs [his/her hobbies] j’aime [I like] j’adore [I love] je déteste [I hate] je préfère [I prefer] Je n’aime pas [I don’t like] la lecture [reading] le sport [sports] les voyages [travelling] 22CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION écouter la radio [listening to the radio] le cinéma [cinema] le théâtre [the theatre] 3.3 I Have Twenty Years [Saying One’s Age] The first thing to remember is that while we say in English ‘I am 20 years old’, the French use the verb ‘to have’ and it sounds like they’re saying ‘I have 20 years’ but it means ‘I’m 20 years old’.
J’ai vingt ans [I am 20 years old] Tu as vingt ans [You are 20 years old] Il / Elle a vingt ans [He/She is 20 years old] Nous avons vingt ans [We are 20 years old] Vous avez 20 ans [You [formal, plural] are 20 years] Ils ont/ Elles ont 20 ans [they [masc., fem] are 20 years] J’ai un an [I’m one year old] J’ai deux ans [I’m 2 years old] J’ai trois ans [I’m 3 years old] Il a quatre ans [he’s 4 years old] Il a cinq ans [he’s 5 years old] Il a sixans [he’s 6 years old] Elle a sept ans [she’s 7 years old] Elle a huit ans [she’s 8 years old] Elle a neuf ans [she’s 9 years old] Elle a dix ans [she’s 10 years old] onze [11] douze [12] treize [13] quatorze [14] quinze [15] seize [16] dix-sept [17] dix-huit [18] dix-neuf [19] vingt [20] vingt-et-un [21] vingt-deux [22] vingt-trois [23] vingt-quatre [24] vingt-cinq [25] vingt-six [26] vingt-sept [27] vingt-huit [28] vingt-neuf [29] trente [30] trente-et-un [31] trente-deux [32] trente-trois [33] …etc quarante [40] cinquante [50] soixante [60] soixante-dix [70] soixante-et-onze [71] quatre-vingts [80] quatre-vingt-dix [90] quatre-vingt-onze [91] quatre-vingt-douze [92] cent [100] mille [1000] un million [1,000,000] 23CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.4 Situations a. X: il a dix ans?
Y: je ne sais pas.
b.
A: Est-ce qu’elle a 20 ans.
B. Je ne sais pas.
c. S: Tu as quel âge?
T: j’ai dix ans.
Sylvie: Voilà les jumeaux, ils ont quel âge?
[Look at the male-twins, how old are they?]
Brigitte: Je ne sais pas.
Sylvie: Et les jumelles, elles ont quel âge?
[And the female-twins, how old are they?]
Brigitte: Je ne sais pas.
3.5 Hobbies J’aime regarder la télévision.
There are two ways of saying things one likes to do.
You either .like the action like ‘I like to dance, to read or you like the activity dancing, reading.
The difference is expressed through the use of a verb on the one hand, and the use of a noun on the other hand.
J’aime écouter la radio [I like listening to the radio] J’aime danser [I like dancing] J’aime lire [I like reading] J’aime le cinéma [I like / love the cinema] J’aime la télévision [I like television] J’aime le théâtre.
J’aime les voyages Il aime la lecture .
[reading] Il aime la musée [ museum] Il aime le sport [sports] Il aime chanter [singing] Il aime de la musique.
[music] Elle aime la peinture.
[paintings] Elle aime nager.
[[to swim] Nous aimons le football .
[football] Nous aimons le tennis et le basket [tennis and basketball] Nous aimons la musique rock [rock music] Tu aime les jeux.
[games] Il aime les jouets.
[ toys] You may also talk about things you love to do.
[ j’adore…..] J’adore les journaux [newspapers] 24CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION J’adore la neige .
[snow] J’adore faire la cuisine.
[I love cooking] Then things you don’t like [je n’aime pas] and things you hate [je déteste….]
Je déteste les romans de Shakespeare.
[Shakespeare’s novels] Je n’aime pas la piscine.
[swimming pool] Elle n’aime pas la nature.
[nature] Elle déteste la bande déssinée.
[cartoon] Il n’aime pas le vélo [motorcycle] Il déteste les films.
[films] Nous détestons la musique rap.
[rap music] Nous n’aimons pas la musique rock.
[rock music] 3.6 Negation When you want to say you do not do a certain thing, the expression to use is “ne…pas” as in the following examples: [love] Il aime Il n’aime pas [hate] Il déteste le rap Il ne déteste pas le rap [sing] Je chante.
Je ne chante pas.
[walk] Je marche.
Je ne marche pas [study] J’étudie le français.
Je n’étudie pas le français.
[eat] Je mange du riz.
Je ne mange pas du riz.
[sleep] Il dort.
Il ne dort pas [dance] Il danse Il ne danse pas [work] Elle travaille.
Elle ne travaille pas.
[Travel] Elle voyage demain.
Elle ne voyage pas demain 3.7 The Other Person By now, you have been introduced to the way to speak about another person or other people.
In French as in English, we differentiate the male from the female: he/she becomes il/elle.
In addition however, French has a different form for the plural whereas English has one form: they.
We use ils for men/boys and elles for women/girls.
When however reference is being made to both [male and female], ils is used.
Here are a few examples.
Il aime la musique rock Ils aiment la musique rock.
Il écoute la radio Ils écoutent la radio.
Il parle anglais.
Ils parlent anglais Il regarde la télévision.
Ils regardent la télévision Elle mange un gateau.
Elles mangent des gateaux Elle habite à Londres.
Elles habitent à Londres 25CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Elle voyage pour les vacances.
Elles voyagent pour les vacances Elle déteste les voitures.
Elles détestent les voitures.
Liaison Ordinarily, as you would have observed, final consonants of French words are not pronounced.
But in certain situations, they are sounded.
For example, we say vous without pronouncing the s but when the word after it begins with a vowel, the s is sounded [z].
This is what is known as liaison.
Let’s look at instances: Ils entrent [ilzãtr] Ils ouvrent Ils écoutent Ils aiment Les enfants un petit enfant Les arachides des bons arachides Les arbres de gros arbres Très élégant Trop intélligent Très intéressant Trop aigu Très important Chez elle Dans un café Sans elle De plus en plus Petit à petit Tout à fait Note : Liaison is however never after et [and] and never before onze [eleven].
Situation Anne.
Bonjour Cécile, comment tu vas?
Cécile Pas mal, merci, et toi?
Anne Oui, ça va, qui est-ce?
Cécile C’est une amie, Bola.
Elle est nigériane Bola, voilà Anne.
Anne Enchantée.
Vous habitez Lagos?
Bola Non, j’habite à Abuja, je suis ici en vacances.
Anne Vous aimez Lagos?
Bola Moi, non.
Je n’aime pas du tout Lagos.
Il y a trop de monde.
26CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Say in French : a) I am married b) I love music c) I don’t like Abuja d) Do you work?
4.0 CONCLUSION By the end of this unit, you are expected to have acquired certain communicative skills associated with saying one’s age, talking about hobbies and talking about a third person.
Here are some exercises to test your knowledge.
5.0 SUMMARY Communication is all about saying something to someone in order to be understood.
This unit concentrates on those aspects that allow to get to know another person better.
Asking for another’s age, hobbies, profession, marital status and being able to say yours are all part of getting to know another better.
These have been the focus of this unit.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Je suis marié(e) b) J’aime la music c) Je n’aime pas Abuja d) Tu /vous travailles/ez 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Complete using the figures in brackets 1.
Elvis a ………….. ans [35] 2.
Moi, j’ai…………..ans [12] 3.
Mon frère a ………ans [9] 4.
Ma soeur a …………ans [15] 5.
Ma mère et ma tante, elles ont …………ans [40] Say the following in French 1.
I don’t like rap music 2.
I like dancing 3.
I love watching television 4.
I hate the museum 5.
I don’t know 27CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 6.
I don’t eat.
7.
I don’t watch television 8.
She doesn’t like music 9.
She is not sleeping 10.
They [girls] are not sleeping.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
28CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 5 DÎNER EN FAMILLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogues 3.2 Vocabulary 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn to describe a person, a place or a thing.
You will learn terms used in differentiating one thing [person or a place] from another.
The dialogue is about Eric bringing a friend [Thomas] home to dinner.
Thomas meets Eric’s parents and we find out a few things about Thomas.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Describe a person, a place or a thing; • Use terms and expressions which indicate possession; and • We will contrast English with French terms and expressions to enable you master those in French with ease.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dîner En Famille Eric.
Salut maman, salut papa.
Maman/Papa:.
Salut Eric, ça va ?
Eric.
Oui,écoutez je viens avec un copain, Thomas pour dîner, le voilà.
Thomas, ce sont mes parents M./Mme Koko.
Thomas est joueur de football, il est Béninois mais il parle bien l’anglais.
Thomas Je suis content de faire votre connaissance.
Maman Tu habites à Cotonou?
29CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Thomas Non, mais mes parents sont là.
Moi, j’habite à Lagos.
Je suis dans l’équipe Nigérian.
Maman Et tu as quel âge?
Thomas J’ai vingt-cinq ans.
Maman Parles-nous de ta famille?
Thomas Eh bien, je suis le premier de cinq enfants.
J’ai deux soeurs, la cadette a huit ans.
Elle est élève.
Mon père est présentateur à la télévision.
Ma mère est journaliste.
Mon frère cadet a envie d’être médecin.
J’aime ma famille, ils sont sympathiques.
Mon père est beau,grand, mince, de teint foncé et il porte des lunettes.
Ma mère, elle est belle, grande, mince, de teint clair et elle a de cheveux longs.
Voilà.
Maman C’est une famille intéressante!
Thomas, fais comme chez toi et bon appétit.
3.2 Vocabulary Un copain [a male friend] Dîner [to dine, a dinner] Joueur de football [footballer, football player] Béninois [indigene of Bénin republic] L’équipe [team] Le premier [the first] Frères [brothers] soeurs [sisters] Cadet, cadette [ the younger] Élève [pupil] Présentateur à la télévision [television presenter] Avoir envie de….
[want to,would like to….]
Sympathique [nice] Beau [handsome].
belle [beautiful] Grand,grande [tall] Mince [slim,slender] De teint foncé / clair [dark/light complexioned] De cheveux [hair] Fais comme chez toi.
[feel at home] Bon appétit [have a good meal/enjoy your meal] Describing A Person/Place/Thing Several words may be used in describing someone or something.
Again, the gender must not be ignored.
Some terms are used when it’s a masculine word.
Others when it is a feminine word.
30CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION [only] le seul étudiant.
La seule étudiante [tall] un grand homme.
Une grande femme [strong] un homme fort.
Une femme forte [small] un petit garçon.
Une petite fille [married] un homme marié .
Une femme mariée [fat, big] un gros arbre .
Une grosse pomme [strong] un vin fort.
Une bière forte [good]un bon cadeau.
Une bonne opinion [tiring] un voyage fatigant.
Une démarche fatigante [bad] un village mauvais.
Une ville mauvaise [talkative] un ami bavard.
Une amie bavarde [new] un nouveau pantalon.
Une nouvelle jupe [tired] il est fatigué.
Elle est fatiguée [interesting] un roman intéressant.
Une histoire intéressante [lazy] il est paresseux Elle est paresseuse.
[ancient/old] un ancien batiment.
Une ancienne maison [happy] je suis content.
Je suis contente Sometimes a single term is used in either case [difficult] un exercise difficile.
Une épreuve difficile [easy] un examen facile.
Une question facile [useful] un message utile.
Une leçon utile [nice] un ami sympathique.
Une famille sympathique [sad] il est triste.
Elle est triste.
[extraordinary] un résultat extraordinaire Une réponse extraordinaire [pleasant] un homme agréable .
une femme agréable Others include jeune [young], drôle [funny], timide [shy] colours; rouge [red], jaune [yellow], rose [pink] Situations A Je suis le seul enfant de mes parents.
Je suis marié.
Ma femme est mince avec un petit nez.
Elle est belle mais elle est paresseuse.
C’est mon fils qui est très intélligent et il pose de questions fatigantes.
Nous habitons dans une nouvelle maison.
B Est-ce que c’est le camarade de Michel.
On dit qu’il est bavard.
Mais il semble pourtant sérieux et fort.
Il a l’air sympathique.
Et il me semble gentil.
On lui parle.
C En hivers, vous voyez des filles belles et élégantes, et elles portent de jolies jupes en fleurs à côte des hommes beaux, forts et élégants eux aussi.
C’est un spectacle intéressant.
Des enfants contents courent tout 31CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION le long de la plage.
Tout le monde causent, ils bavardent et à la fin de la journée, on est fatigué.
Possession is described in French using more than one word again depending on gender and number.
For example: Mon oncle et ma tante viennent chez mes parents.
Ton ami cherche ta montre et tes chaussures.
Son nez et sa bouche sont près de ses yeux.
Mon oncle [ my uncle-masculine] Ma tante [my aunt-feminine] Mes parents [my parents-plural] Ton ami [your friend- masculine] Ta montre [your wristwatch-feminine] Tes chaussures [your shoes- plural] Son nez [his/her nose-masculine] Sa bouche [his/her mouth-feminine] Ses yeux [his/her eyes-plural] Let’s take some sentences to get you used to the expressions 1.
Je prends mon chèque de la banque.
2.
Je laisse mon bébé à l’école maternelle.
3.
Je vois mon livre dans l’armoire 4.
C’est ma jupe 5.
Je vais envoyer ma lettre.
6.
Je travaille dans sa la bibliothèque.
7.
Ce sont mes lunettes.
8.
Elle tresse mes cheveux 9.
Elle aime mes enfants.
10.
Où est ton livre?
11.
Où est ta cravate?
12.
Il regarde ton chien.
13.
Nous aimons ta cravate.
14.
Où est ta chemise?
15.
Je demande si ta voiture est rouge.
16.
Je cherche tes enfants.
17.
Ils écoutent tes disques.
18.
Où sont tes chaussures?
19.
Il mange son gâteau.
20.
Elle lave son sac.
21.
Il dort sur son lit.
22.
Elle cherche sa montre.
23.
Ile porte sa jupe.
24.
Où est sa mère?
25.
Ses livres sont dans son sac.
26.
Il achète des bonbons pour ses enfants.
32CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 27.
Elle voyage avec ses amies.
28.
Il voyage avec ses amis.
29.
Vous cherchez vos amis?
30.
Nous cherchons nos amis.
31.
Ils cherchent leurs amis 32.
Elles cherchent leurs amies.
Avoir Envie De This is an expression used to express a want, a wish, a desire, and is used side by side the action desired.
For example: J’ai envie de voyager [I’ll like to travel] J’ai envie de voir maman.
J’ai envie de dormir J’ai envie de danser.
First, Second, Third, … Le premier enfant…….
Le deuxième [second] enfant Le troisième [third] jour La quatrième [ fourth] saison Le cinquième [fifth] étudiant La sixième étudiante Le septième livre Le huitième mois La neuvième année La dixième semaine.
Le Dîner Meals are takes thrice in a day and often provide the setting for some of the more interesting conversation.
Le petit déjeuner [Breakfast] Le déjeuner [Lunch] Le dîner [Supper, Dinner] Also drinks are part of the daily life of the French people: Un café [Coffee] Du thé [Tea] Du jus de fruit [Fruit juice] D’orange pressée [Squeezed orange] Du citron pressé [Squeezed lemon] Du vin [Wine] De la bière [Beer] 33CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Situations A Cécile: Salut Félix.
J’ai envie de prendre du café, tu viens?
Felix : Oui, c’est mon troisième cafè ce matin.
J’aime beaucoup le café Cécile: Ah bon déjà ?
heureusement tu n’es pas soul.
B X : Qu’est-ce que tu fais ?
Y : Je lis Hamlet de Shakespeare.
X : Encore mais c’est la deuxième fois.
Y : Oui, mais c’est très intéressant.
C Pour les vacances, j’ai envie d’aller à Jos où il fait froid et les gens sont sympathiques.
Je prends mon petit déjeuner très tôt et je bois du thé chaud.
J’adore les montagnes aussi.
C’est ma cinquième fois à Jos.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French : a) He is Beninoise b) His father is tall and handsome c) She wants to go to Kaduna d) Tell me about your brother 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you would have learnt to express possession, saying my, your, his/her, etc.
You should have also learnt to say something about a person or a place or a thing using adjectives.
What you have learnt in this unit will help you communicate in may more ways.
Here are a few exercises to assess your communication skills.
5.0 SUMMARY From this unit, you have learnt the different terms used in describing a person, a place or a thing.
You have learnt terms used to express possession.
You have also learnt to say you wish to do something or other.
You have learnt terms associated with meals and meal times.
All these should have better equipped you for more proficient expressions.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) I l est béninois.
b) Son père est grand et beau c) Elle veux aller aKaduna 34CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION d) Parle moi de ton frère 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Fill in the spaces with appropriate term.
i. Je ne vois pas……….. jupe [my] ii.
Est-ce que ……….amis sont là?
iii.
Cherches dans……….sacs[your] iv.
Où sont……….
lunettes?
[our] v. Je suis chez……….parents.
[my] vi.
Mon père est………..[strong] vii.
Ma tante est ………..[talkative] viii.
Cécile ne trouve pas sa montre, elle n’est pas……….
[happy] ix.
Thomas c’est un ………….joueur de football.
[good] x. Mon père est mince mais ma mere est …………..[fat].
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
35CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION MODULE 2 Unit 1 Dans La Classe Unit 2 Pour te Depanner!
Unit 3 Un Anniversaire Unit 4 Un Devoir Difficile Unit 5 Quelle Ville!
UNIT 1 DANS LA CLASSE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogues 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Simple Requests 3.4 Classroom Instructions 3.5 Situations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn some class instructions, how to make requests of your colleagues, or classmates how to respond to a teacher in the class and so on.
Two friends are among others in the class of the teacher enters and gives some instructions 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Make simple requests of your classmates; and • Respond correctly to instructions from teachers or others.
36CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogues Dans la classe Jean: Tu peux me prêter un stylo?
Pierre: Tiens!
Tu peux garder cela.
J’en ai deux.
Jean: Merci.
Mais où est le torchon?
Le professeur arrive.
Le prof: Bonjour la classe La classe: Bonjour monsieur.
Le prof: Comment allez-vous?
La classe: Très bien monsieur et vous?
Le prof: Bien.
Asseyez-vous!
Ouvrez vos livres de grammaire et travaillez en groupes.
Venez au tableau.
Jean [à Pièrre]: Passé-moi mon sac, s’il te plait Pierre: Tiens Jean: Est-ce que tu as ton livre de …… Le pro: Taisez-vous les deux.
Jean: Excusez-moi monsieur.
Le prof: Si vous êtes là, lisez vite Pierre: Est-ce que je peux lire à haute voix, monsieur Le prof: Oui.
Tous ensemble Jean [à Pierre]: J’espère qu’on va vite terminer.
Je veux voir le match de football à…..
Le prof [à jean]: Sortez vite 3.2 Vocabulary Here are some expressions which might be unfamiliar: Prêter- Lend Tiens!- Take Garder - Keep Le torchon- The duster Asseyez-vous- Be seated [all of you] Travaillez en groupes- Work [as a team, together] Venez au tableau- Come to the board S’il te plait/ s’il vous plait Please Passé-moi mon sac - Pass me my bag Taisez-vous- [keep quiet] 37CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Excusez-moi [Excuse-me/Excuse my behaviour] Lisez-vite- Read quickly A haute voix- Out loud/In a loud voice Tous ensemble- All together J’espère- I hope Le match de football- The football match Sortez- Get out 3.3 Simple Requests It’s easy to make simple requests of your friends, associates and classmates or colleagues.
Let’s look at some of them; Passe-moi du sel [Pass me the salt] Donne-moi ton livre, s’il te plait [Give me your book, please] Prête-moi ton manteau- Lend me your coat Tu m’achètes de biscuits, maman?
[Would you buy me biscuits mum] Vous-avez la monnaie?
Have you got change?
Je voudrais un livre- I would like a book Vous n’avez pas la monnaie Would you have change of 500 de cinq cents?
cents?
Apporte- moi de bonnes choses Bring me some good things/goodies Allons chez moi- Let’s go to my house Au se çours- Help me [A cry for help] 3.4 Classroom Instructions Several things could be demanded by the teacher.
It could take the form of a request.
For example, an order [get out], or a question [have you any question?].
Let’s look at a few of them; Écoutez bien [Listen attentively] Levez-vous [Stand up] Asseyez-vous [Sit down] Répétez [repeat]/ encore [Again] Travaillez par deux [Work in twos] Ecrivez [Write down] Vous avez fini?
[Have you finished] Lisez [Read] Comment ça s’écrit ?
[How is that written?]
Comment ça se prononce?
[how is that pronounce?]
C’est ça ?
[Is that it/correct?]
C’est clair?
[Is that clear?]
38CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Je ne comprends pas [I don’t understand] Est-ce qu’il y a des questions?
[Are there any question?]
Vous pouvez répéter, s’il vous plait [Please repeat] Entrez [Come in] Qu’est-ce que cela veut dire [what does that mean] Parlez plus fort [Speak louder] Encore une fois [One more time] You may also wish to respond in the class.
Je ne comprend pas [I don’t understand] Vous pouvez reprendre?
[Would you say that again please] Je ne sais pas [ I don’t know] Parlez moins vite, s’il vous plait [ please speak slowly] 3.5 Situations A X: Est-ce que tu as quelques sous là bas?
Je dois trouver à manger.
Y: Oui, tiens!
Je peux t’accompagner?
X: C’est gentil!
B X: Je ne trouve pas mes lunettes.
Tu peux les cherche pour moi?
Y: Là, sous la chaise.
X: Merci c’est gentil!
An apology [I am sorry] In French, there are several ways of apologizing, depending on the kind of wrong/crime/injustice committed.
“I am sorry” can be said in many ways.
Excusez-moi When you’ve wronged a person by being rude, doing something he has asked you not to do, stepped on his foot etc, if you’ve disturbed his peace asking him to help you Je suis désolé When you have to refuse his invitation or request.
When you arrived late, or when you have no more of something to give.
Pardon When you’ve not heard what was said and you’re seeking a repetition.
Or when you draw his/her attention to seek an information.
To make him/her to hurry up or move out of the way for you.
Je regrette When you have to deny him a request, or refuse [politely] to honour an invitation.
For example, “Sorry I can’t help you”.
39CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION C’est domage When you’re upset about some mishap befalling a person.
For example, I’m sorry he’s so hardup.
I’m sorry he lost a tooth etc.
or when you mean ‘it’s a pity’ or ‘what a pity’ SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) Please lend me your pen.
b) I am very sorry.
c) Where is your Grammar Book?
d) Where are your reading glasses?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you’ve learnt about simple requests, how to make them and how to respond to them.
You’ve also learnt to take instructions from your teacher in the class, what he/she would say and what he/she expects.
You could also give these instructions to children in your care.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the basic instructions and requests skills.
You’ve learnt some of the more popular requests and classroom instructions.
You should be able to recognize them, when you come across them and make some of your own.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) S’il te plait prète moi ton big.
b Je m’excuse.
c) Ou ton livre de grammaire?
d) Ou sont tes lunettes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Reply to the following requests/instructions.
1.
C’est clair?
2.
Donne moi un papier, s’il te plait.
3.
La langue française, répétez.
4.
Vous comprenez?
5.
Je voudrais un stylo.
40CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
41CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 2 POUR TE DEPANNER!
CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogues 3.2 Vocabulaire 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of the last unit.
You will learn more ways of making requests.
You will also learn to ask for help from friends and give orders.
You will be introduced to terms and expressions associated with these requests and orders.
Mr. Johnson and Miss Taka are colleagues, Mr. Johnson has to go out and ask Miss Taka for some favours.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Communicate in French by making requests and responding correctly in simple everyday situations; • Use more ways to make request of others; and • Giving orders.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogues M. Johnson: Vous êtes là jusqu’à quand?
Mlle Taka: Je suis là toute l’après-midi.
M. Johnson: Il y a ma fiancée qui va venir me chercher, si vous pouvez lui dire que je reviens dans deux heures.
Je dois aller ramener ma bagnole de chez le mécanicien.
Mlle Taka: D’accord.
42CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION M. Johnson: Et aussi, excusez moi si je vous dérange beaucoup, mais il paraît que j’ai laissé mon porte-monnaie à la maison et Je n’ai pas de quoi payer un taxi, si vous pouvez me dépanner.
Mlle Taka: Il n’y a pas de problème.
Prenez trois cents naira.
M. Johnson: Merci beaucoup.
Mlle Taka: Je vous en prie.
M. Johnson: Alors, à tout à l’heure.
Mlle taka: Oui, et soyez sage.
3.2 Vocabulaire Jusqu’à - Until Toute l’après midi - All afternoon Mon fiancé/ma fiancée- My fiancé[e]-[male, female] Dans deux heures - In two hours time.
Ramener - Bring back Je dois - I’ve got to Aller - To go Ma bagnole - My motor-car Chez le mécanicien - At the mechanic’s [place] D’accord - Ok/alright Aussi - Also Déranger - To disturb Il paraît que - It seems that J’ai laissé - I left Mon porte-monnaie - My purse Pas de quoi payer - Nothing to pay with Dépanner - Bail [me] out Pas de problème - No problem Je vous en prie - It’s a pleasure, you are welcome Soyez sage - Take care Toute l’après midi A time limit can be expressed in a number of ways; Je suis là pour deux heures.- I’m around for two hours.
Pour trente minutes - For thirty minutes.
Pour un quart d’heure - For a quarter of an hour.
Peu, à peu près trois heures- For about three hours.
Pour une demi heure - For half an hour.
Pour toujours - Forever.
Pour au moins une heure- For at least one hour.
Pour deux heures au plus - For two hours at most Jusqu’à Lundi - Until Monday.
Jusqu’au soir - Till evening 43CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Je pars pour New York dans un instant [In a moment] Pour quinze jours.
[For a fortnight] Tous les trois jours.
[Every three days] Toute la journée.
[All day] Tous les après-midi.
[Every afternoon] Toutes les nuits.
[Every night] Elle va venir This is a simple way of expressing an action in the near future.
Je vais venir [I am going to come] Tu vas venir [You are going to come] Elle va venir [She is going to come] Il va marcher à pied [He is going to come on foot] Nous allons prendre du thé [We are going to take some tea] Vous allez répéter [You are going to repeat] Ils vont chanter [They are going to sing.
Masc] Elles vont chanter [They are going to sing.
Fem] Devoir To express an obligation, something you have to do, you are obliged or mandated to do or something you feel you should do, the French will use “devoir”.
Je dois marcher [I must walk] Je dois travailler [I must work] Tu dois manger [You must eat] Il doit payer [He must pay] Elle doit sauter [She must jump] Nous devons partir [We must leave] Vous devez refuser [You must refuse] Ils doivent revenir [They must come back.
Masc] Elles doivent s’ amuser [They must have fun.
Fem] 44CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Chez le mécanicien The French have one simple way of refering to someone’s house or to a professional’s workshop.
We say; Chez madame Dilfa (Mrs Dilfa’s home) Chez les Dilfa (To the Dilfas) Chez le coiffeur/la coiffeuse (To the hairdresser’s) Chez Agnès (To the Agnes’ house) Il va chez son ami.
(He’s going to his friend’s house) Je vous en prie When someone says “thank you”, you say in English – “it’s a pleasure or you are welcome”.
In French, we say: Ce n’est rien [It’s nothing] Je vous en prie [You are welcome] De rien [It’s nothing] C’est la moindre des choses [It’s the least I could do] C’est moi qui vous remercier [It’s I who should thank you] Il n’y a pas de quoi [Nothing to bother about] “Merci” can be said in other ways: - c’est vraiment gentil de votre part [it’s really kind of you] - merci à vous - je ne sais comment vous remercier [I don’t know how to thank you] - je suis très reconnaissante [I’m very grateful] - Merci infiniment Requests These also can be made in other ways.
- Ça ne vous gène pas de bouger un peu?
[Would it bother you to move a little?]
- J’aimerais de l’eau à boire [I’d like some water] - Pourrais-je avoir un verre d’eau?
[May I have a glass of water] - Je cherche la rue Maitama s’il vous plait [Please, I’m looking for Maitama Road/Street] - Où’est la banque?
S’il vous plait [Please where’s the bank] There are also polite ways of giving orders like: Entrez, je vous en prie [Please, come in] or Fermes la porte,je t’en prie [please close the door] 45CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION - Je vous conseille de prendre les médicaments.
[I advise you to take some drugs] - Je vous propose d’aller à la banque [I advise that you go to the bank] - Si on va la chercher?
[Supposing we go to look for her] - N’est pas?
Situation A X: Est-ce que tu peux me prêter ton livre de grammaire?
Y: Prends ça.
X: Merci.
Y: De rien.
B X: Ça ne te gène pas de m’accompagner à la bibliothèque.
Je ne connais pas bien la route.
Y: Je suis occupé,je dois faire la lessive.
X: Oh s’il te plait, c’est toi qui connaît le coin.
Y: D’accord, on y va. X: Excuse –moi, et merci.
Y: Il n’y a pas de quoi.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French : a) We are going to France for a week.
b) You must leave now.
c) We are very grateful for your assistance.
d) He must return tomorrow.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit introduced you to typical ways of making simple requests of someone.
Ways of expressing gratitude and time span have also been explored.
These will have no doubt improved your oral capabilities and enhance your comminication skills.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt more about making requests and responding to requests.
You learnt more ways of saying “thank –you”.of responding when someone says “thank you”.
You’ve also learnt to express time limits, how to say you are going to someone’s place and how to express obligation.
46CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Nous irons en France pour une semaine b) Tu dois quitter maintenant c) Nous sommes très reconaissant de votre assisstance d) Il doit retourner demain 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Fill in the appropriate responses: 1.
Prête –moi de l’argent.
Tiens/merci beaucoup.
2.
Je vais ………… L’éléctricien.
Mon rechaud ne marche pas.
3.
Tu ……….
Partir maintenant pour être à l’heure.
4.
Je ……….
Voyager demain.
5.
Elle dort ……….Trios heures.
6.
Elle va arriver ……….
Un quart d’heure.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
47CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 3 UN ANNIVERSAIRE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 La semaine prochaine 3.4 Quelle date 3.5 Quelle heure est-il?
3.6 Faire les courses 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will teach you the days of the week and time of the day.
It begins with a conversation between two friends as one invites the other for a birthday celebration.
In the course of the conversation, you will discover certain elements for expression of the time of the day and of the days of the week.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Say the time of the day; • Ask what time it is; • Ask what day it is; and • Say what day it is.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue 8: Un Anniversaire Fatou: Je t’invite pour mon anniversaire la semaine prochaine, samedi soir.
Souleymane: Samedi, c’est quelle date?
Fatou: C’est le quinze.
Souleymane: Quelle est la date d’aujourd’hui?
48CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Fatou: C’est jeudi le six octobre.
Souleymane: Félicitations d’avance.
Fatou: Merci.
Souleymane: Ah là là il y a ma mere qui m’attend depuis midi pour aller faire des courses pour elle.
Il est déja midi et demie.
Ça fait à bientôt.
Fatou: Bon, tu reviens à quelle heure?
Souleymane: Vers dix-sept heures peut-être, parce qu’après, je dois faire envoyer un paquet à ma sœur qui est à l’internat.
Si tu ne me vois pas jusqu’à dix-huit heures, c’est peut-être parce que je suis trop fatigué pour revenir.
3.2 Vocabulary Je t’invite (I invite you) Mon anniversaire (My birthday) La semaine prochaine (Next week) Samedi (Saturday) Quelle date (What date) Le quinze (The fifteenth) Aujourd’hui (Today) Jeudi (Thursday) Felicitations (Congratulations) D’avance (In advance) Depuis (Since) Il y a (Ago, it’s been) Midi (Noon) Faire les courses (To do some shopping) Déjà (Already) Ça fait (That’ll be/that means) Quelle heure (What time) Vers (Towards) Peut-être (Maybe) Parce que (Because) Faire envoyer (To send / to have something sent) Un paquet (A parcel) L’internat (The boarding school) Si (If) Trop (Too much) Revenir (To come back) 3.3 La Semaine Prochaine Days of the week: Dimanche (Sunday) 49CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Lundi (Monday) Mardi (Tuesday) Mercredi (Wednesday) Jeudi (Thursday) Vendredi (Friday) Samedi (Saturday) Ça fait à la semaine prochaine (till next week) À lundi (till Monday) On se revoit mardi prochain (see you next Tuesday) 3.4 Quelle date Quelle est la date d’aujourd’hui?
(what’s the date of today?)
Demain (tomorrow) Hier (yesterday) Le trois janvier, deux mille trios ([the] third January, two thousand and three) La date d’aujourd’hui c’est le (the date of today is the thirteenth of treize février, deux mille six February, two thousand and six) 3.5 Quelle heure est-il?
Une heure (one o’clock) Deux heures (two o’clock) Trois heures (three o’clock) Quatre heures (four o’clock) Cinq heures (five o’clock) Note: To differentiate a.m from p.m, the French say du matin (morning), du soir (evening) or de l’après-midi (afternoon) as the case may be.
Il est huit heures du matin (It’s eight am) Il est neuf heures du soir (It’s nine pm) Elle part à midi (She’s leaving at noon) Il dort à minuit (He sleeps at midnight) There is however another way of differentiating between morning and evening hours.
Neuf heures (Nine am) Vingt-et-une heures (Twenty-one hours / nine pm) Quatorze heures (Fourteen hours) Treize heures (Thirteen hours) Vingt-trois heures (Twenty-three hours) “Minutes past” and “minutes before” are expressed as follows: Il est trois heures moins le quart (It’s a quarter to three) Il est trois heures et quart (It’s a quarter past three) 50CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Il est trois heures et demie (It’s half past three) Il est trois heures vingt (It’s twenty after three) Il est deux heures vingt (It’s twenty after / past two) Il est deux heures et quart (It’s a quarter after two) Il est midi moins vingt-cinq (It’s twenty-five minutes to noon) Il est six heures (It’s six o’clock) There are many ways of asking for the time of day: Il est quelle heure?
/ quelle heure est-il?
(What’s the time?)
À quelle heure est le petit déjeuner?
(What time is breakfast?)
C’est à quelle heure?
(It’s at what time?)
Vous partez à quelle heure?
(You’re leaving at what time?)
Quelle jour sommes-nous?
(What day are we / is this?)
C’est quelle date?
(What date is it?)
Quel jour est-ce aujourd’hui?
(What day is it today?)
3.6 Faire les courses Faire du ski (To go skiing) Faire du sport (To do some sport) Faire une promenade (To go for a walk) Faire la cuisine (To do some shopping) Faire la vaisselle (To do the dishes) Faire la lessive (To do the laundry) Faire un cadeau (To give a gift to ) Faire le ménage (To do the housework) Faire un regime (To go on a diet) Faire des economies (To save) ‘Faire’ is also used to describe the weather: Il fait chaud (It’s hot) Il fait froid (It’s cold) Il fait frais (It’s cool) Il fait du soleil (It’s sunny) Il fait du vent (It’s windy) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Say in French: a) What is today’s date?
b) It is a bit cold today c) It is midday d) It is midnight 51CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 4.0 CONCLUSION Speaking about the time or days of the week is an indispensable part of communication.
This unit should therefore equip you with the necessary tools for communication at any time.
You would be able to handle most social situations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt to ask for the date, the days of the week and the time of day.
You have also been taught to say what time it is, what day of the week it is and to say the date.
This equips you for communication at a basic level.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Quel est la date d’aujord’ui?
b) Il fait un peu froid aujord’ui.
c) Il estmidi.
d) Il est minuit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Answer the following questions: 1.
Le noel (Christmas) c’est quelle date?
2.
Le petit déjeuner c’est à quelle heure.
3.
Après jeudi, c’est quel jour?
4.
On va à l’église le ______________.
5.
Il est _____________________ (5.45pm).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
52CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
53CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 4 UN DEVOIR DIFFICILE CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0Objectives 3.0Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Month of the Year 3.4 Un Jour Férié 3.5 Le Plus Proche 3.6 This/that 3.7 Du courage!
4.0Conclusion 5.0Summary 6.0Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will encounter all the months of the year, learn how to ask questions involving different months and how to reply to such.
You will also learn how to compare persons and objects.
Then you will learn how to make wishes or make plans regarding dates.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify and say the months of the year; • Say the date; and • Communicate season greetings 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue: Un Travail Difficile Étienne: J’ai un devoir pour décrire comment je vais passer un jour férié.
Simon: Lequel est-ce que tu veux décrire.?
54CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Étienne: Je ne sais meme pas.
Je suis un peu confus.Il y a le Nouvel An en janvier, les pâques en avril, la fête du travail en mai, l’Indépendance en Octobre et le Noel en décembre.
Simon: Je te propose les pâques parce que c’est le plus proche.
Tu peux déja plannifier.
Étienne: Mais qu’est-ce que j’ai envie de faire ce jour-là?
Je compte passer un jour paisible dans ma chambre écoutant de la belle musique.
Simon: Voilà quelque chose.
Étienne: Tu crois que c’est acceptable?
Simon: Oui, pourquoi pas?
Allez, je te quitte.
Bonne nuit et du courage!
Étienne: Merci, et à demain.
3.2 Vocabulary Un devoir (An assignment) Décrire (To describe) Un jour férié (A public holiday) Confus (Confused) Le Nouvel An (New Year’s Day) Janvier (January) Les pâques (Easter) Avril (April) La fête du travail (Workers’ day) Mai (May) L’Indépendance (Independence day) Le noël (Christmas) Décembre (December) Proche (Close) Plannifier (To plan) Ce jour-là (that day) Paisible (Peaceful) Ma chambre (My room) Quelque chose (something) Je te quitte (I’m leaving [you]) Du courage!
(all the best!)
3.3 Months Of The Year Janvier (January) Février (February) Mars (March) Avril (April) Mai (May) Juin (June) 55CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Juilet (July) Août (August) Septembre (September) Octobre (October) Novembre (November) Décembre (December) 3.4 Un Jour Férié Le Nouvel An / Le Jour de l’An (New Year / New Year’s Day) La fête des Mères (Mothers’ Day) La fête des Pères (Fathers’ Day) L’Indépendance (Independence Day) 3.5 Le Plus Proche Proche (close) Plus proche (closer) Le plus proche (the closest) Beau (handsome) Plus beau (more handsome)Le plus beau (the most handsome) Paresseux (lazy) Plus paresseux (lazier) Le plus paresseux (the laziest) Marie est plus grande que Jean (Marie is taller than Jean) Il est plus beau que son frère (He is more handsome than his brother) C’est le plus cher (It’s the most expensive) Est-ce qu’elle est plus intelligente que sa sœur?
(Is she more intelligent than her sister?)
Nous sommes plus contents que nos amis (We’re happier than our friends) Bon (good) Mieux (better) Le meilleur (the best) Mauvais (bad) Pire (worse) Le pire (the worst) J’ai mange le pire des fruits (I ate the worst fruit) Il veut être le meilleur dans la classe (He wants to be the best in the class) Vous avez quelque chose de meilleur?
(Do you have something better?)
Il faut chercher le plus doux (Look for the sweetest) Elle est la plus belle des filles (She’s the most beautiful girl) 56CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Ce Jour-La Ce jour (this day) ce jour-là (That day) Cette femme (this woman) cette femme-là (That woman) Je me souviens de ce jour-là (I remember that day) Donne-moi ce livre-là (Give me that book) Est-ce que je dois lire ce roman-là?
(Do I have to read that novel?)
Je dois acheter ce sac-là (I have to buy that bag) Jean aime cette fille-là (Jean likes / loves that girl) Amène-moi cette montre-là (Give me that wristwatch) Tu vois cette voiture-là?
(Do you see that car?)
Qui sont ces enfants-là?
(Who are those children?)
Tu vois ces enfants-là?
(Do you see those children?)
3.6 This/These Je crois à cette histoire (I believe this story) Je ne crois à pas ces histories (I don’t believe these stories) Je prends ce livre (I’m taking this book) J’aime cet homme (I like / love this man) 3.7 Du Courage!
To wish a person well: Bon travail!
(Well done!)
Bonne chance!
(Good luck!)
Heureuse année (Happy New Year!)
Joyeux Noël (Merry Christmas!)
Bonne journée (Have a good day!)
Bonne soirée (Have a good evening!)
Bonne nuit!
(Good night!)
Bon séjour!
(Have a pleasant stay!)
Bon week-end!
(Have a good weekend!)
Bonne route!
/ Bon voyage!
(Have a safe trip!/safe journey!)
Heureuse Pâques!
(Happy Easter!)
Joyeux anniversaire!
(Happy birthday!)
Félicitations!
(Congratulations!)
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Say in French: a) Good luck!
b) I am highly confused.
c) Safe journey!
57CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION d) Boys are lazier than girls 4.0 CONCLUSION Different ways of expressing the same idea gives you a variety or a wider range of vocabulary or expression to choose from when speaking, to avoid monotony.
This unit helps you to express the time and to ask about time.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught you to say the months of the year, and to talk and ask about festive days and public holidays in French.
You are also expected to be able, by now, to compare and contrast one thing with another.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Bonne chance b) Je suis tellement confus c) Bonne voyage!
d) Les garcons sont plus paresseux queles filles.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Say and write the following in French: 1.
What day is it today?
2.
It’s the 14th of March.
3.
Janice is the happiest girl in the class.
4.
Tomorrow is a public holiday.
5.
It’s your birthday.
6.
Happy birthday.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
58CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
59CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 5 QUELLE VILLE!
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Vous avez l’heure?
3.4 C’est insupportable!
3.5 Maintenant 3.6 Je viens de… 3.7 Trop de monde!
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will encounter manners and forms of talking about your town or any other town.
Descriptive terms and expressions that indicate location will be used in this unit to help you describe a town appropriately.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Describe a place; • Ask about someone’s town; and • Talk about aspects of time 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue Mlle Karaba: Vous avez l’heure, monsieur?
M. Trupet: Oui, il est dix heures moins vingt-trois.
Mlle Karaba: Merci.
M. Trupet: Je vous en prie.
Vous êtes d’ici?
Mlle Karaba: Non, je suis de Jos.
M. Trupet: Et vous êtes madame …?
Mlle Karaba: C’est Mademoiselle Karaba, et vous?
M. Trupet: Louis Trupet.
60CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Mlle Karaba: Heureuse de faire votre connaissance.
Je suis à Lagos pour la première fois.
Il y a deux mois que je suis là, et je regrette déjà Jos.
M. Trupet: Pourquoi vous dites ça?
Mlle Karaba: Jos, c’est une ville tranquille avec des montagnes, la vue est magnifique, le temps parfait, les endroits adorables.
Les gens sont gentils.
M. Trupet: Et comment est-ce que vous trouvez Lagos?
Mlle Karaba: Ah, c’est trop bruyante, il y a trop de monde, et la circulation, c’est insupportable!
Toujours des embouteillages.
Et les jeunes … M. Trupet: Bref, vous n’aimez pas la ville de Lagos.
Mlle Karaba: Non, j’ai envie de retourner à Jos.
Je viens de demander mon ancient poste là-bas.
M. Trupet: Vous êtes fonctionnaire?
Mlle Karaba: Oui, au Ministère de l’ Education.
M. Trupet: Une question, pourquoi êtes-vous là en premier lieu?
Mlle Karaba: Pour être plus proche de ma famille.
M. Trupet: Et maintenant?
Mlle Karaba: Je me decide autrement.
M. Trupet: Ah bon!
Bonne chance alors.
Mlle Karaba: Merci.
Et à la prochaine fois!
3.2 Vocabulary D’ici (from here) Je regrette déjà Jos (I already miss Jos) Une ville tranquille (A calm / quiet town) Des montagnes (Mountains) Des collines (Hills) La vue (The view / scenery) Le temps (The weather) Les gens (The people) Les endroits (The places) Gentil (Kind) Bruyant(e) (Noisy) Trop de monde (Too many people) La circulation (The traffic) C’est insupportable!
(It’s unbearable!)
Des embouteillages (Traffic jams) Bref (For short) Je viens de (I’ve just) Retourner (To go back) Un poste (A post/position/place) Le ministère (The Ministry) 61CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION En premier lieu (In the first place) Maintenant (Now) Se decider (To make up one’s mind) Ah bon!
(Really!)
3.3 Vous Avez L’heure?
There are several ways of beginning a conversation with someone you want to meet or get to know.
One way is to ask about likes and dislikes: Vous aimez ça?
(You like that?)
C’est formidable, ce film!
(This film’s wonderful!)
Ça vous plait?
(You like that?)
* You could also make a request: Vous avez de la monnaie, s’il vous plait?
(Do you have some change, please?)
Vous avez un stylo, s’il vous plait?
(Do you have a pen, please?)
Vous avez du feu?
(Do you have a light / lighter?)
* By seeking some information: Vous avez l’heure?
(Do you have a time-piece?)
Vous pouvez m’aider?
(Could you help me?)
Vous pouvez me dire (Could you tell me where to find the où se trouve le marché international market?)
internationale?
* Also by seeking some personal information: Vous êtes d’ici?
(Are you from here?)
Vous êtes étudiant?
(Are you a student?)
Vous êtes étranger?
(Are you a stranger [here]?)
3.4 C’est Insupportable!
Expressing your opinion on something can take many different forms: C’est inadmissible!
(It’s / that’s unacceptable) C’est une honte!
(It’s a shame!)
J’ai horreur de ça!
(That puts me off!)
Ça m’énerve!
(That annoys me!)
C’est formidable!
(It’s / that’s wonderful!)
C’est chouette!
(That’s cute!)
C’est amusant!
(It’s amusing!)
C’est intéressant!
(It’s interesting!)
62CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Quelle surprise!
(What a surprise!)
C’est difficile!
(It’s difficult!)
C’est ridicule!
(That’s ridiculous!)
C’est affreux!
(That’s frightening!)
C’est fatigant!
(It’s tiring!)
C’est dommage!
(It’s a pity!)
C’est jolie!
(It’s pretty!)
C’est extraordinaire!
(It is extraordinary!)
Aso Rock, c’est magnifique!
(Aso Rock is magnificient!)
C’est super!
(It’s great!)
C’est facile!
(It’s easy!)
C’est beau!
(It’s [a] beautiful [thing]!)
3.5 Maintenant Expressions of aspects of time include: Maintenant (Now) Alors (Then) Demain (Tomorrow) Hier (Yesterday) Dans quelques minutes (In a few minutes) Plus tard (Later) Tout de suite (Right away) Dans un instant (In a moment) Pendant les vacances (During the holidays) Depuis trois ans (Since three years [now]) Dès mardi (As from Tuesday) Dès maintenant (As from now / from now on) Je mange maintenant (I’m eating now) Elle part dans trente minutes (She’s leaving in thirth minutes [time]) Elle voyage tout de suite (She’s travelling right away) Elle pleure depuis hier (She’s [been] crying since yesterday) Il nage pendant les vacances (He swims during the holidays Je mange dans un instant (I [‘ll] eat in a moment) Tu va danser plus tard (You’ll dance later) Il faut partir maintenant (One should leave now) Elle arrive dans trois jours (She’s leaving in three days [time]) Chantez maintenant (Sing now) 3.6 Je Viens De … To express an action which has just been completed, you use ‘venir de …’: Il vient de manger (he has just eaten) Je viens d’entrer (I have just entered) Marie vient de terminer son 63CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION travail (Marie has just finished her work) Nous venons de prendre du café (We have just taken some coffee) Vous venez de prendre le petit déjeuner (You have just taken your breakfast) Il vient de se laver (He has just washed himself / had a bath) Je viens d’arriver (I have just arrived) Elle vient de quitter (She has just left) Il vient de téléphoner (He has just telephoned) Elle vient de chanter (She has just sang) Tu viens d’ouvrir la porte (You have just opened the door) Elle vient de travailler (She has just worked) Vous venez de rire (You have just laughed) Ma mere vient de sortir (My mother has just gone out) Mon frère vient de balayer (My brother has just swept) Nous venons de sauter (Me have just jumped) 3.7 Trop De Monde!
Expressions of quantity: Il y a trop de monde (There are too many people) Je vois beaucoup de livres (I see plenty of books) Il y a assez de nourriture (There is enough food) Il n’y a pas assez d’argent (There isn’t enough money) Il y a un peu de beurre (There is a little butter) Il y a trop peu d’huile (There is too little oil) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) Lagos is a noisy city.
c) There is too much traffic hold-up in Lagos.
c) It is unbearable.
d) There isn’t enough water here.
4.0 CONCLUSION To describe a place, you require words that will enable you to talk about the physical aspects (des montagnes, etc), time spent or to be spent (deux ans, etc), and other expressions that may communicate information about places (je viens d’arriver, etc).
These have all been examined in this unit.
64CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt vocabulary related to describing a place, asking a person about his / her town, and talking about aspects of time important for communication on locations.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Lagos est très bruyant b) Il ya trop d’am bouteillage à Lagos.
c) C’est insupportable.
d) Il n’ya pas assez d’eau ici.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Complete using the appropriate expression: 1.
Jos, c’est une ville ______________.
2.
Il y a trop de moustiques ici, c’est ____________________.
3.
J’aime ce film, c’est _________________________.
4.
Je veux passer le noel avec ma famille, c’est ________________.
5.
C’est ta nouvelle robe?
C’est _______________________.
6.
Je n’ai pas _________ d’argent.
7.
Il y a ____________ de monde à Lagos.
8.
Elle _________________ quitter.
(has just) 9.
Nous _____________ d’arriver (have just).
10.________________ deux ans qu je suis ici.
(it’s been) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
65CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION MODULE 3 Unit 1 En Vacances Unit 2 A Droite Ou A Gauche Unit 3 En Voiture Unit 4 C’est Bon Marché Unit 5 Comme Elle Est Gentille, Ma Grand-Mere UNIT 1 EN VACANCES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 A l’étranger 3.4 Dans la boutique 3.5 Visiter / Render Visite 3.6 On va voir 3.7 À toi de même 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will meet terms and expressions used when going to a place and when visiting.
You will also learn the difference between visiting a location (within a town for instance), a place (e.g.
either town), a country or a continent and visiting a person.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Discuss about places; • Talk about visiting places; • Talk about visiting people; and • Use terms and expressions that make reference to places.
66CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Dialogue Funmi: Tu es en vacances?
Amina: Oui, depuis la semaine passée.
Funmi: Et qu’est-ce que tu vas faire?
Tu va rester à Ife?
Amina: Non, je vais partir pour Jos demain matin.
Je passé deux semaines là-bas et puis je vais à Abuja.
J’ai envie de voyager à l’étranger surtout aux Etats-Unis mais je n’ai pas assez d’argent.
Funmi: Dommage!
Il y a quand même de beaux endroits à visiter dans le pays.
Amina: Oui, je sais.
En tout cas, on va voir.
Funmi: Tu as de la chance.
Moi, je fais les courses pour maman.
On va chercher de nouveaux vêtements à la boutique, et des disques vidéos dans les magasins, et puis on va chez le boulanger pour acheter du pain.
Plus tard, il y aura la plage, le terrain de sports, le cinéma, la discothèque, etc.
Amina: Vous allez bien sûr vous amuser.
Amuse-toi bien.
Funmi: A toi de même.
3.2 Vocabulary La semaine passée (Last week) Rester (To stay) Passer (To spend [time]) Là-bas (Over there) À l’étranger (Abroad) Aux Etats-Unis (To the United States) Assez d’argent (Enough money) Quand même (All the same) Visiter (To visit) Le pays (The country) On va voir (We shall see) Tu as de la chance (You are lucky) La boutique (The boutique) Les magasins (The shops) Les disques Vidéos (VCDs) Le boulanger (The baker) Du pain (Bread) Le terrain de sports (Sports field) Amuse-toi bien (Have a good time) À toi de même (Same to you) 67CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.3 À L’étranger When you want to speak about going to a place, you use à + name of place: Je vais à Paris (I’m going to Paris) Elle va à Londres (She’s going to London) Il va à Abuja (He’s going to Abuja) Nous allons à Onitsha (We are going to Onitsha) Elles vont à Port Harcourt (They [F] are going to Port Harcourt) Nous allons à Cotonou.
(We are going to Cotonou) Ils vont à Abidjan (They [M] are going to Abidjan) When speaking about going to a country or to a continent, you use au for a masculine name, aux for a plural name; but en when it’s a feminine name: Je vais au Nigéria (I’m going to Nigeria) Il va au Ghana (He’s going to Ghana) Il va au Togo (He’s going to Togo) Elle va au Bénin (She’s going to Bénin) Il va au Japon (He’s going to Japan) Je vais au Maroc (I’m going to Morocco) Elle va au Canada (She’s going to Canada) Elle va aux États-Unis (She’s going to the United States) Elle va en Europe (She’s going to Europe) Elle va en France (She’s going to France) Nous allons en Tunisie (We are going to Tunisia) Nous allons en Belgique (We are going to Belgium) Vous allez en Chine (You are going to China) 3.4 Dans La Boutique To talk of going to a place within a town, you use different terms.
Here are some examples: Nous allons dans les magasins (We are going to the shops) Nous allons dans la campagne (We are going to the countryside) Elle va à la banque (She’s going to the bank) Vous allez à l’hôpital (You are going to the hospital) Nous allons à l’hôtel (We are going to the hotel) Nous allons sur les montagnes (We are going to [the tops of] the mountains) Vous allez dans les musées (You are going to the museums) Nous allons dans le parc (We are going to the park) Je vais dans la piscine (I’m going into the swimming pool) Je vais à la piscine (I’m going to the swimming pool) Je vais sur le pont (I’m going on the bridge) 68CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Je vais dans le quartier (I’m going [in]to the area/ district) Je vais à la plage (I’m going to the beach) Je vais au stade (I’m going to the stadium) Je vais au village (I’m going to the village) Je vais en ville (I’m going to town) Je vais dans le jardin (I’m going to the garden) Je vais dans la forêt (I’m going to the forest) Je vais à l’église (I’m going to the church) Je vais dans la rue (I’m going to the road) 3.5 Visiter/Rendre Visite There are two words for visit in French: visiting a place is different from visiting a person.
We have two forms: visiter for a place, and rendre visite à for a person.
Elle va rendre visite à sa sœur (She is going to visit her sister) Nous allons rendre visite à nos amis (We are going to visit our friends) Elle rend visite à sa mere (She’s visiting her mother) Nous rendrons visite à la famille Besula (We are visiting the Besula’s) Elle va visiter la plage (She is going to visit the beach) Nous allons visiter le musée (We are going to visit the museum) Elle visite l’hôtel (She’s visiting the hotel) Nous visitons le quartier (We are visiting the district / area) 3.6 On Va Voir On is a popular term in French used to refer to an unspecified person or persons, it can be the equivalent of one, they, or we in English.
Let’s take a look at some instances: On est là (We are here / around) On travaille beaucoup ici (One works / We work a lot here) On dit qu’il est malade (They say he’s sick / ill) On dit que c’est intéressant (They say it’s interesting) On se retrouve quand?
(When do we see / meet again?)
On cherche toujours (We are still searching) On parle beaucoup au marché (One speaks a lot in the market) On sait [One knows/ We know] Ici, on mange des lapins (There they eat/ one eats rabbits) 69CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION On est toujours à Ibadan (We are still at Ibadan) On aime les filles (We love girls) On est en classe (We are in the class) 3.7 À Toi De Même “I wish you the same” can be said in a number of ways: - A vous de même - A toi de même - A vous pareil - A toi pareil - A vous autant SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) I wish to travel to France b) I am traveling to Abuja c) I am going to school d) Same to you.
4.0 CONCLUSION To talk about places, terms associated with going to places, with visiting, names of places in a town, names of countries and how to make reference to them are all part of what you have learnt in this unit.
This will equip you with the necessary tools for effective communication on such aspects.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been taught to talk about visiting places, parts of a town (l’hôpital, etc), different towns (à Abuja, etc), different countries or continents (en Afrique, en Europe, etc).
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) J’espère voyager en France b) Je voyage à Abuja c) Je vais a l’ecole d) De même à toi 70CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Fill in using à, à l’ , à la, au, en, aux, 1.
Je vais ____ Paris.
2.
Elle rend visite ____ sa mere.
3.
Elle va ____ Afrique.
4.
Nous allons _____ Etats-Unis.
5.
Vous allez ____ ville.
6.
Vous ______ la plage?
((to visit) 7.
Elle _______ son oncle.
(to visit) 8.
Son père va ___ la banque.
9.
____va partir bientôt.
(one) 10.Elle va ___ France.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
71CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 2 A DROITE OU A GAUCHE CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0Objectives 3.0Main Content 3.1 Dialogues 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Juste en face 3.4 Vers le rondpoint 3.5 Giving directions 3.6 Passer 3.7 Il faut / il ne faut pas 3.8 Je m’en vais 4.0Conclusion 5.0Summary 6.0Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be introduced to terms that determine distance, and that talk about moving from one point to another.
You will learn to ask about getting from point A to point B and to reply when asked.
You will be exposed to expressions that will assist you in this effort.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Ask for directions easily; • Give directions when asked; and • Give specific (opposite, etc) and unspecific (around, etc) directions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogues Ngozi: Fais vite sinon tu vas rater l’autobus?
Il est déjà neuf heures et demie et l’autobus part à dix heures et quart.
Marie: Si je me dépêche trop, je vais oublier quelque chose.
Mais où est mon billet?
Ngozi: Le voici.
Tu te rappelles toujours la gare?
72CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Marie: C’est vers le rond point, non?
Ngozi: Oui, quand tu quittes la maison, tu montes la rue Nnamdi Azikiwe, tu vas tout droit jusqu’aux feux, et puis, tu tournes à gauche.
La gare est en face du grand supermarché.
Marie: C’est gentil.
Ngozi: Tu comptes revenir quand?
Marie: Ça dépend.
Si je vois ma mère, je passé un peu de temps avec elle, et je reviens dans deux jours.
Mais sinon, je l’attends.
Ngozi: Il ne faut pas oublier de prendre l’autobus et pas le taxi.
L’autobus est moins cher.
Marie: Mais on met deux heures seulement en taxi.
Ngozi: Oui, mais c’est plus risqué, l’autobus est plus sécurisant.
Marie: Ça coûte quatre cent naira en taxi et trois cent naira en autobus.
La différence n’est pas beaucoup.
Ngozi: Vite, vite, il faut vite partir.
Marie: Allez, je m’en vais.
Ngozi: Bon voyage, et dis bonjour à ta mère.
3.2 Vocabulary Vite (Quickly) Sinon (If not / otherwise) Rater (To miss) Se dépêcher (To hurry up) Oublier (To forget) Quelque chose (Something) Mon billet (My ticket) La gare (The bus station / park) Vers le rondpoint (Towards the roundabout) Quitter (To leave) Monter (To get on to) Jusqu’aux feux (Up to [until] the traffic lights) Dépêche-toi / dépêchez-vous (Hurry up) En face (Opposite) À gauche (To the left) Tout droit (Straight on / ahead) Ça dépend (It all depends) Passer (To spend [time]) Il ne faut pas oublier (You must not forget) Metre deux heures (To take two hours) Risqué (Risky) Sécurisant (Safe / Secure) Coûter (To cost) Je m’en vais (I’m going / leaving) 73CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Dis bonjour à ta mere (Greet your mother) 3.3 Juste en face L’école est en face de l’église (the school is opposite the church) La bibliothèque est à coté de la maison (the library is beside the house) L’aéroport est à droite de l’hôpital.
(the airport is to the right of the hospital) La librairie est à gauche de l’église (the bookshop is to the left of the church) Le marché est avant le rondpoint (the market is before the roundabout) Le magasin est derrière l’hotel (the shop is behind the hotel).
La station d’essence est juste au coin (the petrol station is just at the corner) 3.4 Vers Le Rondpoint To ask for directions, one might ask: Comment est-ce qu’on fait pour (what / how would one [do to] arriver au supermarché?
get to the supermarket?)
La pharmacie Demola, s’il vous plait (Demola pharmacie, please) Je cherche la pharmacie Bricon,.
(I’m looking for Bricon s’il vou plait pharmacy please) Je voudrais aller à la poste, c’est où?
(I’ll like to go the post office, where is it?)
Où est le marché, s’il vous plait (Where’s the market, please) To reply, you use à/au/ à la/ à l’ when it’s a specific place:je vais à la poste Je vais à l’eglise (I’m going to church) You can use descriptive terms like the following: Je vais devant la biblothèque (I’m going in front of the library) Je vais sur la plage (I’m going on the beach) Ma maìson est en face de l’hôtel (My house is opposite the hotel) But when you can’t give specific details, you use vers, dans les environs, dans le coin, etc.
Examples: Il v avers le rondpoint (He’s going towards the roundabout) 74CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Elle v avers l’hôpital (She’s going towards the hospital) Est-ce que vous habitez dans le coin?
(Do you live in this / that corner) Le marché se trouve du coté du restaurant (The market is on the side of the restaurant) 3.5 Giving Directions La pharmacie est à droite (The pharmacy is on the right) L’école est à gauche (The school is on the left) L’église est en face de l’hôtel (The church is opposite the hotel) La librairie est à côté de la banque (The bookshop is beside the bank) La bibliothèque est devant le grand marché (The library is in front of the big market) La boulangerie est derrière notre maison (The bakery is behind our house) Le supermarché est au-dessus du bureau de poste (The supermarket is on top of the pos t office Le cinéma est au-dessous de la boucherie (The cinema is underneath the butcher’s shop) C’est près du cinéma, sur sa gauche (It’s near the cinema, to its left.)
C’est loin du commissariat (It’s far from the police station) 3.6 Passer There are some French words that resemble English words.
Some resemble correctly in that they mean the same thing as their English look-alike.
For example: L’hôpital L’hôtel Une activité Une adresse Age Pharmacie Une bicyclette Une branche Le biscuit La biologie 75CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION La bière La cassette Du chocolat Le cinéma Une conversation Un cousin En décembre Exister Un film La géographie De grand-parents Un journaliste Un kilomètre Les mathématiques La musique L’oncle Un restaurant Du sport Un village Un touriste Un téléphone La tomate Un sujet However, some words only look alike, they mislead because their meanings are different.
Such words are known as ‘faux amis’ (false friends): Librairie (Bookshop) Manger (To eat) Minuit (Midnight) Poisson (Fish) Presenter (To introduce [a person]) Des habits (Clothes) Travailler (To work) Gentil (Kind) Propre (Neat) Préparer (To cook) Crier (To shout / To scream) Passer (To spend [time]) Rester (To stay / To remain) Torchon (Duster) Un Sac (A bag) Licence (A [bachelor’s] degree) Un permis (A licence) Du pain (Bread) Médecin (Doctor) 76CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Un crayon (A pencil) 3.7 Il Faut / Il Ne Faut Pas These are expressions used for obligation or necessary action (you’ve got to, etc).
Il faut partir à l’heure (You must leave on time) Il is an impersonal word referring to no one in particular, much like it in it’s raining.
The obligation is therefore for the speaker or the person(s) spoken to.
Il faut dormir à l’heure (One should sleep early) Il faut travailler dur (One should work hard) Il faut bien manger (One / We / You should eat well) Il ne faut pas fumer (One should not smoke / you must not smoke) Il ne faut pas mentir (One / you should not lie) Il ne faut pas voler (You / one should not steal) 3.8 Je M’en Vais Je pars (I’m leaving) Je renters (I’m going back) Je vais chez moi (I’m going to my house) Je vais à la maison (I’m going to the house) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Say in French: a) Make haste!
b) The class is opposite the office.
c) The school is beside the bookshop.
d) You should not eat.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we came across two friends discussing about getting from one point to another.
In the course of their discussion, you have learnt terms associated with movement.
This should assist you to communicate without much assistance.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt to ask for directions, to give directions and some conversational mannerisms like il faut (you / we / one will have to 77CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION …).
You have also learnt some words that look like English words and how they may or may not be related.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Depeche toi!
b) La classe est en face de cet bureau.
c) L’école est a coté du bibliothèque.
d) Ne mange pas.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Give replies to the following: 1.
Où est la pharmacie?
2.
La bibliothèque est __________ la gare.
a. sur b. dans c. devant 3.
La boulangerie est _________ de la banque.
a. droite b. gauche c. en face 4.
___________ partir à temps.
a. il faut b. il ne faut pas c. il fait 5.
Où est la pharmacie, s’il vous plait?
a. devant la boulangerie b. dans l’école c. sur l’église 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
78CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 3 EN VOITURE CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0Objectives 3.0Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 En avion 3.4 A l’appareil 3.5 En panne d’essence 3.6 Situations 4.0Conclusion 5.0Summary 6.0Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, Mr Lakpa and Mrs Jaja speak on the phone about a transportation problem and how to get to her place.
You will encounter expressions describing locations and means of movement / transportation: car, plane, etc.
You will learn what to say when using a phone.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Speak about modes of transportation; • Ask or give information about where a person comes from or is coming from; • Ask and respond to how to get to and from a place; and • Acquire preliminary information about using a phone.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue Mme Jaja: C’est Monsieur Lakpa à l’appareil?
M. Lakpa: C’est bien moi.
79CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Mme Jaja: C’est Madame Jaja.
J’ai besoin de l’aide.
Ma voiture est en panne d’essence.
Est-ce que vous pouvez passer me prendre?
M. Lakpa: D’accord.
Et votre maison, comment est-ce qu’on fait pour y arriver?
Mme Jaja: Vous venez de quelle côté?
M. Lakpa: Je viens de la rue Coco.
Mme Jaja: Vous prenez la rue de l’université, arrivé au rondpoint, vous prenez la droite, c’est direct.
M. Lakpa: Mais pendant les heures de pointe, tout le monde est pressé.
Est-ce qu’il y a une autre route, au cas où il y a d’embouteillage?
Mme Jaja: C’est de l’autre côté, la rue qui mène au nord; par là, vous passez derrière le grand hôpital et aller jusqu’au bout.
La maison est à côté du salon de coiffure.
M. Lakpa: A tout de suite, alors.
Mme Jaja: Merci mille fois.
M. Lakpa: Je vous en prie.
3.2 Vocabulary À l’appareil (On the line) En panne d’essence (Run out of petrol) En avion (By air / By airplane) Comment est-ce qu’on fait pour y arriver (How does one get there?)
De quel côté?
(From what / which side?)
Arrivé à (On getting to ) C’est direct (It’s direct) Les heures de pointe (Rush hours) Être pressé (To be in a haste / in a hurry) L’autre côté (The other side) Au nord (To the north) Mener (To lead to) Jusqu’au bout (To the end) À côté de (Beside) Salon de coiffure (Hair-dressing salon) 3.3 En Avion Je vais à l’école en autobus (I go to school by bus) Je vais au travail en taxi (I go to work by taxi / in a taxi) Je vais à l’église en voiture (I go to church by car) Elle aime voyager en avion (She loves to travel by air) C’est intéressant d’aller par le train (It’s interesting to go by train) Tu vas à l’école à pied?
(You go to school on foot?)
80CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Etre pressée Je suis pressé (I’m in a hurry) Je me dépêche (I’m rushing / hurrying) Au Nord Port Harcourt est au sud du Nigéria (Port Harcourt is in the south of Nigeria) C’est à l’ouest du pays (It’s west of the country) J’habite une ville à l’est de la France (I live in a town in the East of France) Il va vers le nord du pays (He’s going towards the North of the country) Comment Est-Ce Qu’on Fait Pour Y Aller?
C’est où votre maison (Your house, where is it?)
Vous habitez où?
(Where do you live?)
Vous habitez quel quartier?
(Which area do you live in?)
Votre maison se trouve où?
(Where is your house situated?)
De Quel Côté?
You use de to ask or to talk about where a person is coming from or where he / she comes from: Je viens de Lagos (I’m coming from Lagos) Elle est de l’état d’Oyo (She is from Oyo State) Nous sommes du Nigéria (We are from Nigeria) Nous venons de la France (We are coming from France) Nous rentrons au bureau (We are going back to the office) Je suis d’Ijebu (I’m from Ijebu) Elle est de Kaduna (She is from Kaduna) Nous sommes d’Owerri (We are from Owerri) To Situate An Item C’est au-dessus de la table (It’s above the table) Il est entre moi et toi (He’s between me and you) C’est sur la table (It’s on the table) Le livre est sous la chaise (The book is under the chair) La maison est au-dessous du poste (The house is underneath the Post Office) 81CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Nous sommes au milieu de la ville (We are in the middle of the city) C’est en haut (it’s up) elle est en bas (She is down) C’est là-haut (It’s up there) C’est là-bas (It’s down there) 3.4 A L’appareil Below are a few expressions associated with speaking on the phone: Je suis bien à l’hôtel Grange?
(Am I on to Grange Hotel?
/ Is this Grange Hotel?)
C’est de la part de Thomas (It’s Thomas on the line) Je suis bien chez Mme Pedro?
(Am I on to Mrs Pedro?)
Ah non, c’est une erreur (No, it’s a wrong number) Je vais rappeler demain (I’ll call back tomorrow) Je voudrais parler à M. Bariko (I’ll like to speak to Mr Bariko.)
Restez en ligne (Hold the line / please hold) Téléphoner (To telephone / to call) Sonner (To ring) Mon portable sonne (My handset is ringing) Je vais composer son numéro (I’ll dial his number) Ne quittez pas / ne raccrochez pas (Don’t hang up) Tu peux rappeler à midi?
(Can you call back by noon?)
3.5 En Panne D’essence To speak about a car: La voiture est en panne (The car has broken down) J’ai un pneu crevé (I’ve a flat tyre) C’est grave?
(Is it serious?)
C’est dans le coffre de la voiture (It’s in the booth of the car) Les freins ne marchent plus (The brakes are no longer working) Vous avez une roué de secours?
(Do you have a spare tyre?)
3.6 Situations A: Où se trouve la ville de Maiduguri?
(Where’s Maiduguri town?)
B: C’est au nord du pays (It’s north of the country) A: C’est à quelle distance de Lagos?
(What’s the distance from Lagos) B: A peu près mille et quelques kilomètres (About a thousand kilometres) A: Ah bon!
C’est très loin (Oh, it is very far) 82CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) I go to market by taxi.
b) We are from Ghana.
c) His car has broken down.
d) It has a flat tyre.
4.0 CONCLUSION To travel, you need to learn how to say you’re going par avion, en autobus, par le train, à pied.
You have also learnt to say where a person is going to.
These are some of the things this unit covers.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt to talk about modes of transport.
By now, you should be able to say where you come from and where you are coming from.
Also you have learnt some vocabulary that will be useful for speaking on the telephone.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Je vais au marche par taxi.. b) Nous sommes du Ghana.
c) Sa voiture est tombee en panne.
d) Le pneu est creusé.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Fill in appropriately: 1.
Le Ghana est un pays en ______________________.
2.
Je viens __________________ l’état d’Oyo au Nigéria.
3.
Je vais au bureau ________________________, ce n’est pas loin.
a. par avion b. en voiture c. à pied.
4.
Tu viens de quel état?
________________________________.
5.
______________________________?
Je viens de l’école.
83CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
84CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 4 C’EST BON MARCHÉ CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0Objectives 3.0Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Qu’est-ce que tu fais là?
3.4 Je crois 3.5 Encore / toujours 3.6 C’est bon marché 4.0Conclusion 5.0Summary 6.0Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn to talk about daily activities: to ask about and to respond to questions about someone’s daily activities.
Two friends walk into a bookshop discussing and in the course of studying their discussion, you will learn terms and expressions useful for communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Ask about what a person does for a living or what a person is doing; • Say what you do for a living or what you are doing; and • Bargain at a marketplace.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Dialogue Christine: Yakubu, c’est bien toi?
Yakubu: Oui, c’est moi.
Christine: Qu’est-ce que tu fais là?
Yakubu: J’attends quelqu’une.
Christine: Ah, tu as trouvé la femme de ta vie, je crois.
Dis- moi, elle est jolie?
85CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Yakubu: Qu’en penses-tu?
Christine: Je crois, oui.
Moi, je vais dans la librairie à côté.
Yakubu: Bon, j’ai encore vingt minutes, que je t’accompagne?
Christine: C’est gentil.
Le Vendeur: Bonjour, monsieur, mademoiselle, vous voulez quelque chose?
Christine: Je cherche de romans policiers, monsieur.
Le Vendeur: Les voici, mademoiselle.
Christine: C’est combien?
Le Vendeur: C’est cinq cent naira.
Christine: Mais c’est cher.
Et celui-ci, de James Hardley Chase?
Le Vendeur: C’est huit cent naira.
Christine: Mais c’est impossible.
Y a rien de bon marché ici?
Le Vendeur: Si, les magazines, il y en a pour cent cinquante naira.
Christine: Je prends celle-ci alors.
Tenez l’argent!
Le Vendeur: Merci, et à la prochaine fois mademoiselle.
3.2 Vocabulary Qu’est-ce que tu fais là?
(What are you doing there?)
Attendre quelqu’un (To wait for someone) La femme de ta vie (The woman of your life) Dis-moi (Tell me) Qu’en penses-tu?
(What do you think of it / that?)
Je crois, oui (I think so) J’ai encore vingt minutes (I still have twenty minutes) C’est gentil (That’s kind) Vous voulez quelque chose?
(You want something?)
Des romans policiers (Detective novels) C’est combien?
(How much?)
C’est cher (It’s expensive) Celui-ci / celle-ci (This one) Rien (Nothing) Bon marché (Cheap) Il y en a (There are some) 3.3 Qu’est-Ce Que Tu Fais Là?
To ask what someone does for a living, one may ask: qu’est-ce que vous faites dans la vie?
To this he may reply: Je suis fonctionnaire (I’m a worker / civil servant) Je suis infirmière (I’m a nurse) Je suis avocat (I’m a lawyer) 86CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Je suis médecin (I’m a doctor) Il est mécanicien (He is a mechanic) Elle est journaliste (she’s a journalist) Qu’est-ce que tu fais?
can mean ‘what are you doing?’ or ‘what do you do?’ Several replies are possible: Je fais mon devoir (I’m doing my homework/I do my homework) Je prends mon petit déjeuner (I’m taking my breakfast/I take my breakfast) Je travaille au champs (I’m working on the farm/I work in the farm) Je joue aux cartes (I’m playing cards/I play cards) Je joue au football (I’m playing football/I play football) Je joue de la piano (I’m playing the keyboard / piano/I play the keyboard / piano) Je regarde la télévision (I’m watching the television/I watch (the) television) J’écoute la radio (I’m listening to the radio/I listen to the radio) Je danse à la musique rap (I’m dancing to rap music/I dance to rap music) Je fais la cuisine (I’m cooking/I cook) Je lis un roman (I’m reading a novel/I read a novel) 3.4 Je Crois Je crois que c’est mon argent (I think / believe it’s my money) Je crois qu’il est de retour (I believe he is back) Je crois qu’elle ment (I believe she is lying) Oui, je crois / je crois oui.
(I think so / yes, I think so) Je crois que non (I don’t think so) Je ne crois pas (I don’t think so) 3.5 Encore / Toujours Still can be expressed as ‘encore’ or as ‘toujours’, but ‘encore’ can also mean again.
J’ai encore du vin (I still have some wine) L’argent est encore là (The money is still there) Tu veux encore de la bière?
(You still want some beer?)
Je prends encore du pain (I’m still taking some bread) Est-ce qu’il pleut toujours?
(Is it still raining?)
Il est toujours dans le salon (He’s still in the sitting-room) Elle marche toujours (She’s still walking) Je suis toujours là (I’m still around) 87CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Nous sommes toujours des amis (We are still friends) Il est toujours à la banque (He’s still in the bank) Il cherche toujours son sac (He’s still looking for his bag) Encore Il faut lire encore (You should read again) Je vais chanter encore (I am going to sing again) Tu voyages encore?
(You’re travelling again?)
Elle mange encore des arachides (She’s still eating groundnuts / She’s eating more groundnuts) Il faut prendre encore du vin (Do take more wine.)
Nous allons toujours à l’église (We are always going to church / We always go to church) Vous arrivez toujours à l’heure (You are always coming on time) Nous n’allons plus à l’église (We no longer go to (the) church) Nous n’allons jamais à l’hôtel (We never go to (the) hotel) Nous lisons toujours des romans (We always read novels / We still read novels) NB The context usually determines the meaning.
Consider the following: - Est-ce qu’il est là?
(Is he in?)
- Oui, il se lave.
(Yes, he’s taking a bath) - Il se lave toujours?
(He’s still taking a bath?)
- Oui, attendez-le (Yes, wait for him) 3.6 C’est Bon Marché Bargaining in the marketplace can be easy if you know the right words to say.
C’est combien (How much?)
Ça coûte combien?
(How much does that cost?)
Ça, c’est cher (That’s expensive) Ça, c’est bon marché (That’s cheap) Ça, c’est moins cher (That’s less expensive / cheaper) C’est plus cher (It’s more expensive) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) He is going to the Bookshop.
b) He is looking for good novels.
c) The Bookshop is near the roundabout.
d) I believe that novels are not expensive.
88CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 4.0 CONCLUSION As we round off this section, you need to know how to ask for directions, how to describe your destination and what to say when you get to a marketplace.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt to ask and reply to questions regarding what you or someone else is doing.
You have also learnt expressions dealing with frequency (toujours) and continuity (encore) of action.
In addition, you have learnt to bargain in a marketplace.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Il va a la bibliothèque.
b) Il cherche des bons romans c) La bibbliothèque est très proche du rond point.
d) Je crois que les livres coûte moins cher.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT While watching television a worker (un fonctionnaire) is asked what he does for a living.
He likes to watch television, but he doesn’t like reading newspapers.
Answer the following questions for him: 1.
Qu’est-ce que vous faites dans la vie?
__________________________________ 2.
Qu’est-ce que vous faites maintenant?
___________________________________ 3.
Qu’est-ce que vous aimez faire?
___________________________________ 4.
Vous lisez des journaux?
___________________________________ 5.
Vous êtes professeur?
___________________________________.
89CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
90CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 5 COMME ELLE EST GENTILLE, MA GRAND- MERE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Toujours en vie 3.4 Je ne la vois pas 3.5 Souvent 3.6 Dès 3.7 Elle ne nous laisse jamais frapper 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn the story of a grand-mother who pampers her grand-children when they visit her.
You will learn expressions of regularity, or frequency including such terms like always, often, never, and so on.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Talk about things that happen fairly regularly; • Talk about more activities: to tell a story, to sit, to sleep, etc; • Describe your visit to someone’s house; and • Say whether or not you enjoyed your stay, what things were of interest, and so on.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue 15 Je me rappelle ma grand-mère.
Elle est toujours en vie mais je ne la vois pas très souvent.
Quand on est là en vacances, elle nous raconte des histoires très intéressantes.
Les soirs, au clair de lune, on s’assied sur sa cuisse pour écouter des histoires.
On dort là-dessus et le matin, on se 91CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION retrouve dans son lit.
Le matin, dès qu’on se lève, elle a déjà preparé de la bouillie chaude avec des gâteaux d’haricots qu’on appelle chez nous, akara.
On n’a jamais de faute dans ses yeux et elle ne nous laisse jamais frapper par notre maman.
De notre arrivée à notre départ, elle ne va nulle part, elle reste avec nous.
Le jour de notre départ, elle nous donne toutes sortes de fruits et des produits alimentaires.
Comme on s’amuse lorsqu’on est enfant!
3.2 Vocabulary Se rappeler (To remember) Toujours en vie (Still alive) Mais (But) Je ne la vois pas (I don’t see her) Souvent (Often) On est là (We are there) En vacances (On holidays) Raconteur des histoires (To tell stories) Au clair de lune (In the moonlight) S’assied = s’asseoir (To sit down) Sa cuisse (Her lap) Là-dessus (Right there / on it) Se retrouver (To find oneself) Un lit (A bed) Dès (As soon as) La bouillie (Pap) Les haricots (Beans) Faute (Fault) Dans ses yeux (In her eyes) Nous laisser frapper (Allow us to be beaten) Nullepart (Nowhere) Toutes sortes de fruits (All sorts of fruits) Produits alimentaires (Food stuff) Comme on s’amuse!
(What fun we have!)
Lorsqu’on est enfant (When one is a child) 3.3 Toujours En Vie Il est vivant (He is alive) Il vie toujours (He’s still living) Elle est morte (She is dead) Il est décédé (He is deceased) Feu mon oncle (My late uncle) Feu ma grande-mère (My late grand-mother) 92CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.4 Je Ne La Vois Pas Je la vois (I see her ) Je le vois (I see him) Je prends mon cahier, je le prends (I’m taking my notebook, I’m taking it) Je cherche ma jupe, je la cherche (I’m looking for my skirt, I’m looking for it) 3.5 Souvent Je la vois souvent (I see her often) Je la vois de temps en temps (I see her from time to time) Je la vois toujours (I always see her) Je la vois tout le temps (I see her all the time) Je la vois chaque semaine (I see her every week) Je la vois tous les trois jours (I see her every three days) Je le vois tous les matins (I see him every morning) Je le vois tous les soirs (I see him every evening) Je le vois toutes les nuits (I see him every night) Je le vois tous les lundis (I see him every Monday) 3.6 Dès Dès qu’il est là (As soon as he is around) Dès qu’il arrive (As soon as he arrives) Dès qu’on la vois (As soon as we see her) Dès qu’il trouve le sac (As soon as he finds the bag) 3.7 Elle Ne Nous Laisse Jamais Frapper (She never allows us to be beaten) Je ne saute jamais (I never jump) Elle ne danse jamais (She never dances) Elle ne le derange jamais (She never disturbs him) Il ne mange jamais de fruits (He never eats fruits) Je ne prends jamais l’autobus (I never take the bus) Il ne mange plus (He no longer eats) Elle ne mange plus d’haricots (She no longer eats beans) Il ne parle à personne (He doesn’t speak to anyone / he speaks to no one) Elle n’aime personne (She likes no one) Elle ne cherche rien (She is not looking for anything / she’s looking for nothing) Il ne boit rien (He drinks nothing) 93CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Je ne vais nullepart (I’m going nowhere) Elle ne va nullepart (She’s going nowhere) Je ne mange guère de fruits (I hardly eat fruits) Je ne bois guère d’alcool (I hardly drink / take alcohol) Je ne vois aucun livre (I see no book / I can’t see any book) Je ne vois aucune robe (I can’t see any dress / I see no dress) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) I remember my grandmother.
b) She likes children.
c) She stays with us always; d) She is still alive.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, a story is told of a grand-mother and the things she did for her grand-children.
From the narration, you will have learnt to talk about regular activities.
These include talking about what one does everyday, each morning, every Monday, etc.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt to speak of regular activities.
You have learnt to express differences in frequency, regularity and continuity of actions; and to use terms that relate to everyday activities: often, always, etc; and to speak of everyday, all the time, etc.
You have also learnt in this unit to say I will not, I do not, I never, etc I believe that by now, you should be able to say much of what you intend to say.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Je me rappel de ma grand mère b) Elle aime les enfants c) Elle reste toujours avec nous d) Elle est vivante 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Say and write in French: 1.
I never tell lies.
2.
I don’t see him all the time.
3.
I never see her.
4.
I eat fruits every morning.
5.
She always tells me stories.
94CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
95CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION MODULE 4 Unit 1 Un Jour Chargé Unit 2 Une Journée Typique Unit 3 Bon Anniversaire, Maman!
Unit 4 A Londres En Eté Unit 5 Fou De Joie!
UNIT 1 UN JOUR CHARGÉ CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Ce soir, je prepare 3.4 Quelquefois / de temps en temps 3.5 Tu es vraiment chargé 3.6 Il y a mon devoir à faire 3.7 Situations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will meet two friends discussing their daily activities.
You will learn how to speak of regular or daily activities.
You will also learn how to distinguish between occasional and regular activities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Discuss daily activities; • Discuss occasional activities; and • Distinguish between periods of time for instance, la matinée (morning hours), le matin (in the morning).
96CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue Fatima: Nana, tu viens avec moi au cinéma ce soir?
Nana: Tu oublies que je ne suis jamais libre le soir.
Fatima: Ah bon!
Pourquoi?
Nana: Toute la soirée, je suis occupée.
Quand je reviens de l’école, je prends mon déjeuner et puis je prépare le dîner.
Après, il y a les habits de ma petite sœur à laver.
Fatima: Tu es vraiment chargée.
Nana: Ce n’est pas tout.
En plus, il y a mon devoir à faire.
Et comme papa travaille tard aujourd’hui, je vais chercher des journaux pour lui, et puis je jette des ordures, je repasse le linge, j’amène la radio chez le mécanicien.
Voilà.
Fatima: Oh là là!
C’est fatigant.
C’est vraiment pas intéressant!
Alors!
Ça fait à demain.
Nana: A demain, amuse-toi bien.
3.2 Vocabulary Toute la soirée (Evening hours) Pas ce soir (Not this evening) Préparer (To cook) Le linge (The laundry) Laver (To wash) Chargée (Over-loaded) Vraiment (Really) Ce n’est pas tout (That’s not all) Travailler tard (To work late) Des journaux (Newspapers) Jetter (Throw away) Des ordures (Refuse/waste) Repasser (To iron) Amener (To take/to bring) Voilà (That’s it) Amuse-toi bien (Have a good time/Enjoy yourself, singular) Amusez-vous bien (Have a good time/Enjoy yourself, plural or for respect) 97CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.3 Ce Soir, Je Prépare There are different kinds of regular activities: daily, weekly, once a while, every few hours and so on.
Chaque Soir (Every evening) Je lave les habits (I wash clothes) Je prépare le dîner (I cook dinner) Elle fait ses devoirs (She does her assignments) Je prends mon petit déjeuner (I take my lunch) Je me brosse les dents (I brush my teeth) Je marche à l’école (I walk to school) Il aide sa sœur (He helps his sister) Elle fait la sieste (She takes a siesta) 3.4 Quelque fois (Sometimes) Je jette les ordures (I throw away the refuse) Je repasse le linge (I iron the clothes/laundry) Je vais chez le mécanicien (I go to the mechanic shop) Je prends l’autobus pour aller à l’école (I take a bus to get to school) Il fait la lessive (He does the laundry) Il va à pied (He goes on foot) Il regarde la télévision (He watches the television) Elle va à l’hôpital (The goes to the hospital) Nous allons chez nos grand-parents (We go to our grand-parents’ home) 3.5 Tu Es Vraiment Chargée (You Are Really Busy) Tu as du boulot!
(You’ve got work) Tu es occupé(e) (You’re busy) Je n’ai pas de temps (I haven’t got the time) 3.6 Il Y A Mon Devoir A Faire Il y a can mean “there is”, “there are”, “it’s been”.
Look at some instances: Il y a deux filles qui vous attendent dehors (There are two girls who are waiting for you outside) Il y a des enfants dehors (There are children outside) Il y a des médicaments dans mon sac (There are drugs in my bag) Il y a une femme qui vient chaque jour (There is a woman who comes everyday) 98CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Il y a un livre sur la table (There’s a book on the table) Il y a un des voisins qui vous cherche (There’s one of the neighbours [who is] looking for you).
Il y a sept ans que je suis au Togo (It’s been seven years since I’ve been in togo) Il y a longtemps que j’attends (It’s been long since I’ve been waiting) Il y a longtemps que j’attends (It’s been long since I’ve been waiting) Il y a deux jours qu’elle est perdue (It’s [been] two days since she got lost) Il y a mère qui arrive (Here’s my mother coming / my mother’s coming) Il y a ma sœur qui vient (My sister’s coming / here’s my sister coming).
Il y a ma voiture chez le mécanicien (My car’s with the mechanic).
La soirée The time span of an entire morning, afternoon or evening: la matinée, (the morning hours), la journée (the whole day), la soirée (the evening hours).
3.7 Situations A Le lundi, je vais à l’école, le mardi matin je nettoie la voiture, le mercredi après-midi je repasse les habits, le jeudi soir, je vais au théâtre avec Marc, le vendredi soir, je joue aux cartes.
Le samedi soir je vais à la discothèque et le dimanche soir je vais au stade.
B - Qu’est-ce que tu fais - Je joue au tennis.
- Tu joues au tennis tous les soirs.
- Non, seulement le dimanche soir.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French : a) He is going with me to the school.
b) You are very busy.
c) My brother is coming soon.
d) I am going to the stadium 99CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 4.0 CONCLUSION Speaking of daily, regular or frequent activities is one of the most important aspects of communication.
Whether an action is habitual or regular, it is often expressed in the ‘present tense’.
Je lis un journal (I read / I’m reading a newspaper), je mange des arachides (I eat / I’m eating groundnuts), je regarde la télévision (I watch / I’m watching television), etc expressed in this ‘tense’ and express habitual and ongoing activities.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you should have learnt to speak of daily and current activities.
From the conversation you have gathered terms and expressions used for habitual and current actions and situations.
These should equip you to further enhance your ability to express yourself always.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERSICES a) Il part à l’école avec moi à l’école b) Tu est très occupé(e) c) Mon frère arrive tout de suite d) Je Vais ala stade 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Say and write in French: 1.
I am working.
2.
I work every Tuesday.
3.
I go to school on foot.
4.
Are you coming to the cinema with me?
5.
When do you eat?
6.
Are you going to school?
7.
You are eating mangoes.
8.
You are watching television.
9.
I am reading a novel.
10.I dance on Saturday evening.
100CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
101CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 2 UNE JOURNÉE TYPIQUE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Text 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Je me lève de bonne heure 3.4 Cette heure-ci 3.5 J’ai faim 3.6 A l’heure 3.7 Je prends le déjeuner dans un restaurant 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of the previous unit on daily activities.
The text is about a typical day in the narrator’s life; from the time he wakes up till the time he goes to bed at night, and how he spends his week-end.
You will learn to talk of regular hours, meal time, time of leaving home, time of getting back, etc.
The use of the associated vocabulary includes when and how to use them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Express various actions / activities of daily living; • Describe a personal (and other) time-table / plan of activites; and • Use appropriate terms and expressions 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Text Le matin, je me lève de bonne heure, je me brosse les dents, je me lave et je me peigne, et quelquefois, je me rase la barbe.
Dès que je suis prêt, je prends un café avec des sandwichs et puis, je vais chercher un autobus pour aller au bureau.
Je quitte la maison vers sept heures.
A cette heure- ci, c’est sûr que la circulation n’est pas trop et j’arrive au bureau à 102CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION l’heure.
Je prends le déjeuner dans un restaurant près de mon bureau.
A seize heures, je quitte le bureau.
A cette heure, il y a beaucoup de monde et de circulation, j’entre dans un supermarché pour faire des achats et puis à dix-huit heures, je rentre.
A la maison, je prépare un peu parce que j’ai déjà faim à cette heure.
Je mange, je regarde un peu la télé, et puis, vers vingt-trois heures, je dors.
Le samedi, je vais au terrain de sports et le dimanche après l’église, je rends visite aux amis, et je me repose.
3.2 Vocabulary Se lever (To get up) Se brosser les dents (To brush one’s teeth) Se laver (To bathe) Se peigner (To comb oneself) Se raser (To shave [oneself]) De bonne heure (Early) Prêt(e) (Ready) Le bureau (The office) Cette heure-ci (At this / hour) L’heure (On time) Beaucoup de monde (A lot of people) J’ai faim (I’m hungry) Se reposer (To rest) 3.3 Je Me Lève De Bonne Heure Action words (verbs) that are preceded by se are known as either reflexive or pronominal verbs and often describe actions carried out on oneself, or by two or more people between themselves: Je me lève (I wake up) Tu te laves (You bathe [yourself]) Tu t’occupes (You get busy) Tu t’occupes des enfants (You are preoccupied with the children) Il se repose (He is resting) Il s’habille (He is dressing up / He dresses up) Il se dépêche (He is hurrying up / He hurries up) Vous vous regardez (You are looking at yourselves or at one another/ You look at yourself/one another) Marie et Jean se regardent (Marie and Jean are looking at themselves / each other / Marie and Jean look at themselves or one another) Sylvie et son frère se (Sylvie and her brother are telling each other racontent des histories stories / Sylvia and her sister tell each other stories) 103CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Marie se regarde (Marie is looking at herself / Marie looks at herself) Elle s’arrête sur la route (She is stopping on the road/She stops on the road) Mes parents s’aiment (My parents love each other) Mes sœurs se comprennent (My sisters understand each other) Les gens se téléphonent (People phone each other) Mes professeurs se connaissent (My teachers know each other) Les amis s’écrivent (Friends write each other) La mère et l’enfant se cherchent (Mother and child are looking for each other / Mother and child look for each other) 3.4 Cette Heure-Ci J’aime ce livre-ci (I like this book) Le singe grimpe sur cette (The monkey is climbs tree / arbre-ci The monkey is climbing this tree) Il regarde cet enfant-ci (He is looking at this child / He looks at the child) Elle va à cette école-ci (She goes to this school / She is going to this school) 3.5 J’ai Faim This is just one of those expressions for which the French use to have where the English use to be: Il a faim (He is hungry) Il a soif (He is thirsty) J’ai chaud (I am hot) J’ai froid (I’m cold) Nous avons sommeil (We are sleepy) J’ai neuf ans (I’m nine years old) J’ai vingt ans (I’m twenty years old) This same expression is used for feelings, pains, ailments, and so on: Tu as mal à la tête (You have a headache) J’ai mal au ventre (I have a stomache ache) J’ai mal aux dents (I have toothache) Nous avons mal aux oreilles (We have ear ache) Nous avons mal au dos (We have backache) Elle a mal au pied (She’s got footpain / pain in the foot) Il a mal aux jambs (He’s got pain in his legs) 104CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 3.6 A L’heure Je me lève de bonne heure (I wake up early) Il quitte la maison de bonne heure (He leaves the house early) Nous arrivons à l’heure (We arrive on time / early) Elle rentre de bonne heure (She gets back early) Il est en retard (He is late) Elle arrive en retard (She comes in / arrives late) Elle arrive bientôt (She is arriving soon) Elle va partir bientôt (She is leaving soon) Il sort bientôt (He is going out soon) On arrive au marriage tôt (We’re arriving early at the wedding) Il faut quitter tôt (One should leave early) 3.7 Je Prends Le Déjeuner Dans Un Restaurant Au restaurant, on mange (At the restaurant we eat / one eat(s)) Les malades vont à l’hôpital (The sick [people] go to the hospital) Les étudiants vont à l’école (Students go to school) Au marché, on vend des (At the market, they sell wares) marchandises Les professeurs enseignent (Teachers teach at school) à l’école Au supermarché, on fait (At the supermarket, one makes purchases) des achats A la discothèque, les (At the discotech, people dance) gens dansent A la pharmacie, on (At the pharmacy, people buy drugs) achète des medicaments Au stade, on joue aux sports (At the stadium, people play sports) Au salon de coiffure, (At the hair-dressing salon, one dresses his / on se coiffe her hair) Au bureau, on travaille (At the office, one works) A la piscine, on nage (At the swimming pool, one swims) A la banque, on prend de (At the bank, one receives money) l’argent Au cinema, on voit les (At the cinema, one watches films) films A la plage, on fait de (At the beach, one does a picnic) pique-nique SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) We wake up early every morning.
105CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION b) I take breakfast at 7am.
c) I take lunch at noon.
d) He goes to the cinema on Sunday evening.
4.0 CONCLUSION To be able to talk about activities, daily, occasional, or once-in-a-while, you must be able to express yourself adequately on issues like places you go to, things you do, time of such activities, and so on.
All these as well as expressions of feelings and certain ailments have constituted the subject matter of this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY From this unit, you will have learnt to talk of regular time schedules: every morning, by seven o’clock, etc.You have also learnt to talk of places: the restaurant, the market, etc.
These are to enable you communicate effectively.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Nous nous levons très tôt tout les matins.
b) Je prend mon petit dejeuner a 7heures du matin.
c) Je prend le repas à midi.
d) Il part au cinema le dimanche soir.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Complete the following: 1.
Je suis ________, je vais à l’hôpital.
2.
Au ____________, je prends du café.
3.
J’ai ________, je vais boire de l’eau.
4.
A ________ heures, je vais au supermarché.
5.
Je vais au ___________ pour jouer au tennis.
6.
A __________, on guérit les malades.
7.
A la pharmacie, on __________________.
8.
On prends de l’argent à _________________.
106CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
107CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 3 BON ANNIVERSAIRE, MAMAN!
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Tu te rajeunis!
3.4 Tu trouves!
3.5 J’aime bien la robe!
3.6 C’est genial!
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn more about likes and dislikes.
You will encounter some new words to enable you express yourself with more confidence.
In our dialogue, two daughters give their mother a birthday present and talk about likes, preferences, and so on.
You will learn to present some of your thoughts more accurately.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Make compliments and respond to compliments; • Discuss likes and dislikes; • Talk about preferences; and • Say whether you agree or disagree 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Dialogue 18: Bon Anniversaire Maman!
Ada: Maman, bon anniversaire.
A cinquante-deux ans, tu te rajeunis!
Maman: Tu trouves?
Chinwe: Oui, tu es la plus belle mère de la décennie.
Maman: Merci, mes petites.
108CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Chinwe: Ouvre tes paquets, on a envie de voir ce qu’il y a dedans.
Maman: Voyons, du parfum, des chaussures, oh!
Je suis gâtée.
Le parfum est doux, ça me plait beaucoup, et les chaussures, j’adore les chaussures.
Et cette robe verte, genial!
C’est très gentil!
Chinwe: J’aime bien la robe, moi aussi, elle est chouette, mais j’aime mieux les chaussures.
Maman: Ce sont chers?
Ada: On ne dit pas, maman.
Maman: Allez, un peu de confiance quand même!
Ada: Un peu cher, plus cher que le parfum.
Ce n’est pas mal.
Chinwe: Et papa, qu’est-ce qu’il t’a donné?
Maman: Il avait oublié mais il vient de me trouver de boucles d’oreille en or, les voici.
Et ce sont assez jolies.
Ada : Je suis d’accord, ce sont merveilleux.
Maman : Bon, à table les petites, le déjeuner est prêt!
3.2 Vocabulary Se rajeunir (To get / become younger) Tu trouves !
(Really ?
/ You think so ?)
Mes petites (My little girls) Tes paquets (Your parcels) On a envie de ... (One would like to ...) Voyons (Let’s see) C’est très gentil (That’s so kind) Doux (Pleasant / sweet-smelling) Ça me plaît (I like it / it pleases me) J’aime bien la robe (I really like the dress) J’aime mieux les chaussures (I like the shoes better) Un peu cher (A bit expensive) Qu’rst-ce qu’il t’a donné (What did he give you) Il avait oublié (He had forgotten) Il m’a trouvé (He found [for] me) Des boucles d’oreilles (Earrings) En or (I [Made]of gold) Je suis d’accord (I agree) À table (To the table) Le déjeuner est prêt (Lunch is ready) 3.3 Tu te Rajeunis!
Se rajeunir is just one of the verbs introduced by se and means to become ….
Maman se rajeunit (Mother’s getting younger) La voiture se ralentit (The car’s slowing down) 109CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Elle s’enrichit (She’s getting richer) Musa s’aggrandit (Musa’s getting bigger) 3.4 Tu Trouves!
This is response to a compliment.
A - La robe te va très bien (The dress fits you very well) - Vraiment ?
(Really?)
B - Tu es un bon menuisier (You’re a good carpenter) - C’est un compliment, merci !
(Thanks for the compliment !
/ It’s a compliment, thanks !
3.5 J’aime Bien La Robe!
Elle aime bien cet enfant (She really likes this / that child) Vous aimez mieux le rouge?
(You like the red one better ?)
Elle aime mieux son chat (She likes her cat better) Elle aime bien les voyages (She likes travelling a lot) J’aime mieux la natation (I like swimming better) Elle n’aime pas les oiseaux (She doesn’t like birds) Elle n’aime pas du tout les oiseaux (She doesn’t like birds at all) J’aime beaucoup les enfants (I like children a lot) Tu aimes ça ?
(You like this ?)
Un peu (A little) 3.6 C’est Génial!
These are ways of expressing your opinion about something : C’est genial (It’s great!)
C’est chouette!
(It’s cute) C’est chic (It’s chic / cute) Ce n’est pas mal (It’s not bad) C’est assez jolie (It’s quite pretty) C’est fantastique (It’s fantastic) C’est merveilleux!
(It’s wonderful / marvelous) C’est splendide!
(It’s splendid) C’est super!
(It’s super / great) C’est (très) beau!
(It’s (quite) fine!)
Il est plutôt gros !
(He’s rather fat !)
Elle est plutôt laide !
(She’s rather ugly !)
Ça me plaît beaucoup (I like that a lot !)
Mais c’est cher !
(But that’s expensive!)
C’est pollué!
(It’s polluted!)
110CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION C’est sale!
(It’s dirty!)
C’est sans intérêt!
(It’s not interesting!)
Il y a trop de monde!
(There are too many people!)
Les gens sont aggressifs!
(The people are aggressive!)
C’est bruyant !
(It’s noisy!)
C’est plus cher que ... (It’s more expensive than ...) La robe est plus chère que (The dress is more expensive than la montre the wristwatch) Le livre est plus cher que (The book is more expensive than the le pantalon trousers) Les fleurs sont plus (The flowers are more expensive than chères que les parfums the perfumes) Les sacs sont plus chers (The bags are more expensive than the que les livres books) Le livre est un peu plus (The book is a little more expensive) cher Les boissons sont moins (The drinks are less expensive) chers La robe est moins chère (The dress is less expensive than the skirt) que la jupe Le livre est aussi cher (The book is as expensive as the bag) que le sac Les boissons sont moins (The drinks are less expensive than the chères que les fleurs flowers) Le pantalon est aussi cher (The trouser is as expensive as the skirt) que la jupe La robe est plus belle que (The dress is more beautiful than the la montre wristwatch) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) She has a new dress b) We like the new dress c) The dress is cheap d) The dress is cheaper than the perfume 4.0 CONCLUSION From a conversation between a mother and her daughters, you have gathered information about likes and dislikes, and to prefer something to another.
Compliments and how to respond to them and opinions on how much you like a thing have also been part of this unit.
You have also 111CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION learnt comparison at a basic level : one thing being more or less expensive than the other, for instance.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt how a conversation is done between a mother and her daughter, about likes and dislikes.
Subsequent unit will be built on this.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Nous nous levons très tôt tout les matins.
b) Je prend mon petit dejeuner a 7heures du matin.
c) Je prend le repas à midi.
d) Il part au cinema le dimanche soir.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Fill in the appropriate response : 1.
Je n’aime pas Lagos, c’est trop ____________.
a. calme b. génial c. bruyant 2.
J’aime bien Françoise, elle est ____________.
a. sympathique b. cruelle c. Sans intérêt 3.
Vous êtes très belle en cette robe.
____________________.
a. Oui.
b. C’est triste c. vous trouvez?
4.
J’adore Jos parce que ___________________________.
a. il y a trop de monde b. c’est assez jolie c. c’est pollué 5.
J’aime bien Port Harcourt, mais j’aime ___________ Owerri.
a. pas mal b. beaucoup c. mieux 112CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
113CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 4 À LONDRES EN ÉTÉ CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Le mois prochain 3.4 Un pull bleu 3.5 C’est loin?
3.6 Mais si!
3.7 Ça m’est égal 3.8 Ça se voit 3.9 En été 3.10 N’oublies pas 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A dialogue between Koffi (who’s travelling abroad soon) and his friend Sani reveals details about communicating indifference, time in seasons and periods, colours, giving orders, and so on.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this course unit, you should be able to: - speak to a friend about seasons, periods and instances - communicate indifference / preference - give a few instructions - talk of colours 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue 19: A Londres En Eté Koffi: Je vais voir ma tante à Londres le mois prochain.
Sani : Et tu vas être là pour combien de temps ?
Koffi: Pour un mois, et puis je vais á Brighton.
Je vais voir mon cousin.
Ensuite, je passe par Manchester avant de revenir.
114CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Sani : Manchester n’est pas loin de Londres ?
Koffi: Si, mais ça m’est égal.
Je vais passer de bonnes vacances, c’est ce qui compte.
Sani : Tu voyages seul?
Koffi: Non, avec mon père, mais il va me laisser là.
Sani : Il fait très froid là, il faut être prêt.
Koffi: Oui, mais c’est l’été.
Ce n’est pas trop froid en été.
Sani : N’oublies pas de m’amener un pull bleu, j’aime les pulls bleus.
Koffi: Moi, j’aime plutôt les pulls verts.
Sani : Ça se voit.
Tu ne portes que des habits verts.
Koffi: C’est en harmonie avec la nature.
Sani : En tout cas, n’oublies pas, et bonne route !
3.2 Vocabulary Le mois prochain (Next month) Pour combien de temps?
(For how long?)
Et puis (And then) Passer par (To pass through / by) Loin (Far) Si (But it is!)
Ça m’est égal!
(It’s all the same to me) C’est ce qui compte (That’s what counts) Laisser (To leave) Il faut être prêt (One / you should be ready) En été (In summer) N’oublies pas!
(Don’t forget!)
Les pulls bleus (Blue pullovers / sweaters) J’aime plutôt (I rather like / I prefer) Vert (Green) Ça se voit (That’s obvious [easily seen]) Tu ne portes que des habits verts (You only wear green clothes) En harmonie (In harmony) La nature (Nature) En tout cas (In any case) 3.3 Le Mois Prochain Je voyage aujourd’hui (I’m travelling today) Il a voyagé avant-hier (He travelled day before yesterday) Elle voyagé mercredi (She’s travelling [on]Wednesday) Elle a voyagé la semaine dernière(She travelled last week) Elle voyage l’année prochaine (She’s travelling next year) Il voyage ce matin (He’s travelling this morning) Il voyage cette nuit (He’s travelling this night) 115CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Tu voyages cet après-midi (You’re travelling this afternoon) Elle voyage cette semaine (She’s travelling this week) Vous voyagez dans deux semaines(You’re travelling in two weeks) Nous voyageons tous les lundis (We travel every Monday) 3.4 Un Pull Bleu Elle porte une blouse rouge (She’s wearing a red blouse) Vous aimez le sac brun?
(You like the brown bag ?)
Vous prenez les chaussures noires (You’re taking the black shoes) Je prends la ceinture noire (I’m taking the black belt) Et le pantalon noir (And the black trouser) Nous achetons de tissu rose (We’re buying pink material) Il cherche son cravate blanc (He’s looking for his white tie) 3.5 C’est Loin?
C’est près de la librairie (It’s near the bookshop) C’est très loin (It’s very far) Ce n’est pas loin (It’s not far) Ce n’est pas du tout loin (It’s not far at all) C’est tout près (It’s quite close) C’est à deux kilomètres d’ici (It’s two kilometres from here) C’est à peu près deux cent metres (It’s about two hundred metres) C’est juste au coin (It’s just by the corner) Ce n’est pas trop loin (It’s not too far) 3.6 Mais Si!
When you need to reply to a question that requires a yes or no answer, three kinds of answers are possible: oui, non, si.
Tu viens chez moi (Are you coming to my house?)
Oui (yes) Tu vas chez toi?
(Are you going to your house?)
Non (no) Tu ne vas pas chez moi?
(Aren’t you coming to my house ?)
Si (I am) Si is the typical reply to a negative question.
- Elle ne vient plus?
(Is she no longer coming?)
Si (she is) - vous n’avez pas de stylo?
(You don’t have a pen?)
Si (I do) - Vous ne venez plus ?
(You’re no longer coming?)
Si (I am) - Il ne voyage pas ?
(Isn’t he travelling) Si (he is) 3.7 Ça M’est Egal!
Indifference can be expressed in different ways : Ça m’est tout à fait égal!
(It’s all the same to me!)
116CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Ça m’est complètement égal!
(It’s [absolutely/completely] the same to me) Comme tu veux!
(As you wish!)
Je m’en fous! }
Je m’en moques! }
(I couldn’t be bothered / I don’t care!)
Je m’en fiche! }
3.8 Ça Se Voit Many ‘verbs’ become ‘passive’ by taking se before them: Cela se voit (That can be seen / that’s obvious) Les boissons se vendent au supermarché (Drinks are sold in the supermarket) Le vin se boit partout (Wine is drunk/taken everywhere) Les parfums s’achètent cher (Perfumes are sold expensively) L’argent se gagne difficilement (Money is earned in a difficult way) La grossesse s’annonce dans quelques semaines (Pregnancy is evident in a few weeks) Cela se dit parmi les jeunes (It’s been said among the youths) La peur s’exprime dans la doute (Fear is expressed in doubt) Cela se fait partout (That’s done everywhere) 3.9 En Été There are four seasons in the temperate regions of the world: L’été (Summer) L’hivers (Winter) Le printemps (Spring) L’automne (Autumn / fall) And two seasons in the tropics: L’harmattan (Harmattan) La saison de pluies (Rainy season) 3.10 N’oublies Pas!
Some common simple instructions: Suivez cette rue (Take this road) Il faut metre de l’eau (You have to put some water) Dépêchez-vous (Hurry up) Trouves-moi mon sac, s’il te plaît (Please find my bag for me) Venez, s’il vous plaît (Please come) 117CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Say in French: a) He is going to France to see his brother.
b) France is far.
c) He is traveling during summer.
d) I don’ care!
4.0 CONCLUSION Talking about what you like or dislike is accompanied by expressing indifference.
Indifference means when you say you do not particularly like something and you don’t dislike it either.
From the dialogue in this unit, you have been able to learn certain expressions of indifference, among other things.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about expressing indifference and preferences.
You have also learnt about time in periods (this morning, on Wednesday, etc), seasons (été, etc) colours, distance, and to use the expression si.
This will take you further in both oral and written communication.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Il va en France rendre visit a son frère b) Fance est loin c) Il voyage en été d) Je m’en fou!
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Fill in the correct word or expression: 1.
Vous n’avez pas de stylo?
____________________ (I do) 2.
Tu aimes la chemise bleue?
J’aimes plutôt la ________________ (red) 3.
Tu aimes de mangues?
(indifference) 4.
Le cinéma est __________ de la bibliothèque.
(far) 5.
______________________.
(Don’t travel!)
118CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 6.
______________________.
(It’s too cold today!)
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
119CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION UNIT 5 FOU DE JOIE!
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dialogue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Je suis fou de joie 3.4 To like / to dislike 3.5 When you disagree 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit continues with likes and dislikes.
Two friends discuss about a new car.
From their discussion, you will learn to differentiate between to like a thing and to like a person.
You will also learn how to agree or disagree with someone.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Express the difference between to like a person and like an object; • Say whether you agree or disagree; and • Express yourself in the passive voice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dialogue 20: Fou de joie!
George: Tu as l’air content ce soir.
Steve: Oui, je suis fou de joie!
George: Ah bon, pourquoi?
Tu as gagné beaucoup d’argent?
Steve: Non!
Mon père vient de me trouver une bagnole.
George: Super!
Elle est où, ta bagnole?
Steve: La voilà.
George : Chouette !
c’est magnifique !
Ton père doit t’aimer beaucoup.
Steve : Moi, j’adore mon père !
Il n’y a que lui dans le monde.
120CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION George : On fait la ballade en voiture, ou quoi ?
Steve : D’accord.
On y va. George : On va où ?
Steve : Dans la campagne, j’adore le vent et la campagne.
Ça te plaît ?
George : Tout à fait.
3.2 Vocabulary Tu as l’air content (You look happy) Je suis fou de joie (I’m crazy with joy) Ah bon (Really?)
Tu as gagné beaucoup d’argent?
(Did you win a lot of money?)
C’est magnifique (That’s magnificient / great / marvelous) Il n’y a que lui dans le monde (He’s everything in the world to me) On y va (Let’s go) Dans la campagne (To the countryside) Le vent (The air / wind) Tout à fait!
(Absolutely!)
3.3 Je Suis Fou De Joie!
Ways of expressing one’s happiness or joy : Je suis ravi (I’m delighted) Ça me ravit (That is delightful to me) C’est très bien (That’s very good !)
Tant mieux (Much better) When one is not happy, one could say : Je suis fâché (I’m angry) Il est en colère (He is upset / angry) Ça m’agace (That’s upsetting) Il est ennuyé (He is annoyed) Ça m’énerve (It gets on my nerves) These references are expressed differently depending on whether one is talking about persons or objects.
J’aime beaucoup ce livre (I really like this book) C’est superbe!
(It’s superb!)
C’est beau!
(It’s beautiful!)
C’est agréable!
(It’s pleasant / lovely) C’est intéressant!
( It’s interesting!)
C’est pas mal du tout!
(It’s not bad at all!)
C’est extraordinaire!
(It’s extraordinary!)
121CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Don’t like: C’est pas agréable!
(That’s not acceptable!)
Ce n’est pas très bien!
(It’s not so good!)
Ce n’est pas extraordinaire!
(It isn’t extraordinary!)
C’est sans intérêt!
(It’s not interesting!)
C’est / je trouve ça affreux!
(It’s / I find it frightening!)
C’est / je trouve ça ennuyeux!
(It’s / I find it annoying!)
Sentiments For Food C’est délicieux (It’s delicious) C’est très bien (It’s very good) C’est pas très bon (It’s not so good) C’est mauvais (It’s bad) C’est dégoûtant!
(It’s disgusting) Ça a l’air délicieux (That looks delicious) Ç a l’air mauvais (That looks bad) 3.4 To Like / To Dislike To like a Person: Il est très bien (He is very good) Il est sensationnel (He is sensational) Il est merveilleux (He is wonderful) Elle est formidable (She is wonderful) Je le trouve formidable (I find him wonderful) c’est une fille super!
(She’s a great girl) c’est un type très sympa (He’s a very nice guy) Il a beaucoup de charme (He is charming) Elle a un charme fou (She is absolutely charming) You don’t like the person: Il est assez désagréable!
(He is quite unpleasant) Il n’est pas très sympa!
(He is not so nice) Il est méchant (He is wicked) When you like / love a person: Friendship Georges me plaît (I like George) J’aime bien Agnès (I really like Agnes) Elle est mon amie (She is my friend) Il aime beaucoup Georges (He really likes Georges) Il est mon copain / Elle est ma copine (He / She is my [close]friend) 122CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION Je suis très ami avec Charles (I’m a good friend of Charles’/ Charles is a good friend of mine) Love Elle est amoureuse de Pierre (She is in love with Peter) Elle aime Jacques (She loves James) Il adore Christine (He really loves Christine) Marie est folle de Jean (Mary is crazy for John) Charles est fou de Florence (Charles is crazy for Florence).
Je t’aime (I love you) Tout A Fait If you agree with someone’s suggestion / decision Je suis d’accord (I agree) Je ne suis pas d’accord (I don’t agree) Vous êtes d’accord ?
- Ah, ça oui.
(Oh yea!)
- C’est sûr!
(That’s for sure!)
- C’est certain!
(That’s certain!)
- Absolument!
(Absolutely!)
- Ça c’est vrai.
(That’s true!)
- Sans aucun doute!
(Without any doubt!)
- Vous avez raison!
(You’re right!)
3.5 When You Disagree Je ne suis pas d’accord!
(I don’t agree!)
Ce n’est pas vrai!
(It’s not true!)
Absolument pas!
(Absolutely not!)
Pas du tout!
(Not at all!)
Vous vous moquez de moi!
(You’re kidding me!)
Tu plaisantes!
(You’re joking!)
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Write in French: a) I am happy today b) He is angry c) It is super!
d) I dislike your car 123CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit covers degrees of like or dislike for persons or objects and how to express the difference.
In the dialogue, two friends discuss their feelings about a new car.
They also discuss things they like doing.
5.0 SUMMARY From this unit, you should have learnt to say how much you like something or someone ; and how to express agreement (or disagreement) with someone’s idea.
You have also learnt to describe persons (pleasant, nice, kind, etc) and objects (cute, great, etc).Words and expressions for friendship, love or like have all been learnt in unit and this should have further ameliorated you communicative competence.
ANSWERS TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES a) Je suis content aujord’ui.. b) Il est mecontent.
c) C’est super!
d) Je n’aime pas ta voiture.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Say and write in French : 1.
I’m crazy for her.
2.
Give me a call!
3.
You’re joking!
4.
She’s beautiful and very kind.
5.
(of food) It looks good!
6.
A new car !
wonderful!
124CFR 011 AURAL AND ORAL EXPRESSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berger D. and Mérieux, R. 1994 Cadences 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Capelle, Guy et Grellet, Françoise 1982.
C’est Facile à Dire, Paris: Hatier.
Chamberlain, Alan and Steele, Ross 1991.
Guide Pratique de la Communication, Paris: Didier.
Courtillon, J. and De Salins, G.D. 1995.
Libre Echange 1, Paris: Les Editions Didier.
Girardet, Jacky et Cridlig, Jean-Marie 1996.
Panorama, Paris: Clé International.
Lazar, Liliane 1946.
Conversational French, New York: Crown Publishers.
125
