 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: CTH 053 COURSE TITLE: GREEK GRAMMAR  COURSE GUIDE CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR Course Team Dr. Olubiyi Adeniyi Adewale (Course Developer/ Writer /Programme Leader) – NOUN Dr. A. O. Dairo (Course Editor) - Olabisi Onabanjo University, Ago-Iwoye Dr. Jacob A. Owolabi (Course Coordinator) – NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 Revised 2013 ISBN: 978-058-618-0 All Rights Reserved Printed by ii CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………………… iv What you will Learn in this Course ………………………… iv Course Aims ……………………………………………….. iv Course Objectives………………………………………….. v Working through this Course ……………………………….
v Course Materials …………………………………………… vi Study Units ………………………………………………… vi Textbooks and References ………………………………… vii Assignment File …………………………………………… viii Presentation Schedule ……………………………………… viii Assessment ………………………………………………….
viii Tutor-Marked Assignment ………………………………… viii Final Examination and Grading …………………………… ix Course Marking Scheme ………………………………….. ix Course Overview ………………………………………….. ix How to Get the Best from this Course …………………..… x Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials ………………………….. xi Summary ………………………………………………….. xii iii CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION CTH 053: Greek Grammar is a one-semester 3-credit unit course.
The course is available toward the award of first degree in Christian Theology.
The course material can also be useful for students in other levels of Christian Theology.
Besides, those who wish to broaden their knowledge on religious ideas, especially the role on biblical languages in the understanding of the New Testament can find this course material beneficial.
This course is made up of 22 units.
It will begin from the development of Greek as the lingua franca of the Mediterranean world, to the alphabets and the simple grammar to the level of the inception of translation.
It will highlight the different nuances of the verbs, the nouns and the various moods in the Greek language.
It will also focus on the significance of the moods in translations.
The Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through the materials.
It also emphasizes the need for Tutor – Marked Assignments (TMAs).
Detailed information on TMAs is found in a separate file, which will be sent to you later.
There are periodic tutorial classes that are linked to this course.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of CTH 053 is to help you develop a systematic growth in the use of biblical Greek so that you can get to the level where you can access the original language and do your translation/interpretation without recourse to any existing translation of the New Testament.
This will help you in your personal Bible study, sermon preparation and the development of study guide for use in the Church.
COURSE AIMS The aim of this course is to help you discover the importance of language in the understanding of the New Testament literature since the New Testament was originally written in the Koine Greek.
This will be achieved by: • Introducing you to the history and development of Koine Greek • Learning the Greek alphabets, pronunciations and clusters • Giving you the distinctive traits of Greek verbs in terms of tense, mood, number, person and the voice (active or passive) iv CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE • Giving you the distinctive traits of Greek nouns in terms of number, person and gender.
• Giving you tips of translation process so that you can begin to translate from small units of sentences.
• Giving you various Greek vocabularies that occur commonly in the Bible and the various shades of meaning they possess.
• Introducing you to biblical exegesis through translation and interpretation of actual Bible texts COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set out above, there are set overall objectives.
Besides, each unit has its specific objectives.
The unit objectives would be included in the beginning of each unit.
You should read them before you start working through the unit.
It is advisable that you refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
At the end of every unit, you should also revise the unit objectives.
In this way you can be sure that you have done all you are expected to do in the unit.
Listed below are the broader objectives of this course.
It is expected that by meeting these objectives, the overall aims of the course must have been achieved.
At the end of this course, you should be able to: • Discuss the development of Koine Greek as the lingua franca of Palestine.
• List and name all Greek alphabets • Parse any given Greek verb.
• Decline any given Greek noun.
• Explain the differences between the active and the passive voice in Greek.
• Explain the Middle voice in the Greek language.
• Explain the use of the personal pronoun in the Greek language.
Explain the differences between aspect and tense in English and • Greek languages.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read the recommended books and the other materials provided by the National Open University (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at points during the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course there is a final examination.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course and what you have to do.
v CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments file 5.
Presentation schedule You must obtain these materials.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text materials.
STUDY UNITS There are twenty-two study units in this course.
They are listed as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 General Introduction to the Study of New Testament Greek Unit 2 The Alphabets and Preliminary Matters Unit 3 The Syllables and Accents Unit 4 Verbs: Present Active Indicative Unit 5 Nouns of the Second Declension Unit 6 Nouns of the First Declension Unit 7 The Adjectives of the First and Second Declension Module 2 Unit 1 Prepositions Unit 2 Present Passive Indicative Unit 3 Present Middle Indicative Unit 4 Personal Pronouns Unit 5 Demonstrative Pronouns Unit 6 Deponent Verbs and Present Infinitives Unit 7 Imperfect Active Indicative Module 3 Unit 1 Imperfect Middle and Passive Indicative Unit 2 Future Active and Middle Indicative Unit 3 First Aorist Active and Middle Indicative Unit 4 Second Aorist Active and Middle Indicative Unit 5 Aorist Passive Indicative and Future Passive Indicative vi CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE Unit 6 Third Declension: Liquid, Mute and Syncopated Stems Unit 7 Third Declension: Vowel Stem Nouns Unit 8 Third Declension: Neuter Nouns Each unit contains a number of self-tests.
In general, these self-tests question you on the material you have just covered or require you to apply the material in some ways, and thereby, help you to gauge your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the material.
Together with your tutor marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCES These textbooks are recommended for your study in this course: Adewale, ‘Biyi and E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Pulishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, Williams D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
Books are however very scarce in the area of languages however some websites can give you assistance in seeing what the original manuscripts look like and not a full study.
For these sites see the following: www.bible.org www.religion-online.org www.biblestudies.org ASSIGNMENT FILE In this file you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count toward the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further vii CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE information on assignment will be found in the assignment file itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The “presentation schedule” included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of your tutor marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignment as and when due.
ASSESSMENT There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
First are the tutor marked assignments; second, there is a written examination.
While working on your assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT There are fifteen tutor assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The best three (that is, the three with the highest grades of fifteen assignments) will be counted.
The total mark of the best three will be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignments for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The examination will consist of questions you will come across in tutor marked assignments.
You are therefore advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
viii CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE COURSE MARKING SCHEME The table below gives a break down of the course mark: Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignments 1-15 Three assignments, best three marks of the assignments counts for 30% of course marks.
Final examination The final examination counts for 70% of overall marks.
Total 100% of course marks COURSE OVERVIEW This table brings together the units, the number of works you should take to complete.
Unit Title of Work Week’s Assessment (End Activity of Unit) Course Guide Module 1 1 General Introduction to the 1 Assignment 1 Study of New Testament Greek 2 The Alphabets and Preliminary 2 Assignment 2 Matters 3 The Syllables and Accents 3 Assignment 4 4 Verbs: Present Active 4 Assignment 4 Indicative 5 Nouns of the Second 5 Assignments 5 Declension 6 Nouns of the First Declension 6 Assignment 6 7 The Adjectives of the First and 7 Assignment 7 Second Declension Module 2 1 Prepositions 8 Assignment 8 2 Present Passive Indicative 9 Assignment 9 3 Present Middle Indicative 10 Assignment 10 4 Personal Pronouns 11 Assignment 11 5 Demonstrative Pronouns 12 Assignment 12 6 Deponent Verbs and Present 13 Assignment 13 Infinitives 7 Imperfect Active Indicative 14 Assignment 14 ix CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE Table 2: Course Overview Module 3 1 Imperfect Middle and Passive Indicative 15 Assignment 15 2 Future Active and Middle Indicative 16 Assignment 16 3 First Aorist Active and Middle Indicative 17 Assignment 17 4 Second Aorist Active and Middle Indicative 18 Assignment 18 Aorist Passive Indicative and Future Passive 19 Assignment Indicative 19 Third Declension: Liquid, Mute and 20 Assignment Syncopated Stems 20 Third Declension: Vowel Stem Nouns 21 Assignment 21 5 Third Declension: Neuter Nouns 22 Assignment 22 Revision 16 Revision 17 Examination 18 HOW TO GET THE BEST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning the study units replace the university Lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of the distance learning system.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Following this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives enable you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
The objectives should guide your study.
After studying the units must cross check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you adhere strictly to this art of checking whether the objective is achieved or not, you will definitely improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a “Reading” section.
Whenever you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
x CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE 1.
Read through this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Plan your study schedule.
You should refer to the ‘course overview’ for more details.
Find out the time you are expected to spend on each unit and when and how to turn in your assignments.
3.
Stick to your study schedule.
Don’t allow anything to get you distracted from your study schedule.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and objectives for the unit.
5.
Gather the study material you need.
All you need or a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
The study unit you are working on and one of your set books should be on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit has been arranged in a sequential order.
Instructions would be given on where to read from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm you have achieved them.
8.
Don’t proceed to the next unit, until you are sure you have achieved the objectives of the unit you are working on.
9.
Don’t wait until your assignment is returned before working on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
10.
When you complete the last unit, you can be preparing for exams.
Be sure that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
FACILITATORS/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
The dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor will be communicated to you.
This will be done as you are allocated to a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and xi CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact our tutor by telephone, e-mail or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be the circumstances in which you will find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, and • • You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to interact with your tutor by asking questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To maximize the benefits of the course tutorials, it is advisable that you prepare a question list before attending them.
When you participate in the discussions your intellectually life will be deeply enriched.
SUMMARY CTH 053 exposes you to the background history and development of Koine Greek as the lingua franca of the Palestinian world.
It will also lead you to a working knowledge of the language and the ability to consult the original language of the Bible thereby enriching your knowledge of the Bible.
On successful completion of this course, you will be able to answer questions such as: 1.
What is Koine Greek?
2.
How do you pronounce a Greek letter and word?
3.
What are the differences between the Greek noun and the English noun?
4.
What are the differences between the Greek verb and the English verb?
5.
What is the significance of the middle voice in Greek language?
6.
How would you translate a word in the middle voice?
7.
What are the functions of the article in the Greek language?
8.
What is a dieresis?
9.
What do you understand by the indicative mood?
10.
What to you identify when parsing a verb?
xii CTH 053 COURSE GUIDE 11.
What to you identify when declining a noun?
The questions you will able to answer should not be limited to the ones above.
Greek Grammar is a course you will find interesting and stimulating.
You also have to note that this is a foundational course and is a prerequisite for CTH 054 – Greek Syntax.
If you do not understand this course, it would be difficult for you to cope with CTH 054. xiii  MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ……………………………………………….
1 Unit 1 General Introduction to the Study of New Testament Greek …………………………… 1 Unit 2 The Alphabets and Preliminary Matters ….. 6 Unit 3 The Syllables and Accents………………… 12 Unit 4 Verbs: Present Active Indicative………….. 17 Unit 5 Nouns of the Second Declension………….
22 Unit 6 Nouns of the First Declension…………….. 30 Unit 7 The Adjectives of the First and Second Declension………………………………….
37 Module 2 ……………………………………………… 42 Unit 1 Prepositions………………………………… 42 Unit 2 Present Passive Indicative………………….
47 Unit 3 Present Middle Indicative………………….. 51 Unit 4 Personal Pronouns………………………….. 56 Unit 5 Demonstrative Pronouns…………………… 63 Unit 6 Deponent Verbs and Present Infinitives…… 68 Unit 7 Imperfect Active Indicative………………… 74 Module 3 ……………………………………………….
80 Unit 1 Imperfect Middle and Passive Indicative….. 80 Unit 2 Future Active and Middle Indicative……….
86 Unit 3 First Aorist Active and Middle Indicative….
92 Unit 4 Second Aorist Active and Middle Indicative 98 Unit 5 Aorist Passive Indicative and Future Passive Indicative…………………………………….
103 Unit 6 Third Declension: Liquid, Mute and Syncopated Stems…………………………… 109 Unit 7 Third Declension: Vowel Stem Nouns……… 116 Unit 8 Third Declension: Neuter Nouns…………….
121 CTH 053 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 Unit 1 General Introduction to the Study of New Testament Greek Unit 2 The Alphabets and Preliminary Matters Unit 3 The Syllables and Accents Unit 4 Verbs: Present Active Indicative Unit 5 Nouns of the Second Declension Unit 6 Nouns of the First Declension Unit 7 The Adjectives of the First and Second Declension UNIT 1 GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Historical Background to the Greek Language 3.2 The Importance of Koine Greek to the New Testament 3.3 The Five Keys to Mastering Greek 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to the study of the Greek language.
In this unit you will be introduced to the history of the Greek language which will tell you how the Greek became the language of the New Testament.
This is interesting to know because the language of the Old Testament was the Hebrew language.
This would be learnt in the third year of your course because it is a little bit more complex than the Greek language.
You will also in this unit be introduced to some study methods that are particularly suited to the study of this language.
While welcoming you to this course, I promise you a difficult but an exciting time in the course of studying this language.
1 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • discuss the development of the Koine Greek • explain the role of Alexander the Great in the development of the Greek language • identify the three major dialects of the Greek language • explain the importance of Greek language to theology students • identify the five keys to observe in mastering the Greek New Testament.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Historical Background to the Greek Language The Greek language has a very long and interesting history covering the 13th Century BC to the present day.
There are various types of the Greek language.
There is the Linear B, which is the earliest from of the language and which flourished in the 13th Century BC; the classical Greek flourished between the 8th to the 4th Century and was used by Homer and Plato.
Classical Greek existed in three major dialects called, the Doric, the Aeolic and the Ionic.
Attic Greek was a branch of the Ionic Greek.
When King Philip of Macedon conquered Athens in the 4th Century BC, he gave his son Alexander the Great, over to Aristotle, one of greatest Greek philosophers and one of the pillars of Western philosophy to be tutored.
It was Aristotle that evoked in Alexander the love of Greek language and culture.
By the time Alexander became the king of Macedon and started his military campaign, he had already made up his mind to impose the Greek language and culture upon the world.
However, because Alexander spoke the Attic Greek, it was this dialect that he spread all over.
This was the beginning of Hellenistic age.
As the Greek language spread across the world and met with other languages, what is known as linguistic interference, took place.
The interplay between the Greek dialects and the other languages of the area produced what today is called the Koine Greek.
Koine (koinh) actually is a Greek word meaning ‘common’ and it is actually the form of Greek spoken by the common people or everyday people.
2 CTH 053 MODULE 1 3.2 The Importance of Koine Greek to the New Testament One can boldly say that the spread of the Greek language and the formation of the Koine Greek were part of the events God waited for before the coming of Christ.
Paul has rightly said in Galatians 4:4 that “in the fullness of time God sent his Son”.
The use of Koine Greek made the spread of the Gospel very easy.
Apart from this, it is important to note that God used the common language to communicate the gospel and this shows that the gospel belongs to all the people not just to a few elite.
Though many students (including the students of theological schools who really need the language more) often see Greek as an unnecessary enterprise and consequently it becomes a burden on them.
The truth however is that the knowledge of Greek is an indispensable tool in the bid to understand and communicate the Word of God to others.
Koine Greek is the key that will unlock the treasures of God in elucidating sermons, teachings and Bible studies.
3.3 The Five Keys to Mastering Greek Years of teaching Greek and the experience shared by other teachers of Greek has revealed that almost 90% of the students, if not more, are Greek-phobic.
The bid to reduce this phobia of Greek in the students pivoted the search for these five keys that can help them to master the language.
1.
Memorization As it is true of other languages, anyone wishing to study Greek must be ready to memorize lots of materials.
There is the need to memorize the vocabularies and the word endings.
The student will need to devise memorization methods that would be natural to him.
It is possible to use the Secretary’s Notebook to write the words to memorize and study it always.
It is also possible to use flash cards or mnemonics to aid memorization.
2.
Doing Practice Exercises Some students have a way of avoiding doing exercises, that is, the self- assessment exercises at the end of each sub-unit by copying their friends’ works.
Such an attitude will forever make such students very poor in Greek.
Try to do the exercises at then end of the chapters by yourself and if possible, go an extra mile by giving yourself exercises beyond the ones given either by the teacher or in the text.
3 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.
Devoting Time No one will ever master Greek by studying it as a ‘crash programme’.
For anyone to master Greek, the person has to devote time for it.
Devote a specific period of time daily to study Greek.
It must become a routine that must be followed religiously.
4.
Using a Study Partner It is very rare for a man to study solely, especially where it concerns language.
It is important for students of Greek to form study groups.
Each student should also strive to have a study partner so that they can test, quiz, encourage and motivate one another.
5.
Using a Consistent Study Method Where it is possible, always read a chapter ahead of your lecturer so as to familiarize yourself with the new topic to be taught in class.
After such a topic has been taught, ensure that you revise the topic again the same day it is taught.
Using this method will make you go through the same material at least thrice in two days.
The basic truth is that discipline is the bottom line in studying and understanding Greek.
There is no magical formula to it.
If you can discipline yourself and follow the tedious steps enumerated above, you will definitely excel in the study of Greek.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been exposed to the role of Alexander the Great in the development and the spread of Greek language all over the Mediterranean world.
You are also aware by now that there are three major dialects of the Greek language and that the development of the Koine Greek in which the New Testament was written came as a result of the interplay between Greek and other local languages.
Koine Greek is also the Greek of the common man of the time.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • Classical Greek is the mother of Doric, Aeolic and Ionic dialects which are the three major dialects of the Greek language.
• Attic Greek was a branch of the Ionic Greek.
• It was the Attic Greek that became predominant because it was the dialect used by Alexander the Great.
4 CTH 053 MODULE 1 • The interplay between the Greek dialects and other local languages gave rise to the Koine Greek.
• Greek language made the spread of the gospel very easy.
• It shows that God is interested in the common man as He chose the common language to communicate the gospel.
• There are five keys to help in mastering the Greek language: memorization, doing the self-assessment exercises, devoting more time, using a study partner and using a consistent study method.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss the role of the Greek language in the formation and spread of the New Testament.
ii.
What are the methods that can make you master the Greek language?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
5 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 2 THE ALPHABETS AND PRELIMINARY MATTERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Greek Alphabets 3.2 Gamma 3.3 The Vowels 3.4 The Diphthongs 3.5 The Iota-Subscript 3.6 The Breathing Marks 3.7 The Accents 3.8 The Punctuation Marks 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied the development of the Koine Greek from one of the three major dialects of the language.
You have also studied how to master the language.
In this unit, you will be introduced to the Greek alphabets and other preliminary issues that are important to your understanding of the language.
Let me tell you this: this unit is very vital to your mastering this course.
In fact, I am of the opinion that you should not go to the next unit unless you have absolutely mastered this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • read the Greek alphabets from memory • write all the Greek alphabets • explain the formation of the iota subscript • identify the smooth and the rough breathing marks • differentiate between the smooth and the rough breathing marks • explain the importance of accents in the Greek language • identify all the punctuation marks of the Greek language.
6 CTH 053 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Greek Alphabets The following table shows the Greek alphabets indicating their names, pronunciations and how they are written in both the small and capital letters.
There are twenty-four letters in all.
Capital Small Letters Letters Name Pronunciation A a Alpha long a as in alaafia, magani, father, short a as in baba, bat B b Beta b as in ball, baale, G g Gamma g as in igo, gift, D d Delta d as in dada, debt E e Epsilon e as in eko, met, Z z Zeta z as in adz H h Eta e as in obey, ile Q q Theta th as in theme, I i Iota long i as in magazine short i as in pit K k Kappa k as in kin, kakaki L l Lambda l as in long, M m Mu m as in man, musa, N n Nu n as in no, ina, nunu C c Xi x as in relax O o Omicron o as in omelet, omo, P p Pi p as in pay, pade, R r Rho r as in ring, rara, S s v Sigma s as in sing, sisi T t Tau t as in tale, tata U u Upsilon u as in unity, ibusun F f Phi ph as in phone, X x Chi ch as in chemical, Y y Psi ps as in taps W w Omega Long o as in tone, ole Note that sigma has two forms: v is used in the final position, while s is used either at the beginning of a word or in the midst of the word.
7 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.2 Gamma Gamma has some peculiar rule when it is to be pronounced in association with some other letters.
A gamma before another gamma would be pronounced as an ‘n’.
This is why a1ggelov would be transcribed as ‘angel’.
The same is true of gamma before k x and c though such occurrences are rare.
3.3 The Vowels The Greek vowels are a, e, h, o, i, u and w. Of these vowels, e and o are always short; h and w are always long; a, i, and u can either be long or short.
The student can by observation determine the tone quality of these vowels that can either be long or short.
Knowing the tonal quality of these vowels is important as it has a role to play in the placement of accents as would be studied later.
3.4 The Diphthongs As in English language, two vowels can also unite in a syllable to form a single sound.
This is called a diphthong.
The following are the Greek diphthongs: ai pronounced like ai in aisle ei pronounced like ei in height oi pronounced like oi in oil au pronounced like au in kraut eu pronounced like eu in feud ou pronounced like ou in group ui pronounced like wee All diphthongs are long in tone except ai and oi, when they are final in a word.
They are short for the purpose of accenting.
Thus in a1nqrwpoi, oi is short because it is the final diphthong but in a0nqrw&poiv it is long because it is followed by another letter.
3.5 The Iota-Subscript The iota-subscripts have no parallel in English.
During the development of the language there are times when i followed long a, h, or w. though it became mute, it is a persistent letter that refused to be lost though it was mot pronounced.
In such cases it dropped back under the long letters and became a subscript (a ||, h, w |).
8 CTH 053 MODULE 1 3.6 Breathing Marks Every Greek word that begins with a vowel or a diphthong or rho (r) must carry a breathing mark.
The breathing mark is placed over the rho or the single vowel which opens the word or on the second vowel of the diphthong as in the following examples: r(h=ma, a1nqrwpoi and a)uto&v.
If the letter that is to carry the breathing mark happens to be in the capital, the breathing mark will have to come before the letter as in )Ihsouv.
There are two types of breathing marks.
There is the smooth breathing mark which is indicated by the mark ( ))); and the rough breathing mark that is indicated by the mark ( ().
The rough breathing mark calls for an additional ‘h’ sound to begin the word.
This is why r(h=ma is transliterated as ‘rhema’.
3.7 Accent Marks There are three accent marks in the Greek language.
Like the breathing marks, the accents are placed over the vowels or the second vowel of a diphthong.
There are three types of accents in the Greek language.
These are the acute accent ( &)which indicates a rising inflection of voice; the grave accent ( _ ) which indicates a falling inflection and the circumflex ( ~)which is a combination of both the rising and the falling inflection.
All Greek words have an accent mark except proclitics and enclitics.
When a breathing mark and an accent stand on the same syllable or vowel, the breathing mark stand in front of the accent if it is acute as in oi@kou ; if on the other hand it is the circumflex, the accent stands under it as in oi}kov.
The rules guiding the accent would be discussed later.
3.8 Punctuation Marks There are four punctuation marks in Greek.
Two of them correspond with that of the English language and these are the comma (,) and the period or full stop (.).
The other two though are written like English punctuation marks are different in their function.
The Greek colon (:) functions like the English colon or semi-colon.
The question mark in Greek is written like the English semi-colon (;).
9 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Try writing all the Greek alphabets both in capital and small letters and continue memorizing them until you can identify all the letters as you see them.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been exposed to all the alphabets of the Greek language indicating also the consonants and the vowels.
You have also been shown the diphthongs and how to place accents and breathing marks on the diphthongs that are the combination of two vowel sounds to form one sound.
The other issues talked about are: the iota-subscript, the breathing marks, the three accents: grave, acute and the circumflex as well as the punctuation marks that consists of the comma, the period or full-stop as well as colon and semi-colon.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • The Greek alphabet consists of twenty-four letters that are made up seventeen consonants and seven vowels.
• A diphthong occurs when two vowel sounds combine to become one single sound.
• When two gamma follow one another, the first one is pronounced as ‘n’.
• There are two breathing marks: the smooth and the rough.
• There are three accents: the grave, the acute and the circumflex.
• All Greek words have an accent except the proclitics and the enclitics.
• There are four punctuation marks: the comma, the full-stop, the colon and the semi-colon.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write short notes on the following: i. Diphthongs ii.
Breathing Marks iii.
Accents iv.
Punctuation marks v. The Gamma nasal sound 10 CTH 053 MODULE 1 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R.. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
CAUTION: DO NOT BY ANY MEANS GO FORWARD IN THE STUDY OF THIS COURSE WITHOUT HAVING MASTERED THE ALPHABETS BOTH IN READING AND WRITING.
11 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 3 THE SYLLABLES AND THE ACCENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Syllables 3.3 The Accents 3.3.1 Rules Guiding the Acute Accent 3.3.2 Rules Guiding the Circumflex Accent 3.3.3 Rules Guiding the Grave Accent 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied the Greek alphabets and other preliminary issues that are fundamental to the understanding of the Greek language.
It is expected that before coming to this unit you have mastered the alphabets both in reading and writing.
If you have not mastered these alphabets, kindly go back and master these alphabets.
It is dangerous if you continue without having mastered the alphabets.
It is like building a house on a weak foundation.
As Christ has warned us, such a house will not stand the test of time.
If you however have mastered the alphabets, then you can go forward.
In this unit, you will learn about syllabification and the importance of the syllables to the placement of the accent in the Greek language.
After this, you will also learn the rules guiding the placement of each accent.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the number of syllables in a given Greek word • identify the three syllables that are important to the placement of accent • itemize the rules guiding the placement of the accents • place accents of some Greek words in consonance with the rules.
12 CTH 053 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study a1gw I lead a0kou&w I hear ble&pw I see e1xw I have lu&w I loose, destroy a1ggelov o( messenger a)delfo&v o( brother dou~lov o( slave, servant karpo&v o( fruit lo&gov o( word Note: The words ending with o (are masculine nouns.
The letter should be learnt as part of the vocabulary.
Pronouncing these words would be made easier by first transliterating the words.
For example, a1gw would be transliterated as ago.
Caution has to be taken however that you are not hooked on to transliteration that you will never be able to sight read from the Greek directly.
3.2 The Syllables The study of the accenting rule of the Greek would be made easier if the rules of syllables are first learnt.
This is because the placement of accents in the Greek is on the syllables.
The following are the rules guiding the determination of syllables in the Greek language.
a.
A Greek word has as many syllables as it has vowels or diphthongs.
For example, since the word a1gw has two vowels, it is made up of two syllables.
b.
A syllable is long if it has a long vowel or a diphthong.
It is also short if it has a short vowel.
For example, in the word ble&pw, ble& is a short syllable while pw is a long syllable.
In the word dou~lov, dou~ is a long syllable because it has a diphthong.
The only exception to the diphthong is what has been indicated earlier that ai and oi are short when they occur in the final syllable.
Thus in the word a1nqrwpoi, poi is a short syllable.
c. No matter the number of syllables a word has, only the last three syllables are important as far as accenting is concerned.
These are the ultima (the last syllable); the penult (the next to the last syllable) and the ante-penult (the third to the last syllable).
For example, in the word a0polamba&nomen, there are six syllables but only the last three are important to accenting.
The last three for the purpose of identification are men (the ultima); no (the penult) and ba& (the ante-penult).
13 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR The next issue to tackle is how one demarcates the syllables correctly.
The following rules can therefore be of help.
a.
There is one vowel or diphthong per syllable.
b.
A single consonant by itself goes with the following vowel as in e0qeasa&meqa, which will be separated as e0 qe a sa &me qa.
If however the consonant is the final letter in the word, it will go with the preceding vowel as in e0wra&kamen, which will be separated as e 0w ra &ka men.
Note that the consonant nu (n) goes along with mh.
c. Two consecutive vowels which do not form a diphthong are divided as in e0wra&kamen above.
d. A consonant cluster that does not begin a word is divided and the first consonant goes with the preceding vowel as in a0rxh~v, which will be divided as a0r xh~v.
e. If a consonant cluster begins a word, it goes with the following vowel as in grafh& which will be divided as gra fh&.
f. Double consonants are divided as in a1ggelov which will be divided as a1g ge lov.
g. Any consonant plus m or n goes with the following vowel as in pneu~ma which will be divided as pneu~ ma.
h. Compounds words would be divided where they have been joined as in a0nti xristo&v.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Take each of the words given in the vocabulary below and break them down into syllables.
After this, name each of the syllables appropriately.
3.3 The Accents 3.3.1 Rules Guiding the Acute Accent The acute accent can be placed on any of the three syllables, but the following rules have to be observed in placing the accent.
14 CTH 053 MODULE 1 1.
The acute accent can stand on either short or long syllables as in lo&gov and oi1koiv.
2.
The acute accent can stand on any of the last three syllables as in a1ggelov, lo&gov, and karpo&v.
3.
The acute accent cannot stand on the antepenult when the ultima is long.
For example, while a1ggelov is because it has a short ultima, when the ultima is long, it will become a0gge&lou.
4.
The acute accent cannot stand on along penult before a short ultima.
In such cases, the acute may change to a circumflex.
For example, while dou&lou is correct because the ultima is long, it will change to dou~lov for a short ultima.
3.3.2 Rules Guiding the Circumflex Accent The circumflex can be placed only on two syllables and the following are the rules.
1.
The circumflex can stand only on long syllables as in dou~lov.
2.
It can stand either on the last two syllables- the penult or ultima as in dou~lov and karpou~.
3.
The circumflex cannot stand on the penult if the ultima is long.
4.
It can stand on the penult if the ultima is short.
3.3.3 Rules Guiding the Grave Accent The grave accent can be placed only on one syllable.
The acute accent on the ultima changes to the grave accent when followed by words without any accent in between.
For example a0delfo_v dou&lou: It has to be noted that the primary word has to be learnt with its accent and as the word changes form, the rules has to be applied for the proper placement of the accent.
For example, when using the noun, throughout the declension the accent remains on the same syllable as in the nominative singular as nearly as the general rules permit.
For the verbs the accent stands as far from the ultima as the rules permit.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt that there are as many syllables as the number of vowels in a Greek word.
You have also learnt that the last three syllables called the ultima, the penult and the antepenult are the 15 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR ones that are important for the purpose of accenting.
No matter the number of syllables in a Greek word, the last three are the ones that the rules of accenting affect.
You have also learnt the rules guiding the placement of the grave, the acute and the circumflex accents.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major things you have learnt in this unit: • The syllables that are important for the purpose of accent are the ultima, the penult and the antepenult.
• The acute accent can be placed on any of the last three syllables.
The acute accent can stand on either the long or short syllable.
• • The circumflex can stand only on the long syllable.
• The circumflex can stand only on either the penult or ultima.
• The grave accent can stand only on the ultima.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the rules guiding the placement of the acute accent.
ii.
Explain the rules guiding the placement of the circumflex accent.
iii.
Explain the rules guiding the placement of the grave accent.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R.. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
16 CTH 053 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 VERBS: PRESENT ACTIVE INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Basic Information about the Verb 3.3 Parsing a Verb 3.4 The Present Indicative Form 3.5 Constructing Questions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied the syllables and the three important syllables for the purposes of accenting in the Greek language.
You have also learnt the rules guiding the placement of each of the three accents over the words.
In this unit, you will be exposed to the verbs through a study of the present active indicative form of the verb.
The Greek word luw would be used as the example.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • read and interpret the Greek words studied so far • identify all the elements of the verb • parse a verb • write any verb in all the forms of the present active indicative • use the present active indicative to construct questions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study ginw&skw I know gra&fw I write dida&skw I teach e0gei&rw I raise up lamba&vw I take le&gw I say, speak pe&mpw I send fe&rw I bear, bring 17 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.2 Basic Information about the Verb Like any other language, the Greek verb carries the tense, voice, mood, the person and the number.
The Tense This quality of the verb has to do with the action.
The tense carries two aspects of the verb and these are the time of the action and the kind of the action.
As for time, there are three possibilities: the past, the present and the future.
Also as for kind, there are two kinds: the linear (this is also called the progressive or continuous action) and the punctiliar (this is action that is seen as a single perspective).
The present tense indicates a progressive action at the present time and so would be better translated in that sense.
For example, the word lu&w would be “I am destroying”.
The Voice This is the element of the verb which indicates the relationship between the subject and the action.
The active voice indicates that the subject is acting as in “he killed the lion;” while the passive indicates that the subject receives the action or is being acted upon as in the statement “he was killed by the lion”.
The Greek language however has another voice known as the middle voice which will be studied later.
The Mood Mood is the element of a verb that indicates the relation of the action to reality.
In order words, the mood tells whether the action is really taking place or has a potential of taking place.
All the moods would be studied later, but suffice it to say that the indicative mood is the mood which confirms the reality of the action from the point of view of the speaker.
The Person This is the element of the verb which indicates the person talking.
There are three possibilities: the first person is the subject that is speaking, the second person is the one being spoken to and the third person is the one being spoken about.
The Number This is the element of the verb that indicates whether the subject is singular or plural.
For example, I am ‘destroying’ is singular and ‘we are destroying’ is plural.
18 CTH 053 MODULE 1 3.3 Parsing a Verb This is the technical term used when the student is required to tell the complete story of a verb in order to translate the verb.
In doing so, all the elements mentioned above would be identified in the given verb.
For example, to parse lu&iev, one will say: present active indicative, second person singular from lu&w which means “I am destroying” hence lu&iev means “you (s) are destroying”.
3.4 The Present Active Indicative Form Because of the simplicity of the verb lu&w, and the fact that it can used as an example for all the various voices, tenses and the moods of the Greek verb, it will be used as the guinea-pig for all the examples except where impossible.
The present active indicative form of lu&w is: lu&w I loose or I am loosing (destroy) lu&eiv You (s) loose or you (s) are loosing lu&ei he (she, it) loose or he (she, it) is loosing lu&omen We loose or we are loosing lu&ete You (p) loose or you (p) are loosing lu&ousi(n) They loose or they are loosing Notes: 1.
There is no need for a subject in the use of a Greek sentence.
This is because the inflected endings of the Greek verbs ensure that the person pronouns go along with the verb as seen in the paradigm above.
2.
The stem of the verb is that part that remains unchanged throughout the process of inflection.
The present stem of a word can be obtained by removing the w of the first person singular, which is the lexical form of the verb.
In the above example, lu& is the stem.
3.
It is better for the students to memorize the endings of the various inflections as they are above as any verb of the present active stem would be treated in the same way.
This is to say that the following endings are to be memorized: w, eiv, ei, omen, ete and ousi(n).
4.
Note that the second person singular and the second person plural are translated the same way.
So, to make distinctions, always put 19 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR the sign of either singular or plural as done in the paradigm above.
5.
Note that the third person plural has a n in the bracket.
This is called movable nu because it may or may not be used.
The students are however advised to learn it as part of the spelling so that it will not be strange to him when it occurs.
3.5 Constructing Questions In the Greek language, there is no difference in the construction of a declarative sentence and an interrogative sentence.
The question mark is just placed at the end of the sentence to make it become a question.
For example, lu&omen means ‘we loose’ and lu&ome; becomes ‘are we loosing?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to other Greek vocabularies that you are expected to learn along the other given earlier.
You are also given the present active indicative form using lu&w as a paradigm.
You are also taught that construction a question requires just the addition of a question mark at the end of a present active sentence.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The tense carries the time and the kind of action.
• There are three possibilities of tense: present, past and future.
• Present tense indicates a progressive action at the present time.
• Voice indicates the relationship subject and action; it could be active or passive.
• Mood indicates the relation of action to reality.
• Person indicates who is talking: first, second or third.
• When parsing a verb, all the elements of the verb would be cited.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following to English a1gei, a1kouei, ble&pei, e1xei, lu&omen, ginw&skomen, gra&fomen, dida&skomen, e0gei&rousi le&gousin, fe&reiv, fe&rete, a1gomen, gra&fete, ginw&skei.
20 CTH 053 MODULE 1 ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek They see, he is leading, we take, you (p) hear, I destroy, we raise up, you (s) are writing, he knows, they send, we bring, he teaches, you (p) bring, you (p) are leading, he is hearing, they raise up, we are seeing.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
21 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 5 NOUNS: SECOND DECLENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Inflection 3.3 Review of Nouns and their Functions 3.4 Declension of Masculine Nouns of Second Declension 3.5 The Article 3.6 Parsing a Noun 3.7 Neuter Nouns of the Second Declension 3.8 Tips of Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied about the verbs and all the elements of the verb.
In this unit you will be exposed to nouns.
This is because after the verbs, the nouns are the next important constituent of the sentence because it is very active in all its functions.
You will be exposed to all the functions of the noun within the sentence.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify nouns of the second declension • parse any noun of the second declension • write out the various forms of the masculine noun of the second declension • write out the various forms of the neuter noun of the second declension • translate some Greek sentences.
22 CTH 053 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 VOCABULARY STUDY a1nqrwpov, o9, man a0po&stolov,o9 apostle a1rtov, o9 bread, loaf ga&mov, o9 marriage dw~ron, to& gift qa&natov, o9 death i9ero&n, to& temple li&qov, o9 stone no&mov, o9 law oi]kov, o9 house o1xlov, o9 crowd, multitude ui9o&v, o9 son kai& conj., and 3.2 Inflection Inflection is the word used to describe the changes in the form of a word as the functions it performs changes.
For example, let us use some pronouns: he refers to a male, but it becomes ‘her’ if it is to refer to a female.
Changes can also take place to distinguish the number of things or people involved.
For example a prince refers to one person and it becomes princes if they are more than one.
It has to be emphasized however that Greek is a highly inflected language when compared with the English language.
Almost every word in the Greek is altered depending upon its use in the sentence.
This would be observed later.
3.3 Review of Nouns and their Functions Before going on with the study of Greek nouns, it is better to have a review of the use of nouns in English because without this, some of the terminologies that would be used would be enigmatic.
This study would be done simultaneously with that of the Greek nouns.
It will be handled by going through the elements that make up the noun.
Functions of the Noun Case is the word used to refer to the various functions that nouns perform in the sentence.
Though the English has three cases, the Greek language has eight cases (it has to be noted that some scholars say there are five cases) and these are explained below.
The Noun as Subject This is when the noun functions as the topic or the subject of the sentence.
It is the case of designation.
For example, in the sentence, “Sade is coming to school today,” Sade is the subject and it is a noun.
In 23 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR the Greek language when the nouns functions as the subject, it is put into the nominative case.
The Noun as Direct Object This is when the noun receives the action of the verb in the sentence.
For example, in the sentence “the robbers injured Sade,” Sade is the direct object of the sentence.
In the Greek language, any noun that functions as the direct object is put in the accusative case.
It marks the limit or the end of an action.
The Noun as the Indirect Object When the noun functions as the indirect object, it gives an idea of the person or thing to whom and or for whom something is done.
For example, in the sentence “the conmen sold Sade some dummy,” Sade is the indirect object.
In the Greek language, the noun that functions as the indirect object would be in the dative case.
The dative case is the case of interest.
The Noun as the Owner of Something This is when the noun is used to show that someone or something is the owner of a particular thing.
For example, in the sentence “the robbers stole Sade’s textbook,” Sade is said to be the owner of the textbook.
Though in the English language, the possessive‘s’ is usually used to designate this usage, in the Greek language the genitive case is used.
The genitive case is the case of description.
It is used to attribute quality to the word it modifies.
The Noun as Subject Complement This is when a noun completes the thought of the subject.
It usually occurs when the noun follows the verb ‘to be’.
For example, in the sentence, “the class captain is Sade,” Sade is the subject complement of the subject.
In the Greek language, this function is also put in the nominative case.
This means when this happens, two nouns in the sentence would be in the nominative case.
The problem that will arise with such usage would be dealt with later on.
The Noun as the Person Addressed There are times when the person being addressed is called before the statement meant for them.
For example, in the sentence “Sade, where are you?” Sade is the person addressed.
In the Greek language, this usage is put in the vocative case.
24 CTH 053 MODULE 1 By now, we have exhausted all the cases of Greek that can parallel that of the English language.
There are three more cases in the Greek which can be used in another way in the English language.
The cases are the locative and the instrumental cases.
The locative case is used to describe the location or the position of things.
The instrumental case on the other hand is used to express the means by which something is done and.
These two cases are spelt as the dative case and this is why those who say the Greek has five cases insist.
They see the locative and the instrumental as other usages of the dative case.
The last case of the Greek language is the ablative case.
This case is used to express separation or a movement away from something.
For example, in the sentence “the man sends the servants away from the house,” the Greek would use the ablative to express the phrase “from the house.” The ablative case is spelt like the genitive and that is why it is seen as another function of the genitive.
Having exhausted all the cases of the Greek language, we can now move forward to study the Greek nouns now.
There are three forms of declension in the Greek language.
The first declension has an inflected system in which the a sound is predominant; the second declension is predominant with the o sound and the third declension has a system in which the consonant stem is predominant.
Since the largest number of nouns of the Greek is in the second declension and since it is easier to learn than the others, it is usually studied first.
3.4 Declension of Masculine Nouns of Second Declension To decline the masculine nouns of the second declension, the Greek word a1nqrwpov shall be used: Declension of a1nqrwpov with the definite article Cases Singular Form Meaning Plural Form Meaning Nominative o9 a1nqrwpov The man oi9 a1nqrwpoi The men Genitive tou~ Of the man tw~n a0nqrw&pwn Of the men a0nqrw&pou Ablative tou~ from the tw~n a0nqrw&pwn from the a0nqrw&pou man men Dative tw~| to the man toi~v to the men a0nqrw&pw| a0nqrw&poiv Locative tw|~ in the man toi~v in the men a0nqrw&pw| a0nqrw&poiv Instrumental tw|~ by the man toi~v by the men a0nqrw&pw| a0nqrw&poiv Accusative to_n a1nqrwpon The man tou_v The men a0nqrw&pouv Vocative a1nqrwpe man a1nqrwpoi men 25 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.5 The Article There is no indefinite article in the Greek language and so the absence of the definite article implies the indefinite article.
Hence, a1nqrwpov can mean either ‘a man’ or ‘man’.
The Greek article is usually used to point out a particular identity and this is called the articular use of a noun.
When no definite article is used, it is called the anarthrous use.
Note the declension of the articles of the masculine nouns of the second declension above.
3.6 Parsing the Noun To parse a noun, the four elements that are to examined are: declension, case, gender and number.
Declension This is to locate which form out of the three declensions a noun follows.
It is a matter of the inflected form and has no functional significance.
Case This is the function of the noun as it relates to the verb and the other parts of the sentence.
There are eight cases in the Greek language as discussed above.
Gender This indicates whether the noun is masculine, feminine or neuter.
The gender of the words can be learnt by observation and as part of the lexical study.
Number This indicates whether the noun is singular or plural.
3.7 Neuter Nouns of the Second Declension There is a slight difference between the declension of the masculine nouns and the neuter nouns of the second declension.
As would be seen in the paradigm above, the difference occurs only in the nominative singular and the nominative and accusative plural.
In declining the neuter noun, dw~ron shall be used: 26 CTH 053 MODULE 1 Declension of dw~ron with the definite article Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative to_ the gift ta_ dw~ra the gifts dw~ron Genitive tou~ of the gift tw~n dw&rwn Of the men dw&rou Ablative tou~ from the tw~n dw&rwn from the dw&rou gift men Dative tw|~ to the gift toi~v to the men dw&rw| dw&roiv Locative tw|~ in the gift toi~v in the men dw&rw | dw&roiv Instrumental tw|~ by the gift toi~v by the men dw&rw | dw&roiv Accusative to_ the gift ta_ dw~ra The men dw~ron Vocative dw~ron gift dw~ra men Note that the plural ending a of the second declension neuter nouns are always short.
3.8 Tips of Translation At this point, it is important to learn the tips that would be useful for translation.
The normal word order in the Greek is subject, verb, and object (and followed by others in any other).
It has to be noted however that the order in the sentence is varied many times for purposes of emphasis and euphony.
As a result, it is better to use the cases and word ending as a clue for translation.
The following rules can be followed: a.
Look for a noun in the nominative case.
If there is one, it is most likely to be the subject of the sentence, so let it come first in your translation.
b.
If there is no noun in the nominative case, look for the verb; the ending of the verb would indicate the subject.
c. If there is a noun in the nominative, follow its translation with the verb.
d. Look for a noun in the accusative case and translate after the verb since it is going to be the direct object.
e. Other words, if there are any, would follow at a logical order.
As an example, let us try to translate this sentence: oi9 a0delfoi_ a0kou&ousi tou_v lo&gouv tou~ a0gge&lou.
1.
The noun in the nominative case is oi9 a0delfoi and it is in the plural.
It would be translated: ‘the brothers’.
27 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 2.
The verb is a0kou&ousi.
Though it is in the third person plural, the subject would no longer be indicated because the subject has already taken care of it.
Hence we now have: ‘the brothers hear’.
3.
The noun in the accusative case is tou_v lo&gouv.
It is the direct object.
The sentence will now read: ‘the brothers hear the words’.
4.
The last word is tou~ a0gge&lou and it is in the genitive case.
The whole sentence will now read: ‘the brothers hear the words of the angel’.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been exposed to the nouns of the second declension which consists mostly of masculine and neuter nouns.
You have also been told that Greek is a highly inflected language and that inflection is used to describe the changes in the form of a word as its function in the sentence changes.
You have been taught the various inflections of second declension masculine and neuter nouns and that the four elements of a noun that must be mentioned when a noun is parsed are: declension, case, gender and number.
Finally, you were given the rules to follow when you want to embark on translation.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • Infection is the word that describes changes in the form of a word as the function it performs changes.
• Greek is a highly inflected language.
• Nouns can function as: subject, direct object, indirect object, subject complement, owner of something and as the person being addressed.
Translation must be done phrase by phrase from noun in the • nominative case (if any) to verb and then to other sentence elements.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences into English a) o9 a1nqrwpov ginw&skei to_n no&mon.
b) o9 dou~lov fe&rei dw~ron.
c) o9 a1ggelov le&gei lo&gon.
d) e1xeiv to_n karpo&n.
28 CTH 053 MODULE 1 e) oi9 a0delfoi_ a0kou&ousi tou_v lo&gouv tou~ a0gge&lou.
f) pe&mpete dw~ra tw~| i9erw~|.
g) ble&pomen tou__v oi1kouv tw~n o1xlwn.
h) oi9 ui9oi_ tw~n a0nqrw&pon a1gousi tou_v dou&louv.
i) lamba&nw dw~ra karpou~ kai_ a1rtou.
j) gra&fomen lo&gouv toi~v a0delfoi~v.
ii.
Translate the following sentences into Greek a) The son has bread and fruit.
b) The brother speaks a word to the crowd.
c) You (s) see stones in the houses and in the temples.
d) The servant is bearing a gift to the man.
e) We are hearing words of death from the messenger.
f) You (p) are writing a word to the apostle.
g) Men, brothers, and sons are teaching the crowd.
h) He knows the word of the law.
i) You (s) are seeing a crowd and a marriage in the house.
j) Servants speak words to the sons and bear gifts to the messengers.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
29 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 6 NOUNS: FIRST DECLENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Feminine Nouns of the First Declension 3.3 The Masculine Nouns of the First Declension 3.4 The Full Articles 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied the nouns of the second declension which are mostly masculine and neuter nouns.
As have been said earlier they are easier to understand than the nouns of the first declension that have sub-classes within the classes.
In this unit you will be exposed to the nouns of the first declension which are mostly feminine and masculine nouns.
The feminine nouns have two types: those ending in h and those ending in a.
As you study these declensions, watch out for the differences in the manner in which they are declined.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • decline feminine nouns ending in h • decline feminine nouns ending in a • decline masculine nouns of the first declension • list all the definite articles by gender, case and number.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study a0ga&ph, h9 love a9lh&qeia, h9 truth a9marti&a, h9 sin basilei&a, h9 kingdom glw~ssa, h9 tongue grafh&, h9 writing, Scripture didach&, h9 teaching do&ca, h9 glory ei0rh&nh, h9 peace e0kklhsi&a, h9 church e0ntolh&, h9 commandment h9me&ra, h9 day maqhth&v, o9 disciple Messi&av, o9 Messiah parabolh&, h9 parable profh&thv, o9 prophet 30 CTH 053 MODULE 1 Note: The article h (indicates that the nouns are feminine.
All first declension nouns ending in either a or h in the nominative singular are feminine.
First declension nouns ending in av or hv in the nominative singular are masculine.
3.2 Declension of the Feminine Nouns of the First Declension The inflection of the first declension varies in the singular according to the ending in the nominative.
In all there are five systems of inflection in the singular of the first declension.
Three out of these five systems are applicable to the feminine nouns and would be discussed in this subsection: 1.
When the stems end in e, i or r, the nominative singular will end in long a, which will be retained throughout the word as in the following example: Declension of feminine noun ending in e, i or r, using h( basilei&a with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative h( the ai( the basilei&a kingdom basilei~ai kingdoms Genitive th~v of the tw~n of the basilei&av kingdom basileiw~n kingdoms Ablative th~v from the tw~n from the basilei&av kingdom basileiw~n kingdoms Dative th~| to the tai~v to the basilei&a| kingdom basilei&aiv kingdoms Locative th~| in the tai~v in the basilei&a| kingdom basilei&aiv kingdoms Instrumental th~| by the tai~v by the basilei&a| kingdom basilei&aiv kingdoms Accusative th_n the ta_v the basilei&an kingdom basilei&av kingdoms Vocative h( the ai( the basilei&a kingdom basilei~ai kingdoms 2.
When the stem ends in s, ll, or any of the double consonants, the nominative singular ends in short a, which changes to h in the genitive, ablative, dative, locative and instrumental as in the example below: 31 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR Declension of feminine noun ending in s, ll, or any double consonants, using h( glw~ssa with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative h( the tongue ai( the tongues glw~ssa glw~ssai Genitive th~v of the tw~n of the glw&sshv tongue glwssw~n tongues Ablative th~v from the tw~n from the glw&sshv tongue glwssw~n tongues Dative th~| to the tai~v to the glw&ssh| tongue glw&ssaiv tongues Locative th~| in the tai~v in the glw&ssh tongue glw&ssaiv tongues Instrumental th~| by the tai~v by the glw&ssh tongue glw&ssaiv tongues Accusative th_n the tongue ta_v the tongues glw~ssan glw&ssav Vocative h( the tongue ai( the tongues glw~ssa glw~ssai 3.
When the stem ends in any other letter, the nominative singular will end in h, which is retained throughout the singular, as in the example below: Declension of feminine noun ending in any other letter using h( grafh& with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Form Meaning Plural Form Meaning Nominative h( grafh& the writing ai( the writings grafai& Genitive th~v grafh~v of the writing tw~n Of the writings grafw~n Ablative th~v grafh~v from the tw~n From the writing grafw~n writings Dative th~| grafh~| to the writing tai~v to the writings grafai~v Locative th~| grafh~| in the writing tai~v in the writings grafai~v Instrumental th~| grafh~| by the writing tai~v by the writings grafai~v Accusative th_n grafh&n the writing ta_v the writings grafa&v Vocative h( grafh& the writing ai( the writings grafai& 32 CTH 053 MODULE 1 3.3 Declension of the Feminine Nouns of the First Declension As has been said earlier, there are five declension systems in the first declension system.
The three that are feminine had been shown above.
The last two are masculine and they are as follows: 1.
When a masculine noun of the first declension has a stem ending in e, i or r, the nominative singular will be av (long a).
Declension of masculine noun ending in e, i or r using o( Messi&av with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative o( the Messiah oi( the Messi&av Messi&ai Messiahs Genitive tou~ of the tw~n of the Messi&ou Messiah Messiw~n Messiahs Ablative tou~ from the tw~n from the Messi&ou Messiah Messiw~n Messiahs Dative tw| to the toi~v to the Messi&a| Messiah Messi&aiv Messiahs Locative tw| in the toi~v in the Messi&a| Messiah Messi&aiv Messiahs Instrumental tw| by the toi~v by the Messi&a| Messiah Messi&aiv Messiahs Accusative to_n the Messiah tou_v the Messi&an Messi&av Messiahs Vocative o( the Messiah oi( the Messi&av Messi&ai Messiahs 2.
All other stem endings are followed by hv in the nominative singular, as in the example below: 33 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR Declension of masculine noun ending in other letters using o( profh&thv with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Form Meaning Plural Form Meaning Nom.
o( profh&thv the prophet oi( the prophets profh~tai Gen. tou~ of the prophet tw~n of the prophets profh&tou profhtw~n Abl.
tou~ from the tw~n from the profh&tou prophet profhtw~n prophets Dative tw|| to the prophet toi~v to the prophets profh&th| profh&taiv Locativ tw|| in the prophet toi~v in the prophets e profh&th| profh&taiv Inst.
tw|| by the prophet toi~v by the profh&th| profh&taiv prophets Acc.
to_n the prophet tou_v the prophets profh&thn profh&taiv Voc.
profh&thv the prophet profh~tai the prophets 3.4 The Full Articles By now, all the Greek definite articles have been given in full by number, case and by gender.
For the purpose of summary and emphasis, they are hereby extracted bellow: Cases Masculine Feminine Neuter Singular Nominative o9 h9 to Genitive & Ablative tou~ th~| tou~ Dative, Locative & tw~| th~v tw~| Instrumental Accusative to&n th&n to& Plural Nominative oi( ai( ta& Genitive & Ablative tw~n tw~n tw~n Dative, Locative & Instrumental toi~v tai~v toi~v Accusative tou&v ta&v ta& 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been introduced to the nouns of the first declension which have five different declension systems; three of which are feminine nouns and the remaining two are masculine.
A word has been used as an example for you to know how to decline each system.
You have also been given all the articles by gender, case and number.
34 CTH 053 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • There are five declining system in the first declension.
• The first three are feminine nouns • The last two are masculine nouns • The full list of the articles in the Greek language by gender, case and number has been given.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following into Greek a. o9 a0po&stolov dida&skei parabolh\\\\\n toi~v a0nqrw&poiv.
b. o9 maqhth\\\\\v ble&pei to\\\\\n profh&thn th~| e0kklhsi&a|.
c. o9 a1ggelov tou~ Messi&ou le&gei lo&gouv kai\\\\\ no&mouv toi~v o1xloiv.
d. oi9 ui9oi\\\\\ tou~ a0nqrw&pou ginw&skousin a0ga&phn kai\\\\\ a0lh&qeian kai\\\\\ ta\\\\\v grafa&v.
e. o9 profh&thv le&gei tou\\\\\v lo&gouv parabolh~v th~| glw&ssh|.
f. o9 Messi&av e1xei th\\\\\n didaxh\\\\\n do&chv kai\\\\\ ei0rh&nhv.
g. o9 maqhth\\\\\v ginw&skei a9marti&an kai\\\\\ le&gei lo&gouv a)lhqei&av.
h. o9 a0po&stolov gra&fei grafh\\\\\n th~v basilei&av kai\\\\\ th~v e0kklhsi&av.
i. oi9 ui9oi\\\\\ ginw&skousi th\\\\\n e0ntolh\\\\\n kai\\\\\ le&gousi parabolh\\\\\n tw~| oi1kw|.
j. o9 profh&thv lamba&nei a1rton kai\\\\\ karpo\\\\\n tou~ ui9ou~ tou~ maqhtou~.
ii.
Translate the following into English a.
We know the parables of the kingdom and the teachings of the churches.
b.
You (pl.)
are hearing the words of the prophet and the commandments of the Messiah.
c. The disciples are writing Scriptures of love, peace, and truth to the crowds.
d. The man knows the sins of the sons.
35 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR e. The Messiah is teaching the teaching of glory and love.
f. We are hearing the parables of the church.
g. He is destroying churches with words and temples with stones.
h. The tongue of the prophet speaks the teaching of sin and the glory of truth.
i.
The disciples are leading the men, and the men are hearing the Scriptures.
j.
In the Messiah we have love and peace and truth.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
36 CTH 053 MODULE 1 UNIT 7 ADJECTIVES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND DECLENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Hints on the Adjectives 3.3 The Use of Adjectives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last two previous units you have studied the nouns of the first and second declension.
You have been shown how they are declined to suit the functions they are performing in the sentence.
In this unit you would be introduced to the adjectives of the first and second declension.
Adjectives are the words that modify nouns and so are important that they are studied at this point.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify adjectives from any Greek sentence • decline adjectives by gender, number and case • identify the functions of an adjective • discuss the use of adjectives • translate Greek sentences containing verbs, nouns and adjectives.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study a0gaqo&v, h&, o&n good kaino&v, h&, o&n new a0gaphto&v, h&, o&n beloved kako&v, h&, o&n bad a1llov, h, o other, another (same kind) kalo&v, h&, o&n good, beautiful basiliko&v, h&, o&n royal mikro&v, a&, o&n small, little di&kaiov, a, on righteous, just mo&nov, h, on only, alone e1sxatov, h, on last nekro&v, a&, o&n dead e1terov, a, on another (different kind) pisto&v, h&, o&n faithful ponhro&v, a&, o&n evil prw~tov, h, on first 37 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.2 Hints on Adjectives As is the case with nouns, adjectives when used also have gender, number and case.
As a result, adjectives must agree with the nouns they modify in gender, number and case.
The examples above follow the analogy of the first and second declension.
When the stem of the adjective ends in e, i, or r, the feminine singular ending will end in long a; otherwise it will be h. Below are the examples of some declension of adjectives: agaqo&v Singular Feminine Cas Masculin Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter e e No a0gaqo& a0gaqh& a0gaqo& a0gaqoi a0gaqai a0gaqa& m. v n & & Gen. a0gaqou a0gaqh~ a0gaqou a0gaqw~ a0gaqw~ a0gaqw~ & ~ v ~ n n n Abl Da.
a0gaqw~ a0gaqh~ a0gaqw~ a0gaqoi a0gaqai a0gaqoi Lo.
| | | ~v ~v ~v & In.
Acc.
a0gaqo& a0gaqh& a0gaqo& a0gaqou a0gaqa& a0gaqa& n n n &v v Voc.
a0gaqe& a0gaqh& a0gaqo& a0gaqoi a0gaqai a0gaqa& n & & mikro&v Singular Feminine Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
mikro& mikra mikro& mikroi mikrai mikra& v & n & & Gen. & mikrou mikra mikro& mikrw~ mikrw~ mikrw~ Abl ~ ~v u n n n Da.
Lo.
mikrw~ mikra mikrw~ mikroi mikrai mikroi & In.
| ~| | ~v ~v ~v Acc.
mikro& mikra mikro& mikrou mikra& mikra& n &n n &v v & Voc.
mikre& mikra mikro& mikroi mikrai mikra& & n & & 38 CTH 053 MODULE 1 di&kaiov Singular Feminine Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom di&kai dikai& di&k di&kai di&kai di&kai .
ov a aion oi ai a Gen. dikai& dikai& dika dikai& dikai& dikai& & ou av i&ou wn wn wn Abl Da.
dikai& dikai& dika dikai& dikai& dikai& Lo./I w| a| i&w| oiv aiv oiv n. Acc.
di&kai dikai& di&k dikai& dikai& di&kai on an aion ouv av a Voc.
di&kai dikai& di&k di&kai di&kai di&kai e a aion oi ai a 3.3 The Use of Adjectives Adjectives in Greek are used in three ways: attributively, predicatively and substantively.
Attributive Use of Adjectives When adjectives are used attributively, they attribute qualities to the noun modified.
This kind of construction is made in two ways: o( a)gaqo_v lo&gov o( lo&gov o( a)gaqo&v Both constructions would be translated “the good word”.
You have to note that in both constructions, the adjective is immediately preceded by the definite article.
When there is no article used, the context will determine whether the construction is attributive or predicative.
The Predicative Construction In the predicative use, the adjective makes an assertion about the noun.
There are two possible constructions here too: o( lo&gov a)gaqo&v a)gaqo&v o( lo&gov Both constructions would be translated “the word is good.” Note that in this construction, the adjective is not immediately preceded by the article.
The placement of the article is helpful in the determination of the 39 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR usage of the adjective.
As said above, when no article is used, the context is helpful in the determination of the use of the adjective.
The Substantive Construction This usage occurs when the adjective is made to function as the noun.
In such usages, the adjective would be placed in the nominative case without any other noun.
For example, o( a)gaqo&v could mean “the good man” and ai( a)gaqai& would mean “the good women”.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been taught the use of adjectives in the Greek language.
You have been told that adjectives are words that modify the noun and as such they are placed closely to the noun.
In the Greek, they take the same gender, number and case with the noun they modify.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have being taught in this unit: • Adjectives must agree with the noun they modify in gender, number and case.
• Adjectives can be used attributively, predicatively and substantively.
• In attributive usage the adjective is immediately preceded by the article.
• In predicative usage the adjective is not immediately preceded by the article.
• In substantive usage the adjective is used as the substantive noun.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following passages to English a. o9 a0gaphto_v maqhth_v a0kou&ei tou_v a0gaqou_v lo&gouv.
b. pisth_ h9 didaxh_ kai_ o9 no&mov di&kaiov.
c. o9 basiliko_v no&mov dida&skei th_n do&can a0ga&phn.
d. o9 Messi&av e0gei&rei tou_v nekrou&v.
e. ble&pomen to_n kako_n karpo_n kai_ to_n kalo_n a1rton.
f. oi9 di&kaioi a1nqrwpoi gra&fousin a1llhn parabolh&n.
40 CTH 053 MODULE 1 g. oi9 profh~tai le&gousi kaina_v parabola_v toi~v pistoi~v.
h. o9 apo&stolov ginw&skei tou_v dikai&ouv kai_ ta_v dikai&av.
i. a0gaqo_v o9 a0delfo_v kai_ dida&skei tou_v pistou_v th|~ e0kklhsi&a|.
j. o9 e3terov a1nqrwpov e1xei to_n mo&non kalo_n oi]kon.
ii.
Translate the following passages to Greek a.
The good woman sees the good days of the kingdom of love.
b.
The brothers are first and the servants are last.
c. The Messiah of the kingdom raises up the faithful men and the faithful women.
d. The son of the just man sees the beloved disciples.
e. Men are destroying the beautiful churches and the new houses.
f. The good women say good things.
g. The new fruit is good and the houses are bad.
h. The righteous are leading the evil men.
i.
The Messiah knows the last days of the kingdom.
j.
To the first church the apostle speaks the first parable.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B., & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
41 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR MODULE 2 Unit 1 Prepositions Unit 2 Present Passive Indicative Unit 3 Present Middle Indicative Unit 4 Personal Pronouns Unit 5 Demonstrative Pronouns Unit 6 Deponent Verbs and Present Infinitives Unit 7 Imperfect Active Indicative UNIT 1 PREPOSITIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Greek Prepositions 3.2 Notes on Prepositions 3.3 Forms of Prepositions before Vowels 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last module ended with a study of the adjectives.
In this module, you will begin with another element of the sentence which is also very important in that it functions as that which joins parts of the sentence together.
It is called conjunctions a name that shows its very functions.
Because of the numerous number of the conjunctions that you are about to study, you will not be given any vocabulary study for this unit.
The propositions and their meanings would be the words to be memorized for this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • list all Greek prepositions • give the meaning of all Greek prepositions • identify prepositions within Greek sentences • write prepositions that comes before vowels and have to go through the process of ellipses.
42 CTH 053 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Greek Prepositions Below is a full picture of the prepositions of the Greek language according to their occurrence by meaning and by case.
S/N Prepositions Case Meaning 1. a0na& Accusative up, again 2. a0nti& Genitive against, instead of 3. a0po& Ablative from, away from 4. di&a Ablative through, by Genitive through Accusative because of 5. e0k Ablative out of 6. ei0v Accusative into, unto 7. e0n Locative in, on Instrumental by 8. e0pi& Genitive upon, on (emphasizing contact), at, by Locative upon, on, at, over (emphasizing position) Accusative upon, on, to, up to (emphasizing motion/direction) 9. kata& Ablative down from Genitive down upon Accusative along, according to 10. meta& Genitive with Accusative after 11. para& Ablative from Locative before, by the side of, beside Accusative beside, beyond, along 12. peri& Genitive about, concerning Accusative about, around 13. pro& Ablative before 14. pro&v Locative at Accusative To, toward, with, at 15. su&n Instrumental with, together with 16. u9pe&r Ablative in behalf of, instead of Accusative over, above, beyond 17. u9po& Ablative by (agency) Accusative under Instead of having new vocabularies for this study, the above true prepositions of the Koine Greek would be a good alternative.
They are to be studied and memorized as the vocabularies for this lesson.
43 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.2 Notes on the Prepositions Prepositions are words that are used to help substantives to express their case functions.
They are called prepositions because their position is immediately before the substantives they are associated with.
Prepositions were developed to aid in expressing the case functions which were already in use by the Greek language.
The translation of the prepositions depends however on some other factors.
In order to translate the prepositions accurately, the following should be observed: a.
The basic meaning of the prepositions as indicated in the vocabularies above, b.
The case construction with which the preposition is used, and c. The use as indicated by the context of the passage.
The preposition is also used to express emphasis thereby altering the meaning of the verb with which it is associated.
For example, the Greek verb ble&pw as already known means ‘I see’ but when associated with the preposition ‘dia’ and we have dia ble&pw the meaning would be ‘I see through’ literally and ‘I see clearly’ in polished English.
3.3 Forms of Prepositions before Vowels Remember that when a vowel or rho (r) begins a Greek world, it must carry a breathing mark.
These breathing marks make some prepositions to change form.
This is however completed by the presence of a vowel beginning the following word.
As the prepositions come in contact with these words, they drop their last letter, which is a vowel (a process called elision).
The following chart should be memorized: Prepositions Before Smooth Mark Before Rough Mark a0na& a0n’ a0n’ a0nti& a0nt’ a0nq’ a0po& a0p’ a0f’ di&a di&’ di&’ e0k e0c e0c e0pi& e0p’ e0f’ kata& kat’ kaq’ meta& met’ meq’ para& par’ par’ u9po& u9p’ u9f’ 44 CTH 053 MODULE 2 The following rules are to be observed: a.
Drop the final vowel before a vowel.
b. p becomes f before a rough breathing mark.
c. t becomes q before a rough breathing mark.
d. k becomes c before any breathing mark.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been taught extensively about prepositions are words that express relationships between two words.
They can also be used to express emphasis.
When they are used to express emphasis they alter the meaning of such words they are joined with.
When prepositions occur before words that begins with vowels they are bound to change form because of the process of elision (as some of the vowels ends with a vowel) and also their interaction with the breathing marks on top of the vowel.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • Prepositions are used to express relationship between two words (substantives).
• Prepositions change form as they come into contact with words that begin with vowels because of elision (for those that ends with a vowel) and the influence of breathing marks.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following into English a) o9 a0po&stolov dida&skei e0n th~| e0kklhsi&a|.
b) o9 maqhth_v le&gei parabolh_n peri_ th~v basilei&av.
c) fe&rousin a1rton e0k tou~ oi1kou kai_ pro_v tou_v a0nqrw&pouv.
d) lamba&nomen a0gaqa_v didaxa_v a0po_ tou~ pistou~ a0delfou~.
e) oi9 ui9oi_ tou~ profh&tou le&gousi lo&gouv kata__ th_n a0lh&qeian.
f) dia_ tw~n grafw~n tw~n maqhtw~n ginw&skomen to_n no&mon.
g) o9 a0delfo_v pe&mpei tou_v maqhta_v e0k tw~n oi#kwn kai_ ei0v th_n e0kklhsi&an.
h) o9 Messi&av le&gei parabolh_n e0n lo&goiv a0lhqei&av.
i) o9 Messi&av e0gei&rei tou_v nekrou_v e0k qana&tou.
45 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR j) dia_ th_n do&can th~v e0kklhsi&av le&gei parabolh_n a0ga&phv.
ii.
Translate the following sentences into Greek a) The faithful prophets are leading the righteous disciples of the Messiah into the church.
b) After the son the man sees the brother.
c) The man is saying a good word to the disciple and is leading the sons into the house.
d) The apostle is teaching the men with the sons.
e) Through the word of the Messiah the apostles are raising the dead from death.
f) He speaks the truth in love and leads the sons into the kingdom of peace.
g) Through the Scriptures we know the Lord’s teachings.
h) They are hearing the words of love from the faithful messenger.
i) We are taking good fruit instead of bad fruit.
j) After the parable he teaches good things concerning the last days.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
46 CTH 053 MODULE 2 UNIT 2 PRESENT PASSIVE INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Present Passive Indicative 3.3 The Usages of the Passive Voice 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you were taught the prepositions.
All the prepositions of the Greek language were given to you and it is expected that by now you know all the prepositions and their meanings.
In this unit, you will be introduced to the present passive indicative.
This is the voice in which the subject is receiving the action.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify the present passive indicative forms of the verbs • write the present passive indicative forms of Greek verbs • recall the vocabularies learnt to date • write the present passive indicative of all verbs you have been given so far • discuss the usages of the passive voice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study a0naginw&skw I read ba&llw I throw bapti&zw I immerse (baptize) khru&ssw I proclaim (preach) me&nw I abide (remain) sw&zw I save e1rhmov, h9 desert zwh&, h9 life qeo&v, o9 *god kardi&a, h9 heart ko&smov, o9 world o9do&v, h9 road, a way ou0rano&v, o9 heaven te&knon, to& child to&pov, o9 place fwnh&, h9 voice 47 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR * When the word carries an article, it will be translated ‘God’ and without an article, it will mean ‘god’.
3.2 The Present Passive Indicative The significance of the passive voice in the Greek is as the same as in English language.
It is used when the subject is being acted upon by an outside agent.
Present active indicative of lu/w is “I am loosing” and the present passive would be “I am being loosed”.
This means that the present passive pictures continuous action being received by the subject at the present time.
The primary endings of the present passive are: mai, sai, tai, meqa, sqe and ntai.
These are added to the stem of the word by means of the variable vowel which is either o or e. It has to be noted however that in the second person singular, a significant change occurred during the development of the language.
The sigma sound got lost and the e and a sound got contracted to h, and the i became a subscript.
This would be reflected in the paradigm below.
The Present Active Indicative of lu/w is as follows: lu/omai I am being loosed lu/omeqa we are being loosed luh| you are being loosed lu/esqe you are being loosed lu/etai he, (she, it) is being loosed lu/ontai they are being loosed 3.3 The Usages of the Passive Voice When Direct Agent is indicated When the direct agent producing the action on the subject is indicated, the construction is u(po with the genitive.
For example, dida&sketai u(po\ tou~ a)gge/lou means “he is being taught by the messenger”.
When Indirect Agent is indicated When the agent indicated is the indirect (that is, the agent through which the original agent acts), the construction is dia& with the genitive.
For example, o( ko&smov e)ge&neto di ) au)tou~ which means “the world was made through him”.
In this passage, Christ is seen as the intermediate agent of creation while God is the original agent.
48 CTH 053 MODULE 2 When Impersonal Agent is indicated When the agent is impersonal, the construction is the dative with or without the preposition e)n. For example, oi( a!nqrwpoi sw&zontai e)n tw~| lo&gw| tou~ Messi&ou which means “the men are being saved by the word of the Messiah”.
When no Agent is expressed Sometimes, the passive is used without any agent indicated.
An example is the simple word e)gei&retai which means “he is being raised up”.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been taught the various usages of the present passive voice.
It can be used when the direct agent or indirect agent are expressed.
It can also be used when an impersonal agent in used or when no agent is expressed.
All these usage are constructed uniquely.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • When the direct agent is indicated, the construction is u(po with the genitive.
• When the agent indicated is the indirect, the construction is dia& with the genitive.
• When the agent is impersonal, the construction is the dative with or without the preposition e)n. • Sometimes, the passive is used without any agent indicated 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. oi( oi]koi lu&ontai u(po_ tw~n ponhrw~n a)nqrw&pon.
b. h( a)lh/qeia dida&sketai e)n toi~v lo&goiv tou~ a)posto&lou.
c. o( pisto_v a)delfo_v sw&zetai u(po_ tou~ maqhtou~ tou~ Messi/on.
d. o( ui9o_v tou~ Qeou~ khru/ssei a)ga&phn kai\ a)lh/qeian.
e. zwh\ a)po_ tou~ ui9ou~ me/nei e)n toi~v dikai/oiv a)nqrw&poiv.
49 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR f. fwnh_ a)kou/etai e)n th~| e)rh/mw| kai\ o(do_v ble/petai ei)v ou)rano/n.
g. o( a)gaqo_v profh/thv bapti/zei ta_ te/kna.
h. o( Qeo_v ginw&skei ta_v kardi/av tw~n a(nqrw&pwn kai\ pe/mpei parabolh_n zwh~v.
i. a)naginw&skomen th\n grafh_n kai\ ginw&skomen th_n o(do_n a)ga&phv.
j. oi( o!xloi a)kou/ousi ta_ a)gaqa_ th~v basilei/av tou~ Qeou~ kai\ sw&zontai e)k tou~ ko&smou.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
A parable of the kingdom of heaven is being taught by the faithful apostle.
b.
The disciple knows the Son of God and is being saved by the words of truth.
c. The love of God is being preached by the disciples, and they are baptizing the children.
d. The Scripture is being read, and the crowds are being saved from the world.
e. The good women know the life of peace and the way into the kingdom of God.
f. A voice of love, peace, and truth is being raised up at a place in the desert.
g. Hearts are being saved and are abiding in God.
h. Stones are being thrown by evil children into the house of the prophet.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
50 CTH 053 MODULE 2 UNIT 3 PRESENT MIDDLE INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Introducing the Middle Voice 3.3 The Functions of the Middle Voice 3.4 The Form of the Middle Voice 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you were taught the present passive indicative.
During the course of study you were taught how to write the present passive indicative forms of the Greek verb.
Having done this, you are ripe to be exposed to the present middle indicative forms of the verb.
Though not present in the English language which you are familiar with, the middle voice plays significant role in the Greek language and so has to be understood in all its nuances.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify the present middle indicative forms of the verbs write the present middle indicative forms of Greek verbs • recall the vocabularies learnt to date • • write the present middle indicative of all verbs you have been given so far • discuss the usages of the middle voice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study ai!rw I take up/away doca&zw I glorify a)poste/llw I send (with a message) e)sqi/w I eat bai/nw I go kri/nw I judge a)nabai/nw I go up katabai/nw I go down 51 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.2 Introducing the Middle Voice It has to be stated from the onset that there is no equivalent of the Greek middle voice in the English language.
In the middle voice, the subject is acting in such a way that it participates in the result of the action.
The subject, at this point, rather than the action is the focal point or the point of emphasis.
3.3 The Functions of the Middle Voice The middle voice in the Greek language is used in three different ways: the reflexive middle, the intensive middle and the reciprocal middle.
The Reflexive Middle This is the nearest to the basic idea of the middle voice.
It is the one that pictures the result of the action directly to the agent.
For example, o( a!nqrwpov e)gei/retai which means, “the man is raising himself up”.
The Intensive Middle The intensive middle stresses the agent producing the action rather than its participation in the action.
For example, dida/sketai th_n a)lh/qeian which means “he is teaching the truth”.
The emphasis is on “he”.
The idea is that he and no other person is doing the teaching.
This corresponds to the Piel stem of the Hebrew language which is the dynamic middle voice.
The Reciprocal Middle In the reciprocal middle a plural subject that is engaged in an interchange of action is pictured.
For example, oi( a!nqrwpoi dida/skontai which means “the men are teaching one another”.
It has to be stated that the above three usages of the middle voice does not capture the total force of the middle voice but has given the general idea of the construction.
3.4 The Form of the Middle Voice It has to be stated that the forms of the middle voice in the present, imperfect and perfect tenses are the same as the passive voice.
The difference is one of function.
The context of the passage will indicate 52 CTH 053 MODULE 2 whether the construction is middle or passive in function.
Thus the form of the present middle indicative of lu/w is: lu/omai I loose myself, or lu/omeqa we loose ourselves, or I loose for myself we loose for ourselves luh| you loose yourself, or lu/esqe you loose yourselves, or you loose for yourself you loose for yourselves lu/etai he, (she, it) looses himself, or lu/ontai they loose themselves, he looses for himself or they loose for themselves 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been taught the middle voice in the Greek language.
In the middle voice, the subject is acting in such a way that it participates in the result of the action.
It is used in three major ways: the reflexive middle, the intensive middle and the reciprocal middle.
It is also noted that the form of the middle voice is identical to that of the passive and so it is the context that would determine the form to take in translation.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The middle voice concept does not exist in the English language.
• In the middle voice, the subject is acting in such a way that it participates in the result of the action.
• The forms of the middle voice in the present, imperfect and perfect tenses are the same as the passive voice.
• The middle voice is used in three major ways: the reflexive middle, the intensive middle and the reciprocal middle.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English: a. oi( a!nqrwpoi lamba/nontai a!rton kai\ karpo/n.
b. oi( maqhtai/ dida/skontai to_n lo/gon th~v a)lhqei/av.
c. kri/netai e)n th~| parabolh~| tou~ profh/tou.
d. o( Messi/av suna/getai tou_v o!xlouv ei)v th_n basilei/an.
e. oi( pistoi_ a)delfoi_ a)nabai/nousi pro_v to_ i(ero_n su_n toi~v ui(oi~v tw~n profhtw~n.
53 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR f. o( a!ggelov a)poste/lletai u(po_ tou~ Qeou~ e(k tou~ oi!kou kai ei)v th_v e!rhmon.
g. ai!rousi li/qouv kai_ ba/llousi tou_v a)posto/louv e)k tou~ i(erou~ ei)v th_n o(do/n.
h. h( fwnh_ tou~ profh/tou a)kou/etai kai_ ponhroi_ a!nqrwpoi bai/nousi e)k th~v kakh~v o(dou~ ei)v th_n o(do_n a)ga/phv kai_ ei)rh/nhv.
i. oi( o!xloi e)sqi/ousin a!rton kai_ o( Messi/av doca/zetai.
j. a!nqrwpoi tou~ ko/smov doca/zontai: di/kaioi a!nqrwpoi doca/zousi to_n Qeo/n.
k. a)gaqoi_ a!nqrwpoi dida/skontai tou_v no/mouv kai_ ta_v e)ntola_v tou~ Qeou~.
l. oi( a!ggeloi a)poste/llontai pro_v tou_v ui(ou_v a)nqrw&pwn e)n tai~v e)kklhsi/aiv.
m. o( Qeo_v a)poste/llei to_n Messi/an ei)v to_n ko/smon kai_ o( Messi/av pe/mpei dw~ra th~v a)ga/phv toi~v maqhtai~v.
n. ai( grafai_ a)naginw&skwkontai, a!nqrwpoi sw&zontai, kai_ oi( nekroi_ e)gei/rontai.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
The word of truth is being heard in the world.
b.
The sons of the kingdom are judging one another by the parable of the Messiah.
c. God himself sends apostles into the way of evil men.
d. He is taking for himself gifts of bread and fruit.
e. The truth is being taught by the faithful apostles.
f. They go down from the houses, they go up to the church, and they glorify God.
g. The brothers are sending gifts to one another and eating bread in peace.
h. The men of the world are gathering themselves in bad places and are saying to one another evil words.
54 CTH 053 MODULE 2 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
55 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 4 PERSONAL PRONOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Grammatical Hints 3.3 Declension of the First Person Personal Pronoun 3.4 Declension of the Second Person Personal Pronoun 3.5 Declension of the Third Person Personal Pronoun 3.6 The Use of Personal Pronouns in Greek 3.7 The Use of autov 3.8 The Use of Alternate Pronoun Forms 3.9 Present Indicative Forms of eimi 3.10 Enclitics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you were taught the middle voice.
In this unit you would be introduced to the personal pronouns of the Greek Language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • decline the first person personal pronoun • decline the second person personal pronoun • decline the third person personal pronoun • identify how personal pronouns are used in the Greek language • comment on the use of autos in the nominative position determine the sue of the alternate pronoun forms • • identify enclitics.
56 CTH 053 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study e)gw/ I ei)mi/ I am su/ you (sing) de/ but, and, moreover au)to/v, h/, o/ he, she, it ou) not NB: ou) would be ou)k before vowel with smooth breathing mark and ou)x before vowel with rough breathing mark.
3.2 Grammatical Hints de/ is postpositive, that is, it cannot stand in the first position in a sentence or clause.
Its normal position is in the second position, although sometimes it appears in the third place.
For example, o( a)po/stolov ou)k a)nabai/nei pro_v th_n e)kklhsi/an, o( de__ maqhth_v katabai/nei pro_v to_n oi]kon which means “the apostle did not go up into the church but the disciple goes down into the house”.
In the Greek language, the negative particle is usually placed immediately in front of the word it negates.
This means that its normal position is in front of the verb.
For example, o( a)po/stolov ou)k a)nabai/nei pro_v th_n e)kklhsi/an which means “the apostle did not go up into the church”.
3.3 Declension of the First Person Personal Pronoun The first person personal pronoun is declined as follows: Case Singular Meaning Plural Meaning Pronoun Pronoun Nominative e)gw& I h(mei=v we Genitive e)mou= or mou of me h(mw~n of us Dative e)moi// or to me h(mi=n to us moi Accusative e)me/ or me - me h(ma~v - us Note that the alternative forms mou, moi and me are the un-emphatic forms of the personal pronoun and are enclitic.
The other forms are used when emphasis is on the personal pronoun.
57 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.4 Declension of the Second Person Personal Pronoun The second person personal pronoun is declined as follows: Case Singular Meaning Plural Meaning Pronoun Pronoun Nominative su& you u(mei=v you Genitive sou= or sou of you u(mw~n of you Dative s)oi// or soi to you u(mi=n to you Accusative se/ or se - you h(ma~v - you Note that the alternative forms sou, soi and se are the un-emphatic forms of the personal pronoun and are enclitic.
The other forms are used when emphasis is on the personal pronoun.
3.5 Declension of the Third Person Personal Pronoun The third person personal pronoun is declined as follows: Singular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nominative au)to/v he au)th/ she au)to/ it Genitive au)tou= of him au)th=v of her au)tou= of it Dative au)tw~| to him au)th=| to her au)tw~| to it Accusative au)to/n - him au)th/n - her au)to/ - it Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nominative au)toi/ they au)tai/ they au)ta/ they Genitive au)tw~n of them au)tw~n of them au)tw~n of them Dative au)toi=v to them au)tai=v to them au)toi=v to them Accusative au)tou/v - them au)ta/v - them au)ta/ - them 3.6 The Use of Personal Pronouns in Greek The use of personal pronouns in Greek is very similar to that of English language.
They are used in place of nouns so that monotony could be avoided.
The noun for which a pronoun stands is called the antecedent.
A pronoun must agree with its antecedent in gender and number.
In other words, if the antecedent is feminine and singular, the pronoun must be the feminine and singular form.
However, it has to be noted that the case of the pronoun is determined by its use in the sentence.
Care has to be taken at this point especially in translation from the English language to the Greek language.
For example, if you are to translate “I have a church and remain in it” you must note that “it” is the pronoun and the antecedent is “church”.
It then must agree in number and gender with church, but you must remember that in the Greek language, 58 CTH 053 MODULE 2 “church” is in the feminine and not the neuter as it is in the English language.
The personal pronouns are not used in the nominative as subjects of verb unless there is an emphasis placed on them.
This is because subjects are taken care of in the personal endings of the verbs.
Emphases however are usually called out when clauses are placed in contrast to one another.
For example, the sentence “I am speaking but you are writing” would be written thus: e)gw_ le/gw, su_ de_ gra/feiv.
3.7 The Use of au)to/v au)to/v is not usually used in the nominative case.
However, when it is used in the nominative case, its function would not be that of a personal pronoun.
The following are the functions of au)to/v in the nominative as based on its position: In the Attributive Position When used in the attributive position (you may need to revise this position from the unit on adjectives), whether in the nominative position or not, au)to/v is translated “same”.
Therefore, o( a)po/stolov o( au)to/v or o( au)to/v a)po/stolov will be translated “the same apostle”.
In the Predicative Position When used in the predicative position, it is believed to be intensive and thus would be translated “himself”.
Therefore, au)to_v o( a)po/stolov or o( a)po/stolov au)to/v would be translated “the apostle himself”.
It has to be noted that when au)to_v is used in the intensive form, it is usually found with pronouns or unexpressed subjects of the verb.
For example, au)to_v e)gw_ le/gw or au)to_v le/gw would be translated “I myself say”.
The Use of the Alternate Pronoun Forms The alternate pronoun forms indicated in the table above are called the enclitics or the non-emphatic forms of personal pronouns.
They are usually used in the genitive case to express possession.
Literally in Greek, for example, the phrase “my word” is “the word of me”, hence it would be written o( lo/gov mou.
If emphasis is however required the correct form would be learnt later for that is the “possessive adjective”.
59 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.9 Present Indicative of ei)mi Singular Plural ei)mi/ I am e)sme/n we are ei] you are e)ste/ you are e)sti/(n) he (she, it) is ei)si/(n) they were Note the following about the ei)mi verb: All the forms except ei] are enclitics.
• • It does not have a voice since it describes state of being and not action.
• As shown in the table e)sti and ei)si/ takes the movable nu.
• The verb requires a subject complement rather than an object to complete its meaning.
This is an example of the predicate nominative.
For example, o( a!nqrwpo/v e)stin a)po/stolov would be translated “the man is an apostle”.
3.10 Enclitics Enclitics are Greek words which under normal conditions do not have accents of their own and are pronounced with the words preceding them.
The ones you have studied so far are: mou, moi, me, sou, soi, se, all the present indicative forms of ei)mi except ei].
They usually throw their accent forward to the word preceding them.
For the purposes of accenting, enclitics which have long syllables are considered short when added to the preceding word.
For example, o( lo/gov mou would be looked upon as a four syllable word: o( lo/gov mou.
In such cases, the long syllable ou does not prevent an acute accent on the antepenult.
However, the following principles of accent for enclitics must be kept in mind: • An enclitic at the beginning of a sentence retains its accent as in e)sme_n a!nqrwpou.
• An enclitic or proclitic that comes before another enclitic is accented as in o( a)delfo/v mou/ e)stin a)gaqo/v.
• An acute accent on the ultima is retained in a word standing before any enclitic.
It does not change to grave as in o( Qeo/v e)stin a)gaqo/v.
• If a word preceding an enclitic has an acute accent on the antepenult, or a circumflex on the penult, it takes an additional acute accent on the ultima as in o( oi]ko/v mou.
60 CTH 053 MODULE 2 • If a word preceding an enclitic has an acute accent on the penult or a circumflex or acute on the ultima, an enclitic of one syllable loses its accent as in o( Qeo/v mou.
If a word preceding an enclitic has an acute accent on the penult • or a circumflex on the ultima, an enclitic of two syllables retains its accent as in o( lo/gov e)sti_n a)gaqo/v.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been given all the declensions of the personal pronouns in all the persons.
You have also been taught the use of the personal pronoun in the Greek language including the use of au)to/v which is determined by the position it takes, that is, the predicative and the attributive positions.
The enclitics and the rules guiding the placement of the accent on the enclitics and the proclitics have been given.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The pronoun is used in place of nouns to avoid monotony.
The noun which a pronoun stands for is called the antecedent.
• • The pronoun must agree with its antecedent in gender and number.
• The case of the pronoun is determined by its function in the sentence.
• When au)to/v is used in the nominative case its function is not that of a personal pronoun.
• If it appears in the attributive position, it is translated “same”.
• If it appears in the predicative position, it is translated “himself”.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. oi( maqhtai/ sou ginw&skousi th_n e)kklhsi/an kai\ a!gousi tou_v a)delfou_v au)tw~n ei)v au)th/n.
b. dida/skw tou_v ui)ou_v mou kai_ le/gw au)toi~v parabolh/n.
c. dia_ sou~ o( Qeo_v a!gei ta_ te/kna ei)v th_n basilei/an au)tou~ kai_ di 0 au)tw~n tou_v a!llouv.
d. e)gw& ei)mi dou~lov, su_ de_ ei] a)po/stolov.
e. e)ste_ profh~tai tou~ Qeou~ kai_ a!ggeloi a)ga/phv.
61 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR f. o(( a)po/stolov pisto/v e)stin, oi( de_ dou~loi au)tou~ ei)si_ ponhroi/.
g. oi( a)delfoi_ h(mw~n ble/pousin h(ma~v kai_ h(mei~v dida/skwmen au)tou/v.
h. ginw&skomen th_n o(do/n, kai_ di 0 au)th~v a!gomen u(ma~v ei)v to_n oi]kon h(mw~n.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
My brothers are in the church of God.
b.
We are saying a parable to you, but you are saying other things to us.
c. The Messiah’s disciples are leading their children into his kingdom.
d. My commandment is righteous and my laws are good.
e. Your house is bad, and I am leading my children from it.
f. I am a son, but you are a servant.
g. The disciple himself is saying a parable to the crowd.
h. The same disciple is being heard by the sons of men.
i. I myself am leading my sons to God.
j.
The man is good, and I am teaching him the way to my house.
k. He himself is bearing my gifts and his gifts to the temple.
l. God knows his sons and is leading them out of the world into the church.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
62 CTH 053 MODULE 2 UNIT 5 DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Grammatical Hints 3.3 The Functions of the Demonstrative Pronouns 3.4 Declension of the Demonstrative Pronoun 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you have been taken though the study of the personal pronouns and how they function in the Greek language.
All the declension of the personal pronouns by case, gender and number are all given.
In this unit you will be taken a step further to study the demonstrative pronouns.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the two types of demonstrative pronouns • define the demonstrative pronouns by case, gender and number.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study a(marta/nw I sin a(marti/a, h, sin a(martwlo/v, o( sinner ga/r (postpositive) for dida/skalov, o( teacher e)kei=nov, h, o that e)paggeli/a, h( promise eu)agge/lion, to/ gospel, good news ku/riov, o( lord, the Lord lao/v, o( people o3ti, because, that ou[tov, au#th, tou~to this xara/, h( joy Xristo/v, o(, Christ 63 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.2 Grammatical Hints There are two demonstrative pronouns in Greek language.
We have the near demonstrative (ou[tov) which is used to point out something near at hand.
There is also the remote demonstrative (e)kei=nov) which is used to point out something further removed.
3.3 The Functions of the Demonstrative Pronouns Demonstrative pronouns can be used by themselves with the force of a substantive.
For example, ou[tov Ble/pei to_n oi]kon would be translated “this man sees the house”; e)kei=nov ginw/skei to_n a)po/stolon would be translated “that man knows the apostle”.
Substantively, ou[toi would mean “these men”; e)kei=noi would mean “those men” and tou=to would mean “this thing”.
Demonstrative pronouns can also be used with a force similar to that of an adjective.
In the adjectival use of the demonstrative pronoun, if the noun carries the article, then the demonstrative pronoun is in the predicate position.
For example, ou]tov o( a!nqrwpov or o( a!nqrwpov ou]tov would be translated “this man”.
This can be used with any of the demonstrative pronouns no matter the case function.
For example, in the following sentence, it comes up in the accusative case: ble/pw e)kei/nhn th_n e)kklhsi/an.
This sentence would be translated “I see that church”.
3.4 Declension of the Demonstrative Pronoun The demonstrative pronouns are declined like the adjectives of the first and second declension that has been treated earlier.
In case you cannot remember vividly, go back and read the unit all over again.
You need to observe that in the paradigm below the n ending of the neuter singular nominative and the singular accusative have dropped out.
Now observe the paradigms properly: Singular Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
e)kei=nov e)kei/nh e)kei=no e)kei=noi e)kei=nai e)kei=n a Gen. e)kei/nou e)kei/nhv e)kei/no e)kei/nwn e)kei/nwn e)kei/n u wn Dat.
e)kei/nw| e)kei/nh| e)kei/nw e)kei/noiv e)kei/naiv e)kei/n | oiv Acc.
e)kei=non e)kei/nhn e)kei=no e)kei/nouv e)kei/nav e)kei=n a In the case of ou[tov, the stem as well as the endings experiences some changes.
You will be able to observe in the paradigm below that 64 CTH 053 MODULE 2 when the ultima has an o-sound vowel, the stem will be ou diphthong but when the ultima has another sound (a or h), the stem vowel will be au diphthong.
Singular Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
ou[tov au#th tou~to ou[toi au[tai tau~ta Gen. tou/tou tau/thv tou/tou tou/twn tou/twn tou/twn Dat.
tou/tw| tau/th| tou/tw| tou/toiv tau/taiv tou/toiv Acc.
tou~ton tau/thn tou~to tou/touv tau/tav tau~ta 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been taught the demonstrative pronouns of the Greek language.
The first is the near demonstrative and the second is the far demonstrative.
You have also been taught demonstratives can be used as a substantive as well as an adjective but in the predicate position.
Demonstratives are also declined as adjectives of the first and second declension.
You have also been given the full declension of the demonstratives in gender, number and case.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • There are two types of demonstratives: the far and the near.
• They can be used as substantives • They can also be used as an adjective in the predicate position • They are declined like adjectives of the first and second declension 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English: a. ou[tov o( a!nqrwpov ginw&skei e)kei=non to_n a!nqrwpon.
b. o( a(martwlo_v e!xei a(marti/an e)n th~| kardi/a| au)tou~ kai_ ou) ginw&skei xara/n.
c. a)kou/omen tau/thn th_n parabolh_n peri_ th~v e)kklhsi/av.
d. ei)v th_n au)th_n e)kklhsi/an a!gomen tou/touv tou_v a(martwlou_v kai_ e)kei=na ta_ te/kna.
e. au#th a)kou/ei th_n e)paggeli/an tou~ Kuri/ou au)th~v kai_ le/gei to_ eu)agge/lion tw~| law~|.
65 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR f. ou[to/v e)stin a!nqrwpov tou~ ko/smou, e)kei=nov de/ e)stin a!nqrwpov th~v basilei/av tou~ Xristou~.
g. o( Ku/riov au)to_v le/gei le/gouv xara~v kai_ e)gw_ au)to_v lamba/nw tou/touv ei)v th_n kardi/an mou.
h. e)kei=noi oi( a!ggeloi/ ei)sin maqhtai_ tou~ au)tou~ didaska/lou kai_ khru/ssousi tau/tav ta_v parabola_v peri_ a(marti/av kai_ a(martwlw~~n.
i. ou[tov dida/skei tou_v a)gaqou_v kai_ au)to_v dida/sketai u(po_ tou~ Kuri/ou.
j. Xristo/v e)stin Ku/riov tou~ ko/smou kai_ fe/rei a)ga/phn kai_ ei)rh/nhn kai_ xara_n pro_v au)to/n.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
Through the gospel we have life and joy.
b.
The apostle himself baptizes his children and leads them into the church.
c. We ourselves have these sins in our hearts.
d. They are evil sinners, but the Lord leads them from their sin into his kingdom.
e. You are sinning, and because of your sins, you do not have life and joy in you.
f. We know the truth, for we are hearing it from these messengers of the Lord.
g. He himself is going up to the temple because he has sin in his heart.
h. This same Christ is the Messiah of the people and the Lord of the kingdom of God.
i.
This man knows peace and joy, but this one knows sin because he is not hearing the promise of God.
j.
He himself is a teacher of sinners.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
66 CTH 053 MODULE 2 Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
67 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 6 DEPONENT VERBS AND PRESENT INFINITIVES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Deponent Verbs 3.3 Compound Verbs 3.4 Verbs that Takes Objects Apart from the Accusative Case 3.5 Present Infinitives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you have been taken though the study of the demonstrative pronouns and how they are being used in the Greek language.
In this unit however, you will study four major issues in Greek: the deponent verbs, the compound verbs, verbs that use cases other than accusative for direct object and present infinitives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define deponent verbs • identify deponent verbs • identify compound verbs • explain the formation of compound verbs explain the alternatives for that do not have the accusative case • for their objects • define the present infinitive • explain the formation and the use of present infinitives in Greek.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study a)lla/ but (stronger than de/) a)pokri/nomai I answer (dat.
case) a!rxw I rule (gen. case) gi/nomai I become a!rxwmai I begin poreu/omai I go die/rxomai I come through e!rxomai I come/I go ei)se/rxomai I come into/I enter e)ce/rxomai I come out of kate/rxomai I come down sune/rxomai I come with/together 68 CTH 053 MODULE 2 3.2 Deponent Verbs Deponent verbs are verb which appear in the middle or passive form but in their function are active.
The word deponent is derived from the Latin word “deponere” which means “to lay aside”.
These verbs came into being because somehow during the development of the language the active forms of the word were dropped out of preference for the middle or passive voice.
Thus, while the form of the word changed, the function remained the same.
So in deponent verbs, e!rxomai means “I come” and gi/nomai means “I become”.
You need to take extra care in studying this phenomenon of the Greek language because it can create confusion.
Remember, although they would be written as the middle or passive verbs, in meaning they would be active.
Note that most of the verbs you have been given in the vocabulary study are deponent verbs.
3.3 Compound Verbs Compound verbs are verbs that are written with a preposition combined with them.
When this happens, most of the time, the preposition will determine the significance of the combined expression.
Two things can however happen.
The proposition may intensify the meaning of the verb or alter the meaning completely.
For example, ble/pw means “I see” and di/a menas “through” especially with the accusative.
When combined together, diable/pw would be translated “I see clearly”.
This is a polished English of “I see through”.
However in the case of a)naginw/skw though a)na/ means “up or again” and ginw/skw means “I know” a)naginw/skw means “I read”.
You can see that there is no relationship between the meaning of the verb, the preposition and the meaning of the compound verb.
It is better for you to observe these changes as part of the vocabulary study.
3.4 Verbs that Takes Objects Apart from the Accusative Case There are some verbs that take their object in a case other than the accusative case.
Some of these would be examined right now but the others would be observed in the course of the study.
The first to study is a)kou/w.
a)kou/w may takes its object in the genitive or in the accusative.
When it takes its object in the genitive, it would be translated “to hear without understanding” and if it takes its object in the accusative it would be translated “to hear with understanding”.
This is the explanation for the seeming conflict in Acts 9:7 and Acts 22:9.
Acts 9:7 reads: 69 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR The men who travelled with him stood speechless, hearing the voice but seeing no one.
Acts 22:9 reads: And those who were with me saw the light, to be sure, but did not understand the voice of the one who was speaking with me.
In the Greek New Testament, Acts 9:7 used a)kou/w with the genitive while in Acts 22:9, it is a)kou/w with the accusative.
Thus both constructions can be said to be saying the same thing.
The second verb to study is a!rxw.
In the active voice, a!rxw means “I rule” and it takes the genitive case.
In the middle voice, it becomes a!rxwmai and it means “I begin”.
In the middle, it is usually followed by an infinitive as in a!rxwmai dida/skein which means “I am beginning to teach”.
The third is a)pohri/nomai.
This verb usually takes its object in the dative case.
For example, a)pohri/nomai toi=v te/knoiv would be translated “I am answering the children”.
This construction is sometimes called the dative of the direct object.
3.5 Present Infinitives Infinitives are verbal nouns.
They are so called because in their functions they share in the characteristics of both the noun and the verb.
The use of the present infinitive in the Greek is almost like that of the English language some of which would be discussed right now.
The voice function of the infinitive is the same as the indicative mood.
Remember that the active voice indicates that the subject is performing the action; the middle voice indicates that the subject is acting in such a way as to participate in the result of the action and the passive voice indicates that the subject is being acted upon (or is receiving the action).
The following are the forms of the present infinitives: In the present active infinitive, the ending is –ein.
This ending is added to the present stem of the regular w verb.
That is, you will remove the w and add the –ein.
For example, lu/w becomes lu/ein; ble/pw becomes ble/pein; e!xw becomes e!xein and ginw/skw becomes ginw/skein.
70 CTH 053 MODULE 2 In the present middle and present passive infinitive, the ending is – esqai.
Consequently, the middle or passive infinitive forms of the verbs above are as follows: lu/w becomes lu/esqai; ble/pw becomes ble/pesqai; e!xw becomes e!xesqai and ginw/skw becomes ginw/skesqai.
In the following sentences, the nuances in the translation of the various voices are brought out for you to study and analyze: Greek Sentence English Translation a!rxomai lu/ein to_n a!nqrwpon I am beginning to loose the man.
a!rxomai lu/esqai I am beginning to loose myself.
a!rxomai lu/esqai u(po_ tou= I am beginning to be loosed by the man.
a)nqrw/pou 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt about deponent verbs as the verbs that are written in the middle or passive form but are actually active in function and have to be translated thus.
You have also been taught about the compound verbs which are formed with a combination of a verb and a preposition.
You have also been told that in such occurrences, the presence of the preposition would either add an intensity to the meaning of the verb or alter the meaning entirely.
Finally you have been exposed to the infinitives which have been defined as verbal nouns because they share the qualities of both verbs and nouns in their functions.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this lesson: • Deponent verbs are verbs that are written in the middle or passive voice but are actually active in function.
• Compound verbs are verbs that are formed with a verb and a preposition.
• The preposition thus adds intensity to the meaning of the verb or alters the meaning of the verb entirely.
• Infinitives are verbal nouns.
• They are so called because they share the characteristics of both the verbs and the nouns.
71 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. poreu/omai e)k tou= oi!kou kai_ ei)v th_n e)kklhsi/an.
b. o( profh/thv e)ce/rxetai e)k tou= i(erou=.
c. o( a!nqrwpov gi/netai a!ggelov tou= kuri/ou.
d. o( Xristo_v a)pokri/netai toi=v a(martwloi=v e)n toi=v lo/goiv th=v parabolh=v.
e. ou[tov ei)se/rxetai ei)v th_n basilei/an, e)kei=nov de_ me/nei e)n tw~| ko/smw| tw~n ponhrw~n a)nqrw/pwn.
f. sune/rxontai e)n tw~| oi!kw| tou= Qeou= o#ti ginw/skousi th_n o(do\n a)ga/phv.
g. lu/ontai ou[toi oi( dou~loi u(po_ tou~ kuri/ou.
h. e)n tw~| lo/gw| au)tou~ gi/nesqe maqhtai/.
i. oi( a(martwloi_ ou) bapti/zontai u(po_ tou~ a)posto/lou, a)lla_ poreu/ontai e)k tou~ oi!kou au)tou~ ei)v tou_v oi!kouv th~v a(marti/av.
j. a!rxh| ginw/skein ta_ a)gaqa_ th~v basilei/av tou~ Qeou~.
k. katerxo/meqa e)k tw~n to/pwn a(marti/av o#ti h( fwnh_ tou~ kuri/ou a)kou~etai.
l. oi( ui(oi_ gi/nontai a!nqrwpoi o#ti e)sqi/ousi karpo_n kai_ a!rton.
m. oi( a)delfoi_ a!rxontai sune/rxesqai kai_ o( maqhth_v a!rxetai doca/zein to_n qeo_n di’ au)tou/v.
n. a(martwloi_ ginw/skousi th_n o(do_n tou~ Xristou~, a)lla_ kate/rxontai ei)v ta_v o(dou_v qana/tou.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
We know the word of God and are beginning to teach it to the children.
b.
He is coming out of the world and entering the kingdom of God.
c. The Lord is answering the sons of the prophet.
72 CTH 053 MODULE 2 d. Because the word of truth is being heard, you are becoming disciples of Christ.
e. The crowds are beginning to come out of the houses of sin and to go up to the house of God.
f. They know the teaching of the Lord, but their hearts abide in sin.
g. The child is beginning to be a good son.
h. These sinners are entering God’s house, but those are going out into the desert.
i.
Sin is beginning to be destroyed by the word of God.
j. I am a sinner, but I am being taught by the Lord’s faithful apostle.
k. The apostle says that the Lord is good.
l. These sinners know that this road leads to death.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
73 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 7 IMPERFECT ACTIVE INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Imperfect Active Indicative of lu/w 3.3 The Imperfect Active Indicative in Compound Verbs 3.4 The Imperfect Active Indicative of ei)mi/ 3.5 The Use of the Imperfect Tense 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you have been taken though the study of the deponent verbs, the formation of the compound verbs as well as the form of the present infinities.
In this unit we now taking a detour away from the present active verbs and dwelling upon the imperfect active verbs.
In this unit you will be given the changes in the stem of the verb as we enter the imperfect realm and also study the functions of the imperfect tense.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify the verbs written in the imperfect active form.
• recall all the vocabularies given in this course so far.
• write all the imperfect indicative of ei)mi/ • discuss the use of the imperfect tense extensively.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study a)poqnh/skw I die a)poktei/nw I kill de/xomai I receive e(toima/zw I prepare qerapeu/w I heal pisteu/w I believe nu~n now (adverb) e!ti still, yet (adverb) ou)ke/ti no longer (adverb) to/te then (adverb) skoti/a, h( darkness me/n-de/ on the one hand – on the other hand (conjunction) 74 CTH 053 MODULE 2 3.2 The Imperfect Active Indicative of lu/w The personal endings in the active secondary tenses are –n; -v; none; -men; -te, -n. The variable vowel is o before an ending beginning with m, or n and it is e before any other ending.
The third person singular often take the movable n. you will also discover that the first person singular and the third person plural are identical and thus should be distinguished by the context.
Since we have been using lu/w as our we will still use the word as long as it has a form in what is intended to discuss.
The following is the imperfect active indicative of lu/w: e!luon I was loosing e)lu/omen we were loosing e!luev you were loosing e) lu/ete you were loosing e!lue he, she, it was loosing e!luon they were loosing You will notice that in the above paradigm for the imperfect active indicative of lu/w for the first time you will be seeing that there is a letter (vowel e) before each form of the word.
This letter is called an augment.
In the Greek, this augment is in an indication that the word is a secondary tense.
A secondary tense in the Greek is a tense that expresses a past time.
This is why all the translations are given in the past tense in the English.
This augment is peculiar to verbs that begin with a consonant.
It is also called “syllabic augment” because it adds a syllable to the word.
However, when the word begins with a vowel, the vowel is lengthened to the corresponding long vowel.
This is called a “temporal augment”.
In the temporal augment, e becomes h; o becomes w and a will become h and not the long a because it might not be differentiated easily.
For example, a)kou/w becomes h!kouon, e)gei/rw becomes h!geiron.
3.3 The Imperfect Active Indicative in Compound Verbs In the case of compound verbs, the augment comes after the preposition and before the vowel stem.
If the preposition ends with a vowel, the process of elision will take place.
For example, e)kba/llw becomes e)ce/ballon; a)poktei/nw becomes a0pekteinon; a0pa/gw becomes a)ph~gon.
Note that in all the examples given, the accent is no longer on the preposition for any reason but it mat rest on the augment.
75 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.4 The Imperfect Active Indicative of ei)mi/ The imperfect active Indicative of ei)mi/ is: h!mhn I was h]men we were h]v you were h]te you were h]n he (she it) was h]san they were 3.5 The Use of the Imperfect Tense The imperfect tense indicates continuous action in the past time.
The imperfect active of lu/w would be translated “I was loosing”.
Though there are several expressions of the imperfect, it is always presented as the continuous action in the past.
The emphasis however may differ.
There are however three major occurrences: The Descriptive Imperfect The descriptive imperfect is used to give a vivid representation of what was going on in past time.
It usually draws a picture of the movement of events.
A good example is Matthew 3:5-6 which reads thus: Then Jerusalem was going out (e0ceporeu/eto) to him, and they were being baptized (e0bapti/zonto) in the Jordan River.
In the above quotation, e0ceporeu/eto is the imperfect active while e0bapti/zonto is the imperfect middle or passive.
The significance of these words can be seen vividly in the context of the passage.
The Repeated or Iterative Imperfect The repeated or iterative imperfect is used to show actions repeated in the past time.
Unlike the descriptive imperfect which will denote one continuous action, the repeated imperfect will present an action that is done repeatedly.
A good illustration is found in Acts 1:7 which reads: They were asking him (), Lord art thou at this time restoring the kingdom to Israel?
The phrase could also be rendered thus: “they kept on asking him”.
This implies that the disciples have asked Jesus the same question before frequently.
76 CTH 053 MODULE 2 The Inceptive Imperfect The inceptive imperfect is also used to picture continuous action in the past.
However the emphasis is on the beginning of the action rather than on its progress.
This is best illustrated by Matthew 5:2 where the word e0di/dasken, which is best translated “he began teaching them”.
This word is used to introduce the Sermon on the Mount also in Luke 5:3 and Mark 5:37.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied extensively about the imperfect active indicative.
In the format, you have learnt about the use of augments in the stems beginning with consonants and the vowel lengthening of the stem beginning with vowels.
You have also learnt that there are three major usages of the imperfect active: the descriptive imperfect, the repeated imperfect and the inceptive imperfect.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The imperfect active indicative is used to denote continuous action in the past.
• In its form it carries an augment where the stem begins with a consonant and it takes vowel lengthening when the stem begins with a vowel.
The descriptive imperfect is used to give vivid representation of • what was going on in the past time.
• The repeated or iterative imperfect shows action repeated in the past time.
• The inceptive imperfect pictures continuous time past but with emphasis on the beginning.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. to/te h)kou/omen th~v fwnh~v au0tou~, nu~n de_ ou0ke/ti a0kou/omen au0th~v.
b. e0kei=noi me_n oi9 a9martwloi_ me/nousin e0n th~| skoti/a| ou]toi de_ ei0se/rxontai ei0v th_n basilei/an tou~ qeou~.
c. e0n e0kei/naiv tai=v h9me/raiv o9 Messi/av e0qera/peue tou_v o!xlouv kai_ 77 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR e!swzen au0tou_v a0po_ tw=n a9martiw~n au0tw~n.
d. h9toi/mason ta_v kardi/av au0tw~n ponhroi_ a!nqrwpoi o#ti h!kouon tw~n grafw~n kai_ e0pi/steuon au0ta/v.
e. dia_ me_n th//n a0ga/phn tou~ Qeou~ a0poqnh/skomen e0n th~| basilei/a| tou~ Qeou~, dexo/meqa de_ th_n zwh_n su_n tw~| ui9w~| au0tou~.
f. ponhroi_ h]te, a0gaqoi_ de/ e0ste.
g. nu~n me_n didasko/meqa u9po_ tou~ kuri/ou, to/te de_ e)dida/skomen th_n e)kklhsi/an.
h. o9 Messi/av a0pe/stellen a0gge/louv pro_v h9ma~v.
i. oi( a!nqrwpoi oi9 ponhroi_ a0pe/kteinon ta_ te/kna su_n toi=v didaska/loiv au0tw~n.
j. e0n tw~| ko/smw| h]n kai_ o9 ko/smov ou0k e0gi/nwsken au0to/n.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
The Lord was still in the temple, but they were not seeing him.
b.
On account of the truth of God, you were dying in those evil days.
c. They are still in their sins because they are not coming into the kingdom of God.
d. The evil men were killing the disciples, but the disciples were not dying in darkness and sin.
e. The apostles were preparing their hearts and preaching the gospel to sinners.
f. The same sinners were receiving the gospel of love and peace with joy.
g. Then he was a servant, but now he is a beloved son.
h. You (pl.)
are no longer abiding in the darkness of sin because you hear the voice of the Lord.
i.
The sons of the prophets were gathering the good gifts together into the temple.
j.
You (sing.)
are no longer a sinner because you are believing the gospel of God’s love and are being saved by it.
78 CTH 053 MODULE 2 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, B.
& E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament.
Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1993).
The Greek New Testament.
4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, & B. M. Metzger (Eds).
(1999).
Novum Testamentum.
Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, W. D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, R. (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek.
Nashville: Broadman Press.
79 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR MODULE 3 Unit 1 Imperfect Middle and Passive Indicative Unit 2 Future Active and Middle Indicative Unit 3 First Aorist Active and Middle Indicative Unit 4 Second Aorist Active and Middle Indicative Unit 5 Aorist Passive Indicative and Future Passive Indicative Unit 6 Third Declension: Liquid, Mute and Syncopated Stems Unit 7 Third Declension: Vowel Stem Nouns UNIT 1 IMPEREFCT MIDDLE AND PASSIVE INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Imperfect Middle and Passive Indicative of lu/w 3.3 Other Uses of kai/ 3.4 The Use of ou0de/ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to this third and last module of this course on Greek Grammar.
In the last unit, which is the end of the second module, you have been introduced to the imperfect active indicative tense.
This module would continue with the imperfect by zeroing in on the imperfect middle and imperfect passive which are identical in form.
To conclude this unit, the uses of kai/ and ou0de/ would also be examined.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • write the imperfect form of all the verbs given so far in this lesson • identify the imperfect verb when sighted in any passage 80 CTH 053 MODULE 3 • discuss the other uses of kai/ • discuss the other uses of ou0de/ 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study bibli/on, to/ book kaqari/zw I cleanse, I purify daimoni/on, to/demon ou0de/ (conj.)
and not, nor, not even e!rgon, to/ work qa/llasa, h( sea ploi~on, to/ boat ou0de/… ou0de/ neither…nor ou!pw not yet (adverb) 3.2 The Imperfect Middle and Passive Indicative of lu/w The imperfect middle and passive voice are idential just as they are in the presnet tense.
The difference is just that of the function they perfom.
Ensure that you note the differences in the translation of the imperfect middle and the imperfect passive.
The Imperfect Middle Indicative of lu/w is as follows: Person Singualar Plural 1st e)luo/ I was loosing myself e)luo/m we were mhn or for myself eqa loosing ourselves or for ourselves 2nd e)lu/o you were loosing e)lu/es you were u yourself or for qe loosing yourself youselves or for youselves 3rd e)lu/e he was loosing e)lu/on they were to himself or himself to loosing themselves or for themselves The Imperfect Passive Indicative of lu/w is as follows: Person Singualar Plural 1st e)luo/ I was being loosed e)luo/m we were being mhn eqa loosed 2nd e)lu/o you were being e)lu/es you were being u loosed qe loosed 3rd e)lu/e he (she, it) was being e)lu/on they were being to loosed to loosed 81 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR As you would have noticed, the personal endings of the middle secondary tenses are –mhn, -so, -to, -meqa, -sqe, and – nto.
There are also variable vowels as in the present active.
However, the second person suingular is altered by the loss of the s and the contraction of the connecting vowel e and the ending o.
Thus e)lu/eso becomes e)lu/ou.
Note that deponent verbs in the present are also deponent in the imperfect.
Consequently, there would be no imperfect active forms for deponent verbs.
The imperfect middle forms will have imperfect active functions.
It has to be stated that it is an idiom of Greek language that a neuter plural subject always has its verb in the singular.
For example, ta_ te/kna e!xei (not e!xousi) karpo_n kai a!rton_ would be translated “The children has fruit and bread”.
3.3 Other Uses of kai/ The basic use of kai/ is that of a simple conjunction “and” but it has other uses that are to be examined now.
It has to be noted that it could also be translated or used to mean “also” and “even”.
When it is used this way, it would be placed immediately in front of the word with which it is connected.
In English usage, “also” takes the reverse order from Greek as the word stands after the word with which it is connected.
When used this way, the context would help you to understand whether kai/ is used as a simple connective “even” or an additional connective “also”.
For example, ginw/skousi kai_ a(martwloi_ to_n no/mon will be translated “even sinners know the law”; tou~to de_ kai_ e0gw_ ginw/skw would be translated “but this I also know”.
The final usage of kai/ is that called correlative construction, in which kai/ is used twice.
For example, kai/ oi( maqhtai_ kai/ oi9 profh~tai ginw/skousi tou~to would be translated “both the disciples and the prophets know this”.
Thus, the double kai_ is translated “both…and”.
3.4 The Use of ou0de/ ou0de/ is often used a s a simple negative connective and is usally translated “and not” or “nor”.
For example, ou0 ginw/skw tou~to, ou0de_ ginw/skeiv au0to/ would be translated “I do not know this nor do you know it”.
82 CTH 053 MODULE 3 However, ou0de/ can also be used emphatically.
When it is used this way, it would be transalted “not even”.
For example, ou0de_ oi( profh~tai Ble/pousin to__n Qeo/n would be translated “not even the prophets see God”.
Finally, ou0de/ can also be used correlatively.
When it is used this way, it also appears twice in the sentence and would be translated “neither…nor” as in ou0de_ oi9 maqhtai_ ginw/skousi tou~to ou0de_ oi9 profh~tai which will translate “neither the disciples nor the prophets know this”.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt the imperfect middle and the imperfect passive indicative forms of the Greek verb.
Also you have been introduced to the use of kai__ as a simple conjunction to mean “and” and also to mean “also” as well as the correlative usage to mean “both…and”.
You have also learnt about the use ou0de/ as a simple negative connective (and not or nor); as an emphatic negative (not even) and also its correlative usage (nether … nor).
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The imperfect middle and the imperfect passive indicative forms of the Greek verb are identical • kai__ can be used as a simple conjunction to mean “and” • It can also be used to mean “also” It can also be used correlatively to mean “both…and”.
• • ou0de/ can be used as a simple negative connective (and not or nor); • It can also be used as an emphatic negative (not even) • It can also be used correlatively to mean (nether … nor).
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a) ou[toi oi9 lo/goi e0n tw~| bibli/w| e0gra/fonto.
b) kai_ oi9 lo/goi kai_ ai9 grafai_ tw~n profhtw~n h0kou//onto u9po_ tw~n a9martwlw~n.
83 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR c) e0n e0kei/naiv tai=v h9me/raiv ou0de_ e0didasko/meqa u9p 0 au0tou~ ou0de_ e0dida/skomen tou_v a!llouv.
d) to_te o!xlov e0ceporeu/eto pro_v au0to/n, nu~n de_ ou0ke/ti e0kporeu/etai.
e) kai_ pro_v tou_v ponhrou_v a0delfou_v e0fe/reto ta_ dw~ra.
f) ou!pw ble/pousi to__n ku/rion e0n th~| do/ch| au0tou~, a0lla_ e0dida/skonto u9p 0 au0tou~ kai_ e0n tai=v h9me/raiv tai=v kakai=v.
g) oi9 maqhtai_ kath/rxonto pro_v th_n qa/lassan kai_ ei0shrxo/meqa ei0v to_ ploi=on su_n tw~| kuri/w|.
h) o9 Messi/av e0ce/balle ta_ daimo/nia e0k tw~n a9martwlw~n kai_ e0kaqa/rizen au0tou_v a0po_ tw~n a9martiw~n au0tw~n.
i) e0sme_n e0n tw~| ko/smw|, e0sme_n de_ kai_ e0n th~| basilei/a| tou~ Qeou~.
j) dia_ to_n lo/gon tou~ kuri/ou ta_ daimo/nia e0ch/rxeto e0k tw~n a0nqrw/pwn.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a) In behalf of his children these books were being written by him.
b) On account of the word of God the messengers were being received into the houses of the disciples.
c) You were neither receiving the truth from us nor bearing it to others.
d) Both the love and the peace of God are being heard in the church.
e) Not even the good men are being saved by works.
f) They know the books of the men, but they know also the Scriptures of God.
g) Men were being cleansed from their sin by the Messiah and were being saved by his teachings.
h) We were going down to the sea with the apostles and entering a boat with the Lord.
i) You (pl.)
were not being killed in behalf of him, but he was dying in behalf of you.
j) The demons were being cast out of the men and their children.
84 CTH 053 MODULE 3 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
85 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 2 FUTURE ACTIVE AND FUTURE MIDDLE INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Future Stem 3.3 Stem Changes in Future Stems 3.4 Time and Kind of Action in the Future Tense 3.5 The Future Indicative of ei0mi/ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we have dealt with the last aspect of the imperfect tense which deals with actions that took place in the past though having a continuous tense.
In this unit, we will deal with the future indicative tense that has to do with actions taking place in the future.
In this unit, both the future active and the future middle indicative verbs shall be considered.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify any given future verb in any sentence • write the future stem of all the verbs you have been given so far • write the full persons and number of any given future verb • discuss the changes in the future stem write the future indicative of the verb to be • discuss the kinds of section in the future tense • • translate sample sentences in the future tense.
86 CTH 053 MODULE 3 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study a!cw I shall lead a0kou/sw I shall hear ble/yw I shall see sw/sw I shall save genh/somai I shall become gnw/somai I shall know e0leu/somai I shall come, go lh/myomai I shall take 3.2 The Future Stem The future stem is obtained by adding s to the verb stem.
For example, the verb stem of lu//w is lu//.
When you add s, it becomes lu//s.
Note that this is a primary tense, therefore the primary active endings would be used for the future active and the primary middle tense would be used for the future middle.
These endings are added to the stem through the use of the variable vowel (that is, o and e) just like the present tense.
Therefore, as you will observe below, the future active of lu//w is just like the present active form expect for the suffix s. The following is the future active form for lu//w: lu/sw I shall loose lu//somen we shall loose lu//seiv you will loose lu//sete you will loose lu//sei he, she, it will loose lu//sousi they will loose The following is the future middle form for lu//w: lu/somai I shall loose myself/for myself luso/meqa we shall loose ourselves lu//sh| you will loose yourself lu//sesqe you will loose yourselves lu//setai he (she, it) will loose himself lu//sontai they will loose themselves Note that you have not been given the future passive.
This is because it is built on a different stem entirely.
The two are not to be confused because their meanings would be different.
It will be studied later.
3.3 Stem Changes in Future Stems Note also that not all the stems of the future can be determined easily as that of lu//w.
When the stem of the verb ends in a consonant, there are some changes that are bound to occur when the tense suffix s is added to the stem.
The chart that follows would give you an idea of the kind of 87 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR changes that would take place generally.
However, you have to know that this is by no means universal.
Verbs ending in a liquid consonant (l, m, n, r) In this class of words, the s that is added to the stem would be dropped and the w would be accented.
This change is however due to some contraction principles that would be learnt later in the course.
The following are appropriate example: instead of me/nsw you will have me/nw~; a0poste/llw also becomes a0postellw~.
Verbs ending in a mute consonant Note that mute consonants are divided into three classes: palatial, labial and dental.
In the case of palatal consonants (k, g, x): the palatal consonants become c before s; hence a!gw becomes a!cw.
In the case of labial consonants (p, b, f): the labial consonants become y before s; hence ble/pw becomes ble/yw.
In the case of dental consonants (t, d, q): the dental consonants before s drops out; hence pei/qw becomes pei/sw.
The same principle applies to sibilant consonants like s and z; hence sw/zw becomes sw/sw.
Other Future Tenses Stem You also have to know that there are some future stems that are entirely different from these ones.
This difference is due to the fact that the stem of the general verb and the stem of the present stem are not always the same.
In lu/w they they are the same and this explians the similarity between the present and future tense.
However, there are other verbs that are not similar.
These include: ginw/skw the stem of which is gnw.
The future stem thus would be gnws; in the case of khru/ssw the stem is khruk- and so the future tense stem would be khruc-.
These differences account for the variety of differences between future stem forms.
However, once the first person singular of the future is learned it is easy to know the remainder of the tense forms.
It is also important to know that some verbs are active in the present but in the future tense they become deponent.
You should carefully observe this in the process of your vocabulary study.
Examples however include 88 CTH 053 MODULE 3 lamba/nw has its future in the deponent as lh/myomai; and ginw/skw is also deponent and has gnw/somai as its future form.
3.4 Time and Kind of Action in the Future Tense It is obvious that the time of action in the future tense is the future time.
The kind of action can either be punctiliar or linear.
The context will usually indicate which is intended.
Most of the time however, it is punctiliar action because the most natural construction for indicating continuous action is the periphrastic future and this would be learnt later.
The following however are the possible usages of the future tense: The Simple Predictive Future This is the simple future that predicts what will happen as in u9ma~v dida/cei.
The Imprerative Future The imperative (that is a command) may be expressed by the future as in: kale/seiv to_ o!noma au0tou~ 0Iwa/nhn, that is, “you shall call his name John”.
The Delibrative Future This is sometimes found when a rhetorical (this is a question to which one really expects no answer) question is being asked: Ku/rie, pro_v ti/na a0peleuso/meqa; that is, “Lord, to whom shall we go?” These three usages are the common ones that you will find in the New Testament.
Other usages occur less ferquently.
3.5 The Future Indicative of ei0mi/ The future indicative of ei0mi/ is as follow: e!somai I shall be e0so/meqa we shall be e!sh| you will be e!sesqe you will be e!stai he (she, it) will be e!sontai they will be 89 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been introduced to the future active and middle indicative tense in the Greek language.
You have learnt that the future stem is formed by adding sigma to the verb stem.
The addition of sigma to the stem of the verb would make some sonsonants to react by either changing their form or dropping out entirely.
You are also taught that the future tense is used in three major ways in the Greek New Testament.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The future stem is formed by adding s to the verb’s stem • The presence of s changes some consonants and some also drop out • Some future verbs have their stem different from the present active indicative • The future tense can be used in three ways: simple predictive future, the imperative and the deliberative future.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. o9 Xristo__v a!cei tou_v maqhta_v au0tou~ ei0v th_n o9do_n th~v a0ga//phv.
b. e0n e0kei/nh| th~| h9me/ra o9 Messi/av e0leu/setai su__n toi=v a0gge//loiv au0tou~.
c. a9martwloi_ me/n e0ste, genh/sesqe de__ ui9oi_ tou~ Qeou~.
d. to/te gnw/sontai o#ti au0to/v e0stin o9 Ku/riov.
e. lh/myesqe kai_ ta_ dw~ra kai_ tou_v oi!kouv.
f. ou0de_ e0gw_ tau~ta gnw//somai.
g. ai9 h9me/rai ai9 kakai_ e0leu/sontai.
h. ta_ te//kna ble/yei to_n a!ggelon e0n th~| e0kklhsi/a|.
i. khru/cousi to_ eu0agge/lion kai_ de/contai a9martwlou_v meta_ xara~v.
j. oi9 maqhtai_ a0kou/sousi th~v fwnh~v tou~ Kuri/ou au0tw~n kai_ a!cousi ta_ te/kna pro_v au0to/n.
90 CTH 053 MODULE 3 k. e0so/meqa su_n au0tw~| e0n th~| basilei/a| au0tou~.
l. ei] ponhro/v, a0ll 0 e!sh| a0gaqo/v.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
The Kingdom of God is in you.
b.
You will know the truth of God in that day.
c. They will lead the sinners and the children into the same church.
d. Now the world sees evil days, but then it will see the glory of God.
e. No longer will men be in darkness.
f. The gifts were being taken from the children by us, but we shall no longer take them.
g. The voice of the prophet will prepare a way in the hearts of men.
h. In those days you were evil, but now you are hearing the gospel and you will become good men.
i.
In this world we have death, but in heaven we shall have life with the Son of God.
j.
They were teaching against the Messiah, but now they will teach in behalf of him.
k. Now we are not seeing him, but in that day we shall both see and know him.
l. These men are not yet good, but on account of the word of God, they will become good.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
91 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 3 FIRST AORIST ACTIVE AND MIDDLE INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Aorist 3.3 The First Aorist Active Indicative of lu/w 3.4 The First Aorist Middle Indicative of lu/w 3.5 Functions of the Aorist 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we dealt with the future active and the future middle that deals with the future tense in the Greek language.
In this unit you would be introduced to the aorist tense.
The aorist is almost equivalent to the past tense of the English.
The aorist is different from the imperefect in that it may not denote a continuing action in the past.
As the topic of this unit indicates, there are two forms of aorist and in this unit we will deal with the first aorist.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the aorist stem • identify the aorist stem • explain the functions of the aorist stem • write the first aorist stem of the verbs having the first aorist form • explain the difference between the imperfect and the aorist • explain the formation of the first aorist.
92 CTH 053 MODULE 3 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study h!kousa I heard e!bleya I saw e0di/daca I taught e0qera/peusa I healed e0kh/ruca I preached e!graya I wrote e!pemya I sent e0ba/ptisa I baptized e!swsa I saved e0do/casa I glorified 3.2 The Aorist In Greek as in English language, there are two ways to form the past tense.
It is important to note that this does not mean that each verb has two ways of forming the past tense.
Though some Greek verbs do have the two ways, it must be noted that such verbs are very rare.
The two ways of forming the past tense in the Greek are called the first and the second aorist.
The Greek verbs that add the s to their stems are called the first aorist and the others that add the endings without the s are called the second aorist.
Despite these differences in formation there is basically no difference between the two in terms of function.
The aorist is a secondary tense because it deals with the actions in the past time.
It is therefore augmented just like the imperfect.
Remember that in the augment, a stem beginning with a consonant takes the “syllabic augment” and the stem beginning with a vowel takes the “temporal augment”.
As a secondary tense, the aorist takes secondary active endings in the active and secondary middle endings in the middle.
The aorist passive is entirely different from the aorist middle in form as well as in function.
3.3 The First Aorist Active Indicative of lu/w e!lusa I loosed e0lu/samen we loosed e!lusav you loosed e0lu/sate you loosed e!luse (n) he (she, it) loosed e0lu/santo they loosed 93 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.4 The First Aorist Middle Indicative of lu/w e0lu/samhn I loosed myself e0lu/sameqa we loosed or for myself ourselves or for ourselves e0lu/sw you loosed e0lu/sasqe you loosed yourself or for yourselves or for yourself yourselves e0lu/sato he (she, it) e0lu/santo they loosed loosed himself themselves or for or for himself themselves Please note that it is easier for you to study all the changes in the word formation as part of the vocabulary.
It is also important to remind you that because of the addition of s to the stem of the word, there would be changes in the word.
In general, these changes would correspond to the ones studied earlier when the future stem was studied (you can go back and revise these changes now) but this is not a safe test.
It is better to check a lexicon for the for the first person singular of the word after which it would be easier for you to list other forms.
3.5 Functions of the Aorist It has to be stated that the functions of the aorist tense is a matter of tremendous importance.
As stated earlier, the time of action is in the past and the kind of action is punctiliar.
This is the major difference between the imperfect and the aorist.
Remember that the imperfect indicates continuous action in the past (for example: I was loosing) but the aorist indicates a finished action in the past (for example: I loosed).
The Greek aorist would correspond more to the simple past tense and the perfect tense of the English language.
The use of the aorist tense has many implications: Constative Aorist In this usage, the action is looked upon in its entirety.
For example, e0ba/ptiste tou_v a0nqrw/pouv would be interpreted “he baptized the men”.
You will notice that though the action may have covered considerable time, it would be presented as one act.
Ingressive Aorist In this usage the aorist views the act as having occurred but emphasizes the initiation of the action.
For example, di 0 u9ma~v 94 CTH 053 MODULE 3 e0ptw/xeuse would be translated “for your sakes he becane poor”.
In this usage, the action is one and it is viewed from its inception.
Culminative Aorist The culminative aorist views the action as having occurred but emphasizes the end of the action or the state of being resulting from the action.
For example, to_n prw~ton lo/gon e0poihsa/mhn would be translated “the former treatise I have made”.
In this phrase, the act of writing is looked upon as one act but the emphasis is on the finished product.
Though in this function the aorist overlaps with the Greek perfect tense, the difference would be expatiated on during the study of the perfect tense.
Note that there are other usages but these are sparse in the New Testament Greek.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been introduced to the aorist tense of the Greek language.
It is the tense used to depict the action in the past time.
Being a secondary tense, it has to make use of the augment and also have the s added to its stem.
The aorist is of two forms: the first and the second aorist.
The usage in the New Testament is mainly in three ways: the constantive, the ingressive and the culminative usages.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The aorist tense used to depict the action in the past time.
• Being a secondary tense, it has to make use of the augment and also have the s added to its stem.
• The aorist is of two forms: the first and the second aorist.
• The usage in the New Testament is mainly in three ways: the constantive, the ingressive and the culminative usages.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. e!lusen o( ku/riov tou__v dou/louv au0tou~.
b. e0pe/myamen ta_ te/kna e0k tou~ oi!kou.
c. oi9 maqhtai_ e0do/casan to_n Qeo_n kai_ to_n ui9o_n au0tou~.
d. dia_ tou_v lo/gouv u9mw~n e0ble/yamen th_n ponhra_n o9do_n tou~ ko/smou.
95 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR e. e)kh/rucav to_ eu0agge/lion kai_ oi9 a0delfoi/ sou h!kousan au0to_ kai_ e0pi/steusan.
f. e!graye parabolh_n kai_ e!pemyen au0th_n pro_v th_n e0kklhsi/an.
g. o9 Messi/av e0di/dacen e0n tw~| i9erw~| kai_ e0n tw~| oi!kw|.
h. h9toi/mase toi~v maqhtai=v to/pon e0n tw~| ou)ranw~|.
i. e!swsa u9ma~v e1gw/, u9mei=v de_ ou0k e0de/casqe e0me_ ei0v tou_v oi!kouv u9mw~~n.
j. h0kou/sate e0kei/nav ta_v e0ntola_v e0n tw~| i9erw~|, a!llav de_ e0n th~| e0kklhsi/a| a0kou/sete.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
They heard his voice but did not receive his words.
b.
The evil men saw the Lord, and he preached to them the way of life.
c. The servants have prepared gifts and houses for the disciples.
d. Even those evil men glorified God on account of your words.
e. We have preached the gospel to them and have baptized their children.
f. The Lord of life healed the sinners and saved them.
g. You (pl.)
received the same disciples and believed the same Christ.
h. He has not sent the books nor will he send them.
i.
These good women glorified God because he healed their brothers and saved their sons.
j.
You (sing.)
began to preach the gospel because you heard the voice of the Lord.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
96 CTH 053 MODULE 3 Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
97 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 4 SECOND AORIST ACTIVE AND MIDDLE INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Second Aorist 3.3 The Second Aorist Active Indicative of lu/w 3.4 The Second Aorist Middle Indicative of lu/w 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we dealt with the first aorist active and the first aorist middle which is the first form of the aorist form.
In this unit, you will be exposed to the second form of the aorist.
You are hereby advised to return to the last unit and revise the section on the aorist verb because most of the principles taught are applicable here.
As you have been told before, the only difference between the first and second aorist is just that of form and not function.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify the difference between the first and the second aorist • write the second aorist form for verbs that have the second aorist form • identify some verbs that have both the first and second aorist forms.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study e!balon I threw, cast ei]don I saw ei]pon I said e!labon I took h!gagon I led h]lqon I came, went h!negka (1st aorist of I bore, brought) lei/pw I leave 98 CTH 053 MODULE 3 h!negkon (2nd aorist of I bore, brought)e!lipon I left pa/sxw I suffer e!paqon I suffered pi/ptw I fall e!peson I fell e!sxon I had e!fagon I ate 3.2 The Second Aorist The second aorist as said earlier is the kind of past tense in the Greek language that does not form the past tense by adding s to the stem but alter the stem radically and then add the secondary personal endings.
It has to be noted that there is no way to determine whether a Greek verb will take the first or the second aorist.
You may need to check the lexicon to determine this.
Once you have determined the form of aorist a verb will take, it would be easy for you to finish up the declension.
Note however that there are very few irregular second aorist words, but for the most part they are very regular.
If you see a second aorist verb, to trace it back to the stem, follow the following steps: First, strike off the secondary personal endings.
For example, it will be on in the first person singular.
Second, if it is a syllabic augment, remove the augment and if it is a temporal augment, shorten the vowel back to the normal short vowel.
For example, to determine the stem of e!lipon remove the on and the e which is the augment and what you will have is lip-.
You must know that the functions of the first and second aorist are exactly the same.
The difference is only that of form.
Consequently, with words that have the two forms of aorist, they mean the same thing.
For example, h!negka (first aorist) and (h!negkon (second aorist) forms of fe/rw mean the same thing: “I bore or I brought”.
The following verbs should however be noted: The verb ei]don is from the verb ei!da though some grammarians classify it as a second aorist form of ble/pw.
The second aorist ei]pon is from the verb fhmi/ though some grammarians classify it as a second aorist form of le/gw.
These verbs ei]don and ei]pon in the New Testament usually has first aorist endings on the second aorist stem.
You have to know also that there are some verbs that are deponent in the present tense but are active in the aorist.
An example is e!rxomai that has its aorist active as h]lqon and not h0lqo/mhn.
As it has been said earlier you may need to check up confusing words in the lexicon to determine what their forms in the aorist would be.
99 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.3 The Second Aorist Active Indicative of lei/pw The second aorist is one of those tenses where lu/w could no longer be used as our example.
As a result focus would be changed to the above word.
The following is then the second aorist active of lei/pw: e!lipon I left e0li/pomen we left e!lipev you left e0li/pete you left e!lipe(n) he, she, it left e!lipon they left 3.4 The Second Aorist Middle Indicative of lei/pw e0lipo/mhn I left for myself e0lipo/meqa we left for ourselves e0li/pou you left for e0li/pesqe you left for yourself yourselves e0li/peto he (she, it) left e0li/ponto they left for for himself themselves 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been introduced to the second aorist active and the second aorist middle of the Greek tense.
By now you are aware that the second aorist tense do not use the addition of s to the stem of the the verb but alter the stem radically before adding the regular personal endings.
You were also taught that there is no difference between the first and the second aorist in function but in form.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major lessons you have learnt in this unit: • The second aorist do not form the past tense by adding s to the stem of the verb but by altering the stem radically before adding the regular personal endings.
• There is no difference between the first and the second aorist in function except in form.
• There are some words that have their aorist both in the first and the second aorist.
• There are some verbs that are deponent in the present tense but are active in the aorist.
• There are some peculiar verbs that have first aorist endings on the second aorist stem.
100 CTH 053 MODULE 3 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. pare/labe th/n e0paggeli/an para_ tou~ Messi/ou, kai_ khru/ssei au0th_n e0n th~| e0kklhsi/a|.
b. e0ge/nonto oi9 maqhtai_ tou~ Kuri/ou.
c. o9 Xristo_v e0ce/bale ta_v a9marti/av tw~n a9martwlw~n kai_ e0qera/peusen au0tou/v.
d. kai_ ei!domen to_n Ku/rion kai_ h0kou//samen tw~n lo/gwn au0tou~.
e. oi9 a0po/stoloi ei]don to_n ui9on tou~ Qeou~, e0ge/neto ga__r au0to_v a!nqrwpov kai_ e!menen e0n tw~| ko/smw|.
f. tau~ta ei!pete h9mi=n e0n tw~| i9erw~|, e0kei=na de_ e0n tw~| oi!kw|.
g. ou0de_ ei0sh~lqev ei0v th_n e0kklhsi/an, ou0de_ ei]pev lo/gouv a0ga/phv toi=v te/knoiv.
h. ta_ i9era_ ai9 pistai_ e!lipon, kai_ kath~lqon ei0v tou/v oi!kouv au0tw~n.
i. o9 a!nqrwpov h!gage ta_ te/kna pro_v to_n Ku/rion o#ti e!sxe th_n a0ga/phn tou~ Qeou~ e0n th~| kardi/a| au0tou~.
j. oi9 di/kaioi e!fagon a!rton e0n th~| e0rh/mw| kai_ e0do/casan to_n Qeo/n.
k. o9 Xristo_v e!paqe ponhra_ u9pe_r a9martwlw~n.
l. ta_ te/kna h!negke li/qouv kai_ ei0se/balen au0tou_v ei0v to_n oi]kon tou~ profh/tou.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
The sinners ate the Lord’s bread, but they did not glorify God.
b. Stones fell from the house, and the children bore them into the desert.
c. The Son of God suffered in those days.
d. You left your brother in the house of sin, but I am leading him to the Lord.
e. The sinners had houses, but they left them because the voice of the Messiah was being heard in the church.
101 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR f. We saw the Lord, we heard his parables, and we became his disciples.
g. The children said bad words because they heard them from the evil men.
h. He took gifts of bread, but I took gifts of fruit.
i.
The brothers say that they saw the Lord and heard parables from him.
j.
You have become righteous because the Son of God came down from heaven and into your hearts.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
102 CTH 053 MODULE 3 UNIT 5 AORIST PASSIVE INDICATIVE AND FUTURE PASSIVE INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The First Aorist Passive 3.3 The Second Aorist Passive 3.4 The Future Passive 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we dealt with the second aorist active and middle indicative verb of the Greek language.
In this unit, you will combine the study of the aorist passive and the future passive indicative.
You will recall that before you studied the aorist tense you have studied the active and the middle form of the future tense.
Now be prepared to handle the passive form of both tenses.
Remember that in the passive voice it is the subject of the sentence that is being acted upon.
You may need to revise the future active and middle as well as the voices in the Greek verbs before you commence your study of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the first aorist passive verbs • identify the second aorist passive verbs • identify the future passive verbs • write the future passive of all the verbs you have been given to this point • write the aorist passive (whether first or second) of all the verbs you have been given to this point.
103 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study e0blh/qhn I was thrown e0genh/qhn I became e0gnw/sqhn I was known e0dida/xqhn I was taught e0khru/xqhn I was preachede0lh/mfqhn I was taken e0poreu/qhn I went h0kou/sqhn I was heard e0lei/fqhn I was left a0pesta/lhn I was sent e0gra/fhn I was written w!fqhn I was seen 3.2 The First Aorist Passive The first aorist passive has a tense suffix which is the syllable qe but in the indicative it appears as qh.
As a secondary tense the aorist passive is augmented in the normal way and takes the secondary personal endings which are added without the use of a connecting vowel.
You have to note here that the secondary active endings are used even though this is the passive voice.
This would be reflected in the example that would follow.
When the verb stem ends with a consonant there are various changes before the qh of the aorist passive.
Following are the changes that are normally made; however you need to check the lexicon until you have mastered the aorist passive form: Liquid Consonants n drops out before q.
For example, kri/nw becomes e0kri/qhn.
l, r are retained before q.
For example, a0gge/llw becomes h0gge/lqhn.
m inserts h before q.
For example, ne/mw becomes e0nemh/qhn.
Mute Consonants Palatals k, g change to x before q.
For example, a!gw becomes h!xqhn and diw/kw becomes e0diw/xqhn.
x is retained before q.
For example, dida/skw becomes e0dida/xqhn.
104 CTH 053 MODULE 3 Labials p, b change to f before q.
For example, lei/pw becomes e0lei/fqhn and tri/bw becomes e0tri/fqhn.
f elides the q and becomes second aorist.
This would be discussed fully in the next section.
Dentals t, d, q change to s before q.
For example, pei/qw becomes e0pei/sqhn.
Sibilants Sibilants change to s before q.
For example, bapti/zw becomes e0bapti/sqhn.
3.3 The Second Aorist Passive The second aorist passive is like the first aorist passive except for the absence of the q.
Remember that the aorist passive of a verb cannot be determined by the aorist active.
Some verbs like gra/fw have the first aorist active and the second aorist passive.
Others like lei/pw have second aorist active and first aorist passive.
However as far as function is concerned both first and second aorist passive are the same.
They both indicate finished action received by the subject in the past time.
The second aorist passive of a0poste/llw is set out below: a0pesta/lhn I was sent a0pesta/lhmen we were sent a0pesta/lhv you were sent a0pesta/lhte you were sent a0pesta/lh he (she, it) was sent a0pesta/lhsan they were sent 3.4 The Future Passive The future passive indicative is based on the aorist passive stem and this is why the study is delayed until you have understood the aorist passive stem.
As a primary tense however, it will not take any augment and it will use primary passive personal endings.
In addition to this, it will also take the future tense suffix (s) and the variable connecting vowel o or e. In function, the future passive deals with action received by the subject in the future time.
The following is the future passive of lu/w: 105 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR luqh/somai I shall be loosed luqhso/meqa we shall be loosed luqh/sh| you will be loosed luqh/sesqe you will be loosed luqh/setai he (she, it) will be loosed luqh/sontai they will be loosed You have to note that most deponent verbs vary in the aorist and future passive.
Some have passive forms like a0pokri/nomai.
In the aorist passive it is written as a0pekri/qhn “I answered”.
Some other verbs have both the passive and the middle forms in the aorist.
An example of this is gi/nomai.
It can appear as e0geno/mhn and as e0genh/qhn.
Both are however translated “I became”.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied the forms of the aorist passive and the future passive indicative.
You have been taught the formation of the stems of the two tenses and the expected changes when the suffix of the stems are added.
You also by now know that there is the first aorist and the second aorist passive as well.
You have also been told that the future passive tense is built on the aorist passive stem except that it adds the features of the future tense which is a primary stem.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have studied in this unit: The tense suffix of the first aorist is qe though it appears as qh.
• • The second aorist passive is like the first aorist except for the absence of the q.
• The future passive indicative is built on the aorist passive stem.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. e0dida/xqhte u9po_ tw~n a0posto/lwn tou~ Kuri/ou.
b. e0n e0kei/nh| th~| h9me/ra| oi9 nekroi_ e0gerqh/sontai e0n tw~| lo/gw| tou~ qeou~.
c. tau~ta e0gra/fh e0n tai=v grafai=v.
d. ou]toi oi9 a9martwloi_ sunh/xqhsan ei0v to_n oi]kon tou~ profh/tou.
106 CTH 053 MODULE 3 e. nu~n me_n pe/mpontai oi9 maqhtai/, to/te de_ e0pe/mfqhsan kai_ oi9 a0po/stoloi kai_ oi9 a!ggeloi.
f. dia_ th~v a0ga/phv tou~ Xristou~ oi9 a9martwloi_ e0sw/qhsan kai_ e0genh/qhsan maqhtai_ tou~ Kuri/ou.
g. e0poreu/qhmen ei0v e#teron to/pon, e0kei=noi ga_r ou0k e0de/canto h9ma~v.
h. to_ eu0agge/lion e0khru/xqh e0n e0kei/naiv tai=v h9me/raiv, kai_ khruxqh/setai kai_ nu~n.
i. h9 fwnh_ h0kou/sqh kai_ o9 a0po/stolov a0pesta/lh ei0v to_n ko/smon.
j. tw~n a9martwlw~n prw~to/v ei0mi, kai_ de_ e0gw_ e0sw/qhn th~| a0ga/ph| tou~ Qeou~.
k. ei0sh~lqev ei0v th_n e0kklhsi/an tou~ Kuri/ou kai_ e0bapti/sqhv.
l. e0n e0kei/naiv tai=v h9me/raiv a0kousqh/setai o9 lo/gov th~v ei0rh/nhv.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
The evil men were saved because they were taught the way of Christ.
b.
The Lord went into heaven, but the apostles were left in the world.
c. The voice was heard, and the gospel was preached.
d. The churches were seen by the faithful men, and they went into them with their children.
e. You became a disciple of the Lord because his love was known by you.
f. Stones were taken from the desert and thrown into the houses of the men of God.
g. The books were written, and the messengers were sent to sinners.
h. Now the words of Christ are being heard, but then he himself shall be heard and seen in heaven.
i.
After these things he was received up into glory.
j.
The Son of God was glorified, and the sinners were saved.
k. You were sinners, but you became sons.
l. His word shall be preached in the world, and children shall be cleansed form their sins.
107 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
108 CTH 053 MODULE 3 UNIT 6 THIRD DECLENSION: LIQUID, MUTE AND SYNCOPATED STEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Analysis of the Third Declension 3.3 The Third Declension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we dealt with the aorist passive indicative and the future passive indicative.
However, we will pause in our focus on verbs and take a look again at the nouns.
This time, we will look at the third declension having exhausted what we need to know about the first and second declension.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the liquid stem • identify the mute stem • identify the syncopated stem • explain the formation of the above stems 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study ai0w/n, ai0w~nov, o9 age11 a!rxwn, a!rxontov, o9 ruler e0lpi/v, e0lpi/dov, h9 hope nu/c, nukto/v, h9 night sa/rc, sarko/v, h9 flesh xa/riv,xa/ritov, h9 grace path/r, patro/v, o9 father mh//thr,mhtro/v,h9 mother quga/thr, qugatro/v, h9 daughter a 0rxh/, h9 beginning a0ggeli/a, h9 message koinwni/a, h9 fellowship 1 ei0v to_n ai0w~na is a Greek idiom meaning “forever” and ei0v tou_v ai0w~nav is another idiom meaning “forever and ever”.
109 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.2 Analysis of the Third Declension There are five major classes of the third declension nouns and these are known as liquid, mute, syncopated, vowel stem and the neuter stem.
Within these divisions are other divisions especially in the vowel and neuter stems.
These two will be considered in the next unit.
The Liquid Stem The liquid stem nouns are the nouns ending in liquid consonants.
They are mostly masculine nouns with a few feminine nouns.
The two, that is the masculine and the feminine nouns would be declined as ai0w/n below.
Theoretically, find the stem of the noun and add the endings.
The Mute Stem These are the nouns ending in mute consonants.
Like the liquid stem nouns they also consist of masculine and few feminine nouns.
In the paradigm that would be given below, they are represented by xa/riv, e0lpi/v, and nu/c.
Using three examples is because of the difference in their declension.
For example, xa/riv and e0lpi/v are declined alike except in the accusative singular.
The difference as you will notice is that in the accusative singular, e0lpi/v ended with aand xa/riv with n. You will now be faced with the dilemma of when to use either aor n for the singular accusative.
The answer is this: when a noun stem ends in t, d or q preceded by i or u and it is not accented on the ultima in the nominative form, the accusative singular has the n ending and the mute consonant drops out.
Try to study this rule in the light of the declension of xa/riv and e0lpi/v and you will understand it properly.
The inclusion of nu/c is to serve as an example of monosyllabic nouns of the third declension.
These nouns are all not mute, some of them are liquid.
When accenting monosyllabic nouns of the third declension they take the accent in the ultima in all forms except nominative plural and accusative singular and plural.
The Syncopated Stems The nouns in this class are also a mixture of masculine and feminine nouns.
They are called syncopated nouns because of the shifting of regular accent.
Their accent is explained by the use of path/r below.
110 CTH 053 MODULE 3 The following analysis of the syncopated noun will indicate its highly inflected nature: • The stem is found by changing the h to e in the nominative singular.
This is unusual for a third declension noun.
• The genitive and dative forms singular drop the e of the stem and accent the ultima.
• The vocative singular is the simple stem of the noun and the accent is recessive.
• The stem vowel is accented in all plural forms.
• The plural dative drops the stem vowel e and inserts a short a before the si ending.
• This analysis is true of all syncopated nouns except a0nh/r (man) which is so irregular that it has to be omitted from this study.
Its forms in the Greek New Testament are best learnt by observation.
3.3 The Third Declension In the third declension, there is a basic change in the dative plural form especially when the stem of the noun ends in a consonant.
This is because the declension has to end with si.
The following changes have to take place: p, b or f added to si becomes yi k, g or x added to si becomes ci t, d or q drops out leaving the si n drops out leaving the si nt drops out leaving the si but because two consonants are lost the vowel preceding the nt is lenthened.
Through this, o becomes ou as in a!rxontsi which will become a!rxousi.
Note that all these third plural inflected forms may take the movable n. Before giving the paradigms it is better to first give the endings for the third declension: Case Singular Plural Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
v (or v (or none ev ev a none) none) (short) Gen. ov ov os wn wn wn 111 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR Dat.
i (short) i (short) i si (short) si si (short) (short) (short) Acc.
n/a n/a none av (short) av a (short) (short) (short) (short) Voc.
none none none ev ev a (short) The following are paradigms for the declension: Liquid Stem (using ai0w/n) Case Singular Plural Nominative ai0w/n ai0w~nev Genitive (Ablative) ai0w~nov ai0w/nwn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
ai0w~ni ai0w~si Accusative ai0w~na ai0w~nav Vocative ai0w/n ai0w~nev Mute Stem (using xa/riv) Case Singular Plural Nominative xa/riv xa/ritev Genitive (Ablative) xa/ritov xari/twn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
xa/riti xa/risi Accusative xa/rin xa/ritav Vocative xa/riv xa/ritev Mute Stem (using e0lpi/v) Case Singular Plural Nominative e0lpi/v e0lpi/dev Genitive (Ablative) e0lpi/dov e0lpi/dwn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
e0lpi/di e0lpi/si Accusative e0lpi/da e0lpi/dav Vocative e0lpi/v e0lpi/dev Mute Stem (using nu/c) Case Singular Plural Nominative nu/c nu/ktev Genitive (Ablative) nukto/v nuktw~n 112 CTH 053 MODULE 3 Dative (Loc., Inst.)
nukti/ nuci/ Accusative nu/kta nu/ktav Vocative nu/c nu/ktev Syncopated Stem (using path/r) Case Singular Plural Nominative path/r pate/rev Genitive (Ablative) patro/v pate/rwn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
patri/ patra/si Accusative pate/ra pate/rav Vocative pa/ter pate/rev 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been introduced to the third declension which consists of liquid, mute and syncopated stems.
Various nouns have been used as an example of the three declension forms.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • There are five major classes of third declension nouns: liquid, mute, syncopated, vowel stem and neuter.
• The si ending in this class of nouns leads to changes in the stems ending with consonants.
• Monosyllabic nouns are highly irregular.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. e0lpi/da ou0k e!xomen o#ti ou0 ginw/skomen to_n Ku/rion.
b. th~| xa/riti au0tou~ o9 Qeo_v e!swsen a9martwlou/v.
c. o9 lo/gov mou me/nei ei0v to_n ai0w~na.
d. o9 a0po/stolov ou0ke/ti ginw/skei to_n Ku/rion kata_ th_n sa/rka.
e. o9 ponhro_v maqhth_v e0ch~lqe kai_ h]n nu/c.
f. a!rxwn h]lqe pro__v to_n Xristo_n kai_ e0dida/xqh th_n o9do_n th~v zwh~v.
g. le//gomen o#ti e!xomen koinwni/an met 0 au0tou~.
113 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR h. o9 Qeo/v e0stin a9gaqo_v kai_ oi9 ui9oi_ me/nousin e9n au0tw~| ei0v tou_v ai0w~nav tw~n ai0w/nwn.
i. e0n a0rxh~ h]n o9 Lo/gov, kai_ o9 Lo/gov h]n pro_v to_n Qeo/n, kai_ Qeo_v h]n o9 Lo/gov.
Ou]tov h]n e0n a0rxh~| pro_v to_n Qeo/n.
pa/nta di 0 au0tou~ e0ge/neto.
j. o9 Ku/riov dida/skei o#ti o9 Qeo/v e0stin o9 path_r a9gaqw~n a0nqrw/pwn.
k. o9 ui9o_v kai_ h9 quga/thr lamba/nousi kala_ dw~ra a0po_ th~v mhtro_v au0tw~n.
l. a0ga/ph kai_ e0lpi_v me/nousi ei0v to_n ai0w~na.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a.
The Son of God is the ruler of his kingdom.
b.
The faithful disciples preached the gospel in the night and in the day.
c. The flesh is evil, but it will be cleansed from sin by the grace of God.
d. From the beginning of our fellowship with him we knew peace.
e. The daughter was taught the love of God by her mother, and the son by his father.
f. We were wicked men, but we were saved by his grace and love.
g. Through the death of the Son we see the love of the Father.
h. The world shall be destroyed, but the kingdom of heaven abides forever and ever.
i.
The message of his church brings love, truth, grace and hope.
j.
The Son was raised from death by the Father, and now men have hope of life after death.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
114 CTH 053 MODULE 3 Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
115 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR UNIT 7 THIRD DECLENSION: VOWEL STEM NOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The i Stem Nouns 3.3 The eu Stem Nouns 3.4 The u Stem Nouns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you started working on the third declension nouns by going through the liquid, the mute and the syncopated stems.
You would have noticed the variety of declension in all these stems and the need for you to master these declensions.
In this unit, you will continue the study of the third declension nouns by examining the vowel stem nouns which are in three classes too as reflected in the contents above.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify and decline all i stem nouns • identify and decline all eu stem nouns • identify and decline all u stem nouns.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study a0na/stasiv, a0nasta/sewv, h9 resurrection gnw~siv, gnw/sewv, h9 knowledge du/namiv, duna/mewv h9 power kri/siv, kri/sewv h9 judgement pi/stiv, pi/stewv, h9 faith po/liv, po/lewv h9 city sta/siv, sta/sewv, h9 dissension 116 CTH 053 MODULE 3 a0lieu/v, a9lie/wv, o9 fisherman a0rxiereu/v, a0rxiere/wv, o9 chief priest basileu/v, basile/wv, o9 king grammateu/v, grammate/wv, o9 scribe i9ereu/v, i9ere/wv, o9 fish sta/xuv, sta/xuov, o9 ear of corn 3.2 The i Stem Nouns The i stem nouns of the third declension are all feminine nouns.
The following paradigms are representative of this class: The i Stem Nouns (using pi/stiv) Case Singular Plural Nominative pi/stiv pi/steiv Genitive (Ablative) pi/stewv pi/stewn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
pi/stei pi/stesi Accusative pi/stin pi/steiv Vocative pi/sti pi/steiv The i Stem Nouns (using du/namiv) Case Singular Plural Nominative du/namiv duna/meiv Genitive (Ablative) duna/mewv duna/mewn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
duna/mei duna/mesi Accusative du/namin duna/meiv Vocative du/nami duna/meiv The following analysis calls attention to the characteristics of the inflection of these nouns: • Find the stem by striking off the s in the nominative singular.
• e replaces the final i except in the nominative, accusative and vocative singular.
• e unites with i ending in dative singular to form a diphthong.
• eiv in nominative plural and accusative plural is the result of the contraction of eev and eav respectively.
• The accent of the genitive singular and plural is irregular and stands on the antepenult even with a long ultima.
117 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR 3.3 The eu Stem Nouns The eu stem nouns of third declension are all masculine.
The following is the paradigm using i9ereu/v: The eu Stem Nouns (using i9ereu/v) Case Singular Plural Nominative i9ereu/v i9erei=v Genitive (Ablative) i9ere/wv i9ere/wn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
i9erei= i9ereu~si Accusative i9ere/a i9erei=v Vocative i9ereu~ i9erei=v The following features could be noted in the analysis of the inflection of this class: • Find the stem by striking off the s of the nominative singular.
• The final u of the stem is dropped before an ending with a vowel.
• In the dative singular and the nominative and accusative plural the same combinations as are found in the i stem nouns proper.
3.4 The u Stem Nouns The u stem nouns of the third declension are mostly masculine; however there are a few feminine and one neuter (da/kru, a tear) noun.
The inflection is regular.
The stem is found by dropping the s of the nominative singular.
The u Stem Nouns (using i0xqu/v) Case Singular Plural Nominative i0xqu/v i0xqu/ev Genitive (Ablative) i0xqu/ov i0xqu/wn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
i0xqu/i i0xqu/si Accusative i0xqu/n i0xqu/av or i0xqu~v Vocative i0xqu/ i0xqu/ev 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been given the entire paradigm for the vowel stem nouns of the third declension.
These are sub-divided into three classes: the i stem, the eu stem and the u stem.
118 CTH 053 MODULE 3 5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The i stem nouns of the third declension are all feminine • The eu stem nouns of the third declension are all masculine • The u stem nouns of the third declension are mostly masculine but with a few feminine nouns and one neuter noun.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Translate the following sentences to English a. oi9 maqhtai_ tou~ Kuri/ou e0sqi/ousi a!rton kai_ i0xqu_n kai_ sta/xuav.
b. o9 Messi/av e0kh/russe to_ eu0agge/lion toi=v a9lieu~si kai_ oi9 a0rxierei=v kai_ oi9 grammatei=v e!pempon tou_v dou/louv au0tw~n a0kou/ein au0to/n.
c. e0sw/qhmen th~| xa/riti dia_ pi/stewv.
d. e0n th~| po/lei o9 basileu_v me/vei, oi9 de_ a9liei=v para_ th~| qala/ssh|.
e. o9 Qeo_v e1xei th_n du/namin kri/seowv e0n tw~| ko/smw| kai_ e0n tw~| ou0ranw~|.
f. oi9 i9erei=v ginw/skousi to_n no/mon, a0ll 0 ou0 ginw/skousi xa/rin kai_ pi/stin.
g. e0n th~| a0nasta/sei tou~ Xristou~ e0la/bomen zwh_n kai_ ei0rh/nhn.
h. sta/siv e0n th~| e0kklhsi/a| e0sti_ kakh/.
i. o9 basileu_v o9 a9gaqo_v ble/pei th_n h9me/ran tou~ Kuri/ou.
j. lh/myesqe du/namin a0po_ tou~ Qeou~ kai_ e1sesqe oi9 maqhtai_ au0tou~.
ii.
Translate the following sentences to Greek a) The chief priests and the scribes went out of the temple to hear the Lord.
b) The Lord spoke a parable to the fishermen, and they became his disciples.
c) The disciples were eating corn, and the priests saw them.
d) Even the children of the wicked men have the knowledge of God’s grace in their hearts.
119 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR e) You were cleansed from your sins by grace through faith.
f) I have heard the parable concerning the judgement, and I received its truth into my heart.
g) By the resurrection of Christ from death the power of the Father is being glorified.
h) The king judges his servants, but we are under the power of the Lord.
i) By the law comes the knowledge of the power of sin.
j) Dissension was in the city on account of the parable concerning light and darkness.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
120 CTH 053 MODULE 3 UNIT 8 THIRD DECLENSION: NEUTER NOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The ev Stem Nouns 3.3 The at Stem Nouns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you continued with your study of the third declension nouns and have started on the vowel stem nouns.
You have also learnt that the vowel stem nouns are divisible into three classes.
In this unit which will conclude your study of the third declension and also your study of Greek grammar, you will be working on the neuter nouns of the third declension which are of two classes only.
Welcome to the end of this course and let me give this warning: do not abandon your study of Greek grammar until you complete all the work.
In other words, till you come to Greek Syntax which is the second part of this study.
So, continue your study of this course as this will keep you fresh.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify and write out the full forms of ev stem nouns • identify and write out the full forms of at6 stem nouns.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study ba/qov, ba/qouv, to/depth o1noma, o0no/matov, to/name ge/nov, ge/nouv, to/race ai[ma,ai#matov to/blood e1qnov, e1qnouv, to/nation1 qe/lhma, qelh/matov, to/will2 e1qov, e1qouv, to/custom pneu~ma,pneu/matov to/spirit e1leov, e0le/ouv, to/ mercy r9h~ma, r9h/matov, to/word o1rov, o1rouv, to/mountain sto/ma, sto/matov, to/ mouth 2 When placed in the plural, this word is often translated “Gentiles”.
121 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR te/lov, te/louv to/end sw~ma, sw/matov, to/body sko/tov, sko/touv, to/darkness u#der, u3datov, to/water 3.2 The ev Stem Nouns In the above vocabularies, the first column contains the nouns known as the ev stem nouns.
They are so called because the stem really ends with ev.
In the actual inflection of the nouns so many contractions have taken place that the basic stem cannot be seen anymore.
The endings given for the third declension nouns earlier should be reviewed.
Note how these endings are used and the changes in form in the following example.
The stem here is genes-: The ev Stem Nouns (using ge/nev) Singular Plural Case Original Form Original Form Form Actually Form Actually Used Used Nominative ge/nev ge/nov ge/nesa ge/nh Genitive (Ablative) ge/nesov ge/nouv gene/swn genw~n Dative (Loc., Inst.)
ge/nesi ge/nei ge/nessi ge/nesi Accusative ge/nev ge/nov ge/nesa ge/nh Vocative ge/nev ge/nov ge/nesa ge/nh Note that the changes in the paradigm above are due to the loss of s in many of the forms and the resulting contraction of the e with the case ending.
For practical usage, you should learn the forms that are actually used rather than the original forms which are not used in the New Testament at all.
You should also know that all the third declension neuter nouns with the genitive ending in ouv will be declined as above.
3.3 The at Stem Nouns The nouns in the second column of the vocabulary above are all at stem nouns.
If you strike off the ov of the genitive singular you will arrive at the stem.
The endings are added normally.
You have to note however that the nominative and the accusative singular contain the short form of the word.
Note also the loss of the t before si in the dative plural.
It has to be noted that all at stem neuter nouns would be declined as in the paradigm below: 122 CTH 053 MODULE 3 The at Stem Nouns (using sw~ma) Case Singular Plural Nominative sw~ma sw/mata Genitive (Ablative) sw/matov swma/twn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
sw/mati sw/mavi Accusative sw~ma sw/mata Vocative sw~ma sw/mata 4.0 CONCLUSION In this last unit of this course you have concluded the study of third declension nouns that began in the previous two units.
This is a study of the neuter nouns of the third declension.
It is divisible into two classes: the ev stem nouns and the at stem nouns.
There is a high degree of regularity in the declension of these noun stems and they should be followed rigidly.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The ev stem nouns are the nouns that their stem actually end in ev.
• This actual ending is no longer visible due to contractions in the process of inflection.
• The at stem nouns are the nouns that their stem actually end in at.
• The at stem can be seen when the ov ending of the genitive singular is removed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following sentences to English: a. ginw/skomen kai_ to__ qe/lhma kai_ th_n a0ga/phn tou~ Qeou~.
b. o9 Ku/riov ei0sh~lqen ei0v to_ i9ero_n kata_ to_ e1qov au0tou~.
c. o9 Xristo_v e0di/daske tou_v o1xlouv e0n tw~| o1rei.
d. to_ sw~ma tou~ Kuri/ou e0doca/sqh meta_ th_n a0na/stasin.
e. e0n tw=| o0no/mati tou~ Xristou~ e1xomen e0lpi/da th~v zwh~v.
123 CTH 053 GREEK GRAMMAR f. e0sw/qhmen dia_ tou~ ai3matov tou~ ui9ou~ tou~ Qeou~ kai_ nu~n ginw/skomen to_ e1leov au0tou~.
g. h1kousan ta_ r9h/matatou~ sto/matov au0tou~ kai_ e1labon to_ e1leov au0tou.
h. ta_ e1qnh ou0 ginw/skeito_ ba/qov tou~ e0le/ouv tou~ Qeou~.
i. h9mei=v e0bapti/sqhmen u9po_ tou~ Xristou~, u9mei=v de_ e0bapti/sqhte j. u9p 0 a0posto/lou au0tou~.
k. oi9 maqhtai_ e0ba/ptizon e0n tw~| o0no/mati tou~ patro_v kai_ tou~ ui9ou~ kai_ tou~ pneu/matov.
l. oi9 ponhroi_ me/nousin e0n tw~| sko/tei th~v a9marti/av, oi9 de_ pistoi__ a0kou/ousi ta_ r9h/mata tou~ Kuri/ou kai_ gi/nontai a0gaqoi_ maqhtai/.
m. e0gw_ me_n bapti/zw u9ma~v e0n u3dati, e0kei=nov de_ bapti/sei u9ma~v e0n tw~| pneu/mati.
Note that from this point onward you will no longer have any exercise that has to do with translation to Greek.
In the second part of this course, you will have more exercises in Greek to translate to English language.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle- Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
