NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE:CTH058 COURSE TITLE:Greek Syntax 1Course Guide Course Code CTH058 Course Title Greek Syntax Course Developer/Writer Dr. M. Atere Lagos State University Ojo, Lagos Course Editor Dr. Olubiyi Adeniyi Adewale National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator Dr. Jacob A. Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. Olubiyi Adeniyi Adewale National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2009 Printed 2009 ISBN: ------------------------------------- All Rights Reserved Printed by --------------------------------- For National Open University of Nigeria 3Content Page Introduction 4 What you will learn in this Course 4 Course Aims 4-5 Course Objectives 5-6 Working through this Course 6 Course Materials 6 Study Units 6-7 Set Textbooks 7-8 Assignment File 8 Presentation Schedule 8 Assessment 8 Tutor-Marked Assignments 8 Final Examination and Grading 9 Course Marking Scheme 9 Course Overview 10 How to get the Best from this Course 11-12 Tutors and Tutorials 12 Summary 13 4Introduction CTH058: Greek Syntax is a one-semester 3-credit unit course.
The course is available toward the award of the diploma certificate in Christian Theology.
The course material can also be useful for students in other levels of Christian Theology.
Besides, those who wish to broaden their knowledge on the role on biblical languages in the understanding of the New Testament can find this course material beneficial.
CTH053 is however the prerequisite for this course.
In other words, if you have not offered and passed CTH053 you cannot offer this course.
This course is made up of 21 units.
It will begin with a brief revision of CTH053 (Greek Grammar).
This is to refresh your memory of what has been learnt in CTH053.
After this, you will begin the study of the other grammatical issues and the moods that you have not learnt in CTH053.
in this course, your tutor-marked assignments would become more practical than theoretically as you will have to translate from large passages of the scripture and explain why certain words are preferred in translation over others.
The Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through the materials.
It also emphasizes the need for Tutor – Marked Assignments (TMAs).
Detailed information on TMAs is found in a separate file, which will be sent to you later.
There are periodic tutorial classes that are linked to this course.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of CTH058 is to help you develop a systematic growth in the use of biblical Greek so that you can get to the level where you can access the original language and do your translation/interpretation without recourse to any existing translation of the New Testament.
This will help you in your personal Bible study, sermon preparation and the development of study guide for use in the Church.
Course Aims • The aim of this course is to help you discover the importance of language in the understanding of the New Testament literature since the New Testament was originally written in the Koine Greek.
This will be achieved by: 5• Introducing you to the complexities of translation and the issues involved in syntactical relationships.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, there are set overall objectives.
Besides, each unit has its specific objectives.
The unit objectives would be included in the beginning of each unit.
You should read them before you start working through the unit.
It is advisable that you refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
At the end of every unit, you should also revise the unit objectives.
In this way you can be sure that you have done all you are expected to do in the unit.
Listed below are the broader objectives of this course.
It is expected that by meeting these objectives, the overall aims of the course must have been achieved.
At the end of this course, you should be able to: Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read the recommended books and the other materials provided by the National Open University (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at points during the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course there is a final examination.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course and what you have to do.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments file 5.
Presentation schedule You must obtain these materials.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text materials.
6Study Units There are twenty study units in this course.
They are listed as follows: Unit 1: Present Indicative Verbs Unit 2: Imperfect Indicative Verbs Unit 3: First Aorist Indicative Unit 4: Second Aorist Indicative Unit 5: Future Indicative Verbs Unit 6: First Declension Nouns Unit 7: Second Declension Nouns Unit 8: Third Declension Nouns Unit 9: Personal/Demonstrative Pronouns Unit 10: Participles Unit 11: The Perfect Indicative Unit 12: The Subjunctive Mood: Conditional Sentences Unit 13: The Imperative Mood Unit 14: Contract Verbs Unit 15: Pronouns Unit 16: Adjectives Unit 17: Verbs of the –mi Conjugation Unit 18: The Article Unit 19: The Infinitive Unit 20: Syntactical Issues At the end of the units there is a glossary to help you locate the meaning of some of the words that you would have to translate during your assignments.
Each unit contains a number of self-tests.
In general, these self-tests question you on the material you have just covered or require you to apply the material in some ways, and thereby, help you to gauge your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the material.
Together with your tutor marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Set Textbooks These textbooks are recommended for your study in this course: Adewale, ‘Biyi and E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Pulishers 7Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Mounce, Williams D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan Summers, Ray (1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press Books are however very scarce in the area of languages however some websites can give you assistance in seeing what the original manuscripts look like and not a full study.
For these sites see the following: www.bible.org www.religion-online.org www.biblestudies.org Assignment file In this file you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count toward the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignment will be found in the assignment file itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The “presentation schedule” included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of your tutor marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignment as and when due.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
First are the tutor marked assignments; second, there is a written examination.
While working on your assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your 8tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are fifteen tutor assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The best three (that is, the three with the highest grades of fifteen assignments) will be counted.
The total mark of the best three will be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignments for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Final Examination and Grading The examination will consist of questions you will come across in tutor marked assignments.
You are therefore advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The table below gives a break down of the course mark: Assessment Marks Assignments 1-15 Three assignments, best three marks of the assignments counts for 30% of course marks.
Final examination The final examination counts for 70% of overall marks.
Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Marking Scheme 9Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of works you should take to complete.
Unit Title of Work Week’s Activity Assessment (end of unit) Course Guide 1 1 Assignment 1 2 2 Assignment 2 3 3 Assignment 4 4 4 Assignment 4 5 5 Assignments 5 6 6 Assignment 6 7 7 Assignment 7 8 8 Assignment 8 9 9 Assignment 9 10 10 Assignment 10 11 11 Assignment 11 12 12 Assignment 12 13 13 Assignment 13 14 14 Assignment 14 15 15 Assignment 15 16 16 Assignment 16 17 17 Assignment 17 18 18 Assignment 18 19 19 Assignment 19 20 20 Assignment 20 21 21 Assignment 21 22 16 23 17 24 18 Table 2: Course Overview How to Get the Best from this Course In distance learning the study units replace the university Lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of the distance learning system.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Following this is a 10set of learning objectives.
These objectives enable you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
The objectives should guide your study.
After studying the units must cross check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you adhere strictly to this art of checking whether the objective is achieved or not, you will definitely improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a “Reading” section.
Whenever you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read through this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Plan your study schedule.
You should refer to the ‘course overview’ for more details.
Find out the time you are expected to spend on each unit and when and how to turn in your assignments.
3.
Stick to your study schedule.
Don’t allow anything to get you distracted from your study schedule.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and objectives for the unit.
5.
Gather the study material you need.
All you need or a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
The study unit you are working on and one of your set books should be on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit has been arranged in a sequential order.
Instructions would be given on where to read from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm you have achieved them.
8.
Don’t proceed to the next unit, until you are sure you have achieved the objectives of the unit you are working on.
9.
Don’t wait until your assignment is returned before working on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
1110.
When you complete the last unit, you can be preparing for exams.
Be sure that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
The dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor will be communicated to you.
This will be done as you are allocated to a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact our tutor by telephone, e-mail or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be the circumstances in which you will find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
• You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, and • You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to interact with your tutor by asking questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To maximize the benefits of the course tutorials, it is advisable that you prepare a question list before attending them.
When you participate in the discussions your intellectually life will be deeply enriched.
Summary CTH058 will lead you to a working knowledge of the Greek language and the ability to consult the original language of the New Testament thereby enriching your knowledge of the Bible.
It will expose you to the exegetical principles that are involved in the process of translation and interpreting.
12On successful completion of this course, you will be able to answer questions such as: 1.
What are the uses of the imperfect tense in the Greek language?
2.
How does mood affect interpretation?
3.
What is the relationship between translation and exegesis?
4.
What is the relationship between translation, exegesis and theology?
5.
What is the best way to render the incipient imperfect?
6.
What is the best way to translate the iterative imperfect?
7.
What is the best way to translate the present continuous tense in the Greek?
8.
What is the difference between the aorist and the imperfect tense?
9.
What are the similarities between the aorist and the imperfect tense?
10.
Evaluate your understanding of John 1:14b before now and after this course.
The questions you will able to answer should not be limited to the ones above.
Greek Grammar is a course you will find interesting and stimulating.
Course Code CTH058 13Course Title Greek Syntax Course Developer/Writer Dr. M. A. Atere Lagos State University, Ojo Lagos Course Editor Dr. Olubiyi A. Adewale National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator Dr. Jacob A. Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. Olubiyi A. Adewale National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 14National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2009 Printed 2009 ISBN: ------------------------------------- All Rights Reserved Printed by --------------------------------- For National Open University of Nigeria CONTENTS PAGES 15Module 1 4 Unit 1: Present Indicative Verbs 4 Unit 2: Imperfect Indicative Verbs 11 Unit 3: First Aorist Indicative 17 Unit 4: Second Aorist Indicative 22 Unit 5: Future Indicative Verbs 26 Module 2 32 Unit 1: First Declension Nouns 32 Unit 2: Second Declension Nouns 40 Unit 3: Third Declension Nouns 44 Unit 4: Personal/Demonstrative Pronouns 52 Module 3 59 Unit 1: Participles 59 Unit 2: The Perfect Indicative 72 Unit 3: The Subjunctive Mood: Conditional Sentences 78 Unit 4: The Imperative Mood 87 Unit 5: Contract Verbs 93 Module 4 99 Unit 1: Pronouns 99 Unit 2: Adjectives 108 Unit 3: Verbs of the –mi Conjugation 114 Unit 4: The Article 119 Unit 5: The Infinitive 125 Unit 6: Syntactical Issues 131 Glossary 136 MODULE 1 GREEK VERBS 16Unit 1 Present Indicative Verbs Unit 2 Imperfect Indicative Verbs Unit 3 First Aorist Indicative Unit 4 Second Aorist Indicative Unit 5 Future Indicative Verbs UNIT 1 PRESENT INDICATIVE VERBS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introducing the Verbs 3.2 The Present Active Indicative 3.3 Constructing Questions 3.4 The Usages of the Passive Voice 3.5 The Middle Voice 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcomed to this course in Greek Syntax.
We will begin by having an overview of all that has been studied in Greek Grammar so that you would have continuity of study.
Before you commence your study of this course, it is advisable that you go back and revise all the Greek vocabularies that you have learnt so far, as they are still useful in this course.
In this module, we are going to work round the verbs again.
We are beginning from the present indicative verbs in this unit.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • read and interpret the Greek words studied so far • identify all the elements of the verb • parse a verb • write any verb in all the forms of the present indicative 173.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Introducing the Verbs As you have been taught, the Greek verb carries the tense, voice, mood, the person and the number.
The Tense This quality of the verb has to do with the action.
The tense carries two aspects of the verb and these are the time of the action and the kind of the action.
As for time, there are three possibilities: the past, the present and the future.
As for kind, there are two possibilities: the linear (this is also called the progressive or continuous action) and the punctiliar (this is action that is seen as a single perspective).
The present tense indicates a progressive action at the present time and so would be better translated in that sense.
For example, the word lu&w would be “I am destroying”.
The Voice This is the element of the verb which indicates the relationship between the subject and the action.
The active voice indicates that the subject is acting as in “he killed the lion;” while the passive indicates that the subject receives the action or is being acted upon as in the statement “he was killed by the lion”.
The Greek language however has another voice known as the middle voice which will be studied later.
The Mood Mood is the element of a verb that indicates the relationship of the action to reality.
In order words, the mood tells whether the action is really taking place or has a potential of taking place.
All the moods would be studied later, but suffice it to say that the indicative mood is the mood which confirms the reality of the action from the point of view of the speaker.
The Person This is the element of the verb which indicates the person that is talking.
There are three possibilities: the first person indicates that it is the subject that is speaking, the second person is the one being spoken to and the third person is the one being spoken about.
18The Number This is the element of the verb that indicates whether the subject is singular or plural.
For example, I am ‘destroying’ is singular and ‘we are destroying’ is plural.
7.0 The Present Active Indicative Because of the simplicity of the verb lu&w, and the fact that it can used as an example for most of the various voices, tenses and the moods of the Greek verb, it will be used as the guinea-pig for all the examples except where impossible.
The present active indicative form of lu&w is: lu&w I loose or I am loosing (destroy) lu&eiv You (s) loose or you (s) are loosing lu&ei he (she, it) loose or he (she, it) is loosing lu&omen We loose or we are loosing lu&ete You (p) loose or you (p) are loosing lu&ousi(n) They loose or they are loosing 3.3 Constructing Questions In the Greek language, there is no difference in the construction of a declarative sentence and an interrogative sentence.
The question mark is just placed at the end of the sentence to make it become a question.
For example, lu&omen means ‘we loose’ and lu&omen; becomes ‘are we loosing?
7.0 The Present Passive Indicative The significance of the passive voice in the Greek is as the same as in English language.
It is used when the subject is being acted upon by an outside agent.
Present active indicative of lu/w is “I am loosing” and the present passive would be “I am being loosed”.
This means that the present passive pictures continuous action being received by the subject at the present time.
The primary endings of the present passive are: mai, sai, tai, meqa, sqe and ntai.
These are added to the stem of the word by means of the variable vowel which is either o or e. It has to be noted however that in the second person singular, a significant change occurred during the development of the language.
The sigma sound got lost and the e and a sound got 19contracted to h, and the i became a subscript.
This would be reflected in the paradigm below.
The Present Active Indicative of luw/ is as follows: lu/omai I am being loosed lu/omeqa we are being loosed lu/h| you are being loosed lu/esqe you are being loosed lu/etai he, (she, it) is being loosed lu/ontai they are being loosed 7.0 The Usages of the Passive Voice When Direct Agent is indicated When the direct agent producing the action on the subject is indicated, the construction is u(po with the genitive.
For example, dida&sketai u(po\ tou~ a)gge/lou means “he is being taught by the messenger”.
When Indirect Agent is indicated When the agent indicated is the indirect (that is, the agent through which the original agent acts), the construction is dia& with the genitive.
For example, o( ko&smov e)ge&neto di ) au)tou~ would mean “the world was made through him”.
In this passage, Christ is seen as the intermediate agent of creation while God is the original agent.
When Impersonal Agent is indicated When the agent is impersonal, the construction is the dative with or without the preposition e)n. For example, oi( a!nqrwpoi sw&zontai e)n tw~| lo&gw| tou~ Messi&ou which means “the men are being saved by the word of the Messiah”.
When no Agent is expressed Sometimes, the passive is used without any agent indicated.
An example is the simple word e)gei&retai which means “he is being raised up”.
7.0 The Middle Voice It has to be stated from the onset that there is no equivalent of the Greek middle voice in the English language.
In the middle voice, the subject is acting in such a way that it participates in the result of the action.
The 20subject, at this point, rather than the action is the focal point or the point of emphasis.
The middle voice in the Greek language is used in three different ways: the reflexive middle, the intensive middle and the reciprocal middle.
The Reflexive Middle This is the nearest to the basic idea of the middle voice.
It is the one that pictures the result of the action directly to the agent.
For example, o( a!
nqrwpov e)gei/retai which means, “the man is raising himself up”.
The Intensive Middle The intensive middle stresses the agent producing the action rather than its participation in the action.
For example, dida/sketai th_n a)lh/qeian which means “he is teaching the truth”.
The emphasis is on “he”.
The idea is that he and no other person is doing the teaching.
This corresponds to the Piel stem of the Hebrew language which is the dynamic middle voice.
The Reciprocal Middle In the reciprocal middle a plural subject that is engaged in an interchange of action is pictured.
For example, oi( a!nqrwpoi dida/skontai which means “the men are teaching one another”.
It has to be stated that the above three usages of the middle voice does not capture the total force of the middle voice but has given the general idea of the construction.
The Form of the Middle Voice It has to be stated that the forms of the middle voice in the present, imperfect and perfect tenses are the same as the passive voice.
The difference is one of function.
The context of the passage will indicate whether the construction is middle or passive in function.
Thus the form of the present middle indicative of lu/w is: luo/ mai I loose myself, or I luo/ meqa we loose ourselves, or loose for myself we loose for ourselves luh| you loose yourself, or lu/esqe you loose yourselves, or you loose for yourself you loose for yourselves lu/etai he, (she, it) looses luo/ ntai they loose themselves, himself, or he looses or they loose for for himself themselves 214.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied the present indicative verbs.
You have seen the varuous froms of the verb: the present active, the present passive and the present middle voice.
You have also seen the various usages of the passive voice as well as that of the middle voice which actually has no equivalent in English.
You have also learnt that the middle voice can be used reflexively, intensively and reciprocally.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The present active indicative is used to express the continuous action in the Greek language.
• The passive voice is used when the subject is being acted upon by an outside agent.
• In the middle voice, the subject is acting in such a way that it participates in the result of the action.
• The reflexive middle pictures the result of the action directly to the agent.
• The intensive middle stresses the agent producing the action rather than its participation in the action.
• In the reciprocal middle a plural subject that is engaged in an interchange of action is pictured.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify all the present indicative verbs in the passage below and indicate their voice and person: Matthew 3:1 VEn de.
Tai/j h`me,raij evkei,naij paragi,netai Viwa,nnhj o` baptisth.j khru,sswn evn th/| erv h,mw| th/j Vioudai,aj Matthew 3:2 Îkai.Ð le,gwn\ metanoei/te\ h;ggiken ga.r h` basilei,a tw/n ouvranw/ nÅ Matthew 3:3 ou-toj ga,r evstin o` r`hqei.j dia.
Vhsai<ou tou/ profh,tou le,gontoj\ fwnh.
Bow/ntoj evn th/| evrh,mw|\ e`toima,sate th.n o`do.n kuri,ou( euvqei,aj poiei/te ta.j tri,bouj auvtou/Å 22Matthew 3:4 auvto.j de.
O` Viwa,nnhj ei=cen to.
E;nduma auvtou/ avpo.
Tricw/n kamh,lou kai.
Zw,nhn dermati,nhn peri.
Th.n ovsfu.n auvtou(/ h` de.
Trofh.
H=n auvtou/ avkri,dej kai.
Me,li a;grionÅ Matthew 3:5 To,te exv eporeu,eto pro.j auvto.n ~Ieroso,luma kai.
Pa/sa h` Vioudai,a kai.
Pa/sa h` peri,cwroj tou/ Viorda,nou( 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
23UNIT 2: IMPERFECT INDICATIVE VERBS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Imperfect Active Indicative of lu/w 3.2 The Imperfect Active Indicative in Compound Verbs 3.3 The Imperfect Active Indicative of ei0mi/ 3.4 The Use of the Imperfect Tense 3.5 The Imperfect Middle and Passive Indicative of lu/w 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you have been taken though the study of present indicative verbs in all its voices: active, passive and the middle voices.
In this unit, we are going to be examining the imperfect indicative verbs.
As you study this unit, take note of the difference between the present and the imperfect verbs.
In this unit you will be given the changes in the stem of the verb as we enter the imperfect realm and also study the functions of the imperfect tense.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify the verbs written in the imperfect active form.
• recall all the vocabularies given in this course so far.
• write all the imperfect indicative of ei)mi / • discuss the use of the imperfect tense extensively.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 The Imperfect Active Indicative of luw/ The personal endings in the active secondary tenses are –n; -v; none; -men; -te, n. The variable vowel is o before an ending beginning with m, 24or n and it is e before any other ending.
The third person singular often takes the movable n. You will also discover that the first person singular and the third person plural are identical and thus should be distinguished by the context.
Since we have been using lu/w as our we will still use the word as long as it has a form in what is intended to discuss.
The following is the imperfect active indicative of lu/w: e!luon I was loosing e)lu/omen we were loosing e!luev you were loosing e)lu/ete you were loosing e!lue he, she, it was loosing e!luon they were loosing You will notice that in the above paradigm for the imperfect active indicative of lu/w for the first time you will be seeing that there is a letter (vowel e) before each form of the word.
This letter is called an augment.
In the Greek, this augment is in an indication that the word is a secondary tense.
A secondary tense in the Greek is a tense that expresses a past time.
This is why all the translations are given in the past tense in the English.
This augment is peculiar to verbs that begin with a consonant.
It is also called “syllabic augment” because it adds a syllable to the word.
However, when the word begins with a vowel, the vowel is lengthened to the corresponding long vowel.
This is called a “temporal augment”.
In the temporal augment, e becomes h; o becomes w and a will become h and not the long a because it might not be differentiated easily.
For example, a)kou/ w becomes h!kouon, e)gei/rw becomes h!geiron.
3.2 The Imperfect Active Indicative in Compound Verbs In the case of compound verbs, the augment comes after the preposition and before the vowel stem.
If the preposition ends with a vowel, the process of elision will take place.
For example, ek) ba/llw becomes e)ceb/ allon; a)poktei/nw becomes a0pekteinon; a0pa/gw becomes a)ph~gon.
Note that in all the examples given, the accent is no longer on the preposition for any reason but it may rest on the augment.
7.0 The Imperfect Active Indicative of eim) i / The imperfect active indicative of ei)mi / is: h!mhn I was h]men we were h]v you were h]te you were 25h]n he (she it) was h]san they were 7.0 The Use of the Imperfect Tense The imperfect tense indicates continuous action in the past time.
The imperfect active of lu/w would be translated “I was loosing”.
Though there are several expressions of the imperfect, it is always presented as the continuous action in the past.
The emphasis however may differ.
There are however three major occurrences: The Descriptive Imperfect The descriptive imperfect is used to give a vivid representation of what was going on in past time.
It usually draws a picture of the movement of events.
A good example is Matthew 3:5-6 which reads thus: Then Jerusalem was going out (ec0 eporeu/eto) to him, and they were being baptized (eb0 apti/zonto) in the Jordan River.
In the above quotation, e0ceporeu/eto is the imperfect active while e0bapti/zonto is the imperfect middle or passive.
The significance of these words can be seen vividly in the context of the passage.
The Repeated or Iterative Imperfect The repeated or iterative imperfect is used to show actions repeated in the past time.
Unlike the descriptive imperfect which will denote one continuous action, the repeated imperfect will present an action that is done repeatedly.
A good illustration is found in Acts 1:7 which reads: They were asking him (le/gontej), Lord art thou at this time restoring the kingdom to Israel?
The phrase could also be rendered thus: “they kept on asking him”.
This implies that the disciples have asked Jesus the same question before frequently.
The Inceptive Imperfect The inceptive imperfect is also used to picture continuous action in the past.
However the emphasis is on the beginning of the action rather than on its progress.
This is best illustrated by Matthew 5:2 where the word ed0 i/dasken, 26which is best translated “he began teaching them”.
This word is used to introduce the Sermon on the Mount also in Luke 5:3 and Mark 5:37.
7.0 The Imperfect Middle and Passive Indicative of lu/w The imperfect middle and passive voice are idential just as they are in the presnet tense.
The difference is just that of the function they perfom.
Ensure that you note the differences in the translation of the imperfect middle and the imperfect passive.
The Imperfect Middle Indicative of lu/w is as follows: Person Singualar Plural 1st e)luo/mhn I was loosing e)luo/meqa we were loosing myself or for ourselves or for myself ourselves 2nd e)lu/ou you were loosing e)lu/esqe you were yourself or for loosing yourself youselves or for youselves 3rd e)lu/eto he was loosing e)lu/onto they were himself or himself loosing themselves or for themselves The Imperfect Passive Indicative of lu/w is as follows: Person Singualar Plural 1st e)luo/mhn I was being loosed e)luo/meqa we were being loosed 2nd e)lu/ou you were being e)lu/esqe you were being loosed loosed 3rd e)lu/eto he (she, it) was e)lu/onto they were being loosed being loosed As you would have noticed, the personal endings of the middle secondary tenses are –mhn, -so, -to, -meqa, -sqe, and –nto.
There are also variable vowels as in the present active.
However, the second person suingular is altered by the loss of the s and the contraction of the connecting vowel e and the ending o.
Thus e)lu/eso becomes e)lu/ou.
27Note that deponent verbs in the present are also deponent in the imperfect.
Consequently, there would be no imperfect acticve forms for deponent verbs.
The imperefct middle forms will have imperfect active functions.
It has to be stated that it is an idiom of Greek language that a neuter plural subject always has its verb in the singular.
For example, ta_ te/kna e!xei (not e!xousi) karpo_n kai a!rton_ would be translated “The children has fruit and bread”.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied the imperfect indicative verb in the active, middle and passive voices.
You have learnt that the imperefct is used for the continuous action in the past and that it is identified by the use of the augment.
It is called the syllabic augment if the word begins with a consonant and temporal augment if the word begins with a vowel.
You have also learnt that the imperfect can be used describtively, iteratively and inceptively.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The imperefct is used for the continuous action in the past.
• It is easily identified by its use of the augment.
• The syllabic augument is used when the word begins with a consonant and takes a vowel as its augment.
• The temporal augment is used when the word begins with a vowel and the vowel is lengthened.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify all the imperfect verbs in the passage below and identify the voices in which they are used and the person.
Matthew 9:1 Kai.
Evmba.j eivj ploi/on diepe,rasen kai.
H=lqen eivj th.n ivdi,an po,linÅ Matthew 9:2 kai.
Ivdou.
Prose,feron auvtw/| paralutiko.n evpi.
Kli,nhj beblhme,nonÅ kai.
Ivdw.n o` Vihsou/j th.n pi,stin auvtw/n ei=pen tw/| paralutikw/|\ qa,rsei( te,knon( avfi2, 8lat h, sou ai` a`marti,aiÅ 28Matthew 9:3 kai.
Ivdou, tinej tw/n grammate,wn ei=pan evn e`autoi/j\ ou-toj blasfhmei/Å Matthew 9:4 kai.
Ivdw.n o` Vihsou/j ta.j evnqumh,seij auvtwn/ ei=pen\ i`nati, evnqumei/sqe ponhra.
Evn tai/j kardi,aij u`mw/nÈ Matthew 9:5 ti, gar, evstin euvkopw,teron( eivpein/ \ avfi2, 9lat h, sou ai ` a`marti,ai( h’ eivpei/n\ e;geire kai.
Peripa,teiÈ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
29UNIT 3 FIRST AORIST INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Aorist 3.2 The First Aorist Active Indicative of lu/w 3.3 The First Aorist Middle Indicative of lu/w 3.4 Functions of the Aorist 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we dealt with the imperfect tense that deals with the continuous action in the past time.
In this unit you would be introduced to the aorist tense.
The aorist is almost equivalent to the past tense of the English.
The aorist is different from the imperefect in that it may not denote a continuing action in the past.
As the topic of this unit indicates, there are two forms of aorist and in this unit we will deal with the first aorist.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • define the aorist stem • identify the aorist stem • explain the functions of the aorist stem • write the first aorist stem of the verbs having the first aorist form • explain the difference between the imperfect and the aorist • explain the formation of the first aorist.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 The Aorist In Greek as in English language, there are two ways to form the past tense.
It is important to note that this does not mean that each verb has two ways 30of forming the past tense.
Though some Greek verbs do have the two ways, it must be noted that such verbs are very rare.
The two ways of forming the past tense in the Greek are called the first and the second aorist.
The Greek verbs that add the s to their stems are called the first aorist and the others that add the endings without the s are called the second aorist.
Despite these differences in formation there is basically no difference between the two in terms of function.
The aorist is a secondary tense because it deals with the actions in the past time.
It is therefore augmented just like the imperfect.
Remember that in the augment, a stem beginning with a consonant takes the “syllabic augment” and the stem beginning with a vowel takes the “temporal augment”.
As a secondary tense, the aorist takes secondary active endings in the active and secondary middle endings in the middle.
The aorist passive is entirely different from the aorist middle in form as well as in function.
7.0 The First Aorist Active Indicative of lu/w e!lusa I loosed e0lu/samen we loosed e!lusav you loosed e0lu/sate you loosed e!luse (n) he (she, it) loosed e0lu/santo they loosed 3.3 The First Aorist Middle Indicative of luw/ e0lu/samhn I loosed myself or e0lu/sameqa we loosed ourselvesfor for myself ourselves e0lu/sw you loosed e0lu/sasqe you loosed yourselves yourself or for or for yourselves yourself e0lu/sato he (she, it) loosed e0lu/santo they loosed themselves himself or for or for themselves himself Please note that it is easier for you to study all the changes in the word formation as part of the vocabulary.
It is also important to remind you that because of the addition of s to the stem of the word, there would be changes in the word.
In general, these changes would correspond to the ones studied earlier when the future stem was studied (you can go back and revise these chnages now) but this is not a safe test.
It is better to check a 31lexicon for the for the first person singular of the word after which it would be easier for you to list other forms.
7.0 Functions of the Aorist It has to be stated that the functions of the aorist tense is a matter of tremendous importance.
As stated earlier, the time of action is in the past and the kind of action is punctiliar.
This is the major difference between the imperfect and the aorist.
Remember that the imperfect indicates continuous action in the past (for example: I was loosing) but the aorist indicates a finished action in the past (for example: I loosed).
The Greek aorist would correspond more to the simple past tense and the perfect tense of the English language.
The use of the aorist tense has many implications: Constative Aorist In this usage, the action is loooked upon in its entirety.
For example, e0ba/ptiste tou_v a0nqrw/pouv would be interpreted “he baptized the men”.
You will notice that though the action may have covered considerable time, it would be presented as one act.
Ingressive Aorist In this usage the aorist views the act as having occurred but emphasizes the initiation of the action.
For example, di 0 u9ma~v e0ptw/xeuse would be translated “for your sakes he became poor”.
In this usage, the action is one and it is viewed from its inception.
Culminative Aorist The culminative aorist views the action as having occurred but emphasizes the end of the action or the state of being resulting from the action.
For example, to_n prw~ton log/ on e0poihsa/mhn would be translated “the former treatise I have made”.
In this phrase, the act of writing is looked upon as one act but the emphasis is on the finished product.
Though in this function the aorist overlaps with the Greek perfect tense, the difference would be expatiated on during the study of the perfect tense.
Note that there are other usages but these are sparse in the New Testament Greek.
324.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt that there are two ways of forming the past tense in the Greek language and these are called the first and the second aorist.
The verbs that add s to their stem are the first aorist verbs and those that use the endings without the s are the second aorist verbs.
You have also learnt that the aorist is a secondary tense and so would use the augment like the imperfect.
You have also learnt that the aorist can be used constantively (this is when the action is looked upon in its entirety); it can also be used ingressively (this is when the initiation of the action is emphasized) and culminatively (this is when the end of the action or the state of being resulting from the action is emphasized).
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • There are two ways of forming the past tense in the Greek language and these are called the first and the second aorist.
• The verbs that add s to their stem are the first aorist verbs and those that use the endings without the s are the second aorist verbs.
• The aorist is a secondary tense and so would use the augment like the imperfect.
• The aorist can be used constantively (this is when the action is looked upon in its entirety); it can also be used ingressively (this is when the initiation of the action is emphasized) and culminatively (this is when the end of the action or the state of being resulting from the action is emphasized).
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the entire aorist verb in the passage below and state whether they are first or second aorist, the person and the voice.
Matthew 17:1 Kai.
meqV h`me,raj e]x paralamba,nei o` Vihsou/j to.n Pe,tron kai.
Via,kwbon kai.
Viwa,nnhn to.n avdelfo.n auvtou/ kai.
Avnafe,rei auvtou.j eivj o;roj u`yhlo.n katV ivdi,anÅ Matthew 17:2 kai.
Metemorfw,qh e;mprosqen auvtw/n( kai.
E3; 3lat h to .
Pro,swpon auvtou/ wj` o` h[lioj( ta.
De.
I`ma,tia auvtou/ evge,neto leuka.
W`j to.
Fw/ jÅ 33Matthew 17:3 kai.
Ivdou.
W;fqh auvtoi/j Mwu?sh/j kai.
Vhli,aj sullaloun/ tej metV auvtou/Å Matthew 17:4 avpokriqei.j de.
O` Pe,troj ei=pen tw/| Vihsou/\ ku,rie( kalo,n evstin h`ma/j w-de ei=nai\ eiv qe,leij( poih,sw w-de trei/j skhna,j( soi.
Mi,an kai.
Mwu?sei/ mi,an kai.
Vhli,a| mi,anÅ Matthew 17:5 e;ti auvtou/ lalou/ntoj ivdou.
Nefe,lh fwteinh.
Evpeski,asen auvtou,j( kai.
Ivdou.
Fwnh.
Evk th/j nefe,lhj le,gousa\ ou-to,j evstin o` ui`o,j mou o` avgaphto,j( evn w-| euvdo,khsa\ avkou,ete auvtou/Å 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
34UNIT 4 SECOND AORIST INDICATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Second Aorist 3.2 The Second Aorist Active Indicative of lei/pw 3.3 The Second Aorist Middle Indicative of lei/pw 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we dealt with the first aorist active and the first aorist middle which is the first form of the aorist form.
In this unit, you will be exposed to the second form of the aorist.
You are hereby advised to return to the last unit and revise the section on the aorist verb because most of the principles taught are applicable here.
As you have been told before, the only difference between the first and second aorist is just that of form and not function.
Again, as you study this unit, note the differences between the first and the second aorist in terms of the form.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify the differnce between the first and the second aorist • write the second aorist form for verbs that have the second aorist form • identify some verbs that have both the first and second aorist forms.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 The Second Aorist The second aorist as said earlier is the kind of past tense in the Greek language that does not form the past tense by adding s to the stem but alter the stem radically and then add the secondary personal endings.
It has to be 35noted that there is no way to determine whether a Greek verb will take the first or the second aorist.
You may need to check the lexicon to determine this.
Once you have determined the form of aorist a verb will take, it would be easy for you to finish up the declension.
Note however that there are very few irregular second aorist words, but for the most part they are very regular.
If you see a second aorist verb, to trace it back to the stem, follow the following steps: First, strike off the secondary personal endings.
For example, it will be on in the first person singular.
Second, if it is a syllabic augment, remove the augment and if it is a temporal augment, shorten the vowel back to the normal short vowel.
For example, to determine the stem of e!lipon remove the on and the e which is the augment and what you will have is lip-.
You must know that the functions of the first and second aorist are exactlty the same.
The difference is only that of form.
Consequently, with words that have the two forms of aorist, they mean the same thing.
For example, h!
negka (first aorist) and (h!negkon (second aorist) forms of fe/rw mean the same thing: “I bore” or “I brought”.
The following verbs should however be noted: The verb ei]don is from ei!da though some grammarians classify it as a second aorist form of ble/pw.
The second aorist ei]pon is from the verb fhmi/ though some grammarians classify it as a second aorist form of le/gw.
These verbs ei]don and ei]pon in the New Testament usually has first aorist endings on the second aorist stem.
You have to know also that there are some verbs that are deponent in the present tense but are active in the aorist.
An example is e!rxomai that has its aorist active as h]lqon and not h0lqo/mhn.
As it has been said earlier you may need to check up confusing words in the lexicon to determine what their forms in the aorist would be.
7.0 The Second Aorist Active Indicative of lei/pw The second aorist is one of those tenses where lu/w could no longer be used as our example.
As a result, focus would be changed to the above word.
The following is then the second aorist active of lei/pw: 36e!lipon I left e0li/pomen we left e!lipev you left e0li/pete you left e!lipe(n) he, she, it left e!lipon they left 7.0 The Second Aorist Middle Indicative of lei/pw e0lipo/mhn I left for myself e0lipo/meqa we left for ourselves e0li/pou you left for yourself e0li/pesqe you left for yourselves e0li/peto he (she, it) left for himself e0li/ponto they left for themselves 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been introduced to the second aorist active and the second aorist middle of the Greek tense.
By now you are aware that the second aorist tense do not use the addition of s to the stem of the the verb but alter the sten radically before adding the regular personal endings.
You were also taught that there is no difference between the first and the second aorist in function but in form.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major lessons you have learnt in this unit: • The second aorist do not form the past tense by adding s to the stem of the verb but by altering the stem radically before adding the regular personal endings.
• There is no difference between the first and the second aorist in function except in form.
• There are some words that have their aorist both in the first and the second aorist.
• There are some verbs that are deponent in the present tense but are active in the aorist.
• There are some perculiar verbs that have first aorist endings on the second aorist stem.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the entire aorist verb in the passage below and state whether they are first or second aorist, the person and the voice.
37Matthew 17:1 Kai.
meqV h`me,raj e]x paralamba,nei o` Vihsou/j to.n Pe,tron kai.
Via,kwbon kai.
Viwa,nnhn to.n avdelfo.n auvtou/ kai.
Avnafe,rei auvtou.j eivj o;roj u`yhlo.n katV ivdi,anÅ Matthew 17:2 kai.
Metemorfw,qh e;mprosqen auvtw/n( kai.
E3; 8lat h to .
Pro,swpon auvtou/ wj` o` h[lioj( ta.
De.
I`ma,tia auvtou/ evge,neto leuka.
W`j to.
Fw/ jÅ Matthew 17:3 kai.
Ivdou.
W;fqh auvtoi/j Mwu?sh/j kai.
Vhli,aj sullaloun/ tej metV auvtou/Å Matthew 17:4 avpokriqei.j de.
O` Pe,troj ei=pen tw/| Vihsou/\ ku,rie( kalo,n evstin h`ma/j w-de ei=nai\ eiv qe,leij( poih,sw w-de trei/j skhna,j( soi.
Mi,an kai.
Mwu?sei/ mi,an kai.
Vhli,a| mi,anÅ Matthew 17:5 e;ti auvtou/ lalou/ntoj ivdou.
Nefe,lh fwteinh.
Evpeski,asen auvtou,j( kai.
Ivdou.
Fwnh.
Evk th/j nefe,lhj le,gousa\ ou-to,j evstin o` ui`o,j mou o` avgaphto,j( evn w-| euvdo,khsa\ avkou,ete auvtou/Å 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
38UNIT 5 FUTURE INDICATIVE VERBS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Future Stem 3.2 Stem Changes in the Future Stem 3.3 Time and Kind of Action in the Future Tense 3.4 The Future Indicative of ei0mi/ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we have dealt with the second aorist tense which deals with actions that took place in the past.
In this unit, we will deal with the future indicative tense that has to do with actions taking place in the future.
In this unit, both the future active and the future middle indicative verbs shall be considered.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify any given future verb in any sentence • write the future stem of all the verbs you have been given so far • write the full persons and number of any given future verb • discuss the changes in the future stem • write the future indicative of the verb to be • discuss the kinds of sction in the future tense 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 The Future Stem The future stem is obtained by adding s to the verb stem.
For example, the verb stem of lu//w is lu//.
When you add s, it becomes lu//s.
Note that this is a primary tense, therefore the primary active endings would be used for the 39future active and the primary middle tense would be used for the future middle.
These endings are added to the stem through the use of the variable vowel (that is, o and e) just like the present tense.
Therefore, as you will observe below, the future active of lu//w is just like the present active form expect for the suffix s. The following is the future active form for lu//w: lu/sw I shall loose lu//somen we shall loose lu//seiv you will loose lu//sete you will loose lu//sei he, she, it will loose lu//sousi they will loose The following is the future middle form for luw// : lu/somai I shall loose myself/for myself luso/meqa we shall loose ourselves lu//sh| you will loose yourself lu//sesqe you will loose yourselves lu//setai he (she, it) will loose himself lu//sontai they will loose themselves Note that you have not been given the future passive.
This is because it is built on a different stem entirely.
The two are not to be confused because their meanings would be different.
It will be studied later.
7.0 Stem Changes in Future Stems Note also that not all the stems of the future can be determined easily as that of lu//w.
When the stem of the verb ends in a consonant, there are some changes that are bound to occur when the tense suffix s is added to the stem.
The chart that follows would give you an idea of the kind of changes that would take place generally.
However, you have to know that this is by no means universal.
Verbs ending in a liquid consonant (l, m, n, r) In this class of words, the s that is added to the stem would be dropped and the w would be accented.
This change is however due to some contraction principles that would be learnt later in the course.
The following are appropriate example: instead of me/nsw you will have menw~; a0poste/llwalso becomes a0postellw~.
40Verbs ending in a mute consonant Note that mute consonants are divided into three classes: palatal, labial and dental.
In the case of palatal consonants (k, g, x): the palatal consonants become c before s; hence a!gw becomes a!cw.
In the case of labial consonants (p, b, f): the labial consonants become y before s; hence ble/pw becomes ble/yw.
In the case of dental consonants (t, d, q): the dental consonants before s drops out; hence pei/qw becomes pei/sw.
The same principle applies to sibilant consonants like s and z; hence sw/zw becomes sw/sw.
Other Future Tenses Stem You also have to know that there are some future stems that are entirely different from these ones.
This difference is due to the fact that the stem of the general verb and the stem of the present stem are not always the same.
In lu/w they they are the same and this explians the similarity between the present and future tense.
However, there are other verbs that are not similar.
These include: ginw/skw the stem of which is gnw.The future stem thus would be gnws; in the case of khru/ssw the stem is khruk-and so the future tense stem would be khruc-.
These differences account for the variety of differences between future stem forms.
However, once the first person singular of the future is learned it is easy to know the remainder of the tense forms.
It is also important to know that some verbs are active in the present but in the future tense they become deponent.
You should carefully observe this in the process of your vocabulary study.
Examples however include lamba/nw which has its future in the deponent as lh/myomai; and ginw/skw is also deponent and has gnw/somai as its future form.
7.0 Time and Kind of Action in the Future Tense It is obvious that the time of action in the future tense is the future time.
The kind of action can either be punctiliar or linear.
The context will usually indicate which is intended.
Most of the time however, it is punctiliar action because the most natural construction for indicating 41continuous action is the periphrastic future and this would be learnt later.
The following however are the possible usages of the future tense: The Simple Predictive Future This is the simple future that predicts what will happen as in u9ma~v dida/cei.
The Imperative Future The imperative (that is a command) may be expressed by the future as in: kale/seiv to_ o!noma au0tou~ 0Iwa/nhn, that is, “you shall call his name John”.
The Delibrative Future This is sometimes found when a rhetorical (this is a question to which one really expects no answer) question is being asked: Ku/rie, pro_v ti/na a0peleuso/meqa; that is, “Lord, to whom shall we go?” These three usages are the common ones that you will find in the New Testament.
Other usages occur less ferquently.
7.0 The Future Indicative of ei0mi / The future indicative of ei0mi / is as follow: e!somai I shall be e0so/meqa we shall be e!sh| you will be e!sesqe you will be e!stai he (she, it) will be e!sontai they will be 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been introduced to the future active and middle indicative tense in the Greek language.
You have learnt that the future stem is formed by adding sigma to the verb stem.
The addition of sigma to the stem of the verb would make some consonants to react by either changing their form or dropping out entirely.
You are also taught that the future tense is used in three major ways in the Greek New Testament, namely: the simple predictive, the imperative and the deliberative future.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: 42• The future stem is formed by adding s to the verb’s stem • The presence of s changes some consonants and some also drop out • Some future verbs have their stem different from the present active indicative • The future tense can be used in three ways: simple predictive future, the imperative and the delibrative future.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify all the future tenses in the passge below and indicate how they are used: Mark 10:5 o` de.
Vihsou/j ei=pen auvtoi/j\ pro.j th.n sklhrokardi,an u`mw/n e;grayen u`mi/n th.n evntolh.n tau,43lat Mark 10:6 avpo.
De.
Arv ch/j kti,sewj ar; sen kai.
Qh/lu evpoi,hsen auvtou,j\ Mark 10:7 e[neken tou,tou katalei,yei a;nqrwpoj to.n pate,ra auvtou/ kai.
Th.n mhte,ra Îkai.
Proskollhqh,setai pro.j th.n gunai/ka auvtou/Ð( Mark 10:8 kai.
E;sontai oi` du,o eivj sa,rka mi,an\ w[ste ouvke,ti eivsi.n du,o avlla.
Mi,a sa,rxÅ Mark 10:9 o] ou=n o` qeo.j sunez, euxen a;nqrwpoj mh.
Cwrize,twÅ Mark 10:10 Kai.
Eivj th.n oivki,an pa,lin oi` maqhtai.
Peri.
Tou,tou evphrw,twn auvto,nÅ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
43Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
MODULE 2 Unit 1: First Declension Nouns 44Unit 2: Second Declension Nouns Unit 3: Third Declension Nouns Unit 4: Personal/Demonstrative Pronouns UNIT 1 FIRST DECLENSION NOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Review of Nouns and their Functions 3.2 Declension of the Feminine Nouns of the First Declension 3.3 Declension of the Masculine Nouns of the First Declension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 INTRODUCTION In the last module, you have gone through the whole of the indicative verbs in the Greek language.
You will do well to go over them again and again until you have mastered them.
In this module, you will begin to review all the Greek nouns.
The first three units will focus on the three declensions and the last unit would be on the personal and demonstrative pronouns.
In this unit you will be exposed to the nouns of the first declension which are mostly feminine and masculine nouns.
The feminine nouns have two types: those ending in h and those ending in a.
As you study these declensions, watch out for the differences in the manner in which they are declined.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • decline feminine nouns ending in h • decline feminine nouns ending in a • decline masculine nouns of the first declension • list all the definite articles by gender, case and number.
453.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Review of Nouns and their Functions Before going on with the study of Greek nouns, it is better to have a review of the use of nouns in English because without this, some of the terminologies that would be used would be enigmatic.
This study would be done simultaneously with that of the Greek nouns.
It will be handled by going through the elements that make up the noun.
Functions of the Noun Case is the word used to refer to the various functions that nouns perform in the sentence.
Though the English has three cases, the Greek language has eight cases (it has to be noted that some scholars say there are five cases) and these are explained below.
The Noun as Subject This is when the noun functions as the topic or the subject of the sentence.
It is the case of designation.
For example, in the sentence, “Sade is coming to school today,” Sade is the subject and it is a noun.
In the Greek language when the nouns functions as the subject, it is put into the nominative case.
The Noun as Direct Object This is when the noun receives the action of the verb in the sentence.
For example, in the sentence “the robbers injured Sade,” Sade is the direct object of the sentence.
In the Greek language, any noun that functions as the direct object is put in the accusative case.
It marks the limit or the end of an action.
The Noun as the Indirect Object When the noun functions as the indirect object, it gives an idea of the person or thing to whom and or for whom something is done.
For example, in the sentence “the conmen sold Sade some dummy,” Sade is the indirect object.
In the Greek language, the noun that functions as the indirect object would be in the dative case.
The dative case is the case of interest.
The Noun as the Owner of Something 46This is when the noun is used to show that someone or something is the owner of a particular thing.
For example, in the sentence “the robbers stole Sade’s textbook,” Sade is said to be the owner of the textbook.
Though in the English language, the possessive‘s’ is usually used to designate this usage, in the Greek language the genitive case is used.
The genitive case is the case of description.
It is used to attribute quality to the word it modifies.
The Noun as Subject Complement This is when a noun completes the thought of the subject.
It usually occurs when the noun follows the verb ‘to be’.
For example, in the sentence, “the class captain is Sade,” Sade is the subject complement of the subject.
In the Greek language, this function is also put in the nominative case.
This means when this happens, two nouns in the sentence would be in the nominative case.
The problem that will arise with such usage would be dealt with later on.
The Noun as the Person Addressed There are times when the person being addressed is called before the statement meant for them.
For example, in the sentence “Sade, where are you?” Sade is the person addressed.
In the Greek language, this usage is put in the vocative case.
By now, we have exhausted all the cases of Greek that can parallel that of the English language.
There are three more cases in the Greek which can be used in another way in the English language.
The cases are the locative and the instrumental cases.
The locative case is used to describe the location or the position of things.
The instrumental case on the other hand is used to express the means by which something is done and.
These two cases are spelt as the dative case and this is why those who say the Greek has five cases insist.
They see the locative and the instrumental as other usages of the dative case.
The last case of the Greek language is the ablative case.
This case is used to express separation or a movement away from something.
For example, in the sentence “the man sends the servants away from the house,” the Greek would use the ablative to express the phrase “from the house.” The ablative case is spelt like the genitive and that is why it is seen as another function of the genitive.
Having exhausted all the cases of the Greek language, we can now move forward to study the Greek nouns now.
There are three forms of declension in the Greek language.
The first declension has an inflected system in which the a sound is predominant; the second declension is predominant 47with the o sound and the third declension has a system in which the consonant stem is predominant.
Since the largest number of nouns of the Greek is in the second declension and since it is easier to learn than the others, it is usually studied first.
3.2 Declension of the Feminine Nouns of the First Declension The inflection of the first declension varies in the singular according to the ending in the nominative.
In all there are five systems of inflection in the singular of the first declension.
Three out of these five systems are applicable to the feminine nouns and would be discussed in this subsection: 7.
When the stems end in e, i or r, the nominative singular will end in long a, which will be retained throughout the word as in the following example: Declension of feminine noun ending in e, i or r, using h( basilei&a with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative h( basilei&a the ai( basilei~ai the kingdom kingdoms Genitive th~v of the tw~n of the basilei&av kingdom basileiw~n kingdoms Ablative th~v from the tw~n from the basilei&av kingdom basileiw~n kingdoms Dative th~| basilei&a| to the tai~v to the kingdom basilei&aiv kingdoms Locative th~| basilei&a| in the tai~v in the kingdom basilei&aiv kingdoms Instrumental th~| basilei&a| by the tai~v by the kingdom basilei&aiv kingdoms Accusative th_n the ta_v basilei&av the basilei&an kingdom kingdoms Vocative h( basilei &a the ai( basilei~ai the kingdom kingdoms 2.
When the stem ends in s, ll, or any of the double consonants, the nominative singular ends in short a, which changes to h in the genitive, ablative, dative, locative and instrumental as in the example below: 48Declension of feminine noun ending in s, ll, or any double consonants, using h( glw~ssa with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative h( glw~ssa the tongue ai( glw~s sai the tongues Genitive th~v of the tw~n glwssw~n of the glw&sshv tongue tongues Ablative th~v from the tw~n glwssw~n from the glw&sshv tongue tongues Dative th~| glw&ssh| to the tai~v to the tongue glw&ssaiv tongues Locative th~| glw&ssh in the tai~v in the tongue glw&ssaiv tongues Instrumental th~| glw&ssh by the tai~v by the tongue glw&ssaiv tongues Accusative th_n the tongue ta_v glw&ssav the tongues glw~ssan Vocative h( glw~ssa the tongue ai( glw~ssai the tongues 3.
When the stem ends in any other letter, the nominative singular will end in h, which is retained throughout the singular, as in the example below: Declension of feminine noun ending in any other letter using h( grafh& with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative h( grafh& the writing ai( grafai& the writings Genitive th~v grafh~v of the tw~n grafw~n Of the writing writings Ablative th~v grafh~v from the tw~n grafw~n From the writing writings Dative th~| grafh~| to the tai~v grafai~v to the writing writings Locative th~| grafh~| in the tai~v grafai~v in the writing writings Instrumental th~| grafh~| by the tai~v grafai~v by the writing writings Accusative th_n grafh&n the writing ta_v grafa&v the writings Vocative h( grafh& the writing ai( grafai& the writings 493.3 Declension of the Masculine Nouns of the First Declension As has been said earlier, there are five declension systems in the first declension system.
The three that are feminine had been shown above.
The last two are masculine and they are as follows: 7.
When a masculine noun of the first declension has a stem ending in e, i or r, the nominative singular will be av (long a).
Declension of masculine noun ending in e, i or r using o( Messi&av with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative o( Messi&av the Messiah oi( Messi&ai the Messiahs Genitive tou~ Messi&ou of the tw~n of the Messiah Messiw~n Messiahs Ablative tou~ Messi&ou from the tw~n From the Messiah Messiw~n Messiahs Dative tw| Messi&a| to the toi~v to the Messiah Messi&aiv Messiahs Locative tw| Messi&a| in the toi~v in the Messiah Messi&aiv Messiahs Instrumental tw| Messi&a| by the toi~v by the Messiah Messi&aiv Messiahs Accusative to_n Messi&an the Messiah tou_v the Messiahs Messi&av Vocative o( Messi&av the Messiah oi( Messi &ai the Messiahs 2.
All other stem endings are followed by hv in the nominative singular, as in the example below: Declension of masculine noun ending in other letters using o( profh&thv with the definite article as an example: Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative o( profh&thv the prophet oi( profh~tai the prophets Genitive tou ~ of the tw~n Of the profh&tou prophet profhtw~n prophets Ablative tou ~ from the tw~n from the profh&tou prophet profhtw~n prophets 50Dative tw|| profh&th| to the toi~v To the prophet profh&taiv prophets Locative tw|| profh&th| in the toi~v In the prophet profh&taiv prophets Instrumental tw|| profh&th| by the toi~v By the prophet profh&taiv prophets Accusative to_n the prophet tou_v the prophets profh&thn profh&taiv Vocative profh&thv the prophet profh~tai the prophets 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have reviewed the functions of nouns in the English language and the case through which these functions are expressed in the Greek language.
You have also learnt the various forms of the declension of the feminine nouns of the first declension as well as the declensions of the masculine nouns of the first decelension.
You have been taught that there are five different declension systems in the first decelension.
Out of these five systems, three are feminine and two are masculine.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • There are five different declension systems in the first decelension.
• Out of these five systems, three are feminine and two are masculine.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify all the feminine nouns in the passage below and indicate which declension system they belong to: Mark 10:5 o` de.
Vihsou/j ei=pen auvtoi/j\ pro.j th.n sklhrokardi,an u`mw/n e;grayen u`mi/n th.n evntolh.n tau,51lat Mark 10:6 avpo.
De.
Arv ch/j kti,sewj ar; sen kai.
Qh/lu evpoi,hsen auvtou,j\ Mark 10:7 e[neken tou,tou katalei,yei a;nqrwpoj to.n pate,ra auvtou/ kai.
Th.n mhte,ra Îkai.
Proskollhqh,setai pro.j th.n gunai/ka auvtou/Ð( Mark 10:8 kai.
E;sontai oi` du,o eivj sa,rka mi,an\ w[ste ouvke,ti eivsi.n du,o avlla.
Mi,a sa,rxÅ Mark 10:9 o] ou=n o` qeo.j sunez, euxen a;nqrwpoj mh.
Cwrize,twÅ 51Mark 10:10 Kai.
Eivj th.n oivki,an pa,lin oi` maqhtai.
Peri.
Tou,tou evphrw,twn auvto,nÅ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
UNIT 2 SECOND DECLENSION NOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 523.1 Inflection 3.2 Masculine Nouns of Second Declension 3.3 Neuter Nouns of Second Declension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied about the first declension nouns that have three declension systems of feminine nouns and two declension systems of the masculine nouns.
You have seen the various declensions within the first declension.
In this unit you will be going further to examine the second declension which has masculine and neuter nouns.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify nouns of the second declension • parse any noun of the second declension • write out the various forms of the masculine noun of the second declension • write out the various forms of the neuter noun of the second declension 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Inflection Inflection is the word used to describe the changes in the form of a word as the functions it performs changes.
For example, let us use some pronouns: he refers to a male, but it becomes ‘her’ if it is to refer to a female.
Changes can also take place to distinguish the number of things or people involved.
For example a prince refers to one person and it becomes princes if they are more than one.
It has to be emphasized however that Greek is a highly inflected language when compared with the English language.
Almost every word in the Greek is altered depending upon its use in the sentence.
This would be observed later.
537.0 Declension of Masculine Nouns of Second Declension To decline the masculine nouns of the second declension, the Greek word a1nqrwpov shall be used: Declension of a1nqrwpov with the definite article Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative o9 a1nqrwpov the man oi9 a1nqrwpoi the men Genitive tou ~ of the man tw~n of the men a0nqrw&pou a0nqrw&pwn Ablative tou ~ from the tw~n from the a0nqrw&pou man a0nqrw&pwn men Dative tw~| a0nqrw&pw| to the man toi~v to the men a0nqrw&poiv Locative tw|~ a0nqrw&pw| in the man toi~v in the men a0nqrw&poiv Instrumental tw|~ a0nqrw&pw| by the man toi~v by the men a0nqrw&poiv Accusative to_n the man tou_v the men a1nqrwpon a0nqrw&pouv Vocative a1nqrwpe man a1nqrwpoi men 7.0 Neuter Nouns of the Second Declension There is a slight difference between the declension of the masculine nouns and the neuter nouns of the second declension.
As would be seen in the paradigm above, the difference occurs only in the nominative singular and the nominative and accusative plural.
In declining the neuter noun, dw~ron shall be used: Declension of dwr~ on with the definite article Cases Singular Meaning Plural Form Meaning Form Nominative to_ dw~ron the gift ta_ dw~ra the gifts Genitive tou~ dw&rou of the gift tw~n dw&rwn of the gifts 54Ablative tou~ dw&rou from the gift tw~n dw&rwn from the gifts Dative tw|~ dw&rw| to the gift toi~v dw&roiv to the gifts Locative tw|~ dw&rw| in the gift toi~v dw&roiv in the gifts Instrumental tw|~ dw&rw| by the gift toi~v dw&roiv by the gifts Accusative to_ dw~ron the gift ta_ dw~ra the gifts Vocative dw~ron gift dw~ra gifts Note that the plural ending a of the second declension neuter nouns are always short.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the basis of inflection in the Greek nouns.
You have also learnt the declensions of the masculine nouns of the second declension using a1nqrwpov as an example.
In this unit also you have studied the declension of neuter nouns of the second declension using dw~ron as an example.
You would have also noted the differences between the declension of the masculine and the neuter nouns.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • In the second declension, there are only masculine and neuter nouns.
• There is a slight difference between the declension of the masculine and neuter nouns.
• Inflection is the determination of the various elements of the noun: gender, number and case.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify all the masculine nouns in the passage below and indicate which declension system they belong to: Mark 10:5 o` de.
Vihsou/j ei=pen auvtoi/j\ pro.j th.n sklhrokardi,an u`mw/n e;grayen u`mi/n th.n evntolh.n tau,55lat Mark 10:6 avpo.
De.
Arv ch/j kti,sewj ar; sen kai.
Qh/lu evpoi,hsen auvtou,j\ Mark 10:7 e[neken tou,tou katalei,yei a;nqrwpoj to.n pate,ra auvtou/ kai.
Th.n mhte,ra Îkai.
Proskollhqh,setai pro.j th.n gunai/ka auvtou/Ð( 55 Mark 10:8 kai.
E;sontai oi` du,o eivj sa,rka mi,an\ w[ste ouvke,ti eivsi.n du,o avlla.
Mi,a sa,rxÅ Mark 10:9 o] ou=n o` qeo.j sunez, euxen a;nqrwpoj mh.
Cwrize,twÅ Mark 10:10 Kai.
Eivj th.n oivki,an pa,lin oi` maqhtai.
Peri.
Tou,tou evphrw,twn auvto,nÅ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
UNIT 3 THIRD DECLENSION NOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Analysis of the Third Declension 563.2 Changes in the Third Declension 3.3 The i Stem Nouns 3.4 The eu Stem Nouns 3.5 The u Stem Nouns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous two units we dealt with the first and second noun declensions and you have seeen how they are declined.
In these two previous units you have seen the declension systems of the three genders of Greek nouns, that is, the masculine, the feminine and the neuter.
In this unit, we will move over to the nouns of the third decelension.
These include the nouns of the liquid, the mute and the syncopated stems.
As you study these nouns of the third declension, compare their declension with the nouns of the first and the second declension.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify the liquid stem • identify the mute stem • identify the syncopated stem • identify the vowel stem nouns • explain the formation of the above stems 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Analysis of the Third Declension There are five major classes of the third declension nouns and these are known as liquid, mute, syncopated, vowel stem and the neuter stem.
Within these divisions are other divisions especially in the vowel and neuter stems.
57The Liquid Stem The liquid stem nouns are the nouns ending in liquid consonants.
They are mostly masculine nouns with a few feminine nouns.
The two, that is the masculine and the feminine nouns would be declined as ai0w/n later.
Theoretically, to decline liquid stems, you locate the stem of the noun and add the endings.
The Mute Stem These are the nouns ending in mute consonants.
Like the liquid stem nouns they also consist of masculine and few feminine nouns.
In the paradigm that would be given later, they are represented by xa/riv, e0lpi/v, and nu/c.
Using three examples is because of the difference in their declension.
For example, xa/riv and e0lpi/v are declined alike except in the accusative singular.
The difference as you will notice is that in the accusative singular, e0lpi/v ended with a and xa/riv with n. You will now be faced with the dilemma of when to use either a or n for the singular accusative.
The answer is this: when a noun stem ends in t, d or q preceded by i or u and it is not accented on the ultima in the nominative form, the accusative singular has the n ending and the mute consonant drops out.
Try to study this rule in the light of the declension of xa/riv and e0lpi/v and you will understand it properly.
The inclusion of nu/c is to serve as an example of monosyllabic nouns of the third declension.
These nouns are all not mute, some of them are liquid.
When accenting monosyllabic nouns of the third declension they take the accent in the ultima in all forms except nominative plural and accusative singular and plural.
The Syncopated Stems The nouns in this class are also a mixture of masculine and feminine nouns.
They are called syncopated nouns because of the shifting of regular accent.
Their accent is explained by the use of path/r below.
The following analysis of the syncopated noun will indicate its highly inflected nature: • The stem is found by changing the h to e in the nominative singular.
This is unusual for a third declension noun.
• The genitive and dative forms singular by dropping the e of the stem and accent the ultima.
58• The vocative singular is the simple stem of the noun and the accent is recessive.
• The stem vowel is accented in all plural forms.
• The plural dative drops the stem vowel eand inserts a short abefore the si ending.
• This analysis is true of all syncopated nouns except a0nh/r (man) which is so irregular that it has to be omitted from this study.
Its forms in the Greek New Testament are best learnt by observation.
3.2 Changes in the Third Declension In the third declension, there is a basic change in the dative plural form especially when the stem of the noun ends in a consonant.
This is because the declension has to end with si.
The following changes have to take place: p, b or f added to si becomes yi k, g or x added to si becomes ci t, d or q drops out leaving the si n drops out leaving the si nt drops out leaving the si but because two consonants are lost the vowel preceding the nt is lenthened.
Through this, o becomes ou as in a!rxontsi which will become a!rxousi.
Note that all these third plural inflected forms may take the movable n. Before giving the paradigms it is better to first give the endings for the third declension: Singular Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
V (or v (or none ev ev none) none) Gen. ov ov ov wn wn wn Dav.
I (short) i (short) i si (short) si (short) si (short) (short) Acc.
N or a n or a none av (short) av a (short) (short) (short) (short) Voc.
None none none Not Applicable The following are paradigms for the declension: Liquid Stem (using aiw0 n/ ) 59Case Singular Plural Nominative ai0w/n ai0w~nev Genitive (Ablative) ai0w~nov ai0w/nwn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
ai0w~ni ai0w~si Accusative ai0w~na ai0w~nav Vocative ai0w/n ai0w~nev Mute Stem (using xar/ iv) Case Singular Plural Nominative xa/riv xa/ritev Genitive (Ablative) xa/ritov xari/twn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
xa/riti xa/risi Accusative xa/rin xa/ritav Vocative xa/riv xa/ritev Mute Stem (using e0lpiv/ ) Case Singular Plural Nominative e0lpi/v e0lpi/dev Genitive (Ablative) e0lpi/dov e0lpi/dwn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
e0lpi/di e0lpi/si Accusative e0lpi/da e0lpi/dav Vocative e0lpi/v e0lpi/dev Mute Stem (using nuc/ ) Case Singular Plural Nominative nu/c nu/ktev Genitive (Ablative) nukto/v nuktw~n Dative (Loc., Inst.)
nukti/ nuci/ Accusative nu/kta nu/ktav Vocative nu/c nu/ktev Syncopated Stem (using pathr/ ) Case Singular Plural Nominative path/r pate/rev Genitive (Ablative) patro/v pate/rwn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
patri/ patra/si Accusative pate/ra pate/rav 60Vocative pa/ter pate/rev 7.0 The i Stem Nouns The i stem nouns of the third declension are all feminine nouns.
The following paradigms are representative of this class: The i Stem Nouns (using pi/stiv) Case Singular Plural Nominative pi/stiv pi/steiv Genitive (Ablative) pi/stewv pi/stewn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
pi/stei pi/stesi Accusative pi/stin pi/steiv Vocative pi/sti pi/steiv The i Stem Nouns (using du/namiv) Case Singular Plural Nominative du/namiv duna/meiv Genitive (Ablative) duna/mewv duna/mewn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
duna/mei duna/mesi Accusative du/namin duna/meiv Vocative du/nami duna/meiv The following analysis calls attention to the characteristics of the inflection of these nouns: Find the stem by striking off the s in the nominative singular.
• e replaces the final i except in the nominative, accusative and vocative singular.
• e unites with i ending in dative singular to form a diphthong.
• eiv in nominative plural and accusative plural is the result of the contraction of eev and eav respectively.
The accent of the genitive singular and plural is irregular and stands on the antepenult even with a long ultima.
7.0 The eu Stem Nouns The eu stem nouns of third declension are all masculine.
The following is the paradigm using i9ereu/v: 61The eu Stem Nouns (using i9ereu/v) Case Singular Plural Nominative i9ereu/v i9erei=v Genitive (Ablative) i9ere/wv i9ere/wn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
i9erei= i9ereu~si Accusative i9ere/a i9erei=v Vocative i9ereu~ i9erei=v The following features could be noted in the analysis of the inflection of this class: • Find the stem by striking off the s of the nominative singular.
• The final u of the stem is dropped before an ending with a vowel.
• In the dative singular and the nominative and accusative plural the same combinations as are found in the i stem nouns proper.
7.0 The u Stem Nouns The u stem nouns of the third declension are mostly masculine; however there are a few feminine and one neuter (da/kru, a tear) noun.
The inflection is regular.
The stem is found by dropping the s of the nominative singular.
The u Stem Nouns (using ix0 qu/v) Case Singular Plural Nominative i0xqu/v i0xqu/ev Genitive (Ablative) i0xquo/ v i0xqu/wn Dative (Loc., Inst.)
i0xqui/ i0xqu/si Accusative i0xqu/n i0xqu/av or i0xqu~v Vocative i0xqu/ i0xqu/ev 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have gone through the declension systems of the nouns classified as liquid stem nouns (those nouns ending in liquid stems which are mostly masculine nouns but with few feminine nouns); mute stem nouns (nouns ending in mjute stems and are also masculine with few 62feminine nouns); syncopated nouns (which is a mixture of masculine and feminine nouns) and the vowel stem nouns.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The liquid stem nouns are nouns that ended with a liquid consonant; they are mostly masculine nouns with few feminine nouns.
• The mute stem nouns are nouns that ended with mute consonants; they are mostly masculine nouns with few feminine nouns.
• The syncopated nouns are so called because of the shifting of the regular accents; they are mixture of masculine and feminine nouns.
• The other third declension nouns are nouns ending in vowel stems.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify all the nouns in the passage below and indicate which gender, declension, number and case system they belong to: Mark 15:1 Kai.
Euvqu.j prwi> sumbou,lion poih,santej oi` avrcierei/j meta.
Tw/ n presbute,rwn kai.
Grammate,wn kai.
O[lon to.
Sune,drion( dh,santej to.n Vihsou/n avph,negkan kai.
Pare,dwkan Pila,tw|Å Mark 15:2 Kai.
Evphrw,thsen auvto.n o` Pila/toj\ su.
Ei= o` basileu.j tw/n Vioudai,wnÈ o` de.
Avpokriqei.j auvtw/| le,gei\ su.
Le,geijÅ Mark 15:3 kai.
Kathgo,roun auvtou/ oi` arv cierei/j polla,Å Mark 15:4 o` de.
Pila/toj pa,lin evphrw,ta auvto.n le,gwn\ ouvk avpokri,nh| ouvde,nÈ i;de po,sa sou kathgorou/sinÅ Mark 15:5 o` de.
Vihsou/j ouvke,ti ouvde.n avpekri,qh( w[ste qauma,zein to.n Pila/tonÅ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers 63Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
UNIT 4 PERSONAL AND DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 642.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Declension of the Personal Pronouns 3.2 The Use of Personal Pronouns in Greek 3.3 The Use of au0to/v 3.4 The Present Indicative of ei0mi/ 3.5 The Functions of the Demonstrative Pronouns 3.10 Enclitics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you were taught the nouns of the thrid declension.
You have been shown that these nouns consist of nouns that have their stem ending in liquid, mute and syncopated consonants.
Also included in the third declension are nouns that have their stems ending in vowels.
In this unit you would be introduced to the personal pronouns of the Greek Language and the demonstrative pronouns in the Greek language 7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • decline the personal pronouns by person • identify the use of personal pronouns in Greek language • comment on the use of au0tov in the nominative position • determine the use of the alternate pronoun forms • decline the demonstrative pronoun by number, case and gender 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Declension of the Personal Pronoun The first person personal pronoun is declined as follows: Singular Plural Case Pronoun Meaning Pronoun Meaning Nominative e)gw& I h(mei=v we Genitive e)mou= or mou of me h(mw~n of us 65Dative e)moi// or moi to me h(mi=n to us Accusative e)me/ or me - me h(ma~v -us Note that the alternative forms mou, moi and me are the un-emphatic forms of the personal pronoun and are enclitic.
The other forms are used when emphasis is on the personal pronoun.
Declension of the Second Person Personal Pronoun The second person personal pronoun is declined as follows: Singular Plural Case Pronoun Meaning Pronoun Meaning Nominative su& you u(mei=v you Genitive sou= or sou of you u(mw~n of you Dative s)oi// or soi to you u(mi=n to you Accusative se/ or se - you h(ma~v - you Note that the alternative forms sou, soi and se are the un-emphatic forms of the personal pronoun and are enclitic.
The other forms are used when emphasis is on the personal pronoun.
Declension of the Third Person Personal Pronoun The third person personal pronoun is declined as follows: Singular Masculine Feminine Neuter Case Pronoun Meaning Pronoun Meaning Pronoun Meaning Nom.
Au)to/v he au)th/ au)to/ it Gen. au)tou= of him au)th=v of her au)tou= of it Dat.
Au)tw~| to him au)th=| to her au)tw~| to it Acc.
Au)to/n -him au)th/n -her au)to/ -it Plural Masculine Feminine Neuter Case Pronoun Meaning Pronoun Meaning Pronoun Meaning Nom.
Au)toi/ they au)tai/ they au)ta/ they Gen. au)tw~n them au)tw~n them au)tw~n them 66Dat.
Au)toi=v to them au)tai=v to them au)toi=v to them Acc.
Au)tou/v - them au)ta/v - them au)ta/ - them 7.0 The Use of Personal Pronouns in Greek The use of personal pronouns in Greek is very similar to that of English language.
They are used in place of nouns so that monotony could be avoided.
The noun for which a pronoun stands is called the antecedent.
A pronoun must agree with its antecedent in gender and number.
In other words, if the antecedent is feminine and singular, the pronoun must be the feminine and singular form.
However, it has to be noted that the case of the pronoun is determined by its use in the sentence.
Care has to be taken at this point especially in translation from the English language to the Greek language.
For example, if you are to translate “I have a church and remain in it” you must note that “it” is the pronoun and the antecedent is “church”.
It then must agree in number and gender with church, but you must remember that in the Greek language, “church” is in the feminine and not the neuter as it is in the English language.
The personal pronouns are not used in the nominative as subjects of verb unless there is an emphasis placed on them.
This is because subjects are taken care of in the personal endings of the verbs.
Emphases however are usually called out when clauses are placed in contrast to one another.
For example, the sentence “I am speaking but you are writing” would be written thus: eg) w_ le/gw, su_ de_ gra/feiv.
7.0 The Use of au)tov/ au)to/v is not usually used in the nominative case.
However, when it is used in the nominative case, its function would not be that of a personal pronoun.
The following are the functions of au)to/v in the nominative as based on its position: In the Attributive Position When used in the attributive position (you may need to revise this position from the unit on adjectives), whether in the nominative case or not, au)to/v is translated “same”.
Therefore, o( a)po/stolov o( au)to/v or o( au)to/v a)po/stolov will be translated “the same apostle”.
In the Predicative Position 67When used in the predicative position, it is believed to be intensive and thus would be translated “himself”.
Therefore, au)to_v o( a)po/stolov or o( a)po/stolov au)to/v would be translated “the apostle himself”.
It has to be noted that when au)to_v is used in the intensive form, it is usually found with pronouns or unexpressed subjects of the verb.
For example, au)to_v e)gw_ le/gw or au)to_v le/gw would be translated “I myself say”.
The Use of the Alternate Pronoun Forms The alternate pronoun forms indicated in the table above are called the enclitics or the non-emphatic forms of personal pronouns.
They are usually used in the genitive case to express possession.
Literally in Greek, for example, the phrase “my word” is “the word of me”, hence it would be written o( lo/gov mou.
If emphasis is however required the correct form would be learnt later for that is the “possessive adjective”.
7.0 Present Indicative of eim) i Singular Plural eim) i / form Meaning ei)mi / form Meaning ei)mi/ I am e)sme/n we are ei] you are e)ste/ you are e)sti(/ n) he (she, it) is ei)si/(n) they were Note the following about the ei)mi verb: • All the forms except ei] are enclitics.
• It does not have a voice since it describes state of being and not action.
• As shown in the table e)sti and ei)si/ takes the movable nu (n).
• The verb requires a subject complement rather than an object to complete its meaning.
This is an example of the predicate nominative.
For example, o( a!nqrwpo/v e)stin a)po/stolov would be translated “the man is an apostle”.
7.0 The Functions of the Demonstrative Pronouns There are two demonstrative pronouns in Greek language.
We have the near demonstrative (ou[tov) which is used to point out something near at 68hand.
There is also the remote demonstrative (ek) ei=nov) which is used to point out something further removed.
Demonstrative pronouns can be used by themselves with the force of a substantive.
For example, ou[tov Ble/pei to_n oik] on would be translated “this man sees the house”; e)kei=nov ginw/skei to_n a)po/stolon would be translated “that man knows the apostle”.
Substantively, ou[toi would mean “these men”; ek) ei=noi would mean “those men” and tou=to would mean “this thing”.
Demonstrative pronouns can also be used with a force similar to that of an adjective.
In the adjectival use of the demonstrative pronoun, if the noun carries the article, then the demonstrative pronoun is in the predicate position.
For example, ou]tov o( a!nqrwpov or o( a!nqrwpov ou]tov would be translated “this man”.
This can be used with any of the demonstrative pronouns no matter the case function.
For example, in the following sentence, it comes up in the accusative case: ble/pw ek) ei/nhn th_n e)kklhsi/an.
This sentence would be translated “I see that church”.
7.0 Declension of the Demonstrative Pronoun The demonstrative pronouns are declined like the adjectives of the first and second declension that has been treated earlier.
In case you cannot remember vividly, go back and read the unit all over again.
You need to observe that in the paradigm below the n ending of the neuter singular nominative and the singular accusative have dropped out.
Now observe the paradigms properly: Singular Plural Case Mas.
Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
ek) ei=nov e)kei/nh e)kei=no ek) ei=noi ek) ei=nai ek) ei=na Gen. ek) ei/nou e)kei/nhv e)kei/nou ek) ei/nwn ek) ei/nwn ek) ei/nwn Dat.
ek) ei/nw| e)kei/nh| e)kei/nw| ek) ei/noiv ek) ei/naiv ek) ei/noiv Acc.
ek) ei=non e)kei/nhn e)kei=no ek) ei/nouv ek) ei/nav ek) ei=na In the case of ou[tov, the stem as well as the endings experiences some changes.
You will be able to observe in the paradigm below that when the ultima has an o-sound vowel, the stem will be ou diphthong but when the ultima has another sound (a or h), the stem vowel will be au diphthong.
Singular Plural Case Mas.
Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter 69Nom.
Ou[tov au#th tou~to ou[toi au[tai tau~ta Gen. tou/tou tau/thv tou/tou tou/twn tou/twn tou/twn Dat.
Tou/tw| tau/th| tou/tw| tou/toiv tau/taiv tou/toiv Acc.
Tou~ton tau/thn tou~to tou/touv tau/tav tau~ta 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have studied about the personal pronouns as well as the demonstrative pronouns.
You have learnt the declension of the personal pronoun by gender, case and number as well as their uses.
You have learnt that the personal pronouns replace the nouns to avoid monotony.
You have also learnt that they are not used in the nominative case except for the sake of emphasis as the subject of the sentence is usually taken care of by the verbal endings.
You have also learnt that when au0to/v is used attributively, it is translated ‘same’ and when used predicatively, it is translated reflexively (myself, himself, herself, itself).
There are two demonstrative pronouns and these can be used substantively or predicatively.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • Personal pronouns replace nouns to avoid monotony.
• They are not used in the nominative case except for the sake of emphasis as the subject of the sentence is usually taken care of by the verbal endings.
• When au0to/v is used attributively, it is translated ‘same’ and when used predicatively, it is translated reflexively (myself, himself, herself, itself).
• There are two demonstrative pronouns and these can be used substantively or predicatively.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify all the pronouns used in this passage and indicate their number, case, gender and their antecedent.
Acts 9:1 ~O de.
Sau/loj e;ti evmpne,wn avpeilh/j kai.
Fo,nou eivj tou.j maqhta.j tou/ kuri,ou( proselqw.n tw/| avrcierei/ 70Acts 9:2 hv|th,sato parV auvtou/ evpistola.j eivj Damasko.n pro.j ta.j sunagwga,j( o[pwj eva,n tinaj eu[rh| th/j o`dou/ o;ntaj( an; draj te kai.
Gunai/kaj( dedeme,nouj avga,gh| eivj Vierousalh,mÅ Acts 9:3 Ven de.
Tw/| poreu,esqai evge,neto auvto.n evggiz, ein th/| Damaskw/| ( evxai,fnhj te auvto.n perih,strayen fw/j evk tou/ ourv anou/ Acts 9:4 kai.
Pesw.n evpi.
Th.n gh/n h;kousen fwnh.n le,gousan auvtw/|\ Saou.l Saou,l( ti, me diw,keijÈ Acts 9:5 ei=pen de,\ ti,j ei=( ku,rieÈ o` de,\ evgw, eivmi Vihsou/j o]n su.
Diw,keij\ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
MODULE 3 Unit 1: Participles 71Unit 2: The Perfect Indicative Unit 3: The Subjunctive Mood: Conditional Sentences Unit 4: The Imperative Mood Unit 5: Contract Verbs UNIT 1: PARTICIPLES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Understanding the Participle 3.2 Present Participles 3.3 Characteritics of Participles 3.4 Functions of Participles 3.5 Aorist Participles 3.6 Kind and Time of Action in Aorist Participles 3.7 Temporal Use of the Participle 3.8 Relative Use of the Participle 3.9 The Genitive Absolute 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last two modules you have gone through a review of the major nouns (including personal pronouns and demonstrative pronouns) and the verbs of the indicative mood that were studied in CTH053, the pre-requisite to this course, CTH058.
You will begin this module with the study of Participles.
Participles are the forms of verbs that are used to form complex tenses.
In this study of participles, you will examine how particples are formed in the Greek language, how they are used as well as their characteristics.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this first unit you should be able to: • Explain what participles are • Discuss the characteristics of participles 72• Discuss the functions of participles • Write the participles in the present, middle and passive forms.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Understanding the Participle The participle is a verbal adjective.
In other words, it carries the qualities of the verb and the adjective.
The present active participle is declined like a third declension mute stem noun in the masculine and neuter and like a first declension s stem noun in the feminine.
Below is the present active participle of luw, which you must study carefully, noting the inflection and the accenting pattern.
Following this pattern, you can form the present active participle of any regular verb.
7.0 Present Participles Present Active Participle of lu/w: Singular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Lu/wn lu/ousa lu/on Gen. & Abl.
Lu/ontov lu/oushv lu/ontov Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
Lu/onti lu/oush| lu/onti Accusative lu/onta lu/ousan luo~ n Plural Nom.
& Voc.
Lu/ontev lu/ousai lu/onta Gen. & Abl.
Luo/ntwn luousw~n luo/ntwn Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
Lu/ousi(n) luou/saiv lu/ousi(n) Accusative lu/ontav luou/sav lu/onta It has to be noted that though the middle and passive forms of the present participle are identical they are different in functions.
As you would notice below, this form is characterized by the use of the suffix men, which is added to the connectiong vowel o. the masculine and the neuter forms are declined like the masculine and neuter forms of the second declension and the feminine is decleined like any h ending noun of the first declension.
You need also to observe the accenting and the declension as shown below: Present Middle and Passive Participle of lu/w: Singular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter 73Nom.
& Voc.
Luo&menov luome/nh luo&menon Gen. & Abl.
Luome/nou luome/nhv luome/nou Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
Luome/nw| luome/nh| luome/nw| Accusative luo&menon luome/nhn luo&menon Plural Nom.
& Voc.
Luo&menoi luo&menai luo&mena Gen. & Abl.
Luome/nwn luome/nwn luome/nwn Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
Luome/noiv luome/naiv luome/noiv Accusative luome/nouv luome/na luo&mena By adding the o&menov, h, on endings to any regular verb, you will get the present middle and passive forms of the present particple.
The deponent verbs (if you don’t remember what these are, go back and read the unit on deponent verbs in the CTH053 course material) will also use this system form their present participle.
Present Participle of e0i/mi: Singular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
W!n ou}sa o!n Gen. & Abl.
O!ntov ou!shv o!ntov Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
O!nti ou!sh| o!nti Accusative o!nta ou!san o!n Plural Nom.
& Voc.
O!ntev ou}sai o!nta Gen. & Abl.
O!ntwn ou0sw~n o!ntwn Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
Ou}si n ou!saiv ou}si n Accusative o!ntav ou!sav o!nta 7.0 Characteristics of Participles As you have been told earlier, the participle combines the characteristics of the verb and the adjective.
As a verb, it has tense and voice, it may take an object and it may be used as an adverbial modifier.
As an adjective, it has case, gender and number; it may be used substantively and it may also be used as an adjective modifier.
7.0 Functions of Participles 74The verbal function of the participle has to be noted in relation with the voice (active, middle and passive) and the tense, which has to do with the kind of action.
The present participle indicates continuous action while the aorist participle indicates punctiliar action.
In all, only four Greek tenses, namely: present, aorist, future and perfect has participles.
You have to note that the time of action in participles is indicated in the relationship of the action of the participle to the action of the main verb.
Note the following: The aorist participle indicates action that is antecedent to the action of the main verb.
The present participle indicates action that is contemporaneous with the action of the main verb.
The future participle indicates action which is subsequent to the action of the main verb.
The perfect participle indicates action which has become a state of being.
The following is an example of a present participle: le/gwn tau~ta o9 a!nqrwpov ble/pei to\n Ku/rion which would be translated “while saying these things, the man sees the Lord”.
Another example is: didasko/menov u9po tou~ Kuri/ou o9 a!nqrwpov lamba/vei th\n a0lh/qeian which would be translated “while being taught by the Lord, the man receives the truth” or “as the man is being taught by the Lord, he receives the truth”.
The first of these examples, that is, le/gwn tau~ta o9 a!nqrwpov ble/pei to\ n Ku/rion, illustrates the characteristics of a particple, the ability to carry a direct object.
In the construction, tau~ta is the accusative and this means that it is the direct object of the participle le/gwn.
The Participle as an Adverbial Modifier The following is an example of how the participle can be used as an adverbial modifier.
e0rxo/menoi e0kh/russon to\ eu0agge/lion which would be translated “as they were going they were preaching the gospel”.
In this case, the participle modifies the verb and tells when they were preching.
As an adverbial modifier, the participle may tell when, how, why, on what condition, by what means, or under what circumstances an action took place.
This function would be studied in greater details during the lesson on subordinate clauses.
The Adjectival Function of a Participle As an adjective, the participle would have to agree with the noun it is modifying in gender, number and case.
As an adjective, the participle can also be used substantively.
For example, o9 lu/wn would mean “the loosing man” or “the man who looses” or “he who looses”.
Care has to be taken 75when the participle is used in this way that the relative translation is followed so that the full significance of the construction is given.
Check out the examples below: Sentence Translation ble/pw to\n le/gonta tau~ta I see the one who is saying these things.
Eb1 leya to\n le/gonta tau~ta I saw the one who was saying these things.
Ble/pw tou\v le/gontav tau~ta I see the men who are saying these things or I saw those who are saying these things ble/pw to\n a0delfon th~v I see the brother of the woman who legou/shv tau~ta is saying these things.
In its function as an adjective, the participle may also be used as an adjectival modifier.
In this construction, the participle is always in the attributive position with the noun and it is usually the longer of the two possible forms.
For example, o9 le/gwn a0po/stolov or o9 a0po/stolov o9 le/ gwn would mean “the saying apostle” the second which is longer would be used in this case.
This is the case in o9 a0po/stolov o9 le/gwn tau~ta which would read “the apostle who is saying these things”.
This thus brings us to a very important issue in the function of 76lat h76ples.
When the participle is in the attributive position, that is, it carries the article, it has to be given a relative translation as in “the one who”.
However, when the participle is in the predicate position, that is, it does not carry the article, it is given a temporal translation as in “while” or “as”.
This is seen in the examples below: e!bleya to\n a0po/stolon le/gonta tau~ta would be translated “I saw the apostle while he was saying these things”.
E!bleya to\n a0po/stolon to\n le/gonta tau~ta would be translated “I saw the apostle who was saying these things”.
7.0 Aorist Participles 76The first aorist active participle of lu/w is: Singular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Lu/sav lu/sava lu~san Gen. & Abl.
Lu/santov lusa/shv lu/santov Dat., Loc.
& Inst lu/santi lusa/sh| lu/santi Accusative lu/santa lu/savan lu~san Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Lu/santev lu/savai lu/santa Gen. & Abl.
Lusa/ntwn lusasw~n lusa/ntwn Dat., Loc.
& Inst lu/sasi(n) lusa/saiv lu/sasi(n) Accusative lu/santav lusa/sav lu/santa The first aorist middle participle of lu/w is: Singular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Lusa/menov lusame/nh lusa/menon Gen. & Abl.
Lusame/nou lusame/nhv lusame/nou Dat., Loc.
& Inst lusame/nw| lusame/nh| lusame/nw| Accusative lusa/menon lusame/nhn lusa/menon Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Lusa/menoi lusa/menai lusa/mena Gen. & Abl.
Lusame/nwn lusame/nwn lusame/nwn Dat., Loc.
& Inst lusame/noiv lusame/naiv lusame/noiv Accusative lusame/nouv lusame/nav lusa/mena The second aorist active participle of leip/ w is: Singular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Lipw/n lipou~sa lipo/n Gen. & Abl.
Lipo/ntov lipou/shv lipo/ntov Dat., Loc.
& Inst lipo/nti lipou/sh| lipo/nti Accusative lipo/nta lipou~san lipo/n Plural 77Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Lipo/ntev lipou~sai lipo/nta Gen. & Abl.
Lipo/ntwn lipousw~n lipo/ntwn Dat., Loc.
& Inst lipou~si(n) lipou/saiv lipou~si(n) Accusative lipo/ntav lipou/sav lipo/nta The second aorist middle participle of leip/ w is: Singular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Lipo/menov lipome/nh lipo/menon Gen. & Abl.
Lipome/nou lipome/nhv lipome/nou Dat., Loc.
& Inst lipome/nw| lipome/nh| lipome/nw| Accusative lipo/menon lipome/nhn lipo/menon Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Lipo/menoi lipo/menai lipo/mena Gen. & Abl.
Lipome/nwn lipome/nwn lipome/nwn Dat., Loc.
& Inst lipome/noiv lipome/naiv lipome/noiv Accusative lipome/nouv lipome/nav lipo/mena As you would have noticed, the aorist participle is formed on the aorist stem but it did not carry any augment.
The first aorist active participle has the sa- tense suffix added to the stem.
After this, the participle is declined in masculine and neuter like a mute stem noun of the third declension and in the feminine like a s stem noun of the first declension.
The first aorist middle consists of the aorist stem plus the middle participle suffix (men) plus the second declension endings in masculine and neuter and first declension endings in the feminine.
This is to say that the first aorist middle participle is like the present middle participle except for the suffix sa- added to the stem.
The second aorist participle is built on the second aorist stem.
It is declined exactly like the present participle except that in the second aroist active participle the accent is irregular.
The accent is on the ultima in the nominative masculine singular and thereafter follows the noun rule.
You can compare the accent in the above paradigm with the present participles.
7.0 Kind and Time of Action in Aorist Participles 78The kind of action in the aorist as had been said earlier is punctiliar, that is, it is a finished action.
The time of the action is antecedent to the action of the main verb.
In verbs other than the indicative mood, the stress is on the kind of action.
This is the reason behind the absence of the augment in participles, infinitves and subjunctives because it indicates the action in past time.
The use of the participle with or without the article is similar to that of the present participles.
You can revise it again.
In translating the present participles, good Englism expression should be used.
For example, lu/sav would be translated “having loosed” or “when he had loosed” or “after he had loosed” while o9 lu/sav would be translated “the one who loosed” or “he who loosed”.
Note the following examples, especially the temporal or relative use and the relation of the action of the participle to that of the main verb: Greek Sentence English Translation o9 a1nqrwpov ei0pw_n tau~ta ble//pei The man, having said these things, is to\n K/u//rion.
seeing the Lord.
Ei0pw_n tau~ta e0ch~lqen e0k tou~ oi!
Having said these things (After he kou.
had said/When he had said), he went out of the house.
O( a1nqrwpov o9 ei0pw_n tau~ta The man who had said these things h]lqen ei0v to\n oi]kon.
went into the house.
O9 ei0pw_n tau~ta h]lqen ei0v to\n The man who (He who) had said oi]kon.
these things went into the house.
The aorist passive participle of lu/w is: Singular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Luqei/v luqei~sa luqe/n Gen. & Abl.
Luqe/ntov luqei/shv luqe/ntov Dat., Loc.
& Inst luqe/nti luqei/sh| luqe/nti Accusative luqe/nta luqei~san luqe/n Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
& Voc.
Luqe/ntev luqei~sai luqe/nta Gen. & Abl.
Luqe/ntwn luqeisw~n luqe/ntwn Dat., Loc.
& Inst luqei~si luqei/saiv luqei~si Accusative luqe/ntav luqei/sav luqe/nta 79As shown above, the aorist passive participle is formed following the example above.
Indoing this, the augment would be dropped and the corresponding endings would be added.
Note however that it is only the first aorist that would have the q as a tense suffix and not the second aorist.
The aorist passive participle is used like the other participles.
The kind of action is punctiliar and the time of action is antecedent to that of the main verb.
The voice however indicates that the subject receives the action.
The participle may be translated in several ways: Greek Sentence English Translation o9 luqei\v a1nqrwpov e0ch~lqen ek0 “The man who was loosed went out tou~ oi1kou.
of the house” or “The man who had been loosed went out of the house “.
Swqei\v doca/sei to\n Ku/rion.
“Having been saved, he will praise the Lord” or “After he has been saved, he will praise the Lord”.
The use of the word in its context must determine the translation.
7.0 Temporal Use of the Participle (without the article) Tense Voice Participle Translation Present Active lu/wn Loosing; while loosing; as he was loosing Middle luo/menov Loosing for himself; while loosing for himself; as he was loosing for himself Passive luo/menov Being loosed; while being loosed; as he was being loosed Aorist Active lu/sav Having loosed; after he had loosed; when he had loosed Middle lusa/menov Having loosed for himself; after he had loosed for himself; when he 80had loosed for himself Passive luqei/v Having been loosed; when he was loosed; when he has been loosed; when he had been loosed; after he was loosed; after he has been loosed; after he had been looosed 7.0 Relative Use of the Participle Tense Voice Participle Translation Present Active o9 lu/wn He who looses; the man who looses; the one who looses Middle o9 luo/menov He who looses for himself; the man who looses for himself; the one who looses for himself Passive o9 luo/menov He who is being loosed; the man who is being loosed; the one who is being loosed Aorist Active o9 lu/sav He who loosed; the man who loosed; the one who loosed (or has loosed/had loosed) Middle o9 lusa/menov He who loosed for himself; the man who loosed for himself; the one who loosed for himself (or has loosed/had loosed) 81Passive o9 luqei/v He who was loosed; the man who was loosed; the one who was loosed (or has loosed/had loosed) 7.0 The Genitive Absolute The genitive absolute is found frequently in the Greek New Testament.
It is a kind of construction which has a very loose connection with the main part of the sentence.
It is usually composed by a participle and a noun (or pronoun) connected with it.
When the subject of the main verb is different from the noun or pronoun used with the participle, then the noun and pronoun of the participle are put in the genitive case.
Examine the two sentences below: Greek Sentence English Translation ei0po/ntev tau~ta oi9 a0po/stoloi Having said these things, the a0ph\lqon.
apostles went away.
Ei0po/ntwn tau~ta tw~n maqhtw~n The disciples having said these oi9 a0po/stoloi a0ph~lqon.
things, the apostles went away.
You will note that in the first sentence, the subject of the sentence (apostle) has a direct connection with the participle; hence the subject is in the nominative case.
In the second sentence, there is no direct connection between the participle and the subject of the sentence (apostles).
That is, the ones doing the saying and the ones doing the going away are different group of people.
The participle (having said) and its noun (the disciples) are therefore absolute; hence they are separated from the main part of the sentence and are in the genitive case.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have explored the partciples.
You have been told that the participles are verbal adjectives, that is, they behave like the verb and the adjective.
As verbs, you have been told that participles have tense and voice, they can take the object and may be used as adjectival modifiers.
As adjectives, participles have case, gender and number.
You have also been shown the various examples of the use of participles in the attributive position (where it has a relative translation) and in the predicative (where it has a temporal translation).
You have also been taught the genitive absolute 82which is a frequent construction in the Greek New Testament and it is made up of a participle and a noun.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • Participles are verbal adjectives, that is, they behave like the verb and the adjective.
• As verbs, you have been told that participles have tense and voice, they can take the object and may be used as adjectival modifiers.
• As adjectives, participles have case, gender and number.
• In the attributive position participles would take a relative translation.
• In the predicative position participles would take a temporal translation.
• The genitive absolute is a frequent construction in the Greek New Testament which is made up of a participle and a noun.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Identify the participles in this passage and indicate whether they are present or aorist and the position in which they are used.
2 Corinthians 5:15 kai.
U`pe.r pa,ntwn avpe,qanen( i[na oi` zw/ntej mhke,ti e`autoi/j zw/sin avlla.
Tw/| u`pe.r auvtw/n avpoqano,nti kai.
Evgerqe,ntiÅ 2 Corinthians 5:16 {Wste h`mei/j avpo.
Tou/ nu/n ouvde,na oi;damen kata.
Sa,rka\ eiv kai.
Evgnw,kamen kata.
Sar, ka Cristo,n( avlla.
Nu/n ouvke,ti ginw,skomenÅ 2 Corinthians 5:17 w[ste ei; tij evn Cristw/|( kainh.
Kti,sij\ ta.
Arv cai/a parh/lqen( ivdou.
Ge,gonen kaina,\ 2 Corinthians 5:18 ta.
De.
Pa,nta evk tou/ qeou/ tou/ katallax, antoj h`ma/j e`autw/| dia.
Cristou/ kai.
Do,ntoj h`mi/n th.n diakoni,an th/j katallagh/j( 2 Corinthians 5:19 w`j o[ti qeo.j h=n evn Cristw/| ko,smon katalla,sswn e`autw/|( mh.
Logizo,menoj auvtoi/j ta.
Paraptw,mata auvtw/n kai.
Qe,menoj evn h`mi/n to.n lo,83lat h/j katallagh/jÅ 832 Corinthians 5:20 ~Upe.r Cristou/ ou=n presbeu,omen w`j tou/ qeou/ parakalou/ntoj diV h`mw/n\ deo,meqa u`pe.r Cristou/( katalla,ghte tw/| qew/|Å 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
UNIT 2: THE PERFECT INDICATIVE CONTENTS 841.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Perfect Active Tense 3.2 The Perfect Middle Indicative 3.3 The Perfect Active Participle 3.4 The Perfect Middle and Passive Participle 3.5 The Perfect Infinitive 3.6 Reduplication in the Perfect Tense 3.7 Characteristics of the Perfect Tense 3.8 Functions of the Perfect Tense 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the earlier units, you have studied the present tense, the imperfect tense and the aorist tense.
You have been told that the present tense concerns an ongoing action in the present; the imperfect is an ongoing action in the past time and the aorist concerns specific action in the past time which at times may have its result having a present effect.
In this unit you would be focusing attention on the last of the Greek tenses, the perfect tense.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify any verb in the perfect tense • List the characteristics of the perfect tense • Write the perfect tense in any of the voices • List the functions of the perfect tense 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 The Perfect Active Tense 85The perfect active indicative of lu/w is: le/luka, I have loosed lelu/kamen we have loosed le/lukav, you have loosed lelu/kate you (p) have loosed le/luke(n), he has loosed lelu/kasai/le/lukan they have loosed 7.0 The Perfect Middle Indicative The perfect middle indicative of lu/w is: le/lumai I have loosed for lelu/meqa we have loosed myself for ourselves le/lusai you have loosed le/lusqe you have loosed for yourself for yourselves le/lutai he has loosed for le/luntai they have loosed himself for themselves The perfect passive indicative of lu/w is: le/lumai I have been lelu/meqa we have been loosed loosed le/lusai you have been le/lusqe you (p) have loosed been loosed le/lutai he has been le/luntai they have been loosed loosed 7.0 The Perfect Active Participle The perfect active participle of lu/w is: Singlular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
Lelukw/v lelukui~a leluko/v Gen. and Abl.
Leluko/tov lelukui/av leluko/tov Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
Leluko/ti lelukui/a| leluko/ti Acc.
Leluko/ta lelukui~an leluko/v Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
Leluko/tev lelukui~ai leluko/ta Gen. and Abl.
Leluko/twn lelukuiw~n leluko/twn 86Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
Leluko/si(n) lelukui/aiv leluko/si(n) Acc.
Leluko/tav lelukui~av leluko/ta 7.0 The Perefect Middle and Passive Participle The perfect middle and passive participle of lu/w is: Singlular Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
Lelume/nov lelume/nh lelume/non Gen. and Abl.
Lelume/nou lelume/nhv lelume/nou Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
Lelume/nw| lelume/nh| lelume/nw| Acc.
Lelume/non lelume/nhn lelume/non Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
Lelume/noi lelume/nai lelume/na Gen. and Abl.
Lelume/nwn lelume/nwn lelume/nwn Dat.
Loc.
& Inst.
Lelume/noiv lelume/naiv lelume/noiv Acc.
Lelume/nouv lelume/nav lelume/na 7.0 The Perfect Infinitive The perfect infinitives of lu/w are: Active leluke/nai to have loosed Middle lelu/sqai to have loosed for oneself Passive lelu/sqai to have been loosed 7.0 Reduplication in the Perfect Tense As you would have noticed in the above paradigms, the most striking characteristic of the perfect tense of the Greek language is the reduplication of the stem.
The following are the ways by which the reduplication can take place: a.
Under normal conditions, the initial consonant is doubled and an epsilon (e) is inserted between the two.
For example, the reduplicated stem for lu/w is lelu-; for gra/fw it is gegraf- and for gi/nwmai, it is gegon-.
This is the most frequent form of reduplication.
87b.
Verb stems beginning with f, q or x are reduplicated with the smoother consonants p, t, and k respectively.
For example, qnh/skw becomes te/qnhka.
c. As usual, verb stems beginning with a vowel lengthen the vowel to form the reduplication.
For example, e0lpi/zw will become h1lpika.
d. Verb stems beginning with two consonants sometimes reduplicate by prefixing an e like an augment in the aorist.
For example, the perfect of ginw/skw is e1gnwka.
You have to note that the only safe way to learn the correct perfect form for a verb is to check the word in the lexicon.
The perfect active stem is the fourth principal part in the lexicon.
7.0 Characteristics of the Perfect Tense The major sign of the perfect tense is k. it has to be noted however that there are some perfect tenses like ge/gona that did not have the k. These ones are called second perfetcs.
Note however that the use of the k is the usual sign.
When a verb stem ends in a consonant, some changes would take place.
For example, verb stems ending in t, d, or q would drop the consonant before the k of the perfect.
These changes are also best learned by observation in the lexicon.
The perfect tense is a primary tense.
However, because of the nature of its functions, it uses the secondary personal endings.
The endings are the same as those of the first aorist except in the third personal plural form where – kasi is more frequent than –kan.
Examine the accent system in the paradigms above.
You will discover that is is very irregular unlike the other tenses.
The irregular accent is one of the most certain ways of identifying the perfect tense of a verb.
Finally, you also need to note that the perfect middle and passive forms employ no connecting vowel.
The endings are added directly to the stem as in le/lumai, lelu/sqai and lelume/nov.
7.0 Functions of the Perfect Tense As you have been told earlier, the Greek perfect tense has no corresponding tense in English language.
Though you may have to translate with the English past tense, they however do not express the full force of the Greek 88perfect tense.
The perfect tense is the Greek tense of completed action with a resultant state of being.
Three ideas are involved in this: an action in progress, its coming to a point of culmination and an existing completed result.
The Greek perfect is better seen in the passive voice than in the active voice.
For example, ge/graptai can be translated “it has been written” but it is better translated “it is written”.
In fact, “it is written” pictures an act in progress, the point of culmination and an existing completed result.
This is the same sense in eg0 h/gertai which means “he is risen”.
7.0 CONCLUSION The perfect tense is easily identified with its reduplicated stem and the inserted e. For example, the reduplicated stem for lu/w is lelu-; for gra/fw it is gegraf- and for gi/nwmai, it is gegon-.
This is the most frequent form of reduplication.
Verb stems beginning with f, q or x are reduplicated with the smoother consonants p, t, and k respectively as in qnh/skw becomes te/ qnhka.
Verb stems beginning with a vowel lengthen the vowel to form the reduplication.
For example, e0lpi/zw will become h1lpika.
Verb stems beginning with two consonants sometimes reduplicate by prefixing an e like an augment in the aorist.
For example, the perfect of ginw/skw is e1gnwka.
Remember that the Greek perfect tense has no corresponding tense in English language.
The perfect tense is the Greek tense of completed action with a resultant state of being.
Three ideas are involved in this: an action in progress, its coming to a point of culmination and an exusting completed result.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • The perfect tense is easily identified with its reduplicated stem and the inserted e. • The use of consonant k is the major characteristic of the perfect tense.
• The Greek perfect tense has no corresponding tense in English language.
• The perfect tense is the Greek tense of completed action with a resultant state of being.
Three ideas are involved in this: an action in 89progress, its coming to a point of culmination and an exusting completed result.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Identify the perfect verbs in the passage below and expalin their usages: John 1:1 Ven arv ch/| h=n o` lo,goj( kai.
O` lo,goj h=n pro.j to.n qeo,n( kai.
Qeo.j h=n o` lo,gojÅ John 1:2 ou-toj h=n env avrch/| pro.j to.n qeo,nÅ John 1:3 pa,nta diV auvtou/ evge,neto( kai.
Cwri.j auvtou/ evge,neto ouvde.
E[nÅ o] ge,gonen John 1:4 evn auvtw/| zwh.
H=n( kai.
H` zwh.
Hn= to.
Fw/j tw/n avnqrw,pwn\ John 1:5 kai.
To.
Fw/j evn th/| skoti,a| fai,nei( kai.
H` skoti,a auvto.
Ouv kate,labenÅ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
UNIT 3: THE SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD: CONDITIONAL SENTENCES CONTENTS 901.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Subjunctive Mood 3.3 Forms of the Subjunctive Mood 3.4 The Subjunctive Mood of the Greek New Testament 3.5 Functions of the Subjunctive Mood 3.6 Conditional Sentences 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have completed the study of the main verb that you have started since CTH053, namely, the indicative mood of the verb.
Before you continue this study, you may have to revise all that you have studied under the indicative mood.
From this unit; you would be introduced to other verbal moods.
Remember that we have said that mood has to do with the relationship between the action of the verb and reality.
In this unit we are beginning with the subjunctive mood.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the subjunctive mood in all its usages.
• Write the subjunctive form of ei0mi.
• Write the subjunctive form of any other verb.
• Explain the functions of the subjunctive mood.
• Identify the four classes of conditional sentences.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Vocabulary Study 91dikaiosu/nh, h9, righteousness eu0aggeli/zomai I preach the gospel marturi/a, h9, witness, testimony oik0 i/a, h9, house paidio/ n, to/, child e0a/n (when used with the subjunctive) if ei0 (when used with the indicative) if i3na (when used with the subjunctive) in order that, that 3.2 The Subjunctive Mood The subjunctive mood is used only in the present and the aorist tense in the New Testament Greek.
However, there are few occurrences in the perfect tense.
It is the most regular of all moods because it has the tense stem and the forms of the present subjunctive of ei0mi.
You need to be informed that you will not be given any English translation of the forms that follows because it is difficult to translate the subjunctive mood outside its context.
However in the discussions that follows, you will have many translations as its context would be discussed.
3.3 Forms of the Subjunctive Mood The present subjunctive of ei0mi is: w} w}men h}|v h}te h}| w}si(n) The present active subjunctive of luw/ is: lu/w lu/wmen lu/h|v lu/hte lu/h| lu/wsi(n) The first aorist subjunctive of lu/w is: lus/w lu/swmen lu/sh|v lu/shte lu/sh| lu/swsi(n) The second aorist subjunctive of leip/ w is li/pw: 92li/pw li/pwmen li/ph|v li/phte li/ph| li/pwsi(n) The present middle and passive subjunctive of luw/ is: lu/wmai luw/meqa lu/h| lu/hsqe lu/htai lu/wntai The first aorist middle subjunctive of lu/w is: lu/swmai lusw/meqa lu/sh| lu/shsqe lu/shtai lu/swntai The second aorist middle subjunctive of lei/pw is: li/pwmai li/pwmeqa li/ph| li/phsqe li/phtai li/phsqe The first aorist passive subjunctive of luw/ is: luqw~ luqw~men luqh~| luqh~te luqh~| luqw~si(n) Please note that any second aorist passive would be written as above: the second aorist stem plus the endings.
The following could be observed from the above forms of the subjunctive: • A long connecting vowel, either w or h replacing the short vowels o/ e of the indicative mood.
• The subjunctive tenses have primary endings and there is no augment in the aorist.
This is because the time of action is lost outside the indicative mood.
It is the kind of action that is paramount.
• The irregular accent of the aorist passive is the result of the contraction of qe- with the long w/h connection vowel.
7.0 The Subjunctive Mood of the Greek New Testament 93As you have learnt in CTH053-Greek Grammar, mood has been defined as the affirmation of the relation of action to reality.
Moods thus can be divided into two broad classes: the real and the potential.
In New Testament Greek, there are four moods: the indicative, the subjunctive, the optative and the imperative.
Of all these, it is only the indicative that expresses real action, the other three are used to express potential action.
Let us illustrate this though the English language so that you can understand what is meant by the real and the potential action.
Indicative Mood: The child runs.
This expresses action which is really taking place.
Subjunctive Mood: If the child runs, he will escape.
This expresses an action that is not really taking place but is objectively possible.
This is because the child has the ability to run.
The subjunctive mood is the nearest to reality of all the potential moods.
Optative Mood: Oh, that the child would run!
This expresses an action that is subjectively possible.
It is one step further removed from reality than the subjunctive.
Imperative Mood: Run, child.
This expresses an action that is volitionally possible.
This means that the action will result from the exertion of the will of one to produce action on the part of another.
It is the furthest removed from the real action of the indicative mood.
The time of action in the subjunctive is relative to that of the main verb.
The kind of action finds its expression as linear in the present and punctiliar in the aorist.
For example, e0a\n lu/w means “if I continue loosing” and e0a\n lu/sw would mean “if I loose just once”.
Note the time relation in the following sentences: Greek Sentence English Translation e2rxomai i3na ei2pw au0tw~| I come that I may speak to him h}lqon i#na ei2pw au0tw~| I came that I might speak to him e0leu/somai i3na ei2pw au0tw~| I shall come that I may speak to him In the above sentences, the aorist subjunctive indicates a single act of speaking.
In one, it is in the present time, in the second it is in the past time and in the last one it is in the future time.
7.0 Functions of the Subjunctive Mood 94The Hortatory Function The hortatory subjunctive is the use of the first person plural form of the verb to exhort other people to join in an action that is deemed beneficial to all.
For example, e1lqwmen ei0 v to\n oi]kon would be translated “let us go into the house”.
No other form of person or number is used for this function.
It is used only in the first person plural exclusively.
The Prohibitive Function The prohibitive subjunctive is the use of the second person aorist subjunctive to express a negative entreaty or command.
For example, ei0v peirasmo\n mh\ ei0sene/gkh|v h9ma~v which would be translated: “Lead us not into temptation.
You need to note that the present subjunctive is never used for this form of prohibition; it has to be the aorist subjunctive.
You also need to note that the use of the prohibitive subjunctive is used to forbid the commencement of an action (not the cessation of an action already in progress).
In this case, the most literal translation of the sentence used as an example above is “don’t ever start to lead us into temptation”.
Note that the prohibition of an action already in progress is done with the use of the present imperative and this would be looked at later under the imperative mood.
The Deliberative Function The deliberative subjunctive is used to express a question which is either a mere rhetorical device expecting no answer at all or a real question which expects an answer in the imperative.
For example, ti/ ei!
pw u9mi~n; which would be translated “What shall I say to you?” This question may not have an answer at all and if it will have one it would either be “say this” or “say that”.
The Emphatic Negation The subjunctive is used to express emphatic negation.
In doing this, it employs the use of double negatives.
As you have been taught earlier, ou0 and mh/ are the two words that are used as negatives.
Thus, in this construction, the two would be used together.
When this is used, it is a much stronger negation than the simple use of ou0 with the indicative mood.
For example, ou0 mh/ e0kfu/gwsin would be translated “they shall by no means escape”.
Subjunctive of Purpose or Final Subjunctive 95The subjunctive of purpose which is also called the final subjunctive is the use of the subordinate clause to express purpose.
The main particle used in this kind of construction is i#na.
For example, e1rxomai i3na ei1pw au0tw~| would be translated “I come in order that I may speak to him”.
The Probable Future The probable future condition is expressed by the subjunctive along with e0a/ n. This would be discussed fully under the conditional sentences.
7.0 Conditional Sentences In the Greek language there are various kinds of conditional statements but only four are outstanding in usage; and these are the ones that would be discussed here.
They follow one another according to their degrees of certainty.
• The first class condition affirms the reality of the condition.
This is expressed by the use of ei 0 with the indicative mood in the protasis (that is, the if clause) and it will take any other mood or tense in the apodosis (that is, the main clause).
For example, ei0 maqhtai/ e0smen tou~ Kuri/ou swqhso/meqa would be translated “if we are disciples of the Lord, we shall be saved.” If you analyse this sentence carefully, you will discover that in the protasis (ei0 maqhtai/ e0smen) is in the indicative.
This sentence is best translated “since we are the disciples of the Lord, we shall be saved”.
• The second class condition is the contrary to fact condition.
In the English language, such contrary to fact statements are expressed in the subjunctive but in the Greek language it is expressed by the secondary tenses of the indicative mood.
This construction is expressed by the use of ei0 with the indicative in the protasis and a1n with the indicative in the apodosis.
For example, ei0 h]v w[de ou0k a1n a0pe/qanen o9 a0delfo/v mou would be translated “if you had been here, my brother would not have died”.
The fact however is this: “you were not here and hence my brother died”.
• The third class condition is the probable future condition.
This condition is expressed by e0a/n with the subjunctive in the protasis and any other form needed in the apodosis.
It is used to express that which is not really taking place but will probably take place in the future.
For example, tou~to poih/somen e0a\n e0pitre/ph| o9 Qeo\v would be translated “this we will do if God permit”.
It means that 96though we are not doing it now, it is probable that we will do it on the condition that God permits us.
• The fourth class condition is the possible future condition.
This construction is expressed by the use of ei 0 with the optative mood in the protasis and a1n with the optative mood in the apodosis.
For your information, there is no full construction of this kind in the New Testament.
In the following example, the words in the parenthesis are supplied so that you would see a complete construction.
A9ll’ ei0 kai\ pa/sxoite dia\ dikaiosu/nhn, maka/roi (a1n ei1hte) would be translated “but even if you should suffer for righteousness’ sake, you would be happy”.
This statement implies that you are not currently suffering for righteousness’ sake but though it is possible, it is not probable that you will.
This construction is used to express a condition that is not a reality in the present time but has a remote possibility of becoming a reality.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have studied the subjunctive mood.
This mood is one of the moods that are used to express potential action, that is, an action that is not actually taking place but has the possibility of taking place.
The subjunctive mood has six different functions.
The hortatory subjunctive is used to exhort others to join in an action; the prohibitive subjunctive is used to forbid the beginning of an action; the deliberative subjunctive is used to express a rhetorical question or a question that demands an answer in the affirmative; the emphatic negation; the final subjunctive which is used to express purpose and probable future condition.
After this, you have also studied about conditional sentences.
You were introduced to four classes of conditional sentences.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • This subjunctive mood is one of the moods that are used to express potential action, that is, an action that is not actually taking place but has the possibility of taking place.
• The hortatory subjunctive is used to exhort others to join in an action.
• The prohibitive subjunctive is used to forbid the beginning of an action.
97• The deliberative subjunctive is used to express a rhetorical question or a question that demands an answer in the affirmative.
• The emphatic negation is used to express a very strong negation.
• The final subjunctive is used to express purpose and probable future condition.
Conditional sentences are sentences that express conditions that are not real.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Translate the following sentences to English 1. e0a\n ei1pwmen o3ti a9marti/an ou0k e1xomen, h9 a0lh/qeia ou0k e1stin e0n h9mi~n.
2. ei0sh/lqomen ei0v th\n ek0 klhsi/an i3na a0kou/swmen to\n lo/gon tou~ Qeou~ to\n khrusso/menon.
3. ei0 au3th e0sti\n h9 marturi/a tou~ i0do/ntov to\n Ku/rion pisteu/w au0th/n.
4. a0kou/w to\n lo/gon au0tou~ i3na ginw/skw to\ qe/lhma au0tou.~ 5. eu0aggelizw/meqa i3na ta\ te/kna a0kou/sh| kai\ pisteu/h|.
6. e0a\n ei1pwmen o3ti koinwni/an e1xomen met’ au0tou~ kai\ me/nwmen e0n a9marti/a|, yeudo/meqa.
7. oi9 mh\ pisteu/ontev to\ eu0agge/lion ou0 mh\ swqw~sin e0n th~| duna/mei au0tou~.
8. me/nwmen e0n a9marti/a| i3na h9 du/namiv th~v xa/ritov tou~ Qeou~ ble/phtai; 9. ei0 e0kh/rucav to\ eu0agge/lion, oi9 a2n a9martwloi\ e0pi/steusan.
10. e0a\n ei0se/lqhte ei0v th\n oik0 ian tou~ maqhtou~, dida/cei u9mi~n tou\v lo/ gouv th~v zwh~v.
11. o9 ui9o\v tou~ a0nqrw/pou h[lqen i3na sw/sh| a0nqrw/pouv a0po\ tw~n a9martiw~n au0tw~n.
12. mh\ ei0se/lqh|v ei0v tou\v oi1kouv tw~n ponhrw~n.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers 98Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
UNIT 4: THE IMPERATIVE MOOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 992.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Imperative Mood 3.3 Forms of the Imperative Mood 3.4 Functions of the Imperative Mood 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied about the subjunctive mood which is one of the moods that is used to express potential action.
You have also read about the functions of subjunctive mood.
At the later part of that unit, you also studied the formation of the four kinds of conditional sentences.
In this unit, you will also study another of the mood used to express potential action and that is the imperative mood.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Write the impetrative form of any verb that you have learnt before now • Distinguish between the impetrative mood in Greek and English languages • Identify the functions of the imperative mood 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Vocabulary Study a0gia/zw I sanctify pi/nw I drink qe/lw I wish spei/rw I sow ou]v, w0to/v, to/, ear a1xri, (with genitive) until pri/n before 3.2 The Imperative Mood 100The imperative mood in the New Testament occurs only in the present and aorist tenses.
You need to know also that the imperative mood is not available in the first person.
Though in the English language the imperative mood occurs only in the second person, in the Greek language, it occurs in the second and third persons.
As a result of this, in translation, where the imperative occurs in the third person, it is placed within the permissive idea, using the phrase “let him/her/it…” In the following sub-section, the various forms of the mainline imperative mood would be given.
7.0 Forms of the Imperative Mood The present active imperative of lu/w is: 2nd Person lu~e loose lu/ete loose 3rd Person lue/tw let him loose lue/twsan let them loose The present middle and passive imperative of lu/w is: 2nd Person lu/on lu/esqe 3rd Person lue/sqw lue/sqwsan The first aorist active imperative of luw/ is: 2nd Person lu~son lu/sate 3rd Person lusa/tw lusa/twsan The first aorist middle imperative of luw/ is: 2nd Person lu~sai lu/sasqe 3rd Person lusa/sqw lusa/sqwsan The first aorist passive imperative of lu/w is: 2nd Person lu/qhti lu/qhte 3rd Person luqh/tw luqh/twsan The second aorist active imperative of leip/ w is: 2nd Person li/pe li/pete 3rd Person lipe/tw lipe/twsan 101The second aorist passive imperative of ap0 ostel/ lw is: 2nd Person a0posta/lhqi a0posta/lhte 3rd Person a0postalh/tw a0postalh/twsan The present imperative of ei0mi is: 2nd Person i1sqi e1ste 3rd Person e1stw e1stwsan 7.0 Functions of the Imperative Mood As you have been told earlier, the imperative mood is one of the moods that are used to express potential action.
In its own case, the imperative mood is used to express an action which is to be realized by the exercise of the will of one person upon that of another.
For example, lue~ to\n a1nqrwpon would be translated “loose the man” and lue/tw to\n a1nqrwpon would be translated “let him loose the man”.
You need to know also that the time of action is insignificant in the imperative mood.
In this case, the distinction between the present and the aorist tense would lie in the kind of action.
The present imperative has to do with an action that is in progress while the aorist would be an action that has not yet come into existence.
In this regard, the proper translation of lue~ to\n a1nqrwpon would be “continue loosing the man” and lu~son to\n a1nqrwpon would be translated “start loosing the man”.
The following are the basic functions of the imperative mood: Cohortative or Positive Function The cohortative function is a positive command.
To perform this function, the present or the aorist imperative may be used.
An example is lue~ to\n a1nqrwpon which has been translated “continue loosing the man”.
Prohibitive or Negative Function This is used to give a negative command.
To perform this function, only the present imperative is used along with the negative particle mh/.
This 102construction is used purposely to prohibit the continuance of an action that is already in progress.
For example, mh\ lu~e au0to/n which would be translated “stop loosing him” and mh\ le/gete tau~ta which would also be translated “stop saying these things”.
This is the opposite form of the aorist subjunctive that is used to prohibit the commencement of an action.
This distinction is of tremendous syntactical significance.
Entreaty Function This is the use of the imperative to express a request rather than a direct command.
A good example is found in the prayer of Jesus of John 17:11, when he said: pa/ter a3gie, th/rhson au0tou\v e0n tw|~ o0no/mati/ sou which have been translated “Holy Father, keep them in thy name.” Permissive Function This is the use of the third person imperative that is not available in the English construction.
However, to interpret it, the English auxiliary verb ‘let’ would be introduced to make its meaning clear.
For example, lue/tw to\n a1nqrwpon would be translated “let him continue loosing the man” and lusa/tw to\n a1nqrwpon which would also be translated “let him loose (or start loosing) the man”.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have studied the imperative mood.
You have learnt that there is no first person in the imperative mood and that unlike the English language, which has the imperative only in the second person; the Greek language has the imperative in both the second and third persons.
The imperative has four different functions: it can be used as positive command, as negative (prohibitive) command, as an entreaty and also for the permissive use.
You have also been taught that in the imperative mood, the time of action is of no significance but the distinction between the present and the aorist is to be found in the kind of action.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • The imperative mood appears only in the present and aorist tenses.
103• Unlike the English language, which has the imperative only in the second person; the Greek language has the imperative in both the second and third persons.
• Cohortative command is used to give positive command • Prohibitive command is used to give negative command and it prohibits the commencement of an action.
• The entreaty is a function that is used to express a request rather than a direct command.
• There is the permissive function that is used in the third person.
In translation, the English ‘let’ is supplied to make the tense clear.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Identify all the verbs of the imperative in the following passage and indicate all its elements: Revelation 2:1 Tw/| avgge,lw| th/j evn Vefe,sw| evkklhsi,aj gra,yon\ Ta,de le,gei o ` kratw/n tou.j e`pta.
Avste,raj evn th/| dexia/| auvtou/( o` peripatw/n evn me,sw| tw/n e`pta.
Lucniwn/ tw/n crusw/n\ Revelation 2:2 oi=da ta.
E;rga sou kai.
To.n ko,pon kai.
Th.n u`pomonh,n sou kai.
O[ti ouv du,nh| basta,sai kakou,j( kai.
Evpei,rasaj tou.j le,gontaj e`autou.j avposto,louj kai.
Ouvk eivsi.n kai.
Eu-rej auvtou.j yeudei/j( Revelation 2:3 kai.
U`pomonh.n e;ceij kai.
Evba,stasaj dia.
To.
O;noma, mou kai.
Ouv kekopi,akejÅ Revelation 2:4 avlla.
E;cw kata.
Sou/ o[104lat .n avga,phn sou th.n prw,thn avfh/kejÅ Revelation 2:5 mnhmo,neue ou=n po,qen pe,ptwkaj kai.
Metano,hson kai.
Ta .
Prw/ta e;rga poi,hson\ eiv de.
Mh,( er; comai, soi kai.
Kinh,sw th.n lucni,an sou evk tou/ to,pou auvth/j( eva.n mh.
Metanoh,sh|jÅ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies 104Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
UNIT 5: CONTRACT VERBS 105CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Contract Verbs 3.3 The Chart for Regular Contractions 3.4 Principles for Contractions 3.5 Accenting in Contract Verbs 3.6 Forms of Contract Verbs 3.7 Forms of Liquid Contract Verbs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last two units, you have studied about two moods that are different from the indicative that you have learnt mostly in CTH053 and from the beginning of this course.
In this unit, you will take a break and focus on another form of verbs that is called the contract verbs.
Contract verbs are a special class of verbs as you would find out later in this unit and thus have a different ending from others.
You need to take note of this class so that when you see them you would not mistake them for another word thus have difficulty in translating or interpreting them.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify contract verbs • Explain the principles behind the contractions • Identify the vowels that produced a certain spelling • Parse any contract verb 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 1067.0 Vocabulary Study a0gapa/w I love (to put supreme value on) parakale/w I exhort, I comfort dhlo/w I show peripate/w I walk about eu0loge/w I bless poie/w I do, I make eu0xariste/w I give thanks stauro/w I crucify zhte/w I seek thre/w I keep qewre/w I behold tima/w I honour kale/w I call lale/w I speak file/w I love (to have a warm personal affection for) 3.2 The Contract Verbs Contrast verbs are a special class of w verbs.
These are the verbs ending in –aw, -ow and –ew.
In the process of forming the paradigm however, the vowels ending the verbal stems, that is, a, o, and e would have to come in contact with the connecting vowel (usually o and e) thus bringing together two vowels or a vowel and a diphthong to form a single long vowel or diphthong.
This contraction would take place in all forms of the present and imperfect tenses.
This does not however take place in the aorist, future, pluperfect and future perfect passive tenses because of the tense sign consonants.
These tenses are regular except for the lengthening of the stem vowel (a, o, and e) before s, k and other sibilants.
The only exception to this rule is kale/w whose future form is kale/sw and not kalh/sw.
7.0 The Chart for Regular Contractions The chart below shows the regular contractions of the stem vowels (this is the vertical column) with the connecting vowel which is on the top line.
E h ei h| o w ou oi e ei h ei h| ou w ou oi a a a a| a| w w w w| o ou w oi oi ou w ou oi 7.0 Principles for Contractions As you study the following principles, ensure that you read along with the chart above so that you would understand the reasons for the contractions: 107Vowel Contracting with Vowel The first thing to learn here is that when two like vowels come together to form a contraction, they would result in the long vowel of their class.
For example, a + a = a (long alpha) and e + h = h. There are only two exceptions to this rule and these are: e + e = ei and o + o = ou.
Secondly, when an o sound vowel (o or w) comes in contact with the connecting vowels (a, e, and h), no matter the position (whether in first or second position) it forms an w. The exceptions to this rule are e + o = ou and o + e = ou.
Thirdly, when a- and e- (or –h) contracts, the one which comes first overcomes the other and forms its long.
For example, a + e = a and a + h = a and e + a = h. Vowel Contracting with Diphthong Firstly, when a vowel comes in contact with a diphthong which begins with the same vowel, that vowel will disappear.
For example, e + ei = ei and o + ou = ou.
Secondly, when a vowel comes in contact with a diphthong which does not begin with a similar vowel, it contracts with the diphthongs first vowel and the diphthong’s second vowel disappears, unless it is an i, which in its case will become a subscript.
For example, a + ei = a|; a + ou = w and e + ou = ou.
The major exceptions to this rule are o + ei = oi; o + h| = oi and e + oi = oi.
There are however two unusual exceptions to this rule.
The present active infinitive of verbs ending in –aw has a~n (and not –a~|n) as its regular ending.
The other is the present active infinitive of verbs ending in –ow which will have –ou~n (and not –oin) as its regular ending.
3.5 Accenting in Contract Verbs There are four things to note about accenting when it comes to the case of contract verbs: a.
The accent on the uncontracted form will be recessive just as it will be in any other verb.
b.
If the accent is to fall on one of the vowels suffering contraction, the accent will fall on the vowel that the contraction results in.
For example, tima/w will become timw~ but e0ti/maon will be e0ti/mwn.
c. If the accent falls on the first of the two vowels, the resulting contracting form will have a circumflex as its accent.
A good example is timw~ as seen in the example ‘b’ above.
108d.
If the accent falls on the second of the two vowels, the resulting contracting form will have an acute accent.
A good example is timao/meqa which in its contracted form will become timo/meqa.
7.0 Forms of Contract Verbs In showing the forms of the contracted verbs, you will have both the contracted and the uncontracted forms so that you will understand how the contracted form was got.
Please, note that you will never see the uncontracted from in the Greek New Testament.
They are just used here for the purpose of clarity and for your understanding.
Present Active Indicative of tima/w Uncontracted Contracted Uncontracted Contracted Form Form Form Form tima/w timw~ tima/omen timw~men tima/eiv tima~|v tima/ete tima~te tima/ei tima?~ tima/ousi timw~si Present Active Indicative of file/w Uncontracted Contracted Uncontracted Contracted Form Form Form Form file/w filw~ file/omen filou~men file/eiv filei~v file/ete filei~te file/ei filei~ file/ousi filou~si Present Active Indicative of dhlo/w Uncontracted Contracted Uncontracted Contracted Form Form Form Form dhlo/w dhlw~ dhlo/omen dhlou~men dhlo/eiv dhloi~v dhlo/ete dhlou~te dhlo/ei dhloi~ dhlo/ousi dhlou~si 7.0 Forms of Liquid Future Active Contract Verbs Liquid verbs are the verbs that their stems ended in any of the following letters: l, m, n and r. In forming their future active indicative verbs, they will drop the s of the future and add an e, and then form the regular contraction.
Thus, the future active indicative of kri/nw is as follows: 109Uncontracted Contracted Uncontracted Contracted Form Form Form Form kri/nsw krinw~ krinsw~omen krinou~men kri/nseiv krinei~v krinsw~ete krinou~te kri/nsei krinei~ krinsw~ousi krinou~si 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt about the contract verbs.
The contract verbs are the verbs whose stems ended in vowels and because they have to be joined with the endings of the various paradigms, the vowels that come into contact with one another would have to undergo contraction.
You have been given the chart that would serve as a guide to the contractions and you have also been given the rules that would govern the accenting of contract verbs.
You need to practice these forms with other contract verbs so that you will master them.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • Contrast verbs are a special class of w verbs.
• These are the verbs ending in –aw, -ow and –ew.
• In the process of forming the paradigm however, the verbs a, o, and e would have to come in contact with the connecting vowel (usually o and e) thus bringing together two vowels or a vowel and a diphthong to form a single long vowel or diphthong.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Identify all the contract verbs in the following passage and describe their elements: Revelation 2:1 Tw/| avgge,lw| th/j evn Vefe,sw| evkklhsi,aj gra,yon\ Ta,de le,gei o ` kratw/n tou.j e`pta.
Avste,raj evn th/| dexia/| auvtou/( o` peripatw/n evn me,sw| tw/n e`pta.
Lucniwn/ tw/n crusw/n\ Revelation 2:2 oi=da ta.
E;rga sou kai.
To.n ko,pon kai.
Th.n u`pomonh,n sou kai.
O[ti ouv du,nh| basta,sai kakou,j( kai.
Evpei,rasaj tou.j le,gontaj e`autou.j avposto,louj kai.
Ouvk eivsi.n kai.
Eu-rej auvtou.j yeudei/j( 110Revelation 2:3 kai.
U`pomonh.n e;ceij kai.
Evba,stasaj dia.
To.
O;noma, mou kai.
Ouv kekopi,akejÅ Revelation 2:4 avlla.
E;cw kata.
Sou/ o[111lat .n avga,phn sou th.n prw,thn avfh/kejÅ Revelation 2:5 mnhmo,neue ou=n po,qen pe,ptwkaj kai.
Metano,hson kai.
Ta .
Prw/ta e;rga poi,hson\ eiv de.
Mh,( er; comai, soi kai.
Kinh,sw th.n lucni,an sou evk tou/ to,pou auvth/j( eva.n mh.
Metanoh,sh|jÅ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
111MODULE 4 Unit 1: Pronouns Unit 2: Adjectives Unit 3: Verbs of the –mi Conjugation Unit 4: The Article Unit 5: The Infinitive Unit 6: Syntactical Issues UNIT 1: PRONOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Relative Pronoun 3.2 The Interrogative Pronoun 3.3 The Indefinite Pronoun 3.4 The Indefinite Relative Pronoun 3.5 The Reciprocal Pronoun 3.6 The Reflexive Pronouns 3.7 The Possessive Pronouns 3.8 The Negative Pronouns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you have studied a special class of verbs known as the contract verbs and also called the –ew verbs.
You have been shown how contraction of vowels would result either in another vowel or in a diphthong and the principles that guides such contraction.
In this unit however, we are going to study about pronouns again.
You will remember that in module two above you have done a revision of personal and demonstrative pronouns.
I will advise you to revise the unit on personal and demonstrative pronouns.
In this unit however, you will be focusing on the other types of pronouns.
1127.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify relative pronouns • Decline interrogative pronouns • Explain the use of the indefinite pronoun • Discuss the use of reciprocal pronouns • Explain why possessive pronouns are also called possessive adjectives 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 The Relative Pronoun The relative pronoun is that pronoun that is used to relate one substantive to another.
Because it has to agree with its substantive in gender and number, it exists in the three gender forms and also in the singular and the plural.
The following is the declension of the relative pronoun: Singular Plural Case Mas.
Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
O3v h3 o3 oi3 ai3 a3 Gen/Abl ou[ h[v ou[ w[n w[n w[n Dat/Loc/Ins w[| h[ w[| oi[v ai[v oi[v Accusative o3n h[n o3 ou3v a3v a3 It is however important for you to know that the case of the pronoun is determined by its function in the relative clause.
Let us examine the following examples: a. o9 a1nqrwpov o3v ei]de to\n Ku/rion e9stin nu~n a0po/stolov.
b. o9 a1nqrwpov o3n ei]dev e0ch~lqen e0k th~v po/lewv.
In sentence a, which would be translated “the man who saw the Lord is now an apostle,” the relative pronoun is o3v and it is in the nominative case because it functions along with its antecedent.
In sentence b, which would be translated “the man whom you saw came out of the city,” the relative pronoun is o3n and it is in the accusative case because of its function while its substantive is in the nominative case.
113You also need to know that sometimes a relative pronoun is so closely related to its antecedent that it is attracted to the case of its antecedent, that is, it takes the case form of its antecedent even though it retains its own case function.
An example is o3 a2n pi/h| e0k tou~ u3datov ou[ eg0 w\ dw/sw au0tw~| which would be translated “whoever drinks of the water which I shall give him”.
In this sentence, the relative pronoun ou[ is grammatically the direct object of dw/sw and thus it would be expected to be in the accusative case.
However, because it has been attracted to the case form of its antecedent, it took its case in the genitive.
You also need to note that the above example is also representative of the use of relative pronoun as a conditional sentence.
The relative pronouns a1n or e0a/n are used with the subjunctive mood to express clauses which in English would be expressed by “whoever,” “whatever,” “whenever” and “wherever”.
It usually gives the third class conditional sentence.
Finally, there are times when the antecedent of a relative pronoun is not given and thus the relative pronoun is used substantively.
An example is o3v ouk0 e1stin kaq’ u9mw~n u9pe\r u9mw~n e0stin, which would be translated “he who is not against you is for you.” Note that o3v is translated ‘he’ because it is the masculine singular nominative of the relative pronoun.
If h3 had been used, it would have been translated ‘she’.
7.0 The Interrogative Pronoun The interrogative pronouns are the pronouns that are used to introduce direct or indirect questions.
These pronouns are also given according to gender, case and number.
Singular Plural Case Mas.
Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
Ti/v ti/v ti/ ti/nev ti/nev ti/na Gen/Abl ti/nov ti/nov ti/nov ti/nwn ti/nwn ti/nwn Dat/Loc/Ins ti/ni ti/ni ti/ni ti/si(n) ti/si(n) ti/si(n) Accusative ti/na ti/na ti/ ti/nav ti/nav ti/na You should note in the above table that the interrogative pronoun form for both the masculine and feminine are identical.
In this case, it means the context would decide which of the genders to use.
The following are examples of such questions: ti/v ei]; which would be translated “who are you?” and ti/ le/gei; which would also be translated “what is he saying?” 1147.0 The Indefinite Pronoun The indefinite pronouns are pronouns that do not refer to a specific person or thing.
In their form, they are identical with the interrogative pronouns except that they are enclitics.
As enclitics, they would not be accented except the special rules for accenting enclitics apply.
In order to avoid misunderstanding, the forms would be repeated below so that you can see the difference between the interrogative and the indefinite pronouns.
Singular Plural Case Mas.
Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
Tiv tiv ti tinev tinev tina Gen/Abl tinov tinov tinov tinwn tinwn tinwn Dat/Loc/Ins tini tini tini tisi(n) tisi(n) tisi(n) Accusative tina tina ti tinav tinav tina These pronouns are usually translated as: “someone,” “somebody,” “something,” “a certain one” or “a certain thing”.
Examples are: e0a\n mh/ tiv gennhqh~| a1nwqen which would be translated “except somebody is born from above” and ei0v th\n ek0 klhsi/an ei0sh~lqe tiv “a certain man came into the church”.
7.0 The Indefinite Relative Pronoun The indefinite relative pronoun is so called because it is a combination of the relative pronoun o3v and the indefinite pronoun tiv.
In the New Testament it appears only in the nominative case but appeared both in the singular and the plural.
The following are its forms: Gender Singular Plural Masculine o3stiv oi3tinev Feminine h3tiv ai3tinev Neuter o3ti ai3tina By function, it is qualitative in nature and it is usually translated as ‘who’ though its meaning is far more than that.
The expression “who is of such nature” is a better translation of the idea.
A good example of this usage in the New Testament can be seen in Roman 1:25 which reads: oi3tinev meth/llacan th\n a0lh/qeian tou~ Qeou~ e0n tw~| yeu/dei which is translated “who were of such nature that they exchanged the truth of God for a lie”.
You are hereby advised that when translating this word, look for the qualitative idea.
1153.5 The Reciprocal Pronoun The reciprocal pronoun is that pronoun that shows mutual relationship.
It is a word or phrase representing two or more things that mutually correspond to one another.
By function, it represents an interchange of action between the members of a plural subject.
The reciprocal pronoun appeared in the New Testament only in three case forms and these are: a0llh/lwn, a0llh/loiv and a0llh/louv.
Examples from the New Testament are: a0gapw~men a0llh/louv which means “let us love one another” and e0cekau/qhsan e0n th~| o0rec/ ei au0tw~n ei0v a0llh/louv which also would be translated “they burned in their lust for one another”.
7.0 The Reflexive Pronouns The reflexive pronoun is that noun that describes an action taken by the subject in such a way that the action affects the subject.
The function is to express the action of the subject upon itself.
The forms are as follows: First Person – Myself Singular Plural Case Masculine Feminine Masculine Feminine Gen./Abl.
E0mautou~ e0mauth~v e9autw~n e9autw~n Da/Lo/Ins e0mautw~| e0mauth~| e9autoi~v e9autai~v Accusative e0mauto/n e0mauth/n e9autou/v e9auta/v Second Person – Yourself Singular Plural Case Masculine Feminine Masculine Feminine Gen./Abl.
Seautou~ seauth~v e9autw~n e9autw~n Da/Lo/Ins seautw~| seauth~| e9autoi~v e9autai~v Accusative seauto/n seauth/n e9autou/v e9auta/v Third Person-Himself, Herself, Itself Singular Plural Case Mas.
Fem.
Neuter Mas.
Fem.
Neuter Ge./Ab e9autou~ e9auth~v e9autou~ e9autw~n e9autw~n e9autw~n D/L/I e9autw~| e9auth~| e9autw~| e9autoi~v e9autai~v e9autoi~v Acc.
E9auto/n e9auth/n e9auto/ e9autou/v e9auta/v e9auta/ If you are a keen observer, the first thing you will notice is the absence of the nominative case in the forms above.
This is because the reflexive idea 116can only be expressed in the oblique cases.
The intensive myself, yourself and himself in the nominative has been taken care of by the use of the intensive au0to/v that you have learnt in CTH053.
You can please go and revise that to refresh your memory.
The second thing you would notice is that the plural forms are identical for the first, second and third persons.
This is also because the old first and second persons have been dropped by the Greeks.
An example of the use of the reflexive pronoun is: ou0 ga\r e9autou\v khru/ssomen which would be translated “for we preach not ourselves” and le/gw tau~ta peri\ e0mautou~ which would also be translated “I say these things concerning myself.” 7.0 The Possessive Pronouns These pronouns are called possessive pronouns because they are used to designate ownership.
They are also classified as possessive adjectives because they also agree in gender, number and case with the noun they modify.
The following are the forms of the possessive pronoun: First Person-my Singular Plural Case Mas.
Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nominative e0mo/v -mh/ e0mo/n e0moi/ e0mai/ e0ma/ Gen./Abl.
E0mou~ e0mh~v e0mou~ e0mw~n e0mw~n e0mw~n Da/Lo/Ins e0mw~| e0mh~| e0mw~| e0moi~v e0mai~v e0moi~v Accusative e0mo/n e0mh/n e0mo/n e0mou/v e0ma/v e0ma/ Second Person-your Singular Plural Case Mas.
Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nominative so/v sh/ so/n i1diov i0di/a i1dion Gen./Abl.
Sou~ sh~v sou~ i0diw~n i0diw~n i0diw~n Da/Lo/Ins sow~| sh~| sow~| i0di/oiv i0di/aiv i0di/oiv Acc.
So/n sh/n so/n i1dion i1diav i1dion Third Person-his, her its Singular Plural Case Mas.
Fem.
Neuter Mas.
Fem.
Neuter Nom.
H9me/terov h9me/tera hm9 e/teron u9me/terov u9me/tera um9 e/teron Gen./A h9mete/rou h9mete/rhv hm9 ete/rou u9me/terwn um9 e/terwn u9me/terwn D/L/I h9mete/rw| h9mete/rh hm9 ete/rw| u9mete/roiv u9mete/raiv u9mete/roiv Acc.
H9me/teron h9mete/rhn hm9 e/teron u9mete/rouv um9 e/terav um9 e/teron 117The following are examples of the usage of possessive pronouns: Singular Plural o9 e0mo\v oik] ov my house oi9 e0mo\i oi]koi my houses o9 so\v oik] ov your house oi9 soi\ oi]koi your houses o9 i1diov oik] ov his house oi9 i1dioi oik] oi his houses o9 h9me/terov our house oi9 h9me/teroi our houses oi]kov oik] oi o9 u9me/terov your house o9 u9me/terov your houses oi]kov oik] oi 7.0 The Negative Pronouns There are two types of negative pronouns: ou0dei/v (which is usually used with the indicative mood) and mhdei/v which is used with any other mood.
The negative pronoun is formed through the combination of the numeral one (ei[v, mi/a and e3v) and the negative particles hence it is really literally translated “no one”.
The negative pronouns are declined thus: Case Mas.
Fem.
Neuter Mas.
Fem.
Neuter Nom.
Ou0dei/v oud0 emi/a ou0de/n mhdei/v mhdemi/a mhde/n Ge./Ab oud0 eno/v oud0 emia~v ou0deno/v mhdeno/v mhdemia~v mhdeno/v D/L/I oud0 eni/ oud0 emia~| ou0deni/ mhdeni/ mhdemia~| mhdeni/ Acc.
Ou0de/na oud0 emi/an ou0de/n mhde/na mhdemi/an mhde/n Examples of the use of the negative pronouns are: ou0dei/v e1rxetai pro\v to\n pate/ra ei0 mh\ di’ e0mou~ which means “no one comes to the father if not through me” and mhdei\v plana/tw u9ma~v which means “let no one deceive you.” 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied the other types of pronouns apart from the personal and demonstrative pronouns that have been studied in CTH215.
You have been taught the forms of the relative pronoun, the interrogative pronoun, the indefinite pronoun, the indefinite-relative pronoun, the reciprocal pronoun, the reciprocal pronoun, the reflexive pronoun, the possessive pronoun and the negative pronouns.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: 118• The relative pronoun is used to relate one substantive to another and it has to agree with its antecedent in gender and number while its case is determined by its function.
• The interrogative pronouns are used to introduce direct or indirect questions.
• The indefinite pronouns are similar to interrogative pronouns except that they are enclitics.
• The indefinite relative pronoun combines the form of the relative and the indefinite pronoun and it is more qualitative in function.
• The reciprocal pronoun is used to represent an interchange of actions between members of a plural group.
• The reflexive pronoun expresses the action of the subject upon itself.
• The possessive pronouns are also called possessive adjectives because they must agree with the noun in gender, case and number.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS a.
Translate the following passage to English b.
Identify all the pronouns in the passage and indicate their type 1 John 1:5 Kai.
E;stin au[th h` avggeli,a h]n avkhko,amen avpV auvtou/ kai .
Avnagge,llomen u`mi/n( o[ti o` qeo.j fw/j evstin kai.
Skoti,a env auvtw/| ouvk e;stin ouvdemi,aÅ 1 John 1:6 Vea.n ei;pwmen o[ti koinwni,an e;comen metV auvtou/ kai.
Evn tw /| sko,tei peripatw/men( yeudo,meqa kai.
Ouv poiou/men th.n avlh,qeian\ 1 John 1:7 eva.n de.
Evn tw/| fwti.
Peripatw/men w`j auvto,j evstin evn tw/| fwti, ( koinwni,an e;comen metV avllh,lwn kai.
To.
Ai-ma Vihsou/ tou/ ui`ou/ auvtou/ kaqari,zei h`ma/j avpo.
Pa,shj a`marti,ajÅ 1 John 1:8 eva.n ei;pwmen o[ti a`marti,an ouvk e;comen( e`autou.j planw/men kai.
H` avlh,qeia ouvk e;stin evn h`mi/nÅ 1 John 1:9 eva.n o`mologw/men ta.j a`marti,aj h`mw/n( pisto,j evstin kai.
Di,kaioj( i[na avfh/| h`mi/n ta.j a`marti,aj kai.
Kaqari,sh| h`ma/j avpo.
Pa,shj avdiki,ajÅ 1 John 1:10 eva.n ei;pwmen o[ti ouvc h`marth,kamen( yeu,sthn poiou/men auvto.n kai.
O` lo,goj auvtou/ ouvk e;stin evn h`mi/nÅ 1197.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
120UNIT 2: ADJECTIVES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Study of Adjectives 3.3 The Functions of Adjectives 3.4 Forms of Adjectives 3.5 Comparison of Adjectives 3.6 Adverbs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last module you have continued your study of Greek Syntax by going through the study of moods other than the indicative mood, namely, the subjunctive and the imperative mood.
You have also studied the contract verbs and the pronouns other than the personal and the demonstrative pronouns.
In this module you would be expected to study the few syntactical matters before going on to the practical aspect of this course.
In this unit you would continue your study of the adjectives.
You would remember that in CTH053 you have studied the adjectives of the first and second declension.
This unit is a continuation of that unit.
I will advise that you go back to that course material and revise what you have studied on the adjectives of the first and second declension.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Decline any adjective • Differentiate between predicative and attributive usage of the adjective • Draw the comparison of adjectives in Greek • Discuss the formation of adverbs.
1213.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Vocabulary Study a0lhqh/v, a0lhqe/v true me/gav, mega/lh, me/ga great pa~v, pa~sa, pa~n every polu/v, pollh/, polu/ much, many 3.2 The Study of Adjectives Adjectives are words describing nouns, that is, words that describe or qualify a noun or pronoun.
In the earlier study of adjectives, you have studied adjectives that follow a regular pattern.
In this unit, you would study the declension of an adjective in the first declension but which is feminine (pa~v) and some others in the third declension.
7.0 The Functions of Adjectives Adjectives in Greek are used in three ways: attributively, predicatively and substantively.
The Predicative Construction In the predicative use, the adjective makes an assertion about the noun.
The example here is: pa~sa h9 po/liv which would be translated “all the city”.
Note that in this construction, it is the substantive noun that carries the definite article.
Attributive Use of Adjectives When adjectives are used attributively, they attribute qualities to the noun modified.
An example is h~ pa~sa po/liv which would be translated “the whole city”.
Note that in this construction, the adjective carries the definite article.
The Substantive Construction This usage occurs when the adjective is made to function as the noun.
In such usages, the adjective would be placed in the nominative case without any other noun.
For example, pa~sa po/liv would mean “every city”.
122In the Greek language, there are times when the adjective is placed in a predicate position along with a participle.
An example is, pa~v o9 pisteu/wn which would be translated “everyone who believes”.
7.0 Forms of Adjectives Below is the declension of pa~v.
This declension however follows the third declension in the masculine and neuter and first declension in the feminine: Singular Plural Case Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nom.
Pa~v pa~sa pa~n pa/ntev pa~sai pa/nta Gen./Abl.
Panto/v pa/shv panto/v pa/ntwn pa/ntwn pa/ntwn Da/Lo/Ins panti/ pa/sh| panti/ pa~si(n) pa/saiv pa~si(n) Accus pa/nta pa~san pa~n pa/ntav pa/sav pa/nta Below is the declension of me/gav and polu/v.
These declensions however follow the second declension in masculine and neuter and the first declension in the feminine but have short forms: The declension of me/gav, mega/lh, me/ga Singular Plural Case Mas Fem Neuter Mas Fem Neuter Nom.
Me/gav mega/lh me/ga mega/loi mega/lai mega/loi Gen/Ab mega/lou mega/hv mega/lou mega/lwn mega/lwn mega/lwn Da/Lo/I mega/lw| mega/lh| mega/lw| mega/loiv mega/laiv mega/loiv Accu me/gan mega/lhn me/ga mega/louv mega/lav mega/louv The declension of polu/v, pollh/, polu/ Singular Plural Case Mas Fem Neuter Mas Fem Neuter Nom.
Polu/v pollh/ polu/ polloi/ pollai/ polla/ Gen./Abl.
Pollou~ pollh~v pollou~ pollw~n pollw~n pollw~n Da/Lo/Ins pollw~| pollh~| pollw~| polloi~v pollai~v polloi~v Accusative polu/n pollh/n polu/ pollou/v polla/v polla/ The declension of a0lhqh/v, a0lhqe/v Singular Plural Case Mas Fem Neuter Mas Fem Neuter Nom.
A0lhqh/v a0lhqh/v a0lhqe/v a0lhqei~v a0lhqei~v a0lhqh~ Gen./Abl.
A0lhqou~v al0 hqouv~ al0 hqouv~ a0lhqw~n a0lhqw~n a0lhqw~n Da/Lo/Ins a0lhqei~ a0lhqei~ a0lhqei~ al0 hqe/si(n) al0 hqe/si(n) al0 hqe/si(n) 123Accusative a0lhqh~ a0lhqh~ a0lhqe/v a0lhqei~v a0lhqei~v a0lhqh~ Please note that in the above declension, the masculine and the feminine forms are perfectly similar while the neuter agrees with them in most instances.
This tells you that you need to be very careful as the context will go a long way to tell you what to use at any particular point in time.
You need to note too that the stem for a0lhqh/v is a0lhqev.
Therefore, in most of the forms, the final v is dropped and the stem vowel becomes e which would now enter into contraction with the connecting vowel.
This resulted in the unusual accenting as well as the seeming irregularity with other adjectives that has been declined above.
7.0 Comparison of Adjectives In the adjectival degree of comparison, the Greek language also has three degrees as we have in the English language: the positive, the comparative and the superlative.
When the adjective follows the regular declension, the following forms would be used: -terov, -a and –on in the comparative.
Let us use i0sxuro/v as an example: in the comparative we would have, i0sxuro/terov, i0sxuro/a and i0sxuro/n which would mean stronger in the masculine, feminine and neuter respectively.
The superlative degree carries the ending –tatov, -h, -on.
Consequently, the superlative degree of i0sxuro/v would be i0sxuro/tatov, i0sxuro/h and i0sxuro/n respectively and it would be translated “strongest”.
You need to note however that the superlative degree is rare in the New Testament as they are more or less expressed by the comparative forms.
What has been described above is the comparison of adjectives in the regularly declined adjectives.
When the adjective is irregular, the stem of the word is usually changed.
An example is mikro/v (little) which has e0la/ssw (less) in the comparative and e0la/xistov (least) in the superlative.
As a result of this irregularity between the positive form and the comparative and the superlative forms, you are hereby advised to learn such as vocabularies on their own right.
3.6 Adverbs In the Greek language, there is no systematic treatment for the adverbs.
Some are formed from the genitive neuter plural adjective.
In this case, the n of the genitive neuter plural adjective would be substituted with v. For example, the genitive plural of kalo/v is kalw~n; thus the adverb would be kalw~v and would be translated ‘well’.
The formation of the other adverbs 124is so diverse that they are better learnt as part of the vocabularies as they occur in your study of the Greek New Testament.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the declension of the adjectives of the third declension as well as the other two declensions: the first and the second declensions.
You have also been taught here that the adjective can also be used in the predicate position with a participle.
You were also shown the declension of a0lhqes- that because of the dropping of its final sigma would lead to contraction of vowels and thus is unusually accented.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • Adjectives are words describing nouns, that is, words that describe or qualify a noun or pronoun.
• Adjectives can be used predicatively, attributively, substantively and along with a participle in a predicate position.
• Comparative degree of the adjective is formed with the following endings: -terov, -a and –on.
• Superlative degree of the adjective is formed with the following endings: –tatov, -h, -on.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Identify all the adjectives in this passage and indicate their usage: Revelation 5:1 Kai.
Ei=don evpi.
Th.n dexia.n tou/ kaqhme,nou evpi.
Tou/ qro,nou bibli,on gegramme,non e;swqen kai.
O;pisqen katesfragisme,non sfragi/sin e`pta,Å Revelation 5:2 kai.
Ei=don a;ggelon ivscuro.n khru,ssonta evn fwnh/| mega,lh|\ ti,j a;xioj anv oi/xai to.
Bibli,on kai.
Lu/sai ta.j sfragi/daj auvtou/È Revelation 5:3 kai.
Ouvdei.j evdu,nato evn tw/| ourv anw/| ouvde.
Evpi.
Th/j gh/j ouvde.
U`poka,tw th/j gh/j avnoix/ ai to.
Bibli,on ou;te ble,pein auvto,Å Revelation 5:4 kai.
E;klaion polu,( o[ti ouvdei.j a;xioj eu`re,qh avnoi/xai to.
Bibli,on ou;te ble,pein auvto,Å 125Revelation 5:5 kai.
Ei-j evk tw/n presbuter, wn le,gei moi\ mh.
Klai/e( ivdou.
Evni,khsen o` le,wn o` evk th/j fulh/j Viou,da( h` ri` ,za Daui,d( avnoi/xai to.
Bibli,on kai.
Ta.j e`pta.
Sfragi/daj auvtou/Å 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
126UNIT 3: VERBS OF THE –mi CONJUGATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Introducing the –mi Verbs 3.3 Characteristics of the –mi Verbs 3.4 -mi Verbs in the Indicative Mood 3.5 -mi Verbs in the Non-Indicative Mood 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION By the end of the last unit you have completed the study of the adjectives.
This includes the adjectives of the first, second and third declensions.
You have also been taught all the four functions of the adjective as against the three given in CTH053 and you are also shown that some adverbs are formed from the adjectives.
In this unit however, you would be exposed to a new types of verbs.
Up to this point in your study of the Greek language, you have studied only the same type of verbs because all the verbs you have studied to date are verbs that usually end in w in the first person singular and also have connecting vowels for the other paradigms.
These types of verbs are called thematic conjugation verbs because of the use of thematic vowels (also called connecting vowels).
In this unit, you would now study the –mi conjugation verbs, that is, verbs that end in –mi.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify any –mi conjugation verb • Explain the characteristics of the –mi conjugation verbs • Identify the stem of any –mi conjugation verb • Decline any –mi conjugation verb 1273.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Vocabulary Study di/dwmi, dw/sw, e1dwka, de/dwka, de/domain, e0do/qhn I give i3sthmi, sth/sw, e1sthsa (e1sthn), e3sthka, e3stamai, e0sta/qhn I stand ti/qhmi, qh/sw, e1qhka, te/qeika, te/qeimai, e0te/qhn I place, I put 3.2 Introducing the –mi Verbs As you have been told earlier, the –mi conjugation verbs also called athematic conjugation verbs because they do not use thematic vowels in their formation are different kinds of verbs entirely.
In the vocabulary study above you have been given three words that are –mi conjugation verbs.
They are also written out in their full forms, that is, it included the present, the future, the first aorist, the perfect and the aorist passive forms.
7.0 Characteristics of the –mi Verbs The main characteristic of the –mi conjugation verbs is that they have their stem reduplicated in the present tense.
Secondly, for the vowel of the reduplication, they use i and not and not the e that is used prominently in the case of the perfect tenses.
In all there are four classes of this verb when classified according to their vowel stem.
These are the o-class, the a-class, the e-class and the u-class.
Despite this variety however, they follow the same pattern and once you get the pattern for one you would be able to get the others.
7.0 -mi Verbs in the Indicative Mood In the present tense, the stem of the verb reduplicates with i.
The active voice uses the long stem vowel w in the singular and o in the plural while the middle and the passive voice use the short stem o throughout.
In the imperfect, the stem reduplication stays and the active voice uses the long stem vowel ou in the singular and o in the plural while the middle and the passive use the short stem vowel o throughout.
In the aorist tense, the verb usually changes form entirely and the form would also change in the middle voice and in the passive voice.
This is shown in the paradigm below: Per/No Present Imperfect Future Aorist Perfect 1st Sing di/dwmi ed0 i/doun dw/sw ed1 wka de/dwka 1282nd Sing di/dwv ed0 i/douv dw/seiv ed1 wkav de/dwkav 3rd Sing di/dwsi (n) ed0 i/dou dw/sei ed1 wke(n) 1st Plu di/domen ed0 i/domen dw/somen ed0 w/kamen dedw/kamen 2nd Plu di/dote ed0 i/dote dw/sete ed0 w/kate dedw/kate 3rd Plu dido/asi (n) ed0 i/dosan dw/sousi (n) ed1 wkan de/dwkan Study the above paradigm very well so that you can become familiar with the various forms of the –mi conjugation verbs, at least in the indicative mood.
Below you would be given the present form of i3sthmi and ti/qhmi: Person Singular Plural 1st i3sthmi ti/qhmi i3stamen ti/qemen 2nd i3sthv ti/qhv i3state ti/qete 3rd i3sthsi(n) ti/qhsi(n) i9sta~si(n) tiqe/asi(n) Self-Assessment Exercise Draw up the imperfect, future, aorist and perfect form of i3sthmi and ti/qhmi.
7.0 -mi Verbs in the Non-Indicative Mood In the other non-indicative moods, it is easier to identify the verbs of the – mi conjugation because they appear in a more regular way.
Firstly, in the non-indicative moods, only two tenses, that is, the present and the aorist, are active.
For example, in the present subjunctive mood, the stem reduplication as it occurred in the indicative mood stands and the long stem vowels are used throughout with the regular w endings.
In the aorist tense however, the active and middle voices would follow the second aorist and the passive would follow the first aorist.
The active and the middle voices would use the long stem vowel and the passive would use the short stem.
In all the conjugations there would be vowel contraction as the vowels ending the stem and beginning the endings would come together.
Try to find these explanations in the paradigm below for di/dwmi: The Subjunctive Mood for di/dwmi: Person/Number Present Second Aorist 1st Person-Singular didw~ dw~ 2nd Person-Singular didw~|v dw~|v 3rd Person-Singular didw~| dw~| 1st Person-Plural didw~men dw~men 1292nd Person-Plural didw~te dw~te 3rd Person-Plural didw~si(n) dw~si(n) The Imperative Mood for did/ wmi: Person/Number Present Second Aorist 2nd Person-Singular di/dou do/v 3rd Person-Singular dido/tw do/tw 2nd Person-Plural di/dote do/te 3rd Person-Plural dido/twsan do/twsan The Infinitive for did/ wmi: Voices Present Second Aorist Active dido/nai dou~nai Middle di/dosqai do/sqai Passive di/dosqai doqh~nai 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been exposed to the –mi conjugation verbs otherwise known as the athematic verbs.
You have been told that they are called athematic verbs because they don’t use thematic vowels in their conjugation.
You have also been taught that they are characterized mostly by the reduplication of their stem.
You have also been shown the various conjugations of these verbs in both the indicative and the non-indicative moods.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points that you have learnt in this unit: • –mi conjugation verbs, are verbs that end in –mi and they are also called athematic verbs because they do not make use of thematic vowels in their conjugation.
• The main characteristic of the –mi conjugation verbs is that they have their stem reduplicated in the present tense.
• For the vowel of the reduplication, they use i and not and not the e that is used prominently in the case of the perfect tenses.
• In all there are four classes of this verb when classified according to their vowel stem.
These are the o-class, the a-class, the e-class and the u-class.
Despite this variety however, they follow the same 130pattern and once you get the pattern for one you would be able to get the others.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Identify the verbs of the –mi conjugation in the passage below and indicate their elements: 1 John 2:7 Vagaphtoi(, ouvk evntolh.n kainh.n gra,fw u`min/ avllV evntolh.n palaia.n h]n ei;cete avpV arv ch/j\ h` evntolh.
H` palaia, evstin o` lo,goj o]n hvkou,sateÅ 1 John 2:8 pa,lin evntolh.n kainh.n gra,fw u`mi/n( o[ evstin avlhqe.j evn auvtw/| kai.
Evn u`mi/n( o[ti h` skoti,a para,getai kai.
To.
Fw/j to.
Avlhqino.n h;dh fai,neiÅ 1 John 2:9 ~O le,gwn evn tw/| fwti.
Ei=nai kai.
To.n avdelfo.n auvtou/ misw/n env th/| skoti,a| evsti.n e[wj a;rtiÅ 1 John 2:10 o` avgapw/n to.n avdelfo.n auvtou/ evn tw/| fwti.
Me,nei kai.
Ska,ndalon evn auvtw/| ouvk e;stin\ 1 John 2:11 o` de.
Misw/n to.n avdelfo.n auvtou/ env th/| skoti,a| evsti.n kai.
Evn th/| skoti,a| peripatei/ kai.
Ouvk oi=den pou/ u`pa,gei( o[ti h` skoti,a evtu,flwsen tou.j ovfqalmou.j auvtouÅ/ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
131Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
UNIT 4: THE ARTICLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Article in Greek Language 3.3 Ordinary Use of the Article 3.4 Special Use of the Article 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In CTH053 you have you have been introduced to the articles of the Greek language by gender, case and number.
By way of summary to refresh your memory, the Greek language has no indefinite article and the definite articles are o9, h 9 and to / in the nominative singular.
In that lesson you were given only one major function of the definite article, which is called the articular use.
In this unit, you will continue the study of definite articles in the Greek language and go through all the uses of the article both ordinary and special.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify all articles by gender, case and number • List the ordinary uses of the articles • List the special uses of the articles 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Vocabulary Study a0lazoni/a, h, vainglory a0fi/hmi I forgive 132neani/skov, o9, a young man nika/w I overcome, conquer bio/ v, o9, life* e1gnwka (perfect active of ginw/skw) *Note: Compare bi/ov with zwh/ and yuxh/ in the lexicon and note the differences.
3.2 The Article in Greek Language As you have been told, the basic function of the Greek article is to identify.
However, you need to note a differentiation in this function.
When the article is used with a substantive, the identity of the substantive is emphasized.
For example, o9 a1nqrwpov meaning ‘the man’ refers to a particular man, thus giving a specific identity.
This difference could be seen more graphically when the article is used with qeo/v.
When o9 qeo/v is written it refers to the divine Person and would be translated ‘God’.
However, without the article qeo/v is used for the divine character or essence and would be translated “divine”.
This is why terms such as o0rgh\ Qeou~ was translated “divine wrath” and dikaiosu/nh Qeou was also translated “divine righteousness” in the epistle to the Romans.
7.0 Ordinary Use of the Article In this sub-section, we are going to list the ordinary functions of the article citing examples: 1.
To point out particular objects as in o9 a1nqrwpov (the man) and h9 basilei/a (the kingdom).
2.
Articles are used in the Greek language along with abstract nouns though this usage is not found in English language.
Examples are h9 a0lh/qeia (truth) and h9 xa/riv (grace).
3.
Articles are used in the Greek language with proper nouns.
This usage too is not found in English language.
Examples are o9 Pe/trov (Peter) and o9 ‘Ihsou~v (Jesus).
4.
Articles are used in the Greek language with classes or groups of things.
This usage is also not found in English language.
Examples are: ai9 a0lw/pekev (foxes) and ta\ peteina/ (birds).
5.
Articles are used in the Greek language along with pronouns especially in the possessive pronouns.
Examples are: o9 so\v oik] ov (your house) and o9 i1diov oi]kov (his house).
6.
Articles are used in the Greek language along with adverbs.
An example is: a0po\ tou~ nu~n, which literally means “from the now,” that is, “from the present moment” in polished English.
1337.
Articles are also used in the Greek language along with infinitives as in e0n tw~| spei/rein, which means “in the to sow,” that is, “while he was sowing” in polished English.
8.
Finally, in the Greek language, articles are used along with prepositional phrases as in oi9 e0n tw~| oi1kw | which would literally read “the in the house ones,” that is, “the men who are in the house.” 7.0 Special Use of the Article In this sub-unit we would be looking at the special use of the article in the Greek language.
The use of the article with the conjunction kai/ In this case, there are two different usages: 1.
Firstly, if the two nouns that are joined together by the conjunction have the definite article, it means that they refer to two different people or things.
For example, o9 a0po/stolov kai\ o9 maqhth/v which means “the apostle and the disciple”.
The use of the definite article for the two means that the apostle is a different person from the disciple.
2.
Secondly, if the first of the two nouns has the definite article and the second noun does not, it means that the two nouns refer to the same person or thing.
For example, o9 a0po/stolov kai\ maqhth/v which means “the apostle and disciple”.
This usage means that the person who is the apostle is also the one who is the disciple.
The use of the article with the conjunction men/ …de/ The definite article is also used with the conjunction me/n …de/ and when this is done, it gives the force of an alternative pronoun.
For example, oi9 me\ n h]san su\n toi~v ‘Ioudaio/ iv, oi9 de\ su\n toi~v a0posto/loiv would be translated “Some were with the Jews, but others were with the apostles”.
Note that in this translation, it is the use of the definite article that turns the translation me/n …de of to ‘some … others’.
The use of the article with the force of a demonstrative pronoun The definite article is sometimes used with a demonstrative pronoun so as to carry the force of a demonstrative.
For example, oi9 ou]n h9rw/twn au0to/n which is translated “these, therefore, were asking him.” 134The use of the article with the force of a possessive pronoun As you have been told earlier, the article can be used with the force of a possessive pronoun.
For example, sunepe/myamen met’ au0tou~ to\n a0delfo/ n which would be “we have sent him with his brother”.
Remember that ‘his brother’ literally in Greek is ‘the brother of him’ and this is the force of the article in the possessive pronoun.
The use of the article with the force of a relative pronoun The article can also be used with the force of a relative pronoun.
For example, tou~to ga/r e0stin to\ ai]ma mou th~v diaqh/khv to\ peri\ pollw~n e0kxunno/menon which would be translated “for this is my blood of the new covenant which is shed for many”.
You need to take note of the definite article before peri\.
It functions as the force of a relative pronoun.
The use of the article with nouns joined by forms of eim0 i:\ This can also take place in two instances: 1.
If one of the two nouns joined by any form of ei0mi \ has the definite article, it has to be regarded as the subject of the sentences and the anarthrous (that is, the one without the definite article) one as the predicate.
An example is: o9 Qeo\\v a0ga/ph e0stin which would be translated “God is love”.
Thus in the sentence, o9 Qeo\\v, the noun carrying the definite article has been taken as the subject.
2.
If both nouns have the definite article, they are interchangeable as to subject and predicate and you may need the context to determine which would be the subject and which would be the predicate.
An example is h9 du/namiv th~v a9marti/av e0sti\n o9 no/mov could be translated as “the power of sin is the law” as well as “the law is the power of sin”.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have continued the study of the use definite articles in the Greek language.
You had a brief review of the functions of the definite article and we began with the study of the ordinary functions of the definite article which include usages with abstract nouns, pronouns, adverbs and 135infinitives.
You then continued with the study of the special use of the definite article which includes the use of the definite article with the conjunction kai\ and also with me\n…de\.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • When the article is used with a substantive, the identity of the substantive is emphasized.
• Articles are used in the Greek language along with abstract nouns.
• Articles are used in the Greek language with proper nouns.
• Articles are used in the Greek language along with pronouns.
• If the two nouns that are joined together by the conjunction have the definite article, it means that they refer to two different people or things.
• If the first of the two nouns has the definite article and the second noun does not, it means that the two nouns refer to the same person or thing.
• The definite article is also used with the conjunction me/n …de/ and when this is done, it gives the force of an alternative pronoun.
• If one of the two nouns joined by any form of ei0mi \ has the definite article, it has to be regarded as the subject of the sentences and the anarthrous (that is, the one without the definite article) one as the predicate.
• If both nouns have the definite article, they are interchangeable as to subject and predicate and you may need the context to determine which would be the subject and which would be the predicate.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following passage: 1 John 2:12 Gra,fw u`mi/n( tekni,a( o[ti avfe,wntai u`mi/n ai` a`marti,ai dia.
To.
O;noma auvtou/Å 1 John 2:13 gra,fw u`mi/n( pate,rej( o[ti evgnw,kate to.n avpV arv ch/jÅ gra,fw u`mi/n( neani,skoi( o[ti nenikh,kate to.n ponhro,nÅ 1 John 2:14 e;graya u`min/ ( paidi,a( o[ti evgnw,kate to.n pater, aÅ e;graya u`mi/n( pate,rej( o[ti evgnw,kate to.n avpV arv ch/jÅ e;graya u`mi/n( neani,skoi( o[ti ivscuroi, evste kai.
O` lo,goj tou/ qeou/ evn u`mi/n me,nei kai.
Nenikh,kate to.n ponhro,nÅ 136 1 John 2:15 Mh.
Avgapa/te to.n ko,smon mhde.
Ta.
Evn tw/| ko,smw|Å evan, tij avgapa/| to.n ko,smon( ouvk e;stin h` avga,ph tou/ patro.j env auvtw/|\ 1 John 2:16 o[ti pa/n to.
Evn tw/| ko,smw|( h` evpiqumi,a th/j sarko.j kai.
H` evpiqumi,a tw/n ovfqalmw/n kai.
H` avlazonei,a tou/ bi,ou( ouvk e;stin evk tou/ patro.j avllV evk tou/ ko,smou evsti,nÅ 1 John 2:17 kai.
O` ko,smoj para,getai kai.
H` evpiqumi,a auvtou/( o` de.
Poiw/n to.
Qe,lhma tou/ qeou/ me,nei eivj to.n aivw/naÅ Note: In doing this exercise, please, do not use polished English so that you can avoid the temptation of copying from Scripture.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
137UNIT 5: THE INFINITIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Forms of the Infinitive 3.3 The Infinitive as a Verb 3.4 The Infinitive as a Noun 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you have completed the study of the articles in the Greek language.
You have seen most of the functions of the articles, both ordinary and special functions and the importance of the articles in the syntactical analysis.
In this unit, which is going to be the last unit of this module, and also the last of all theoretical studies, you are going to study about the infinitives.
Infinitives, as you have known, are verbal nouns, that is, they have both the characteristics of the verbs and also of the noun.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify any infinitive by sight • List the characteristics of the infinitive as a noun • List the characteristics of the infinitive as a verb • Discuss the functions of the infinitive in Greek language 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 7.0 Vocabulary Study a0nti/xristov, o9 antichrist o9mologe/w I confess a0rne/omai I deny fanero/w I make manifest 138e0pagge/llw I announce xri~sma, -atov, to/ anointing yeu~dov, -ouv, to/ lie oi]da, I know (this is the perfect tense of ei1dw, an already obsolete word; when this is used it carries the force of present tense) 7.0 The Forms of the Infinitive Though you have learnt this in CTH053, you would be given some of the forms again by way of refreshing your memory.
Below you would see the forms of the infinitive in the present, the first aorist, the second aorist and the perfect tenses.
The word to be used is the usual one, that is, lu/w: Present Tense of luw/ : Tense/Voice Form of Infinitive Translation Present Active lu/ein to loose Present Middle lu/esqai to loose for oneself Present Passive lu/esqai to be loosed First Aorist Tense of lu/w: Tense/Voice Form of Infinitive Translation First Aorist Active lu~sai to loose First Aorist Middle lu/sasqai to loose for oneself First Aorist Passive luqh~nai to be loosed Perfect Tense of luw/ : Tense/Voice Form of Infinitive Translation Perfect Active leluke/nai to have loosed Perfect Middle lelu/sqai to have loosed for oneself Perfect Passive lelu/sqai to have been loosed Second Aorist Tense of lipw:~ Tense/Voice Form of Infinitive Translation Second Aorist Active lipei~n to leave Second Aorist Middle lipe/sqai to leave for oneself Second Aorist Passive lipe/sqai to have been left 139NB: The second aorist has to use another word because there is no second aorist form for lu/w.
7.0 The Infinitive as a Verb As a verb, the infinitive has voice and tense.
As a verb also, the infinitive may also take an object and it may be modified by adverbs.
The following are the verbal functions of the infinitive: To express the purpose of the main verb: One of the functions of the main is to let the purpose of the main verb be explicit.
For example, mh\ nomi/shte o3ti h]lqon katalu~sai to\n no/mon which means “do not conclude that I have come to destroy the law”.
To express the result of the main verb: Though the expression of result may be easily confused, in the Greek language the two are treated differently.
The common way of doing this is to use the clause introduced by w3ste.
In this case, w3ste would be followed by an infinitive and not the finite verb which would be natural.
An example is: e0ge/neto w9sei\ nekro/v, w3ste tou\v pollou\v le/gein o3ti a0pe/qanen which would be translated “he became as a dead man so that many said that he died.” The clause w3ste tou\v pollou\v le/gein o3ti a0pe/qanen is the result clause introduced by w3ste.
To express temporal ideas: There are three usages under this function: 1.
‘Before’ is expressed by the use of the infinitive and pri/n or pri\n h1 as in Ku/rie, kate/bhqi pri\n a0poqanei~n to\ paidi/on mou which would be translated “Lord, come down before my child dies”.
Note however that this same function can be expressed by pro\ tou~ and the infinitive.
2.
‘While’ is expressed by the use of the infinitive and e0n tw~| as in e0qau/mason e0n tw~| xroni/zein e0n tw~| naw~| au0to/n which would be translated “they were wondering while he was tarrying in the temple.” 3.
‘After’ is expressed by the use of the infinitive and meta\ to/ as in pare/sthsen e9auto\n zw~nta meta\ to\ paqei~n au0ton which would be translated “he showed himself alive after his suffering.” 140To express cause: In order to express cause, the infinitive would be used with dia\ to/ as in ouk0 e1xete dia\ to\ mh\ ai0tei~sqai u9ma~v which would be translated “you have not because you ask not.” 7.0 The Infinitive as a Noun As a noun, the infinitive originally has an inflection which has been lost.
However, because of its noun quality, the infinitive can be used in any way the noun can be used.
The Infinitive as the Subject of a Finite Verb As had been said earlier, because the infinitive has the characteristics of a noun, it can be used as a substantive, that is, the subject of a sentence or clause.
An example is, ou0x u9mw~n e0stin gnw~nai xro/nouv h1 kairou/v which would be translated “To know times and seasons is not yours”.
Please not that in this usage at times, the definite article can precede the infinitive as in to\ e0sqi/ein e0stin a0gaqo/n which would be translated “to eat is good”.
Note the definite article in front of e0sqi/ein.
The Infinitive as the Object of a Verb Also a noun, the infinitive can also serve as the direct object of a verb as in o9 ‘Ihsou~v h1rcato poiei~n kai\ dida/skein which would be translated “Jesus began to do and to teach”.
The infinitive can also serve as the indirect object as in e1xw soi/ ti ei0pei~n which would be translated “I have something to say to you”.
In this sentence, ‘something’ is the direct object and ‘to you’ is the indirect object.
The Infinitive as a Modifier The New Testament abounds with examples of the infinitives that are used as modifiers.
An example is h]lqen o9 kairo\v tw~n nekrw~n kriqh~nai which would be translated “the time of the dead to be judged has come”.
In this instance, the infinitive modifies a noun but it could as well modify an adjective.
1414.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied extensively about the functions of the infinitive.
You have seen its characteristics as a noun and as a verb as well as its functions as a noun and as a verb.
You have been taught also the various forms of the infinitive in the available tenses and voices.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have been taught in this unit: • As a verb, the infinitive has voice and tense.
• As a verb, the infinitive is used to express the purpose of the verb, to express the result of the main verb, to express temporal ideas and to express the cause of the infinitive.
• As a noun, the infinitive originally has inflection and so it functions as a substantive, as an object (both direct and indirect) and as a modifier.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following passage: 1 John 2:18 Paidi,a( evsca,th w[ra evsti,n( kai.
Kaqw.j hvkou,sate o[ti avnti,cristoj er; cetai( kai.
Nu/n avnti,cristoi polloi.
Gego,nasin( o[qen ginw,skomen o[ti evsca,th w[ra evsti,nÅ 1 John 2:19 evx h`mw/n evxh/lqan avllV ouvk h=san evx h`mw/n\ eiv ga.r evx h`mw/n h=san( memenh,keisan a’n meqV h`mw/n\ avllV i[na fanerwqw/sin o[ti ouvk eivsi.n pa,ntej evx h`mw/nÅ 1 John 2:20 kai.
U`mei/j cri/sma e;cete avpo.
Tou/ a`gi,ou kai.
Oi;date pa,ntejÅ 1 John 2:21 ouvk e;graya u`mi/n o[ti ouvk oi;date th.n avlh,qeian avllV o[ti oi;date auvth.n kai.
O[ti pa/n yeu/doj evk th/j alv hqei,aj ouvk e;stinÅ 1 John 2:22 Ti,j evstin o` yeu,sthj eiv mh.
O` avrnou,menoj o[ti Vihsou/j ouvk e;stin o` Cristo,jÈ ou-to,j evstin o` anv ti,cristoj( o` avrnou,menoj to.n pate,ra kai.
To.n ui`o,nÅ 1421 John 2:23 pa/j o` arv nou,menoj to.n ui`o.n ouvde.
To.n pate,ra e;cei( o` o`mologw/ n to.n ui`o.n kai.
To.n pater, a e;ceiÅ 1 John 2:24 u`mei/j o] hvkou,sate avpV avrch/j( env u`mi/n mene,twÅ eva.n evn u`mi/n mei,nh| o] avpV arv ch/j hvkou,sate( kai.
U`mei/j env tw/| ui`w/| kai.
Evn tw/| patri.
Menei/teÅ 1 John 2:25 kai.
Au[th evsti.n h` evpaggeli,a h]n auvto.j evphggei,lato h`mi/n( th.n zwh.n th.n aivw,nionÅ 1 John 2:26 Tau/ta e;graya u`mi/n peri.
Tw/n planwn, twn u`ma/jÅ 1 John 2:27 kai.
U`mei/j to.
Cri/sma o] elv a,bete avpV auvtou/( me,nei evn u`mi/n kai.
Ouv crei,an e;cete i[na tij dida,skh| u`ma/j( avllV w`j to.
Auvtou/ cri/sma dida,skei u`ma/j peri.
Pa,ntwn kai.
Avlhqe,j evstin kai.
Ouvk e;stin yeu/doj( kai.
Kaqw.j evdi,daxen u`ma/j( me,nete evn auvtw/|Å 1 John 2:28 Kai.
Nu/n( tekni,a( men, ete evn auvtw(/| i[na eva.n fanerwqh/| scw/men parrhsi,an kai.
Mh.
Aivscunqw/men avpV auvtou/ evn th/| parousi,a| auvtou/Å 1 John 2:29 eva.n eivdh/te o[ti di,kaio,j evstin( ginw,skete o[ti kai.
Pa/j o` poiw/ n th.n dikaiosu,nhn evx auvtou/ gegen, nhtaiÅ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
143UNIT 6: SYNTACTICAL ISSUES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Syntactical Issues in 1 Corinthians 7:1-5 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Having gone through all the various aspects of this course, you are left with the practical application of syntactical issues.
It is important for you to know that syntactical matters are not what are really taught but what you have learnt by constant practice.
You need to be at alert, to note the realtionship between words: because this is what syntax is all about.
You need to learn the parctical application of all that have been taught from CTH053 to this point.
In this unit, you will go through a handful of examples and you would be left alone to develop yours.
7.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Identify word relationships that may raise syntactical issues • Comment on any identified syntactical issues • Evaluate biblical translations based on syntactical issues • Examine the use of words in 1 Corithinas 7:1-5.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Syntactical Issues in 1 Corinthians 7:1-5 Let us begin this analysis by looking into the Greek Text: 1 Corinthians 7:1 Peri.
De.
W-n evgray, ate( kalo.n anv qrw,pw| gunaiko.j mh.
Ap[ tesqai\ 1441 Corinthians 7:2 dia.
De.
Ta.j pornei,aj e[kastoj th.n e`autou/ gunai/ka ecv e,tw kai.
E`ka,sth to.n i;dion a;ndra evce,twÅ 1 Corinthians 7:3 th/| gunaiki.
O` avnh.r th.n ofv eilhn.
avpodidot, w( o`moi,wj de.
Kai.
H` gunh.
Tw/| avndri,Å 1 Corinthians 7:4 h` gunh.
Tou/ ivdi,ou sw,matoj ouvk exv ousia,zei avlla.
O` avnhr, ( o`moi,wj de.
Kai.
O` avnh.r tou/ ivdi,ou sw,matoj ouvk evxousia,zei alv la.
H` gunh,Å 1 Corinthians 7:5 mh.
Apv osterei/te alv lh,louj( eiv mh,ti a’n evk sumfw,nou pro.j kairo,n( i[na scola,shte th/| proseuch/| kai.
Pa,lin evpi.
To.
Auvto.
H=te( i[na mh.
Peira,zh| u`ma/j o` satana/j dia.
Th.n avkrasi,an u`mw/nÅ The phrases that are highlighted above are the phrases that have been selected for syntactical comment.
Peri .
De .
W-n egv ra,yate Paul started this chapter with this phrase.
The first word is the preposition peri .
Which has been translated as ‘concerning’ by many versions of the Bible.
This is a true rendering of the preposition because as you have learnt in CTH053, peri .
With the genitive would be translated ‘concerning’.
The genitive in this case has been supplied with the word ‘w-n’ which is a relative plural pronoun of the genitive case.
Since this relative pronoun is of the neuter, then it is acting as a substantive to supply the subject for the verb.
Let us now take a look at the verb.
The verb evgra,yate is a first aorist active indicative, second person plural of gra,fw which means I write, hence it would be translated ‘you have written’.
It is important for you to note that though de.
Is in the second position, it would be translated first.
It is a coordinating conjunction.
If all these are put together, we have ‘now concerning the things you have written’.
This implies that what Paul is about saying here is a response to the issues raised in the letter the Corinthians have written to Paul.
A[ptesqai It is important to get the authorial intention of this word since it is central to the verse.
It is a present middle infinitive from a3ptw.
This word has many meanings such as ‘ignite’, but what is sure is that since the word has been used in the middle voice, it means ‘touch’.
The issue now is what did Paul mean by touch here?
To say that Paul is talking about touching literally here is to misunderstand the word because it would be difficult for one to 145imagine that the Corinthians would have written to Paul to clarify whether it is right or wrong to touch a woman.
However, because according to Arndt and Gingrich (1957) have identified that Plutarch has used the word before to mean sexual intercourse with a woman, it is implied that this is the nuance that Paul is driving at.
This is further corroborated by the use of words in the following verses.
Evcet, w This word is important to this verse since it is the main verb and it is repeated twice within the same verse.
This verb is a present active imperative verb of the third person singular from the word e1xw which means ‘I have’.
Since the subject of this verb is ‘each man’ and ‘each woman’, it is translated ‘have his own wife’ and ‘have her own husband’.
The question again is what did Paul mean by ‘have’?
Again, this is an euphemism for sexual intercourse within the ambits of marriage.
Ovfeilhn.
avpodidot, w By verse three, Paul is becoming clearer in his expression as indicated by the phrase above.
This phrase consists of a verb and a noun in the accusative case, which clearly shows that the noun is the direct object of the verb.
The verb avpodido,tw is the third person singular of the present active imperative of avpodi,dwmi which has several meanings like ‘give,’ ‘pay,’ ‘fulfil vow,’ and ‘to render what is due’.
The accusative noun is feminine and singular and is translated ‘debt’.
Let us now examine how the various translations rendered the verse: Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband (KJV) The husband should fulfill his duty toward his wife, and likewise the wife toward her husband (NAB) The husband must fulfill his duty to his wife, and likewise also the wife to her husband (NAU) The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband (NIV) The husband should give to his wife her conjugal rights, and likewise the wife to her husband (RSV) 146If you consider these translations, except for the King James’ Version, it is clear that by touch or have, Paul clearly meant sexual intercourse.
It is also important to note here that Paul’s use of the present imperative for the command is better translated “continue fulfilling marital rights”.
This cohortative (positive) command is better understood against the use of prohibitive command in verse five.
Mh.
Apv ostereit/ e alv lhl, ouj As you have studied earlier, the use of the negative particle mh\ along with the present imperative as is the case here is a prohibitive command that is used to prohibit the continuation of an act that is already in progress.
This is why the New American Bible translated the phrase as “stop depriving one another.” This implies that before then couples in Corinth have started avoiding sexual intercourse with their spouses and Paul is urging that such practice has to stop.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have seen the interplay of the relationships of word to one another in the Greek text.
You have seen the practical use of the present imperative as a cohortative command as well as a prohibitive command within few verses and their relationship to the understanding of the text.
You have also seen how the meaning of a word can be deduced within the context of a passage as we have determined the meaning of ‘touch’ and ‘have’ as sexual intercourse.
7.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • Syntax is learnt more through practice rather than theory.
• ovfeilh.n avpodido,tw is the cohortative use of the present imperative in 1 Corinthians 7:3 • mh.
Avposterei/te is the prohibitive use of the present imperative in 1 Corinthians 7:5 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Kindly undertake a syntactical analysis of the passage below: 2 Corinthians 10:3 Ven sarki.
Ga.r peripatou/ntej ouv kata.
Sa,rka strateuo,meqa( 1472 Corinthians 10:4 ta.
Ga.r o[148lat h/j stratei,aj h`mw/n ouv sarkika.
Avlla.
Dunata.
Tw/| qew/| pro.j kaqair, esin ovcurwma,twn( logismou.j kaqairou/ntej 2 Corinthians 10:5 kai.
Pa/n u[ywma evpairo,menon kata.
Th/j gnw,sewj tou/ qeou/( kai.
Aivcmalwti,zontej pa/n no,hma eivj th.n u`pakoh.n tou/ Cristou/( 2 Corinthians 10:6 kai.
Evn e`toi,mw| e;contej evkdikh/sai pa/san parakoh,n( o[tan plhrwqh/| u`mw/n h` u`pakoh,Å 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, Biyi & E. Ojo (2000).
Mastering the Greek New Testament, Oyo: Multicrown Publishers Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1993).
The Greek New Testament, 4th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger (eds.)
(1999).
Novum Testamentum, Nestle-Aland 28th ed.
Germany: United Bible Societies.
Mounce, William D. (1993).
Basics of Biblical Greek, Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Summers, Ray.
(1950).
Essentials of New Testament Greek, Nashville: Broadman Press.
GLOSSARY 148a alpha ‘Abraa/m Abraham a0gaqo/v, h, on good, useful a0gallia/w, -, h0gallia/sa, -, -, I exult h0gallia/qhn a0gapa/w, a0gaph/sw, h0ga/phsa, h0ga/ I love phka, h0ga/phmai, h0gaph/qhn a0ga/ph, h9, love a0gaphto/v, h/, o/n beloved a0ggeli/a, h9 message a1ggelov, o9 messenger, angel a9gia/zw, , h9gi/has, , h9gi/asmai, I sanctify h9gia/sqhn a0giasmo/v, -ou,~ o9 sanctification a1giov, a, on holy, (oi9 a1gioi, the saints) a0gnoe/w, h0gno/oun, -, -, -, -, - I do not know a0gora/, -a~v, h9 marketplace a0gora/zw, h0go/razon, -, h0go/rasa, I buy -, h0go/rasmai, h0gora/sqhn a1gw, ac1 w, h1gagon, , h1xqhn I lead a0delfo/v, o9 brother a0diki/a, h9 unrighteousness ai[ma, ai1matov, to/ blood ai1rw, a0rw~, I take up (or take away) ai0w/n, ai0w~nov, o9 Age ai0sxu/nomai, (aorist passive: I am ashamed h0sxu/nqhn) a0kou/w, a0kou/sw, h1kousa, a0kh/koa, , I hear h0kou/sqhn a0lazoni/a, h9 empty talk, vainglory a0lhqino/v, h/, o/n genuine, truth a0lhqh/v, e/v true, unhidden a0lhqw~v, (adverb) truly a0lieu/v, a0lie/wv, o9 Fisherman a0lla/, h, o other (of the same kind) a0marta/nw, a9marth/sw, h9ma/rthsa, I sin h9ma/rthka, , , a9martwlo/v, o9 sinner a1n temporal particle not usually translated a0na/ Preposition, with accusative: up, 149again a0nabai/nw I go up a0nagge/llw, a0naggelw~, a0nh/ggelia, I announce -, -, a0nhgge/lhn a0naginw/skw I read (see ginw/skw for other parts) a0na/stasiv, a0nasta/sewv, h9 Resurrection a1nqrwpov, o9 man a0nti/ preposition with genitive, against, instead of a0nti/xristov, o9 antichrist a0po/ preposition with ablative, away from a0poqnh/skw, a0poqanou~mai, I die a0pe/qanon, -, -, - a0pokri/nomai, a0pokrinou~mai, I answer a0pekrina/mhn, -, -, a0pekri/qhn a0poktei/nw, a0poktenw~, a0pe/kteina, I kill -, -, a0pekta/nqhn a0poste/llw, a0postelw~, a0po/steila, I send (with a message) a0pe/stalka, a0pe/stalmai, a0pe/sta/lhn a0po/stolov, o9 Apostle a0rneo/ mai, a0rnh/somai, h/rnhsa/mhn, I deny -, h1rnhmai, - a0rti Adverb, now a1rtiv, o9 bread a0rxh/, h9 beginning a0rxiereu/v, e/wv, o9 chief-priest a1rxw, a1rcw, h]rca, -, -, - I rule (middle voice: I begin) a1rxwn, a1rxontov, o9 ruler au0to/v, h9, o9 he, she, it a0fi/hmi, a0fh/sw, af0 h~ka, a0fei~ka, I forgive a0fei~mai, a0fei/qhn a1xri preposition with genitive: until b beta baq/ ov, ba/qouv, to/ depth bai/nw, bh/somai, eb1 hn, beb/ hka,-, I go eb0 h/qhn (deponent) ba/llw, ba/lw~, eb1 alon, be/blhka, be/ I throw, cast blhmai, e0blh/qhn bapti/zw, bapti/sw, e0ba/ptisa, -, I baptize 150beba/ptismai, e0bapti/sqhn Basilei/a, h9 kingdom basileu/v, e/ws, o9 king basiliko/v, h/, o/n royal, kingly bibli/on, to/ book bi/ov, o9 Life ble/pw, ble/yw.
e1bleya, -, -, - I see g gamma ga/mov, o9 marriage, marriage feast ga/r (conjunction) for genna/w, gennh/sw, eg0 e/nnhsa, I beget gege/nnhka, gege/nnhmai, e0gennh/qhn ge/nov, ge/nouv, to/ race gi/nomai, genh/somai, eg0 eno/mhn, I become ge/gona, gege/nhmai, eg0 enh/qhn ginw/skw, gnw/somai, e1gnwn, I know eg1 nwka, e1gnwsmai, eg0 nw/sqhn glw~ssa, h9 tongue, language gnw~siv, gnw/sewv, h9 knowledge grammateu/v, -e/wv, o9 scribe grafh/, h9 writing, scripture gra/fw, gra/yw, e1graya, ge/grafa, I write ge/grammai, e0gra/fhn d delta daimo/nion, to/ demon de/, conjunction: but, moreover, and de/xomai, dec/ omai, e0deca/mhn, -, I receive de/degmai, e0de/xqhn dhlo/w, dhlw/sw, e0dh/lwsa, -, -, I show, make manifest ed0 hlw/qhn dia/ preposition: with genitive: through with ablative: by, through with accusative: because of, on account of dida/skalov, o9 teacher dida/skw, dida/cw, e0di/daca, -, -, I teach ed0 ida/xqhn didaxh/, h9 teaching di/dwmi, dw/sw, e1dwka, de/dwka, I give de/domain, e0do/qhn dikaiosu/nh, h9 righteousness 151diw/kw, diw/cw, e0di/wca, -, I persecute dedi/wgmai, e0diw/xqhn do/ca, h9 praise doca/zw, doca/sw, e0doc/ asa, -, I glorify dedo/casmai, e0doca/sqhn dou~lov, o9 slave, servant du/namiv, duna/mewv, h9 power dw~ron, to/ gift e episilon e0a/n conditional particle used with subjunctive: if e0autou~, h~v, ou~ of himself, of herself, of itself eg0 gi/zw, eg0 gi/sw, h1ggisa, h1ggika, I come near, draw near -, - eg0 ei/rw, eg0 erw~, h1geira, -, I raise up eg0 h/germai, h0ge/rqhn eg0 w/ I eq1 nov, e1qnouv, to/ nation (plural: gentiles) eq1 ov, e1qouv, to/ custom ei0 conditional particle used with indicative: if, since ei]don 2nd aorist of o9ra/w: I saw ei0mi/, e1somai I am ei]pon 2nd aorist of le/gw or fhmi/: I said ei0rh/nh, h9 peace ei0v preposition: with accusative: into, unto, because of ek0 (ec0 before a vowel) preposition: with ablative: out of, from ek0 ei~nov, h, o that ek0 klhsi/a, h9 church e1leov, e0le/ouv, to mercy e0lpi/v, e0lpi/dov, h9 hope e0mautou~, h~v, ou~ of myself e0mo/v, e0mh/, e0mo/n my e0n preposition: with locative: in, on with instrumental: by e0ntolh/, h9 commandment e0pagge/llomai, -, e0paggeila/mhn, I announce -, e0ph/ggelmai 152e0paggeli/a, h9 promise e0pi/ preposition: with genitive: upon, on, at by with locative: upon, on, at, over with accusative: upon, on, to, up to e0piqumi/a, h9 lust, desire e1rgon, to/ work e1rhmov, h9 desert e1rxomai, e0leu/somai, h]lqon, e0lh/luma, I come, I go -, - a0pe/rxomai I go away die/rxomai I go through ei0se/rxomai I go into, I enter ec0 e/rcomai I go out kate/rxomai I go down sune/rxomai I come together e0sqi/w, fa/gomai, e1fagon, -, -, - I eat e1sxatov, h, on last e1terov, a, on other (another of a different kind) e1ti still, yet e0toima/zw, e0toima/sw, h9toi/masa, I prepare h9toi/maka, h9toi/masmai, h9toima/sqhn eu0aggeli/zomai, -, eu0hgge/lisa, -, I preach the gospel eu0hgge/lismai, eu0hggeli/sqhn eu0agge/lion, to/ gospel eu0loge/w, eu0logh/sw, eu0lo/ghsa, I bless eu0lo/ghka, eu0lo/ghmai, eu0logh/qhn eu0xariste/w, eu0xaristh/sw, I give thanks eu0xari/sthsa, -, -, eu0xaristh/qhn e1xw, ec1 w, e1sxon, e1sxhka, -, -, I have (imperfect: ei]xon) e3wv adverb: until z zeta zhte/w, zhth/sw, e0zh/thsa, -, -, - I seek zwh/, h9 life h eta h1dh already h9me/ra, h9 day h9me/terov, a, on our q theta 153qa/lassa, h9 sea qa/natov, o9 death qauma/zw, qauma/somai, eq0 au/masa, I wonder -, -, e0qauma/sqhn qe/lhma, qelh/matov, to/ will qe/lw, qelh/sw, h9qe/lhsa, -, -, -, I wish (imperfect: h1qelon) qeo/v, o9 god, God qerapeu/w, qerapeu/sw, e0qera/peusa, I heal -, teqera/peumai, eq0 erapeu/qhn qewre/w, qewrh/sw, e0qew/rhsa, -, -, I behold - quga/thr, qugatro/v, h9 daughter i iota i1diov, a, on his own, her own, its own i9ereu/v, i9ere/wv, o9 priest i9ero/n, to/ Temple 0Ihsou~v, o9 Jesus i9lasmo/v, o9 propitiation i3na conjunction usually with the subjunctive: in order that, that i3sthmi, sth/sw, e1sthsa (or e1sthn), I cause to stand, I stand e1sthka, -, e0sta/qhn i0sxuro/v, a/, o/n strong, sufficient i9xqu/v, i9xquo/ v, o9 fish k kappa kaqari/zw, kaqariw~, e0kaqa/risa, -, I cleanse, I purify -, e0kaqari/sqhn kaqw/v comparative particle: just as, even as kai/ conjunction: and, also, even kai…/ .. kai/ both….and kaino/v, h/, o/n new kako/v, h/, on/ bad kale/w, kale/sw, e0ka/lhsa, ke/klhka, I call ke/klhmai, e0klh/qhn kalo/v, h/, o/n good kardi/a, h9 heart karpo/v, o9 fruit kata/ preposition: with ablative: down from with genitive: down upon 154with accusative: according to, along katabai/nw I go down khru/ssw, khruc/ w, e0kh/ruca, -, -, I preach, or I proclaim ek0 hru/xqhn koinwni/a, h9 fellowship ko/smov, o9 world kri/ma, kri/matov, to/ judgement kri/nw, krinw~, e1krina, kek/ rika, I judge ke/krimai, e0kri/qhn kri/siv, kri/sewv, h9 judgement ku/riov, o9 lord, Lord l lambda lale/w, lalh/sw, e0la/lhsa, I speak lela/lhka, lela/.lhmai, e0lalh/qhn lamba/nw, lh/myomai, e1labon, I take or I receive ei1lhfa, ei1lhmmai, e0lh/mfqhn lao/v, o9 people le/gw, e0rw~, ei]pon, eir1 hka, ei1rhmai, I say e0rre/qhn (or e0rrh/qhn) lei/pw, lei/yw, e1lipon, -, le/leimmai, I leave e0lei/fqhn li/qov, o9 stone log/ ov, o9 word, discourse loipo/v, h/, o/n remaining oi9 loipoi/ the rest lu/w, lu/sw, e1lusa, le/luka, le/lumai, I loose, I destroy e0lu/qhn m mu maqhth/v, o9 disciple maka/riov, a, on blessed marturi/a, h9 witness, testimony me/gav, mega/lh, me/ga great me/n exclamatory particle: indeed me/n….de/ strong adversative: on the one hand…on the other hand me/nw, menw~, e1meina, meme/nhka, -, - I remain, I abide Messi/av, o9 Messiah meta/ preposition: with genitive: with with accusative: after 155mh/ negative particles in moods other than indicative: not mhde/ negative mhde/….
mhde/ neither….nor mhdei/v, mhdemi/a, mhde/n no one mhke/ti negative adverb: not yet, no longer mh/thr, mhtro/v, h9 mother mikro/v, a/, o/n little, small mise/w, mish/sw, e0mi/shsa, memi/shka, I hate, I detest -, - mo/nov, h, on only, alone n nu neani/skov, o9 young man nekro/v, a/, o/n dead nika/w, nikh/sw, e0ni/khsa, neani/khka, I overcome, I conquer -, - no/mov, o9 law nu/c, nukto/v, h9 night nu~n adverb: now o9, h9, to/ the o9do/v, h9 way, road o3qen adverb: whence oi]da (perfect form of obsolete ei3dw, used as present) I know oi0ki/a, h9 house oi]kov, o9 house o3lov, h, on whole o9mologe/w, o9mologh/sw, I profess, or I confess w9molo/ghsa, -, -, - o1noma, o0no/matov, to/ name o0ra/w, o1yomai, ei]don, e0w/raka (or e0o/ I see raka) , -, w1fqhn o1rov, o1rouv, to/ mountain o3v, h1, o1 who, which o3stiv, h3tiv, o3ti who, which (qualitative in force) o3ti conjunction: because, that ou0 (ouk0 before vowel; ou0x before negative with indicative mood: vowel with rough breathing) not ou0de/ negative conjunction: and not, nor 156ou0de/… ou0de/ neither…nor ou0dei/v, ou0demi/a, ou0de/n no one ou0ke/ti negative adverb: no longer ou1pw negative adverb: not yet ou0rano\v, o9 heaven ou]v, w0to/v, to/ ear ou]tov, au3th, tou~to this ou3twv adverb: thus, so, in this manner o0fei/lw I owe, I ought o0fqalmo/v, o9 eye o1xlov, o9 multitude p pi palaio/v, a/, o/n old para/ preposition: with ablative: from with locative: before, beside with accusative: beside, beyond, along parabolh/, h9 parable parakale/w I exhort, beseech, comfort para/klhtov, o9 comforter parrhsi/a, h9 boldness parousi/a, h9 presence, coming pa~v, pa~sa, pa~n all, every, the whole pa/sxw, -, e1paqon, pe/ponqa, -, - I suffer path/r, patro/v, o9 father pe/mpw, pe/myw, e1pemya, -, -, I send e0pe/mfqhn peri/ preposition: with genitive: about, concerning with accusative: about, around peripate/w, peripath/sw, I walk periepa/thsa, peripepa/thka, -0 , - pi/nw, pi/omai, e1pion, pe/pwka, -, I drink e0po/qhn pi/ptw, pesou~mai, e1peson, I fall pe/ptwka, -, - pisteu/w, pisteu/sw, e0pi/steusa, I believe pepi/steuka, pepi/steumai, e0pisteu/qhn pi/stiv, pi/stewv, h9 faith pisto/v, h/, o/n faithful 157plana/w, planh/sw, e0pla/nhsa, -, I lead astray, or I deceive pepla/nhmai, e0planh/qhn ploi~on, to/ boat pneu~ma, pneu/matov, to/ spirit poie/w, poih/sw, e0poi/has, pepoi/hka, I do or I make pepoi/hmai po/liv, po/lewv, h9 city polu/v, pollh/, polu/ much ponhro/v, a/, o/n evil poreu/omai, poreu.somai, I go e0poreusa/mhn, -, pepo/reumai, e0poreu/qhn pri/n adverb: before pro/v Preposition: With locative: at With accusative: to forward, with at proseu/xomai, proseucomai, I pray proshuca/mhn, -, -, - profh/thv, o9 prophet prw~tov, h, on first r rho r9h~ma, r9h/matov, to/ word, saying s sigma sa/rc, sarko/v, h9 flesh seautou~, seauth~v of yourself ska/ndalon, to/ offense, stumbling-block skoti/a, h9 darkness sko/tov, sko/touv, to/ darkness so/v, sh/, so/n your own (second person singular) spei/rw, -, e1speira, -, -, - I sow sta/siv, sta/sewv, h9 strife, dissension stauro/w, staurw/sw, e0stau/rwsa, I crucify -, e0stau/rwmai, e0staurw/qhn sta/xuv, sta/xuos, to/ corn, ear of corn sto/ma, sto/matov, to/ mouth stratiw/thv, o9 soldier su/ you su/n preposition: with instrumental: with, together with 158suna/gw I gather together sunagwgh/, h9 synagogue sw/zw, sw/sw, e1swsa, se/swka, I save se/swsmai, e0sw/qhn sw~ma, sw/matov, to/ body swthri/a, h9 salvation t tau te/knon, to/ child teleio/w, -, e0telei/wsa, tetelei/wka, I perfect, I carry out to an end tetelei/wmai, e0teleiw/qhn te/lov, te/louv, to/ end thre/w, thrh/sw, e0th/resa, teth/rhka, I keep teth/rhmai, e0thrh/qhn ti/qhmi, qh/sw, e1qhka, te/qeika, I place, I put te/qeimai, e0te/qhn tima/w, timh/sw, e0ti/mhsa, -, I honour teti/mhmai, -, ti/v, ti/ who?
what?
tiv, ti Someone, something or a certain one to/pov, o9 place to/te adverb: then tuflo/v, o9 a blind man tuflo/w, -, e0tu/flwsa, tetu/flwka, I blind or I make blind -, - u upsilon u3dwr, u3datov, to/ water ui9o/v, o9 son u9me/terov, a, on your (second person plural) u9pa/gw I go away u9pe/r preposition: with ablative: in behalf of, instead of with accusative: over, above, beyond u9po/ preposition: with ablative: by (agency) with accusative: under f phi fai/nw, fanou~mai, -, -, -, e0fa/nhn I shine fanero/w, fanerw/sw, e0fane/rwsi, I make manifest -, pefane/rwmai, e0fanerw/qhn 159fe/rw, oi1sw, h1negka, (h1nehkon), I bring, I bear e0nh/noxa, -, h0ne/xqhn file\w, -, e0fi/lhsa, pefi/lhka, -, -, I love - fwnh/, h9 voice fw~v, fwto/v, to/ light x chi xara/, h9 joy Xa/riv, xa/ritov, h9 grace, thanks xei/r, xeiro/v, h9 hand xrei/a, h9 need xri/sma, xri/smatov, to/ anointing Xristo/v, o9 Christ y psi yeu/domai, -, e0yeusa/mhn, -, -, - I lie or I deceive yeud~ ov, yeu/douv, to/ lie yeu/sthv, o9 liar w omega w3ra, h9 hour w9v comparative particle: as, like 160
