NoneCTH: 009 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE CTH 009 INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY Course Code CTH 009 Course Title Introduction to Philosopy Course Developer Rev.
Fr.
Dr. Augustine Essien, mps Course Writers Rev.
Fr.
Dr. Augustine Essien, mps Course Editor Dr. O.
A. Adewale Benson Idahosa University Benin City Edo State Course Co-ordinator Revd.
Dr. Jacob A. Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria Nigeria.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCTH: 009 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-494-3 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCTH: 009 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………….......……………….
1 What you will learn in this course ……………………… 1 Course Aims …………………………………………….
1 Course Objectives ……………………………………… 1 Working through this Course (Course Requirement) …… 2 Study Unit ……………………………………………….
2-3 Textbooks ……………………………………………….. 3 Assignment File ………………………………………… 3 Assessment ……………………………………………… 3 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………… 4 Course Overview ………………………………………… 4-5 How to get the most from this course …………………… 5-6 Tutors and Tutorials ……………………………………… 6 ivCTH: 009 COURSE GUIDE Introduction This is a foundational course for any student who is interested in philosophical studies, but also for students in higher institutions of learning.
The Course exposes the student to the meaning, nature and the discipline of Philosophy.
It will help the student to be more reflective on the ordinary reality, which manifests itself in an extraordinary way.
The Course helps the student to ask meaningful and soul-Searching questions about the world around him.
The course will examine the major areas of Philosophy which include: Logic, Ethics, Metaphysics, Epistemology, Aesthetics, etc.
It will lead the student to examine some of the major themes and problems of philosophy.
What you will learn in this course Introduction to Philosophy is a general Course that opens the student to the wide array of ideas in the history of thought.
During this Course you will come to know what Philosophy is all about, its development and its methods.
You will know what it is that interests philosophy, that is, its object of concern.
But above all, you will learn to look at reality with a more critical mind.
Course Aims The aims of this Course are to expose you to look at reality more objectively, to ask questions, and to judge reality based on that objectivity.
Course Objectives In addition to the general aims of the Course above, each Unit of the Course has its specific objectives.
And these will be given at the beginning of each Unit.
You are therefore, encouraged to read through these objectives at the beginning of the Unit and at the end of it so as to judge whether the set objectives have been achieved.
The following shall be considered as the main and general objectives of the Course: a.
Various notions, definitions, branches, methods and nature of Philosophy; b.
Themes and Problems in Philosophy; c. Major epochs, their representatives and relevance of Philosophy.
1CTH: 009 COURSE GUIDE Working through this Course (Course Requirements) For this Course to be completed, you must study each unit carefully.
There are self-assessment exercises in each unit which you are required to do.
Assignments have to be submitted to the appropriate quarters for corrections.
This will be followed by the final examination.
The following are the contents of the Course Pack: a.
Course Materials b.
Course Guide c. Study Unit d. Textbooks e. Assignment File f. Presentation The Text materials are provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
In addition, your tutor will be of help to you should you encounter problems in getting the Text materials.
Study Units There are sixteen Study Units in this Corpus: 1.
Various Notions and Definitions of Philosophy 2.
Origin and Development of Philosophy 3.
The Different Branches of Philosophy 4.
Methods of Philosophy 5.
Philosophy and Other Sciences 6.
Problems or the Concerns of Philosophy 7.
Themes of Philosophy 8.
Mind and Body Problems 9.
Change, Movement and Time 10.
Existence of God and related Issues 11.
Ancient Philosophy 12.
Medieval Philosophy 13.
Modern Philosophy 14.
Contemporary Philosophy 2CTH: 009 COURSE GUIDE 15.
African Philosophy 16.
Relevance of Philosophy Each of these Units contains self-assessment test questions on the material you have studied.
They are for your own good, because they assist you to assess your progress in the Course in general, and to see whether you meet up with the set objectives of the Unit in particular.
Textbooks Recommended Maritain, Jacques.
An Introduction to Philosophy.
London: Sheed and Ward, 1979.
Wallace, William A.
The Elements of Philosophy.
New York: Alba House, 1974.
John-Terry, Chris.
For the Love of Wisdom: An Explanation of the Meaning and Purpose of Philosophy.
New York: Alba House, 1994.
Assignment File Your Assignment File will be mailed to you.
The File will contain the details of what you are expected to do for submission to your tutor for marking.
Your scores in the Assignments form part of your final mark for the Course.
The Assignments will cover all the Units.
Assessment The assessment comprises two parts: In the first place, your assignments, that is, the tutor marked assignments and secondly, the written examination.
The Assignment will take into consideration the materials provided for the Course not excluding your extended reading and other experiences gained there from.
This will be submitted to your tutor within the stipulated dateline for marking.
The Assignments attract 30% of your total score.
The Final Examination will count for the remaining 70%.
Final Examination The Final Examination will attract 70% of the total mark.
The Examination Questions will cover all materials treated in the Course including your assignments and self-assessment test questions and will last for (3) Three Hours of writing time.
You will have enough time for revision between the last Unit and the Examination date.
3CTH: 009 COURSE GUIDE Course Marking Scheme The following table shows the breakdown of the actual marking scheme for the Course Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks.
Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of Course marks Course Overview The following table is the summary of the Units, the number of weeks needed to complete them and the assignments that accompany them.
Table 2: Course organizer No.
of Unit Title of Work Assessment weeks Course Guide Notions and Definitions of 1 1 Assignment 1 philosophy Origin and Development of 2 1 Assignment 2 Philosophy 3 Branches of Philosophy 1 Assignment 3 4 Methods of Philosophy 1 Assignment 4 5 Philosophy and Other Sciences 1 Assignment 5 6 Problems of Philosophy 1 Assignment 6 7 Themes in Philosophy 1 Assignment 7 8 Mind and Body Problems 1 Assignment 8 9 Change, Movement and Time 1 Assignment 9 Existence of God and Related 10 1 Assignment 10 Issues 11 Ancient Philosophy 1 Assignment 11 12 Medieval Philosophy 1 Assignment 12 13 Modern Philosophy 1 Assignment 13 14 Contemporary Philosophy 1 Assignment 14 4CTH: 009 COURSE GUIDE 15 African Philosophy 1 Assignment 15 16 Relevance of Philosophy 1 Assignment 16 Revision 1 Examination 1 Total 17 How to get the most from this course The Distance Learning Programme is to provide an opportunity for people who, due to various circumstances of life could not avail or are not able to avail themselves the privilege of the regular university programme.
It offers you the advantages of studying at your own convenient time and place and at their own pace.
The lectures are carefully arranged in Units.
Each Unit is equivalent to a lecture period so that instead of listening to a lecturer, you are reading the lecture.
Each Unit contains some self- assessment exercises and assignment as would be given by a lecturer in an ordinary lecture hall.
Each Unit follows a common pattern.
It begins with an introduction of the subject matter of the Unit, connecting it with the previous Unit and leading to the sole aim of the course as a whole.
This is followed by the set objectives of the Unit.
The objectives help you to know what you are expected to learn by the end of the Unit.
It is advisable, therefore, to read and understand the objectives at the beginning and at the end of the Unit.
This will help to judge your progress in the course.
The main corpus of the Unit is the lecture proper with relevant suggestion of materials for your further reading.
This is followed by conclusion and summary.
The following are some tips that may help you in your studies.
Should you encounter any difficulty, do not hesitate to contact your tutor.
a.
Read the Course Guide carefully; b. Organize yourself and your time properly so as to create a specific time and place under normal circumstances for your studies; c. Try to know exactly when the semester begins and when and where you are to meet for your tutorials; d. Under normal circumstances, try your very best to keep to your scheduled time for studies.
And do not lack behind in your studies and exercises or assignments.
Should there be any eventuality, inform your tutor in time; 5CTH: 009 COURSE GUIDE e. Try to avail yourself the relevant or set textbooks for each Unit.
It is most advisable to have the required texts handy as you study each Unit; f. The tutor marked assignments are not only for the purpose of examinations.
They will help you to deepen your knowledge of the course you are doing.
Therefore, take your time to do and submit the assignments promptly.
When your assignment is returned, pay close attention to the comments made by your tutor; g. Do not jump to the Unit ahead without reading the previous Unit.
Take each Unit step-by-step in the order in which they are given; h. Make sure that you keep to your schedule with the Units so that you will have well-enough time to review and prepare for the final examinations.
Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of tutorials provided to support this Course.
The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and the address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important; therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
We wish success in your programme.
6
