NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE :ENG 122 COURSE TITLE: THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II ENG 122 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Course Developer Professor (Mrs.) Inyang M. Udofot University of Uyo Uyo Course Writers Professor (Mrs.) Inyang M. Udofot University of Uyo Uyo Dr. (Mrs.) Juliet Udoudom Department of English University of Uyo Uyo Course Editor Professor Dele Orisawayi University of Calabar Calabar Programme Leader Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Iyere Theodore National Open University of Nigeria iiENG 122 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiiENG 122 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-174-X All Rights Reserved ivENG 122 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………………….….. 1 Course Aims ………………………………………….………….
1 Course Objectives ……………………………………….……….
1 Working through this Course ……………………….……..…….
2 Course Materials………………………………………………… 2 Study Units ……………………………………………………… 2 Textbooks and References ………………….…………………… 3 Assessment………………………………………………….…… 3 Tutor-Marked Assignment…….………………….……….…….. 4 Final Examination and Grading …………….…………………… 4 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………………... 4 Course Overview ………………………….…………………….. 5 How to Get the Most from this Course………………………….. 5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials………………………………… 6 Summary ………………………………………………………… 7 vIntroduction ENG 122 is a one semester two credit units 100 level course.
It is designed for students whose major discipline is English.
The course consists of fifteen units which deal with aspects of structure not treated in ENG121.
The prerequisite for the course is ENG.
121.
The material has been developed with local examples suitable for Nigerian students.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how to work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments.
You are advised to attend the tutorial classes to discuss your difficulties with your tutors.
Course Aims The course is designed to consolidate your knowledge and grasp of the structure of English and master aspects of sentence construction.
The course will also take you through the development of grammar by reviewing grammatical models from traditional to modern.
Its goal is to: •enable you to have a firm grasp of the patterning of the structure of the English Language •help you to acquire skills for recognizing and describing the various structural patterns at the various levels and how they interrelate in communication; •enable you to achieve, through knowledge and practice, competence and skills in the use of English for general and academic purposes.
Course Objectives There are objectives to be achieved in each unit of the course.
You should read them before studying each unit.
It is expected that by the time you have finished studying this course you should be able to:ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •detect and correct the structural problems of an English sentence; •write well coordinated and connected sentences; •have an idea of the ancestry and the development of grammatical models; •have a firm grasp of the English verb and its various properties since it is about the most important word in a sentence.
Working through this Course To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units, read recommended books and other materials provided by NOUN.
Each unit contains self assessment exercises, and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
The course should take you about fifteen weeks to complete.
You will find all the components of the course listed below.
You have to allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: Study units Textbooks Assignment File Presentation schedule Study Units There are fifteen study units in this course, as follows: Module 1 The English Sentence Unit 1 Structural Problems Unit 2 Sentence Connection Unit 3 Subject-Verb Agreement Unit 4 Agreement of Pronoun with Antecedent Unit 5 Coordination Unit 6 Punctuation Module 2 The English Verb viiENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Unit 1 Tense and Aspect Unit 2 Voice and Mood Unit 3 Modal auxiliaries Unit 4 Non - Finite and Emphatic Forms Module 3 Grammatical Models Unit 1 Traditional Grammar Unit 2 Structural Grammar Unit 3 Transformational Generative Grammar Unit 4 Systemic Grammar Unit 5 Government and Binding Grammar Module 1 deals with sentence construction.
It consolidates what was begun in ENG 121.
The first unit of Module 1 examines possible structural problems in sentence construction.
The second unit looks at various ways of connecting sentences.
The next two units: Units 3 and 4 discuss agreement of subject with the verb and pronoun with antecedents.
Unit 5 examines coordination of parts of sentences and clausal coordination.
The final unit: Unit 6 discusses punctuation, a seemingly unimportant but very necessary aspect to master in sentence construction.
Module 2 deals with aspects of the English verb that require specific attention and are seldom mastered.
Unit 1 deals with tense and aspect showing how they interrelate to express the meaning of the verb.
Unit 2 discusses other properties of the verb: voice and mood, while Unit 3 examines the modalities expressed by modal auxiliaries.
Unit 4 discusses the non finite and emphatic forms of verbs.
Module 3 examines grammatical models from traditional grammar in Unit 1 through structural grammar in Unit 2, transformational generative grammar in Unit 3 to Systemic grammar in Unit 4 and government and binding grammar in Unit 5.
Each study unit consists of one week’s work and includes specific objectives, directions for study, reading material, self assessment exercises.
Together with tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Textbooks and References Certain books are recommended in the course.
You should purchase them yourself and read them where you are so directed before attempting the exercises.
viiiENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Assessment There are two aspects of the assessment of this course: the tutor marked assignments and a written examination.
In doing these assignments, you are expected to apply information gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work that you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There is a tutor marked assignment at the end of every unit.
You are required to attempt all the assignments.
You will be assessed on all of them but the best three performances will be used for your continuous assessment.
One of the three selected will come from each of the three areas covered in the course namely: Module1, Module 2 and Module 3.
The assignment carries 10% each.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for ENG 122 will be of three hours duration and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the kinds of self assessment exercises and the tutor marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.
ixENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Assessment Marks Assignments 1-3 three assignments, marked out of (the best three of all the 10% assignments submitted) Totaling 30% Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide 1 Module 1 1 Structural Problems 1 Assignment 1 2 Sentence Connection 1 Assignment 2 3 Subject-Verb Agreement 1 Assignment3 4 Pronoun with Antecedent 1 Assignment 4 5 Coordination 1 Assignment 5 6 Punctuation 1 Assignment 6 Module 2 1 Tense and Aspect 1 Assignment 7 2 Voice and Mood 1 Assignment 8 3 Modal Auxiliaries 1 Assignment 9 4 Non Finite and Emphatic Form 1 Assignment10 Module 3 1 Traditional Grammar 1 Assignment11 2 Structural Grammar 1 Assignment12 3 Transformational Grammar 1 Assignment13 4 Systemic Grammar 1 Assignment14 5 Government and Binding 1 Assignment15 Grammar Revision 1 Examination 1 Total 18 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
The advantage is that you can read and work through the study materials at your pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Just as a lecturer xENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II might give you in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate times.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you should go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
Self assessment exercises are interspersed throughout the units and answers are given at the end of the course.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self assessment exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
There will be examples given in the study units.
Work through these when you have come to them.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 10 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: •you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
•you have difficulty with the self assessment exercises.
•you have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials prepare a question list before attending them.
You will gain a lot from participating actively.
xiENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Summary ENG 122 intends to consolidate your proficiency in English by giving you systematic training in the analysis of the structure of modern English.
Upon completing the course you should be equipped with the resources to identify and solve structural problems of English sentences.
You should also be able to construct better sentences in English when speaking or writing.
You will be able to deal with such issues as: Structural problems Sentence connection and coordination Concord The characteristics and usages of verbs Models of grammatical analysis.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
xiiENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II MAIN COURSE Course Code ENG 122 Course Title The Structure of Modern English II Course Developer Professor (Mrs.) Inyang M. Udofot University of Uyo Uyo Course Writers Professor (Mrs.) Inyang M. Udofot University of Uyo Uyo Dr. (Mrs.) Juliet Udoudom Department of English University of Uyo Uyo Course Editor Professor Dele Orisawayi University of Calabar Calabar Programme Leader Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Iyere Theodore National Open University of Nigeria xiiiENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xivENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-174-X All Rights Reserved xvENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 The English Sentence………………………..…….
1 Unit 1 Structural Problems………………………..….…… 1 Unit 2 Sentence Connection……………………….……… 14 Unit 3 Subject-Verb Agreement………………………..….
26 Unit 4 Agreement of Pronoun with Antecedent…….…....... 36 Unit 5 Coordination …………………………….……....….
45 Unit 6 Punctuation………………………………………….. 54 Module 2 The English Verb…………………………………... 73 Unit 1 Tense and Aspect………………………….………… 73 Unit 2 Voice and Mood………………………….….……….
84 Unit 3 Modal Auxiliaries…………………………………….. 95 Unit 4 Non-Finite and Emphatic Forms…………………… 105 Module 3 Grammatical Models………………….…….......... 113 Unit 1 Traditional Grammar………………………………… 113 Unit 2 Structural Grammar…………………….……..….….. 120 Unit 3 Transformational Generative Grammar………………127 Unit 4 Systemic Grammar…………………………..…….… 140 Unit 5 Government and Binding Grammar………..…………146 xviENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II MODULE 1 THE ENGLISH SENTENCE Unit 1 Structural Problems Unit 2 Sentence Connection Unit 3 Subject-Verb Agreement Unit 4 Agreement of Pronoun with Antecedent Unit 5 Coordination Unit 6 Punctuation UNIT 1 STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS This unit will present the structural problems of an English sentence.
You will learn the possible things that can go wrong with an English sentences and how to avoid them in sentence construction.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Parallelism 3.2 Fragmentation 3.3 Dangling Modifiers 3.3.1 Causes of Dangling Modifiers 3.4 Ambiguity 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall examine possible structural problems of an English sentence.
This is to say that we shall identify what can go wrong in a sentence, resulting in a sentence that does not convey the intended sense.
The most common of such problems include wrong use of parallel structures, construction of sentences that lack one of the essential parts, wrong use or placement of modifiers which can lead to dangling modifiers, and situations where sentences have more than one interpretation.
1ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •identify the structural problems of an English sentence; •correct the problems identified; and •construct correct sentences.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Parallelism ‘When words or word groups perform the same function in the sentence, we say that they are in parallel form’ (Oluikpe, Iwundu and Ngwagba, 1981, p.103) Parallel forms are used for writing words or word groups of identical grammatical forms when they appear in a series.
Parallel structures help to emphasise the grammatical and logical relationships of the ideas that are expressed.
Also, parallel grammatical structures reinforce one’s thought by stressing the importance of the various sentence elements.
Many of the famous phrases in English exemplify effective use of parallel structures as in the following examples: 1.
Democracy is a government of the people, by the people and for the people (three prepositional phrases) 2.
What people value most are: life, liberty and happiness (three nouns) 3.
Give me a helping hand or go away (two imperatives) 4.
Early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise.
(two infinitives, three adjectives) 5.
I came, I saw, I conquered (three sentences).
6.
To be or not to be, that is the question (two infinitives) 7.
Friends, Brothers, Sisters let us reason together (three nouns).
To produce effective sentences containing parallel forms one must make verbs, nouns, pronouns, phrases and clauses appear in the same grammatical form and perform the same function in the sentence.
This means that if the first noun is singular all the others must be singular; if the first verb is in present tense all the others must be in the present tense and if the first group is a phrase the other groups in the sentence must be phrases not clauses or infinitives.
As shown in Examples 1 – 7 the nouns, phrases and sentences are so arranged that they function in a similar way in each sentence.
Thus, both the grammatical and logical ideas are neatly tied up to make the sentence more effective.
2ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Parallel structures help to emphasise the grammatical and logical relationships of the ideas that are expressed.
Also, parallel grammatical structures reinforce ones thought by stressing the importance of the various sentence elements.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Correct the following sentences by putting the parallel structures in the same grammatical forms.
1.
He likes singing, dancing and to drum.
2.
One can travel to Kaduna by bus, by car or fly.
3.
During the last S.S.C.E.
examination the invigilator told us to write fast and that we should write on both sides of the paper.
4.
Lamenting the loss of her father Ekaette said: Papa was a good father, a loving husband and worked hard.
5.
Reading is a more rewarding hobby than to watch films.
3.2 Fragmentation Fragmentation describes a situation where one of the essential parts of a sentence is absent.
Often, the incomplete sentence is punctuated as if it were a complete sentence.
It is easy to recognise a fragment since either the subject or the predicate is often missing (see section 4.2.2.).
To ensure that one is not writing sentence fragments instead of sentences, it is important to read over every sentence or passage written and to ensure that each sentence has a subject and a predicate.
Another cause of fragmentation is the confusion between finite and non- finite verbs.
Non-finite verbs are those which cannot occur alone as verb elements in clauses because they cannot take subjects and are invariable in the sense that they do not show tense distinction.
They are infinitives (to go, to be) and participles (going, being, gone, been).
Finite verbs on the other hand are full verbs which can occur as verb elements in clauses, take subjects and show tense distinctions (e.g.
go, goes, went; am, is, was).
Many times fragmentation results from a wrong choice of verb.
Examine the following: 8.
Hoping to hear from you soon.
9.
To control my temper always.
This is my resolution.
10.
In reply to your advertisement in the Pioneer of last week, requesting applications for the post of clerical assistants.
11.
My brother sent me a present.
Because I passed my examinations well last year.
3ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II The first example (No.8) is a fragment because it has no finite verb.
The verb form in the group of words is a participle.
It cannot take a subject since the form: I hoping to see you soon would not be an acceptable form unless ‘am’ is added to ‘I’.
Similarly Nos.
9 and 10 are fragments, the verb form in 9 is to control, an infinitive; and the verb in No.10 requesting is also a non-finite form (participle).
Wrong punctuation can also result in fragmentation.
This can be seen in Nos.
9 and 10 where the use of the semi – colon or colon after the word ‘always’ rather than the full stop in No.9 and the comma after the word ‘assistants’ in No.10 could be the acceptable options.
Alternatively, each of the two sentence fragments could have been written as one complex sentence.
In learned and mannered style, fragments are sometimes used for sudden dramatic effect.
They also occur in colloquial style which characterises everyday conversation as in the following: 12.
So far, so good; 13.
The sooner, the better; 14.
I shall not go back.
Never.
15.
A fool does not only fail to understand but also fails to know that he does not know.
And there is astonishment on his face when told that he is ignorant!
Ordinarily, it is better to avoid sentence fragments when writing.
Rather than use fragments a variety of sentence types including exclamatory sentences could be used for dramatic effect.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Make the fragments full sentences in the following: 1.
Be seeing you later.
2. Who has seen the car?
Neither you nor I.
3.
I refused to vote for that political party.
The leader being very corrupt.
4.
To err is human.
To forgive divine.
5.
With kind personal regards 6.
How are you?
Hope fine.
7.
What about your brothers and sisters?
8.
During the symposium there were many activities.
Presentation of papers, a cocktail party and a gala night.
9.
I do not go out these days because I am busy.
Cooking, cleaning sewing and reading.
10.
Although Nigeria is one nation.
There is need for resource control.
4ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Note, however, that some of the fragments are acceptable in the context of speech or conversation.
3.3 Dangling Modifiers Modifiers are said to dangle when they are not consistent with the subject – predicate relationship in the sentence.
This means that the action attributed to the subject of the sentence cannot normally be performed by the subject as in the following sentence: 16.
Sitting in the Convocation Park, a motor cycle flew past.
Knowledge of sentence structure would make one regard the motor cycle as the subject of the sentence and the performer of the action of sitting but common sense tells us that a motor cycle cannot sit.
The phrase sitting in the Convocation Park therefore dangles because it does not logically relate to the subject of the sentence ‘motor cycle’.
Examine the following: 17.
Running to the notice board, my scores and grades were seen.
18.
Feeling completely exhausted, a bed was needed.
19.
Meeting Akon for the first time, her mode of dressing repelled me.
Note that there is no logical relationship between the italicised words and the subjects in each case.
The sentences can be re-written thus: 17a.
Running to the notice board, I saw my scores and grades.
18a.
Feeling completely exhausted, I decided I needed a bed rest.
19a.
Meeting Akon for the first time, I was repelled by her mode of dressing.
3.3.1 Causes of Dangling Modifiers Dangling modifiers result from a number of factors.
One factor is the wrong use of the passive voice as can be seen in Nos.
16, 17 and 18 above.
Where one is in doubt, it is better to use the passive voice as in Nos.
17a, 18a, and 19a.
Also participles which begin a sentence may dangle if not used carefully as the examples above show.
There are however some participles that are often used impersonally.
These include supposing, considering, assuming, and admitting.
Since these words are used to mean that one supposes considers assumes admits they do not become dangling modifiers.
5ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 20.
Assuming that you finish your work in time, there is no reason why we would fail to catch the plane.
21.
Admitting that she disobeyed her father, it is understandable why he beat her up.
The two sentences above do not contain dangling modifiers as they are taken to mean: if one (assumes) … (admits ) … Another structure that often dangles is the past participle verb phrases.
In the following examples, there are no logical relationships between the past participle verb and the subject.
22.
Identified by the witnesses, his shame was boundless.
23. enounced and deserted by her children, her life became unbearable.
The sentences can be rewritten thus: 22a.
Identified by the witness, the criminal’s shame was boundless.
23a.
Denounced and deserted by her children, the woman’s life became unbearable.
It must be noted that for a modifier not to dangle, a subject of the sentence which is also modified by the modifier has to be named.
In Nos.
22a and 23a, the criminal and the woman are the subjects which are modified by the italicised parts of the sentence.
Occasionally, infinitive phrases also dangle, as in the following examples: 24.
To do well in an examination, studying is necessary.
25.
To have a successful get-together many guests are required.
26.
To do well in science courses, mathematics is necessary.
For the same reasons given above the above sentences should be revised and the subjects which are modified by the infinitive phrases above should be introduced as shown below: 24a.
To do well in an examination the candidate must study.
25a.
To have a successful get-together one should invite many guests.
26a.
To do well in science courses one should be good in mathematics.
The revised versions: Examples.
24a–26a have subjects which relate with the infinitive phrases.
The subjects in these examples are italicised.
Note that in each case writing the 6ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II sentence in the active voice helps to correct the sentence with the dangling modifier.
Also, adjectival phrases dangle if not properly utilised in sentence construction.
The following sentences exemplify this situation: 27.
Disappointed with her daughter’s behaviour, a privilege was withdrawn.
28.
Angry with the students, a suspension order was given 29.
Content with the students’ performance, prizes were given.
Again for the same reasons earlier given the above sentences can be revised thus: 27a.
Disappointed with her daughter’s behaviour, Mrs. Okon withdrew the privilege of allowing her go out alone.
28a.
Angry with the students, the school principal gave a suspension order.
29a.
Content with the students’ performance, the Vice-Chancellor gave them prizes.
The main issue in all the cases so far discussed is that the modifying phrases must relate logically to the subject in the main clause which must be named.
The understanding is that the subject must be the one who performs the action in the modifying phrase or clause or about whom the information in the modifying clause is given.
When there is any indication that the information in the modifying clause cannot relate to the subject, then the modifier dangles.
In some passive sentences, the subject can be situated at the end of the sentence to make for complete meaning and logical connection.
E.g.
No.
28 can be written as: Angry with the students, a suspension order was given by the principal.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Correct the following sentences by ensuring that the modifiers have subjects and do not therefore dangle.
1.
Caught with the stolen vehicle, the policeman arrested Etim (who was caught?).
2.
Having entered the house, the robbery was carried out (who entered the house?)
3.
To live well in the rural area, money is necessary (who will live well?)
7ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 4.
After seeing the doctor, the fever went down (who saw the doctor?)
5.
Angry at not being recognised, revenge was planned (who was angry?).
6.
After condemning his lateness, he was suspended (who condemned lateness?).
7.
Entering the bus, his briefcase was snatched from him (who entered the bus?)
8.
Having rested for sometime, the headache was gone (who rested?)
9.
Arriving home at last, my dinner was no where to be found (who arrived?)
10.
Surprised at seeing his name among the successful candidates, a party was immediately thrown (who was surprised?).
3.4 Ambiguity A sentence is ambiguous if it is capable of more than one interpretation and therefore has more than one meaning.
Although one can be deliberately ambiguous especially in creative writing for a particular effect, ambiguity is a feature of poor sentence construction.
It should therefore be avoided.
Ambiguity occurs as a result of wrong placement of words, phrases and clauses in a sentence.
To avoid ambiguity it is important to take the following steps when constructing sentences.
(a) Adverbs should be placed near the words they modify: In this regard, the following adverbs are likely to present problems: early, only, almost, hardly, scarcely, just, even and quite.
Examine the following sentences which are ambiguous: 30.
She only described what happened.
31.
Those who watched the television programme scarcely criticised it.
The first example No.30 could mean that she was the only one who described what happened or that she described only what happened and nothing else.
If the first meaning is intended the sentence should read: 30a.
Only she described what happened.
If on the other hand the second meaning is intended the sentence should read as in No.30 above.
Similarly, in No.31 the adverb scarcely could modify ‘watched’ to mean those who did not watch it often enough or it could modify ‘criticised’ 8ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II to mean ‘hardly ever.
If the first meaning is intended the adverb should be placed before the verb watch as follows: 31a.
Those who scarcely watched the television programme criticised it.
Modifying phrases and clauses should be placed immediately after the words they modify.
The following is ambiguous because of the wrong placement of the modifying clause: 32.
The girl in the bus that had an accident … arrived finally.
Note that usually, ambiguity occurs when a modifying prepositional phrase and a relative clause have a common antecedent.
In the example above, that accepts both human and non-human nouns and can refer to both ‘girl’ and ‘bus’.
If that is replaced by who it will refer to the girl.
If on the other hand it is replaced with which it will refer to the bus as in the following: 32a.
The girl in the bus, who had an accident, arrived finally.
32b.
The girl in the bus which had an accident arrived finally.
It is also important to watch the number of the antecedents, that is, whether they are singular or plural.
Examine the following: 32c.
The girls in the bus have just had an accident … (girl) 32d.
The girl in the bus that has just had an accident … (bus) A single pronoun should not refer to two males, two females, two things or two groups as in the following: 33.
Mrs. Okon told her sister that she was not going to the market anymore.
In the above example, ‘she’ refers to both Mrs. Okon and her sister.
Some writers try to resolve such problems by using rather awkward structures such as: 33a.
Mrs. Okon told her sister that she (Mrs. Okon) was not going to the market anymore.
The sentence can be restructured to resolve the ambiguity thus: Either 33b.
When Mrs. Okon realised that she was not going to the market anymore, she told her sister.
33c.
Mrs. Okon told her sister not to go to the market anymore.
9ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Resolve the following ambiguities by reconstructing the sentence to have one meaning at a time: 1.
Esther told her mother that she was going mental.
2.
If the baby does not like the milk, boil it.
3.
He removed the plate from the table and washed it.
4.
Mercy only listens to the best in classical music.
5.
Before the nurses start treating chicken pox patients they are often inoculated.
6.
I found out the problem with my radio set in the office.
7.
Visiting grandmothers can be boring.
8.
The stern face of the lady sitting on the veranda which was cold and uninviting repelled me.
9.
The passenger in the bus that has just moved is going to Abuja.
10.
Can I have the glasses, please?
Parallel forms are used for writing words or word groups of identical grammatical forms when they appear in a series.
4.0 CONCLUSION When structural problems occur in an English sentence, such as those discussed in this unit, the result is a sentence that conveys the wrong meaning.
The relationships between words performing various functions constitute the major source of structural errors.
It is therefore essential to pay utmost attention to such relationships to ensure correct sentence constructions.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt the following about some English sentences from this unit: i.One thing or the other can go wrong in a sentence resulting in a sentence that does not convey the intended sense.
ii.The most common of such problems include wrong use of parallel structures; construction of sentences that lack one of the essential parts, wrong use or placement of modifiers which can lead to dangling modifiers and situations where sentences have more than one interpretation.
iii.Modifiers are said to dangle when they are not consistent with the subject – predicate relationship in the sentence.
This means that the action attributed to the subject of the sentence cannot normally be performed by the subject.
iv.Parallel forms are used for writing words or word groups of identical grammatical forms when they appear in a series.
10ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II v.Parallel structures help to emphasise the grammatical and logical relationships of the ideas that are expressed.
vi.Also, parallel grammatical structures reinforce one’s thought by stressing the importance of the various sentence elements.
vii.Fragmentation describes a situation where one of the essential parts of a sentence is absent.
viii.It is easy to recognise a fragment since either the subject or the predicate is often missing.
ix.Dangling modifiers result from the wrong use of the passive voice, participles and infinitives.
x.A sentence is ambiguous if it is capable of more than one interpretation and therefore has more than one meaning.
xi.Ambiguity occurs as a result of wrong placement of words, phrases and clauses in a sentence.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
He likes singing, dancing and drumming.
2.
One can travel to Kaduna by bus, by car or by air.
3.
During the last S.S.C.E.
examination the invigilator told us to write fast and to write on both sides of the paper.
4.
Lamenting the loss of her father Ekaette said: Papa was a good father, a loving husband and a hard worker.
5.
Reading is a more rewarding hobby than watching films.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
I’ll see you late 2. Who has seen the car?
Neither you nor I have seen it.
3.
I refused to vote for that political party.
The leader is very corrupt.
4.
To err is human.
To forgive is divine.
5.
Please accept this gift with kind personal regards.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Having been caught with the stolen vehicle, the policeman arrested Etim.
2.
The robbers having entered the house, the robbery was carried out.
3.
For anyone to live well in the rural area, money is necessary.
4.
After seeing the doctor, the fever went down (who saw the doctor?)
5.
His mother, angry at not being recognised, planned a revenge.
6.
After condemning his lateness, the principal suspended him.
7.
On entering the bus, Peter’s briefcase was snatched from him.
11ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 8.
Having rested for some time, the patient’s headache was gone.
9.
On arriving home at last, I found that dinner was no where to be found 10.
Surprised at seeing his name among the successful candidates, John immediately threw a party.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Resolving Ambiguities 1.
Esther told her mother that she (Esther/her mother) was going mental.
2.
If the baby does not like the milk, boil the milk.
3.
He removed the plate from the table and washed the table/the plate.
4.
Mercy only listens to the best in classical music.
(Mercy alone/classical music alone).
5.
Before the nurses start treating chicken pox patients they (the nurses) are often inoculated.
6.
I found out the problem with my radio set while I was in the office.
7.
Paying visits to grandmothers can be boring.
8.
The stern face of the lady sitting on the veranda repelled me/The veranda which was cold and uninviting repelled me.
9.
The passenger in the bus which has just moved is going to Abuja.
10.
Can I have the drinking glasses, please?
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify parallel structures in the following extract and comment on their effect on the text.
Perhaps, it is easy for those who have never felt the stinging darts of segregation to say “Wait”.
But when you have seen vicious mobs lynch your mothers and fathers at will and drown your sisters and brothers at whim; when you have seen hate-filled policeman curse, kick and even kill your black brothers and sisters; when you see the vast majority of your twenty million Negro brothers smothering in the air-tight cage of poverty in the midst of an affluent society; when you suddenly find your tongue twisted and your speech stammering as you seek to explain to your six year old daughter why she cannot go to the public amusement park that has just been advertised on television and see tears welling up in her eyes when she is told that Funtown is closed to coloured children, and see ominous clouds of inferiority beginning to form in her little mental sky, and see her beginning to distort her personality by developing an unconscious bitterness toward white people; when you 12ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II have to concoct an answer for a five year-old son who is asking: “Daddy, why do white people treat coloured people so mean?” When you take a cross country drive and find it necessary to sleep night after night in the uncomfortable corners of your automobile because no motel will accept you; when you are humiliated day in and day out by nagging signs reading “white” and “coloured”; when your first name becomes “nigger” your middle name “boy” (however old you are) and your last name becomes “John” and your wife and mother are never given the respected title “Mrs.”; when you are harried by day and haunted by night by the fact that you are a negro … then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait.
(Adapted from: Martin Luther King, Jr. Letter from Birmingham Jail) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eka, D. (1996).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of English.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Eka, D. (ed) (1993).
Fundamentals of Communication in English.
Calabar: BON Universal Ltd. Iwundu, M. C., Oluikpe, B. and Ngwaba, F. E. (1981).
Clarity.
In Oluikpe, B. O.
A.
(Ed.)
The Use of English for Higher Education Onitsha, AFRICANA FEP, 103-124.
Quirk, R. and Greenbaum, S. (1980).
A University Grammar of English.
London: Longman.
Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
(2004).
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. 13ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 2 SENTENCE CONNECTION This unit will present the different ways of linking sentences to one another in English.
The factors which interact to indicate links between sentences are also identified.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Transitional Words 3.2 Time Relationships 3.3 Place Relationships 3.4 Enumerations 3.5 Addition 3.6 Summation 3.7 Consequence 3.8 Inference 3.9 Concession 3.10 Contrast 3.11 Structural Parallelism 3.12 Conjuncts and Disjuncts 3.13 Conjuncts 3.14 Disjuncts 3.14.1 Style Disjuncts 3.14.2 Attitudinal Disjuncts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Apart from links within sentences, linking occurs between sentences in English.
Certain factors interact in pointing to links between sentences.
These are: •implied semantic relationships; that is, links that sentences of a certain paragraph have to the main idea and to one another; •lexical equivalence: a relationship shown in successive sentences through the equivalence in the vocabulary (lexical items) used, as, for instance, in the repetition of words or phrases; •syntactic devices: alternative grammatical ways of referring to the same thing, as, for instance reference to man as he; and 14ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •by the use of transitional words (Quirk and Greenbaum, 1975, p.287).
In the following passage from Chinua Achebe’s Things Fall Apart, there are semantic as well as syntactic links between sentences: Okonkwo was well known in the six villages and even beyond.
His fame rested on solid personal achievements.
As a young man of eighteen, he had brought honour to his village by throwing Amalinze the Cat.
Amalinze was a great wrestler who for seven years was unbeaten from Umuofia to Mbaino.
He was called the Cat because his back would never touch the earth.
(Achebe, 1975, p.5).
The central idea of the passage is Okonkwo’s fame.
The sentences are each linked to this central idea.
Lexical equivalents are seen in the words and phrases repeated at times in other words: ‘well known’ and ‘fame’ are near equivalents; ‘the Cat’ suggests Amalinze’s expertise in wrestling.
The second and third sentences are further explanations of the first while the fourth and fifth further explain the third.
Syntactic devices used in the passage also include the pronoun ‘his’ and ‘he’ used instead of Amalinze and Okonkwo, while the clause, ‘his back would never touch the earth’ explains why Amalinze was unbeaten.
Such relatedness in meaning creates links between sentences dealing with a particular point (Udofot, 1993, p.140).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •write well connected sentences; •use both semantic and syntactic links; and •use transitional words and recognize them when used.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Transitional Words Other syntactic devices used in connecting sentences are commonly referred to as transitional words.
These (transitional words) connect sentences and independent clauses of a compound sentence.
Examples of transitional words are: ‘first, next, then, finally, formerly, earlier, here, there furthermore, similarly, nevertheless, consequently’.
Sometimes the connection is effected with a group of words like ‘in fact, on the other hand, on the contrary, above all’.
The following sentences are linked using transitional words: 15ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 1.
First, he made his excuses himself.
Next, he sent explanatory notes.
Finally, he did not bother to explain.
Where the transitional words form part of the independent clause that they introduce, they are always preceded by a semi-colon and apart from time and place, they indicate ideas like additions, enumerations, summations, consequences, concessions, contrasts.
We will now examine the above cases individually.
3.2 Time Relationships Time relationships between sentences can be signaled by temporal adjectives, adverbials or by tense, aspect and modality in verbs.
There are three major divisions of time relationships: (a) Previous to a given time reference Adjectives: earlier, former, previous and preceding can be used to signal this.
2.
He submitted a good assignment.
His previous assignments were all poor (previous to the good one).
Adverbials: already, as yet, before, earlier, first, formerly, previously, so far, yet … 3.
I will tell you what happened, but first, sit down (before I tell you what happened).
(b) Simultaneous with given time reference Adjectives: contemporary, simultaneous.
4.
The news was heard on Akwa Ibom Radio.
A simultaneous announcement was made on the Network news (simultaneous with the AKBC News).
Adverbials: at present, at this point, meanwhile, in the meantime, now, presently, then.
5.
Many of the cult members have been arrested.
Meanwhile, the police are continuing their investigations in the recent killings on Campus (at the same time as the arrests are being made).
16ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II (c) Subsequent to given time reference Adjectives: following, later, next: 6.
I saw him on Friday and he appeared to be in perfect health.
The following day, he died (following the Friday just mentioned).
Adverbials: afterwards, again, immediately, later, next, since, then, after that.
7.
The Vice-Chancellor attended Senate Meeting.
He later went to the state function.
(after Senate meeting).
3.3 Place Relationships Words denoting place relationships also play a part in sentence connection.
Some place adverbs include here, there, where as for instance in: 8.
All my friends have been to Lagos at least once.
I am going there next long vacation.
3.4 Enumeration Enumerations conjuncts indicate a listing of what is being said.
Some of the common ones are: first, furthermore, finally, far more importantly, above all, on top of it all, last but not the least.
These can be so arranged to mark particular positions as in first(ly), second(ly), third(ly) and finally.
At other times ascending and descending order of importance can be shown as in first …, secondly and more importantly … above all.
The enumerations may be expressed in a more integrated way as in: 9.
Let me begin by saying … I would like to conclude by saying ….
3.5 Addition The addition relationship is often affected by the use of additive conjuncts such as: also, equally as in the following 10.
This food tastes good.
Also it looks attraction.
11.
The striking workers and the government have made no progress in the negotiations.
The workers are bent on getting all that they wanted.
Equally the government is sticking to her guns.
Additive conjuncts specify that part of the sentence is an addition to what has been previously said.
17ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 12.
The children read the play.
They acted it too 13.
He didn’t travel any more.
Neither did she.
Either, neither and nor require that the two sentences they link be negative.
Too, on the other hand requires both sentences that are linked to be positive.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 In the following sentences A and B use either, neither, nor and too where necessary.
A.
The children didn’t eat the food.
B.
They didn’t drink the water.
A.
The children didn’t eat the food.
B.
They also didn’t drink the wine.
A.
The children didn’t eat the food.
B.
They didn’t drink the tea.
A.
The children ate the food.
B.
They drank the water.
3.6 Summation The final part of a unit may generalise or sum up what preceded.
This is often effected by the use of such words as in brief, in summary, in all (summative conjuncts and style disjuncts) as in: 14.
The ideas discussed are useful.
Attention is given to oral drill.
Each chapter contains a lot of exercises for practice.
In brief, the book is well written and very useful to English teachers.
Summation can also be achieved with integrated expressions like: I will like to conclude by … I will sum up by ….
3.7 Consequence Several result conjuncts indicate that a sentence expresses the consequence or result of what was said before: 15.
I don’t use the book on weekends; so you can borrow it.
16.
My car broke down; as a result, I missed the lecture.
Integrated indications include the result is that … the consequence (of that) was … 3.8 Inference An inferential conjunct can indicate a deduction from what is implicit in the preceding sentence or sentences.
In the two examples that follow, the second sentence is an inference from the first: 17.
A I’m afraid I cannot help you.
18.
B In other words you do not care.
18ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 19.
A She is going to marry my brother.
20.
B In that case, she should relate well with his relations 3.9 Concession Concessive conjuncts signal the surprising nature of what is being said in view of what was said before.
These include: however, still, besides as in: 21.
He was in his study for a few hours.
He has however done a lot of work.
22.
The holiday was very short; still it afforded me enough rest.
23.
I did not send my friend an invitation.
Besides she wouldn’t have come.
Most of the conjuncts that signal concession can be paraphrased by a subordinate clause of concession introduced by though or although.
The first pair of examples above can be rephrased as follows: 21a.
Though he was in his study for a few hours, he did a lot of work.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Rephrase Nos.
22 and 23 by introducing a subordinate clause of concession as in 21a 2.
Write three sentences of your own using the pattern of No.
21a above.
3.10 Contrast A contrast is often indicated by antithetic conjuncts.
On the contrary, indicates that the opposite is true.
24.
I did not send her away; on the contrary I persuaded her to stay.
The other conjuncts which signal contrast introduce a comparison or contrast without denying what went before: 25.
He’s rather foolish.
By comparison, his sister is very brilliant.
On the other hand often suggests contrast especially when it is the second of a correlative pair as in: 26.
You should be firm.
On the other hand you shouldn’t be too difficult.
Instead also involves a contrast though it often also suggests a replacement, as in: 19ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 27.
She doesn’t study at all; instead she spends her time in beauty saloons.
28.
He wanted a radio for his birthday; his father bought him a clock instead.
3.11 Structural Parallelisms Links between sentences can also be realized through similarity in sentence structure as in the following examples: 29.
She admired my mother.
My father irritated her.
30.
My hobby is reading; hers is writing.
Such structural parallelisms are common in mannered and literary styles.
They are however often reinforced by lexical equivalence and implications of semantic relationships, usually those of contrast.
3.12 Conjuncts and Disjuncts 3.13 Conjuncts Conjuncts are adverb phrases or prepositional phrases (not conjunctions) which are used in sentence connection.
Examples of the use of conjuncts are given below together with a list of common conjuncts grouped according to their sub classes: 31.
I would like you to do two things for me.
First phone my house and tell them I’ll be late.
Secondly, order a taxi to be here in about one hour.
32.
It was a difficult test.
Nevertheless he passed it with a credit.
33.
He doesn’t need any help from you.
On the contrary, he can give us a loan.
Conjuncts are used for special effects (see the section on transitional words).
The normal position for most conjuncts is initial.
They are usually separated from what follows by a pause in speech or a comma in writing.
In other positions they may be enclosed in commas.
Medial and final positions are rare for conjuncts.
Those that readily appear finally include anyhow, anyway, otherwise.
The last two frequently appear medially.
3.14 Disjuncts 20ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Disjuncts are structures mostly prepositional phrases or clauses which convey the speaker’s comment.
Disjuncts are of two main types: style disjuncts comment on what is said stating in some way the conditions under which one is talking.
Attitudinal disjuncts on the other hand comment on the content of the communication.
3.14.1 Style Disjuncts 34.
Very frankly, I don’t like this food.
35.
Seriously, do you intend to go?
36.
Strictly speaking, nobody is allowed to enter this room.
Other examples are: personally, if I may say so, to be precise.
Some adverbs can also be used as style disjuncts.
These include: bluntly, briefly, candidly, confidentially, frankly, honesty, generally.
Style disjuncts usually appear initially.
For some adverbs phrases which function as style disjuncts there are equivalent structures.
For example frankly can also be expressed as: Frankly speaking, they have no chance.
We can have the following equivalent structures: prepositional phrase - in all frankness frankly, to put it frankly; -ing participle phrase – frankly speaking -ed participle phrase – putting it frankly – put frankly finite verb clause – if I may be frank, if I can put it frankly.
The adverbs listed above as style disjuncts can also have equivalent structures with participle constructions e.g.
bluntly – bluntly speaking – honestly – honestly speaking – 3.14.2 Attitudinal Disjuncts Attitudinal disjuncts convey the speaker’s comment on the content of what he is saying.
They generally feature in declarative sentences: 37.
Obviously, nobody expected me today.
38.
Of course, you will have to pay your debt.
39.
She wisely stayed at home today.
Common attitudinal disjuncts include: 21ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Understandably, to our surprise/surprisingly, to be sure, more importantly/even more important, unfortunately, rightly … Many of the adverb phrases can be paraphrased by constructions in which the adjective is subject complement expressing an attribute of the subject as in the following: 40.
Unfortunately, Mary missed the lecture = That Mary missed the lecture was unfortunate = It was unfortunate that Mary missed the lecture.
Other forms of paraphrases like the ones below are also possible: 41.
Rightly, he rejected the appointment.
= It was right for him to reject the appointment.
42.
To our regret, Okon rejected the offer.
= We regretted that Okon rejected the offer.
Common adverbs often used as attitudinal disjuncts are given below together with the meanings they convey: Group I: The disjuncts in this group express the speaker’s comment on the extent to which he believes that what he is saying is true: Certainly, he has no right to be there (I am certain) He has probably left by now (I consider it probable …) Definitely, I will pass my examinations (I cannot fail).
Obviously, they were not invited (It is obvious to me and to everybody else).
Apparently, he is the new principal (It seems so).
Group II: The disjuncts in this group make comments other than on the truth-value of what is said.
Some convey the attitude of the speaker without reference to the subject of the sentence as in: Fortunately, Mary has returned my pen.
Other similar disjuncts include: curiously, annoyingly, happily, hopefully, luckily, preferably.
Other disjuncts in this category convey the speaker’s attitude with an implication that the judgment applies to the subject of the sentence as in: 43.
Wisely, Mary did not attend the meeting.
22ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II This implies that the speaker considers Mary’s action wise.
Other such disjuncts include: rightly, wrongly, foolishly.
Adverbs with an –ing participle base such as surprisingly are also very useful as attitudinal disjuncts.
Attitudinal disjuncts can appear in almost any position but most of them appear initially.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Replace the disjuncts in the Sentences 41- 43 with other disjuncts.
4.0 CONCLUSION Well connected sentence constructions are realisable through a correct understanding and appropriate use of linking devices in English as discussed in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt the following: •Apart from links within sentences linking occurs between sentences in English.
These can be effected through implied semantic relationships, lexical equivalence, syntactic devices and transitional words.
•Some syntactic devices used in connecting sentences are commonly referred to as transitional words.
These (transitional words) connect sentences and independent clauses of a compound sentence.
•Transitional words express ideas such as: time and place relationships, additions, enumerations, concession, summation, contrasts, inference and consequence.
•Many transitional words are referred to as conjuncts and disjuncts.
•Disjuncts are mostly prepositional phrases or clauses which convey the speaker’s comment.
•Disjuncts are of two main types: style disjuncts which comment on what is said stating in some way the conditions under which one is talking.
•Attitudinal disjuncts on the other hand comment on the content of the communication.
•Conjuncts are adverb phrases or prepositional phrases (not conjunctions) which are used in sentence connection.
•Conjuncts are used for special effects.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 In the following sentences use either, neither, nor and too where necessary.
23ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II A.
The children didn’t eat the food.
B.
They didn’t drink the water either A.
The children didn’t eat the food.
B.
They also didn’t drink the wine.
A.
The children didn’t eat the food.
B.
Neither did they drink the tea.
A.
The children ate the food.
B.
They drank the water too.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Rephrase Nos.
22 and 23 by introducing a subordinate clause of concession as in 21a 22a Though the holiday was very short; still it afforded me enough rest.
23a Unfortunately I did not send my friend an invitation.
Even then, she wouldn’t have come.
2.
Write three sentences of your own using the pattern of No21a above.
Any three sentences with a concessive adjunct following the pattern of No.
21a are acceptable ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Replace the conjuncts in the Sentences 41- 43 with other conjuncts 41.
I would like you to do two things for me.
First phone my house and tell them I’ll be late.
Next, order a taxi to be here in about one hour.
42.
It was a difficult test.
All the same he passed it with a credit.
43.
He doesn’t need any help from you.
On the other hand, he can give us a loan 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are transitional words?
What roles do they play in sentence connection?
2.
Write a paragraph of five compound or compound complex sentences appropriately connected with sentence connectors.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Achebe, C. (1958).
Things Fall Apart.
London: Heinemann.
24ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Quirk, R. and Greenbaum, S. (1980).
A University Grammar of English, London: Longman.
Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
2004.
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. 25ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 3 SUBJECT - VERB AGREEMENT This unit deals with agreement of the subject of the sentence with the verb as well as the agreement of pronouns with antecedents.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Subject – Verb Agreement 3.1.1 Compound Subjects 3.1.2 Collective Nouns 3.1.3 Intervening Phrases 3.1.4 Contractions 3.1.5 Indefinite Pronouns 3.1.6 Special Cases of Agreements 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the most common errors in sentence construction is the failure of the subject (noun or pronoun) to agree with the predicate verb.
In order to have good grammatical relations between the parts of a sentence, the subject must agree with the verb in number and person.
This means that if the subject of the sentence is singular, the verb must take a form that agrees with it and if the subject is plural, the verb must also be plural.
With regard to pronouns, if the subject is a pronoun in the first person, the verb must also be in the first person and if the subject is in the second or third person the verb too must be in the second or third person.
Also, the pronoun which refers to a noun must agree in number and person with its antecedent (the noun to which it refers).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •write sentences with the correct subject/verb agreement; •write sentences with correct agreement of pronoun with antecedent; •identify sentences with faulty subject verb agreement; and •identify problematic and special cases of agreement.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 26ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 3.1 Subject and Verb Agreement The discussion in this section is based on Udofot and Ekpenyong, (2006, pp.119-120).
Examine the following sentences 1.
She does not like beans.
(subject and verb and in the third person).
2.
She don’t like beans.
(No agreement) 3.
You were invited to the party.
(subject and verb are in the second person) 4.
You was invited to the party (No agreement).
In Sentence No.1 above, both the subject she and the verb does are in the third person singular whereas in No.2, the subject is in the third person singular but the verb do (do not) is in the second person.
In No.
3 both the subject and the verb are in the second person (singular or plural) but in No.
4 the subject ‘You’ is in the second person but the verb, was, is in the third person and there is therefore no agreement.
The rule about subject-verb agreement as explained above appears very simple but there are some problems involved.
These problems are responsible for the errors that are often made.
Sometimes, the writer or speaker fails to know whether the subject should be regarded as singular or plural.
At other times, the writer or speaker is not sure what form of the verb is for singular or plural.
The real subject of the sentence is not obvious in some sentences and if the writer fails to identify the real subject there is often a problem.
In the remaining part of this section, we will consider some of the problems that are responsible for errors of subject-verb agreement.
3.1.1 Compound Subjects Some sentences have more than one subject.
When two or more subjects are connected by and, the subject is plural and requires a plural verb but if the compound subject is joined by or, nor, either … or, neither … nor, the subject is singular and requires a singular verb.
Examine the following: 5.
Amaete and Mfon are preparing for G.C.E.
examinations.
6.
The president and the secretary attend all diocesan meetings.
Note that the two parts of the compound subject are connected by and in the above examples and the compound subjects take plural verbs.
There 27ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II are however some exceptions to this rule.
If the two subjects connected by and form a unit, the subject is regarded as singular and takes a singular verb as in the following example: 7.
Bread and tea is a popular breakfast (one unit – verb is singular).
Also, when the two subjects connected by and refer to the same person or thing, the subject is singular: 8.
Her companion and friend is her cousin (one person).
9.
The secretary and typist was present at the meeting (one person).
Note, however, that if the compound subjects in Nos 8 and 9 above referred to two individuals, the verbs would be plural and the sentences would read thus: 8a.
Her companions and friends are her cousins.
9a.
The secretary and the typist were present at the meeting When two subjects are connected by or the subject is singular.
This means either the first or the second subject not both.
The same rule applies in the case of nor being used to join two subjects.
Either … or and neither … nor follow the same rule.
10.
Idongesit or Uko starts the generator (one of them = Singular) 11.
Neither the lecturer nor the typist was responsible for the leakage (neither the one nor the other; singular) When one of the subjects joined by or, nor, neither … nor, either … or is singular and the other one is plural, the verb agrees with the subject that is nearer to it.
If, however, both subjects are plural, the verb is plural.
Examine the following sentences.
12.
Neither the teacher nor the students were here when I arrived (verb = plural).
13.
Neither the students nor the teacher was here when I arrived (verb = singular).
14.
Neither the teachers nor the students were here when I arrived (verb = plural).
In No 12, the plural subject is nearer to the verb and the verb is therefore plural.
In No.
13 the singular subject is nearer to the verb and the verb is singular.
In No.
14, both subjects are plural.
When one of the subjects is singular and the other is plural it is advisable to put the plural subject nearer to the verb as this makes the verb plural and sounds better.
Occasionally, there are sentences where the compound subjects differ in person.
According to the rule the verb should agree with the subject nearer to it although such sentences look and sound awkward.
28ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Examine the following sentences: 15.
Either I or they are responsible for what happened (I = 1st person; they = 3rd person).
16.
Either they or I am responsible for what happened.
It is sometimes better to restructure such sentences as No 17 below to make them sound better.
17.
Either they are responsible for what happened or I am.
3.1.2 Collective Nouns A collective noun is a noun that names a group or a collection of people or objects usually seen as a unit.
The following are examples of collective nouns: people: audience, crowd, jury; animals: flock, herd, troop, pride; objects: band, package, luggage.
A collective noun which is singular in meaning requires a singular verb and the one that is plural in meaning requires a plural verb.
18.
The jury has given the verdict.
19.
That family is very united.
20.
The audience is very attentive.
Occasionally, the sentence may indicate that the members of a collective noun are acting as individuals, not as a unit.
In such cases the collective noun requires a plural verb.
Examine the following examples: 21.
The jury have returned to their houses.
22.
The family have made their contributions.
23.
The audience were clapping for him.
It is sometimes clearer to introduce expressions like ‘the members of’, ‘the people in’, to indicate that the members were behaving as individuals, for clarity.
For example No.23 can be rewritten as follows for clarity: 23a.
The people in the audience were clapping for him.
3.1.3 Intervening Phrases 29ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II When the subject of a sentence is followed by prepositional phrases or expressions like as well as, together with, accompanied by, including, etc the subject of the sentence is not affected by the addition of such phrases.
This is because the subject of a sentence can never be found in a prepositional phrase or any of such expressions listed above.
Examine the following: 24.
The lecturer as well as his students has not paid the conference fee.
25.
Important papers together with his will were found in his brief case.
In No.
24, the subject (lecturer) is singular and takes a singular verb irrespective of the intervening phrase as well as his students.
Similarly in No.
25 the subject is plural and takes a plural verb irrespective of the intervening phrase together with his will.
Note that in both cases the subject is not located in the prepositional phrase nor is it affected by the number of the noun in the intervening phrase.
3.1.4 Contractions Contractions are contracted forms of verbs, that is verbal forms that have been shortened by the omission of one or more letters indicated by the use of the apostrophe.
Many mistakes in agreement occur with the use of contracted forms such as don’t, aren’t and isn’t.
Note that contracted form for am not is not am’t.
Another common error is the use of don’t (do not) for doesn’t (does not).
Don’t should not be used with subjects in the third person singular.
Thus the expressions, she don’t, he don’t and it don’t are wrong.
Note the following usages: 24.
It don’t matter (incorrect).
24a.
It doesn’t matter (correct).
25.
He don’t belong to our club (incorrect).
25a.
He doesn’t belong to our club (correct).
26.
They doesn’t play well (incorrect).
26a.
They don’t play well (correct).
27.
We aint going to the market (unacceptable).
27a.
We aren’t going to the market (acceptable).
3.1.5 Indefinite Pronouns The following indefinite pronouns are singular and require singular verb forms: anyone, everyone, no one, one, someone, anybody, somebody, nobody, everybody, each, either and neither.
28.
Either of them is qualified.
30ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 29.
Neither of them is qualified.
( pronouns) 30.
Only one of the candidates is qualified.
31.
Everybody is invited to the function.
32.
Anyone has the right to make a suggestion.
33.
Somebody was responsible for closing that door.
34.
Each of these bags has been checked.
When many, each, and every are used to begin a sentence, and function as adjectives, the subject is singular.
35.
Many a woman wishes she had a child.
36.
Each student was asked to show his fee receipt.
37.
Every man, woman and child is expected at the football field.
The indefinite pronouns several, few, both and many are always plural because they mean more than one.
38 Several were called to the high table.
39.
A few have received their number.
40.
Both were eager to win.
41.
Many in the group are against the motion.
The indefinite pronouns some, none, any and all can be singular or plural depending on the meaning of the sentence.
When any of these words refer to mass or quantity they are regarded as singular and take singular verbs.
When they refer to number they are regarded as plural and take plural verbs.
Examine the following examples: 42.
Some are going by bus (number = more than one = plural).
42a.
Some of the rice is left in the bag (quantity = singular) 43.
All of the petrol has been sold (mass or quantity = singular).
43a.
All of the members bring gifts to the church at harvest.
(number – plural).
3.1.6 Special Cases of Agreement Some nouns are plural in form but singular in meaning.
Such nouns, when they are the subject of sentences, take singular verbs as in the following examples: 44.
Mathematics is an interesting subject (singular verb).
45.
Measles is a childhood disease (verb singular).
46.
The news was terrible (singular verb).
Certain words are plural in form and meaning and take plural verbs.
These include, scissors, pants, trousers, pliers, tongs.
When the word pair is used with them they are singular.
31ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 47.
The trousers are very costly.
(plural).
47a A pair of trousers is hanging in his wardrobe.(singular).
48.
The scissors are not sharp.
(plural).
A plural noun which refers to quantity, weight or distance is singular and requires a singular verb.
49.
Twenty kilometres is a long distance to walk (Distance = singular).
50.
Fifty kilograms of meat is quite heavy to carry (Mass = singular).
The words half and part can be singular or plural depending on the meaning of the sentence.
As a guide, when these words refer to number, they are plural but when they refer to mass or section, they are singular as in the following examples.
51.
Half of the girls are in the hostel (Number = plural).
51a.
Half of the meat pie is left (Mass = singular).
52.
Part of the house was destroyed (Section = singular).
52a.
Part of occupants were saved (Number = plural).
When the word number is preceded by the article a it requires a plural verb but when it is preceded by the it takes a singular verb.
53.
A number of women were cooking for the occasion (plural).
53a.
The number of women present was small (singular).
The name of a firm is often regarded as singular even if the name is plural in form.
If however, the name suggests a plural idea it is regarded as plural and takes a plural verb.
54.
Ugo Parker Motors Company has made substantial sales this year.
54.
Marks and Spencers has retrenched a lot of workers.
55.
Evans Brothers have declared dividends.
Sometimes a sentence begins with there, here.
It should be noted that neither of these words is the subject of the sentence.
Here is an adverb and there is an adverb which is often used as an expletive.
To get the real subject the sentence should be transposed so that the true subject begins the sentence as in the following: 56.
There are six children in the room.
56a.
Six children are (there) in the room.
57.
Here comes the Vice Chancellor together with his principal staff.
32ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 57a.
The Vice Chancellor comes here together with his principal staff (singular) sentence 56 becomes a possibility in a special sense: poetic or exclamatory writing.
The real problem occurs when a sentence which begins with an introductory there or here has a compound subject which requires a plural verb.
The speaker or writer may fail to realise that the subject is a compound one.
It is easy to determine whether the subject is single or compound after the sentence has been transposed.
The following examples have compound subjects.
58.
There goes the boy and his mother (incorrect).
58a.
The boy and his mother go there (compound subject – plural).
58b.
There go the boy and his mother.
59.
Here comes Idongesit and Uko (incorrect).
59a.
Idongesit and Uko come here (compound subject = plural verb).
59b.
Here come Idongesit and Uko.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Select the correct answer from the alternatives given in each sentence.
1.
One can no longer take for granted what_____enjoyed in the university.
(a) you (b) he (c) they (d) one.
2.
Atim and Dan met on the ship and greeted_______.
(a) one another (b) themselves (c) each other (d) theirselves.
3.
I am not surprised that he failed the election; everybody________that he is unreliable.
(a) know (b) knows (c) will know (d) do know.
4.
Knowledge of Mathematics as well as Physics________ in the Aptitude Test.
(a) is tested (b) have been tested (c) are tested (d) were tested.
5.
Evidence before the court_______ that you are guilty Mr. Jones.
(a) proves, (b) prove (c) proved, (d) proofed.
6.
Alice, together with her sisters_____ happy with the End-of-Year Result.
(a) was (b) were (c) was being (d) weren’t.
7.
_____do you think will carry your cross?
(a) whom (b) who (c) which (d) that 8.
Either our housemistress or you_______ to act as referee but none______ arrived.
(a) is/have (b) is/has (c) are/have (d) are/has.
9.
His knowledge of materials, sources of supply and prices __________ unparalleled.
33ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II (a) was (b) were (c) being (d) is being 10.
Thirty years_______too long to be away from home (a) are (b) is (c) being (d) has been.
4.0 CONCLUSION Subject-verb agreement is a common structural problem found in the writings of learners of English as a second language.
Since the subject determines the agreement it is important to learn to identify the type of subject in terms of type and number.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt the following i.In order to have good grammatical relations between the parts of a sentence, the subject must agree with the verb in number and person.
ii.When two or more subjects are connected by and, the subject is plural and requires a plural verb.
iii.If the compound subject is joined by or, nor, either … or, neither … nor, the subject is singular and requires a singular verb.
iv.Subjects separated by intervening phrases, collective nouns as well as nouns which end with ‘s’ but are singular take singular verbs.
v.Nouns that are plural in form and meaning take plural subjects.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE The correct answers are highlighted.
1.
One can no longer take for granted what____enjoyed in the university.
(a) you (b) he (c) they (d) one.
2.
Atim and Dan met on the ship and greeted_______.
(a) one another (b) themselves (c) each other (d) theirselves.
3.
I am not surprised that he failed the election; everybody________that he is unreliable.
(a) know (b) knows (c) will know (d) do know.
4.
Knowledge of Mathematics as well as Physics________ in the Aptitude Test.
(a) is tested (b) have been tested (c) are tested (d) were tested.
5.
Evidence before the court_______ that you are guilty Mr. Jones.
(a) proves, (b) prove (c) proved, (d) proofed.
6.
Alice, together with her sisters________ happy with the End-of- Year Result.
(a) was (b) were (c) was being (d) weren’t.
7.
_____do you think will carry your cross?
34ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II (a) whom (b) who (c) which (d) that 8.
Either our housemistress or you_______ to act as referee but none______ arrived.
(a) is/have (b) is/has (c) are/have (d) are/has.
9.
His knowledge of materials, sources of supply and prices – unparalleled.
(a) was (b) were (c) being (d) is being 10.
Thirty years_______too long to be away from home (a) are (b) is (c) being (d) has been.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss and illustrate five special cases of subject-verb agreement.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eka, D. (1996).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of English.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Eka, D. (ed) (1993).
Fundamentals of Communication in English.
Calabar: BON Universal Ltd. Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
(2004).
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. 35ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 4 AGREEMENT OF PRONOUN WITH ANTECEDENT This unit deals with the agreement of pronouns with antecedents.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Pronoun and Antecedent Agreement 3.1.1 Indefinite Pronouns 3.1.2 Compound Antecedents 3.1.3 Collective Nouns 3.1.4 Agreement in Person 3.1.5 Vague Antecedents 3.2Gender 3.3Number 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A pronoun is a word used to refer to a noun or another pronoun which precedes it in a sentence.
The word to which a pronoun refers is called its antecedent.
In the sentence Mary lost her handbag, the pronoun her refers to Mary.
The word Mary precedes the pronoun her or goes before it.
It is therefore the antecedent of the pronoun ‘her’.
Examine the following sentences and note the antecedents of the pronouns.
1.
Unwana says that she respects herself.
(Unwana = antecedent of she and herself) 2.
Every day brings its problems (day = antecedent of its) 3.
The lecturer himself did not know the answer (lecturer = antecedent of himself) Since a pronoun refers to or replaces a noun, it must agree with the noun in number, gender and person.
We have already dealt with the issue of number and person in Unit 3 in connection with subject-verb agreement.
We shall therefore take up the issue of gender and show its relationship with the agreement of pronouns and their antecedents while assuming a background knowledge of number and person.
36ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •identify pronouns and their antecedents; •use pronouns with appropriate antecedents; and •construct sentences with pronouns which agree with the nouns they replace in gender and in case.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Pronoun and Antecedent Agreement 3.1.1 Indefinite Pronouns Indefinite pronouns refer to both sexes; male and female.
In the following example, everyone includes male and female: 1.
Everyone is invited to the party.
The problem arises where the indefinite pronoun is the antecedent of another pronoun.
In such a situation the convention is to use the masculine gender for the pronoun which is used in place of the indefinite pronoun.
In the following example, everybody is the antecedent of the pronoun, his instead of his or her.
2.
Everybody received his declaration of assets form.
It must however be noted that the more cumbersome form ‘his or her’ is sometimes preferred by women who assert their individuality as a sex.
This is also the reason behind modern usages like chairperson instead of chairman.
In example 5 above, the pronoun his refers to everyone which includes people of both male and female genders.
If it is clear from the sentence that the indefinite pronoun refers to only male or female, the pronoun that refers to that sex is used.
However, some grammarians think that ‘everyone’ can be used in a generic sense without prejudice to sex.
3.
Everyone who attended the meeting of the Catholic Women Organisation wore her uniform.
4.
Everyone in the Boys Scout Movement had his height measured.
When it is not clear whether the antecedent indefinite pronoun is masculine or feminine the pronoun he is used.
5.
Somebody left his pen on my table.
37ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II The practice of using the pronoun their instead of his or her is also gaining grounds as in: 6.
‘God send everyone their hearts desire’.
(Shakespeare, Much Ado About Nothing).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examine the following.
1.
All were waiting for their children (plural) 2.
There is no salad left; all of it has been eaten (singular) 3.
Some gave their contributions yesterday (plural) 4.
Some of the beer has lost its flavour; it is now stale (singular) 5.
Did any of the girls collect their membership cards from the office?
(Plural) 6.
Any of the lecturers is willing to help (singular) 7.
None have sent their abstract (plural) 8 None of these is a typical case (singular) 3.1.2 Compound Antecedent At times a pronoun refers to two antecedents joined by a conjunction, if both antecedents are singular and refer to different persons or things, the pronoun used to refer to them has to be plural: 7.
The president and the secretary have given their manifestoes.
However if the compound antecedents refer to one person who occupies two positions or performs two functions the pronoun which takes the place of the antecedent has to be singular.
8.
The secretary and typist has complained about her workload (singular).
If in the above example, the typist were another individual, the article ‘the’ would be placed before the word typist and the pronoun which refers to the compound antecedents would be plural.
8a.
The secretary and the typist have complained about their workload.
When the connectives either … or and neither … nor connect singular nouns, the antecedent is regarded as singular.
When they join plural nouns, the antecedent is plural.
When, however, they join nouns that are 38ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II different in number (one singular and the other plural) the pronoun agrees with the antecedent that is nearer to it.
9.
Either Etim or his brother left his briefcase in the office (Both nouns are singular – pronoun singular) 10.
Either ladies or the gentlemen came into the hall without their tickets.
(Both nouns are plural – pronoun plural) 11.
Neither Mary nor her cousins brought their levies (Pronoun is plural – agrees with cousins).
3.1.3 Collective Nouns Collective nouns are singular when they express singular ideas or refer to groups acting as units, they are plural when they express plural ideas or when they refer to members in a group who are acting independently.
Examine the following: 12.
The band played its first number (as a unit).
13.
The band were tuning up their instruments when we arrived (as individuals).
3.1.4 Agreement in Person As we earlier stated (Section 1.0) a pronoun must agree with its antecedent in person.
If the antecedent of the pronoun is in the first person, the pronoun which refers to it must also be in the first person.
If the antecedent is in the second or third person, the pronoun that refers to it must also be in the appropriate person.
One of the most common errors of agreement in English is to start a sentence in the third person and put the pronoun that refers to it in the second person.
Examine the following: 14.
If anyone wants some water you can get it from the tap (wrong-person).
14a.
If anyone wants some water, he can get it from the tap.
3.1.5 Vague Antecedents Sometimes a pronoun has two possible antecedents in the same sentence to which it refers.
This can create misinterpretations of the sentence.
Note the two possible interpretations of the following sentence: 39ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 15.
Ekaette told her friend that she had been appointed a commissioner.
In the above sentence it is possible for the antecedent to be Ekaette or her friend.
This is a case of ambiguity.
To disambiguate the sentence, it can be re-written in either of the following ways.
15a.
Ekaette told her friend: ‘I have been appointed a commissioner’.
15b.
Ekaette told her friend: ‘you have been appointed a commissioner’.
15c.
Ekaette told her friend that she (Ekaette) had been appointed commissioner.
15d.
Ekaette told her friend that she (her friend) had been appointed a commissioner.
15e.
Ekaette announced her friend’s appointment as a commissioner.
There are many errors of agreement which can be traced to vague antecedents.
It is important in sentence construction to make a pronoun refer directly to the noun which it represents.
Examine the following sentence.
16.
Your application and your electronic mail arrived in time but we cannot treat it at the moment.
Notice that the pronoun it has no antecedent in the sentence.
The antecedent to the nouns: application and electronic mail would be them as this is a case of a compound antecedent joined by and.
3.2 Gender In grammar, gender refers to the classification of nouns and pronouns according to sex.
Four genders are often identified: masculine, feminine, common and neuter.
Masculine gender denotes the male sex while feminine gender denotes the female sex.
Neuter gender indicates absence of sex and common gender denotes either male or female sex.
Examples of nouns and pronouns in the four genders are given below: Masculine Feminine gender gender man woman boy girl he she him her Neuter gender bag television bottle it 40ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Some nouns and a few pronouns have special forms which show gender.
These include Masculine Feminine host hostess king queen uncle aunt nephew niece waiter waitress hero heroine alumnus alumna monk nun actor actress he she him her bridegroom bride peacock peahen ram ewe son daughter The above list is by no means exhaustive but there are some forms used to show gender which are hardly ever used.
These include author – authoress, poet – poetess.
3.3 Number Indefinite pronouns also present a problem of number; some may be either singular or plural while some are always plural.
The following list shows the pronouns that are always singular and those that are plural.
Singular Plural anybody many everybody both anyone few everyone several each others either no one nobody neither one someone somebody 41ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II There should therefore be proper agreement between the above pronouns when they are antecedents and the pronouns that refer to them.
Study the following examples: 17.
Neither of the men had his entitlements (Not their).
18.
If anyone wants a drink he can buy it at the bar (Not they).
19.
One should concentrate on what one can do well (not they).
20.
Only a few would give up their comfort for others (plural).
21.
Several found their cars opened (plural).
22.
Others could not locate their cars (plural).
The pronouns all, any, some and none may be singular or plural depending on the meaning of the sentence.
When these pronouns refer to quantity or mass, they are singular but when they refer to number, they are generally regarded as plural.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Select the correct answer from the alternatives given in each sentence.. 1.
Either you or Peter _____invited (a) are (b) was (c) have been (d) were 2.
The scissors_______ used for cutting (a) is (b) are (c) being (d) been.
3.
The committee has submitted______report (a) her (b) his (c) its (d) their 4.
The manager together with his visitor_______left for Abuja.
(a) have (b) has (c) were (d) was 5.
Neither Alice nor you______invited (a) is (b) are (c) has been (d) was 6.
A group of four women and a child______the first to be released.
(a) were (b) was (c) being (d) been.
7.
I want everybody to eat_______food.
(a) their (b) his (c) her (d) his/her.
8.
I hate examinations because it makes________nervous.
(a) us (b) me (c) you (d) them 9.
For one to succeed in any endeavour______must work hard.
(a) he (b) she (c) they (d) one 10.
We are shocked at_______being so irresponsible.
(a) them (b) their (c) they (d) us.
42ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 4.0 CONCLUSION The problem of agreement between pronouns and their antecedents is a common problem among second language speakers of English.
Agreement between these two elements must be in number, gender, and person.
5.0 SUMMARY The following important points have been raised in this unit: i.
A pronoun is a word used to refer to a noun or another pronoun which precedes it in a sentence.
The word to which a pronoun refers is called its antecedent.
ii.
Since a pronoun refers to or replaces a noun, it must agree with the noun in number, gender and person iii.
At times a pronoun refers to two antecedents joined by a conjunction, if both antecedents are singular and refer to different persons or things, the pronoun used to refer to them has to be plural.
iv.
If the antecedent is in the second or third person, the pronoun that refers to it must also be in the appropriate person.
v. Sometimes a pronoun has two possible antecedents in the same sentence to which it refers.
This can create misinterpretations of the sentence.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examine the following.
1.
All were waiting for their children (plural, refers to number) 2.
There is no salad left; all of it has been eaten (singular, refers to quantity).
3.
Some gave their contributions yesterday (plural, refers to number) 4.
Some of the beer has lost its flavour; it is now stale (singular, refers to quantity) 5.
Did any of the girls collect their membership cards (plural, refers to number) 6.
Any of the lecturers is willing to help (singular, refers to number but to one lecturer) 7.
None have sent their abstract (plural refers to number) 8.
None of these is a typical case (singular, refers to quantity).
43ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Select the correct answer from the alternatives given in each sentence.
The correct answers have been highlighted.
1.
Either you or Peter_____invited (a) are (b) was (c) is (d) are 2.
The scissors_______ used for cutting (a) is (b) are (c) being (d) been.
3.
The committee has submitted______report (a) her (b) his (c) its (d) their 4.
The manager together with his visitor_______left for Abuja.
(a) have (b) has (c) were (d) was 5.
Neither Alice nor you______invited (a) is (b) are (c) has been (d) was 6.
A group of four women and a child______the first to be released.
(a) were (b) was (c) being (d) been.
7.
I want everybody to eat_______food.
(a) their (b) his (c) her (d) his/her.
8.
I hate examinations because it makes________nervous.
(a) us (b) me (c) you (d) them 9.
For one to succeed in any endeavour______must work hard.
(a) he (b) she (c) they (d) one 10.
We are shocked at_______being so irresponsible.
(a) them (b) their (c) they (d) us.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss and illustrate five cases of agreement of the pronoun with the antecedent 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eka, D. (1996).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of English.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Eka, D. (ed) (1993).
Fundamentals of Communication in English.
Calabar: BON Universal Ltd. Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
(2004).
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. 44ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 5 COORDINATION This unit deals with coordination.
This term involves the linking of sentence parts which are related.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Coordination 3.1.1 Clausal Coordination 3.1.2 Phrasal Coordination 3.1.3 Semantic Implications of Coordination 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Coordination involves the linking of units of equal status through the use of coordinating conjunctions .Therefore the notion of linking parts of a sentence is central to a discussion of coordination.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •construct well coordinated sentences; •differentiate between coordination and subordination; and •identify the semantic restrictions of coordination by and, or and but.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Coordination Coordination is often realised in English through the use of coordinators.
Coordinators, according to Strang (1970, p.194), are link words between equivalent structures like members of the same form classes, phrases, clauses or even sentences.
The term coordination is used in cases where coordinating conjunctions are present or absent.
These are the two cases described by Quirk and Greenbaum (1975, p. 253) as syndetic and asyndetic coordination.
The following sentences exemplify cases of syndetic (when there is a coordinating conjunction) and asyndetic coordination (where there is no coordinating conjunction) 45ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Slowly but steadily she got to the top of her career.
Slowly, steadily, she got to the top of her career.
The common coordinators are: and, or, but, for, while (when it means the same as but).
The others are: rather, sooner than, nor (after a negative construction) as well as the correlatives both.. and, either..or, not only…but also, neither… nor.
The following are examples of coordination of phrases and clauses with and without ellipsis of Subject or Predicate: David likes teaching but his brother prefers business.
I wonder whether he has ever tried anything else.
You can either write or type your assignment Janet ate a loaf of bread and drank many cups of tea.
She works in an office and her husband in a school.
Ekaete is intelligent but playful.
Coordination is often contrasted with subordination.
Subordination involves the linking of units like coordination but with subordination one of the units is subordinated to the other.
Indicators of subordination are referred to as subordinating conjunctions.
When two adjectives modify a noun, for instance, they can be coordinated or not as in the example 1.
This is her first and major outing, The adjectives are coordinated in the above example, but if the same sentence is written as follows: 1a.
This is her first major outing the two parts are not coordinated.
First modifies major which in turn modifies outing.
There are similar such relationships in both coordination and subordination.
In the two examples which follow, two clauses are coordinated in the first case and subordinated in the second: 2.
They woke up early, but they were late.
3.
Although they woke up early, they were late.
It is clear that the parts of the first sentence are independent and are linked by but whereas the parts of the second sentence are not of equal rank.
The first clause is dependent on the second but the point of interest is that the two clauses have been linked.
The same semantic relationship can be suggested by a conjunct such as yet as in the following: 4.
They woke up early yet they arrived late.
46ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Sentence No 4 is an asyndetic coordination which can become syndetic with the addition of a coordinating conjunction like but as in: 4a.
They woke up early but yet, they failed SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Distinguish between coordination and subordination.
3.1.1 Clausal Coordination There are three main coordinators.
These are: and, or, but.
And, or are the central coordinators.
But differs from them in some respects.
This will be discussed later.
The clause coordinators often occur in initial positions in the clause.
Examine the following: 5.
Mercy sings very well and her brother plays the guitar.
This is generally the case with conjunctions and some conjuncts (particularly yet and so).
However most conjuncts come later in the clause as in: 6.
Mercy sings very well; her brother, however, plays the piano Note that the conjunctions though, as, and that are exceptions to this rule.
They appear non-initially in some contexts as in the following: 7.
Though she is jobless, she is very generous 7a.
Jobless though she is, she is very generous.
Although unlike though is an exception.
It does not change its position.
Thus the second alternative-17a is not allowed 8.
Although she is jobless, she is very generous.
8a.
*Jobless although she is, she is very generous Coordinated clauses which begin with a coordinator are fixed and cannot be in front of the preceding clause without producing unacceptable sentences.
For example, the coordinated clause in the following sentence cannot come in front of the preceding clause: They are living in Lagos or they are spending their holidays there.
9a* Or they are spending their holidays there, they are living in Lagos.
To avoid repetition, coordinators allow ellipsis of the clauses they introduce if the subject is the same as that of the linked clause as in: 47ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 10.
I shall visit you tomorrow or (I) may phone you in the evening.
This does not however apply to other conjunctions (those that are not coordinating conjunctions) including for and or to conjuncts except yet, so, or then.
11.
* He did not approve of the plan for was uncooperative.
12.
They did not approve of the plan yet (they) said nothing.
It is important to note that a subordinator does not allow ellipsis even when the clause is linked by a coordinator.
Examine the following: 13.
* I did not give him the money because he looked suspicious and because had no bag with him.
If the second subordinator is removed the ellipsis is normal as in: 13a.
I did not give him the money because he looked suspicious and had no bag with him.
Conjuncts which normally do not allow ellipsis do so if they are preceded by a coordinator.
Examine the following: 14.
She slept late nevertheless had a lot of work to do 14a.
She slept late, but nevertheless, (she) had work to do The coordinators and, or can also link subordinate clauses as in the following cases: 15.
I wonder whether we should send him a congratulatory message on his recent appointment or whether we should pay him a visit.
Such linking is not possible with conjuncts or for other conjunctions except but which is only restricted to linking a maximum of two clauses and even so can link only certain types of subordinate clauses 16.
She said that she would attend the function but that she would be late.
Unlike but, and the subordinators and conjuncts and and or can link more than two clauses and all except the last instance of these conjunctions is mandatory.
Examine the following: 17.
All staff were invited, they were expected to accept the invitation and find their way to the venue of the function.
17a All staff were invited and they were expected to accept the invitation and find their way to the venue of the function.
48ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 3.1.2 Phrasal Coordination And and or are also the main coordinators for phrasal coordination.
But is used only to link adjectival clauses and adverbial phrases.
18.
… an extremely long but very interesting letter.
18a.
… She spoke to him politely but firmly.
It must be noted that when phrases are joined by and and or there is no ellipsis of the rest of the clause as is the case when the verb phrases or parts of them are directly linked.
For instance in: 19.
Felicia and her friend sang in the school choir.
Sentence No.19 is not regarded as elliptical because what it means is that Felicia sang in the school choir and her friend also sang in the school choir.
The two sentences can be regarded as synonymous.
Felicia and her friend are regarded as a coordinated noun phrase functioning as the subject of the sentence.
The two nouns can be replaced by the girls or they.
This type of coordination is phrasal coordination.
Phrases that can be coordinated include: Noun phrases: Mary and Agnes, novels and plays,; There may be ellipsis of the head within the noun phrase 20.
New and old were asked to pay their fees.
(the ellipsis for old students and new students) Coordination also occurs with units other than noun phrase.
These include Prepositional Phrases: 21.
The thief ran down the street and into the bush.
Adverbials and Dependent Clauses: 22.
You can lift the load gradually or by using a truck.
23.
She can come this evening or early in the morning.
Adjectives can be coordinated when they are predicative: 24.
He is young and handsome Adjectives can also be coordinated when they are attributive: 49ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 25.
His fluent and intelligent speech impressed listeners.
It must be noted that ellipsis can occur in all three cases where the first or second of the phrases is omitted: examine the following; 26.
I shall see him when (he wishes) and where he wishes.
27.
She will come before it gets dark or after (it gets dark).
28.
I am willing (to tell her the truth) but afraid to tell the truth.
There are also some stereotyped and institutionalized coordinated expressions such as: If and when, as and when, and unless and until.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Use the above coordinated phrases in your own sentences.
3.1.3 Semantic Implications of Coordination There are certain semantic implications of coordination by and, or, but.
And suggests relationships between the clauses which suggest chronology through comment to consequence and contrast.
Let us illustrate this with some examples: 29.
He heard gunshots and (therefore) he called for help (consequence) 30.
She washed the clothes and (then) she ironed them (chronology) 31.
Tony is cowardly and his brother is a courageous man (contrast) Note that and can be replaced by but in the last example.
32.
Nobody likes Susan – and that is not surprising (Comment) 33.
She studied very hard and yet she failed.
(element of surprise ) Note that and can also be replaced by but in the last example.
34.
Tell me the truth and I will give you protection (condition).
35.
She wears short hair and (also) she wears a mild perfume.
(addition) Or usually expresses the idea that only one of the possibilities obtain.
Examine the following: 36.
You can sleep on the bed or on the couch, or you can go to a hotel.
50ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Sometimes or is regarded as inclusive, allowing the combination of alternatives, and the third alternative can be included as a third clause: 37.
They are free to interview individuals or ask for memoranda or do both.
At other times, the alternative expressed by or may be a restatement or correction of what is said as in the following examples: 38.
They entertained visitors all day or at least they appeared to be doing so.
39.
Okon has just become a jambite, or, in other words, he is in his first year in a university.
Also, or may suggest a negative condition as in the following: 40.
Pay your rent regularly or you quit.
No 40 can be paraphrased as: Pay your rent regularly.
If you do not, you quit.
But normally suggests a contrast.
The contrast may be because what is said in the second part in unexpected judging from what is said in the first part, or the contrast may be a restatement in positive terms of what was said or implied negatively in the first part.
Examine the following: 41.
She did not need a servant but accepted the orphan.
42.
Peter did not waste his money on trivialities but saved every bit of it.
Note also that yet can replace but in No.41 while on the contrary can be used instead of but in No.42 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Summarise the semantic implications of and, but, and or.
4.0 CONCLUSION Coordination differs from subordination in that the former describes the linking of two equivalent structures.
Well coordinated sentence constructions are achieved by distinguishing between equivalent and subordinating structures to be linked and using appropriate coordinators.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit the main points that have been made are: 51ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •Coordination involves the linking of units of equal status through the use of coordinating conjunctions.
•Coordinating conjunctions are link words between equivalent structures.
•Coordination is often contrasted with subordination.
•Subordination also involves the linking of units but with subordination one of the units is subordinated to the other.
•Words, clauses and phrases can be coordinated.
•There are three main coordinators; these are: and, or, but.
•There are semantic implications of coordination by and, but and or.
•And suggests relationships which range from chronology through consequence to addition.
•Or suggests that only one of the possibilities obtain.
•But suggests contrast.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Distinguish between coordination and subordination.
1.
Coordination involves the linking of units of equal status through the use of coordinating conjunctions.
Coordination is often realised in English through the use of coordinators as well as the correlatives both..and, either..or, not only…but also, neither… 2.
Coordination is often contrasted with subordination.
Subordination involves the linking of units like coordination but with subordination one of the units is subordinated to the other.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Use the above coordinated phrases: If and when, as and when, and unless and until in sentences: Candidates should make their own sentences using the coordinated phrases in italics.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Summarise the semantic implications of and, but, and or.
There are semantic implications of coordination by and, but and or.
And suggests relationships which range from chronology through consequence to addition.
Or suggests that only one of the possibilities obtain.
But suggests contrast 52ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the term coordination and discuss its types.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eka, D. (1996).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of English.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Eka, D. (ed) (1993).
Fundamentals of Communication in English.
Calabar: BON Universal Ltd Quirk, P. and Greenbaum, S. (1975).
A University Grammar of English.
London: Longman.
Strang, B.H.M (1970).
Modern English Structure (2nd ed.).
London: Edward Arnold.
Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
(2004).
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. UNIT 6 PUNCTUATION This unit deals with punctuation.
In this unit, we shall review the major types of punctuation marks commonly used in sentence construction.
The unit is arranged as follows: 53ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 End Punctuations 3.1.1 The Full Stop 3.1.2 The Question Mark 3.1.3 The Exclamation Mark 3.2 Internal Punctuation 3.2.1 The Comma 3.2.2 The Semi Colon 3.2.3 The Colon 3.3 Other Punctuations 3.3.1 Capital Letters 3.3.2 Parenthesis 3.3.3 The Apostrophe 3.3.4 Quotation Marks 3.3.5 Brackets 3.3.6 The Dash 3.3.7 The Hyphen 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In sentence construction, it is important to indicate that one sentence has ended and another is about to start or that it is time to break either for a short time or because a certain quotation, list or another part of the sentence is about to follow.
At other times punctuations signal abbreviations, proper nouns or omissions of certain letters.
Some sentences require one type of punctuation only while others require more than one.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to 54ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •identify the end punctuations; •use end punctuations appropriately in sentence constructions; •identify the internal punctuations; and •use internal punctuations appropriately in sentence constructions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 End Punctuations These are punctuation marks which come at the end of sentences.
They include the full stop or period, the question mark and the exclamation mark.
The use of one of these excludes the use of the others.
3.1.1 The Full Stop or Period (.)
The full stop is used to mark the end of a declarative sentence or an imperative sentence that issues its commands mildly as in the following: 1.
In 1960, Nigeria became independent.
2.
Give us this day our daily bread.
To give a declarative or imperative sentence the force of an exclamatory sentence an exclamation mark can be used.
Examine the following sentences: 3.
I was so shocked that I stood motionless!
4.
Bring the ladder quickly!
After a request, it is preferable to use a full-stop rather than a question mark: 5.
May I have your pen, please.
(request) 6.
Will you send me any additional information you may have.
(request) The full stop is also used after abbreviations and initials: 7.
Dr., Mr., Mrs., A.M., P.M, Ph.D, U.S.A.
When however the abbreviation includes the last letter of the word the full stop is usually omitted.
Note however that when a sentence ends with an abbreviation, one full- stop is sufficient for both the sentence and the abbreviation: 8.
Cash the cheque at All States Trust Bank Plc.
55ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II The full-stop is also used to signal the omission of words in a quoted passage.
When used in this way the three dots used together are referred to as ellipsis as in the following 9.
‘Intonation is used to describe … the way the voice rises and falls in speech” (Udofot and Eshiett, 1996, p. 44).
If the omission (ellipsis) occurs at the end of a quoted passage, it is more conventional to use four dots.
10.
To translate is to change into another language ….
3.1.2 The Question Mark (?)
The question mark is used at the end of an interrogative sentence which asks direct questions as in the following: 11.
Why did you beat that child?
12.
How are you?
13.
Do you like rice?
If a sentence contains more than one question, the question mark may be used after each separate part of a sentence.
Also, more than one question mark may be used in a single sentence to show the close-linked nature of the5 questions or to emphasise each of the separate questions.
14.
Will Amate marry George?
Or will Uduak?
15.
Are we sure of his honesty?
His commitment?
His willingness?
Note however that if the question is not complete until the end of the sentence the question mark should be placed at the end only.
16.
Will the examination take place today, tomorrow or the next?
When only part of the sentence is a question, the question is usually introduced by a comma or colon; a semicolon or dash may also be used.
17.
May I ask, what is your problem?
17a.
This is my problem: what can I do to prevent the rain from falling?
17b.
We would like to know, what date will you arrive?
Will you like a room to be reserved for you?
And, how long do you intend to stay?
A question mark can also be used to show uncertainty or to suggest humorous intentions.
Examine the following.
56ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 18.
Professor Ekpedeme was born in 1950 (?)
19.
His requests (?)
are too many.
Note that the question mark should not be used (a) at the end of an indirect question.
Examine the following example: 20.
I demand to know why children should be made to be bread winners through hawking.
(b) to mark the end of a polite or formal question.
21.
Could you send your reply at your earliest convenience.
3.1.3 The Exclamation Mark (!)
The exclamation mark is used at the end of an exclamatory sentence, phrase or clause.
Examine the following: 22.
How have the mighty fallen!
23.
God forbid!
24.
What a surprise!
Note that like the question mark, the exclamation mark can be used within the sentence to show strong feeling; that is after an interjection as in the following examples: 25.
Good God!
She is dead!
26.
Father!
Father!
27.
Oh!
I haven’t heard that before!
The exclamation mark should not be used after mild exclamations as in 28.
Well, I have survived it.
The exclamation mark is also used after statements which are commands or those that imply immediate action.
29.
Return the form today!
Do not delay!
30.
Hurry!
Pay your subscription today!
The exclamatory mark can also be used after an interrogative sentence that is intended to be exclamatory.
57ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 31.
Oh!
Why should she say that!
32.
But can a human being be trusted!
Sometimes, an exclamation mark is used for emphasis as in the following: 33.
Remember the deadline of May 2nd!
34.
Your admission lapses irrevocably after February 28th, 2008!
Some writers use the exclamation mark to indicate an afterthought or ironical statements e.g.
34a.
I like toads!
34b.
Let’s go to hell!
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Insert the proper end punctuation at the end of each of the following: 1.
Never I would rather resign 2.
Resign you will 3.
Unwana asked why her brothers had gone out.
4.
Well done 5.
May I suggest that you give us the money 6.
Oh Nigeria my dear native land 7.
He screamed angrily that he did not welcome opposition 8.
Where are the children 9.
Prof I Udofot 10.
NEPA 3.2 Internal Punctuation Internal punctuation refers to punctuation marks used within the sentence to point out that the flow of thought in the sentence is interrupted.
They warn the reader to slow down because something is about to be added to or subtracted from the sentence.
3.2.1 The Comma (,) The comma separates sentence elements.
It is the most frequently used, the least emphatic and the most abused of the internal punctuation marks.
The comma is used to separate words, phrases or clauses in a series when there are more than three items: 35.
He went to the market to buy clothes, food, books and some fruits.
58ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 36.
On weekends, I do my shopping, wash my clothes, iron them and then cook a big pot of soup.
It is conventional to omit the comma before and, or connecting the last two items of the series.
The comma also separates two independent clauses joined by a co-ordinating conjunction such as and, but, or, nor, for, so, yet, either … or, neither … nor.
37.
I had thought that snails were tasty, but I found that they were not.
If the independent clauses are short and closely related, the comma should be omitted.
38.
John likes Mary and Mary likes him.
The comma is also used after an adverbial subordinate when the subordinate clause begins the sentence.
39.
When I finish my education, I will work in Abuja.
Note that when the dependent clause does not begin the sentence, the comma is unnecessary.
40.
I will work in Abuja when I finish my education.
When a phrase also begins the sentence, a comma is used to separate it from the rest of the sentence.
41.
The strike having been called off, we went back to work.
If however the subject of the sentence is an infinitive, the subject is not separated from the rest of the sentence.
42.
To pass the examination was her target When two adjectives modify a noun, a comma is used to separate them; 43.
She is a clever, well-behaved girl.
Note that if the comma cannot be replaced by ‘and’ in the sentence it is not in order.
Examine the following: 44.
She is a clever and well behaved girl.
But not: 45.
He is a brave military man.
59ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II In the above sentence, a comma cannot be used between brave and military because that comma cannot be replaced by ‘and’ as in 46.
He is a brave and military man (unacceptable) In writing the date, the comma separates the year from other items as in 31st December, 1950.
A comma is also used to separate the parts of geographical names, addresses, districts etc.
47.
27 Idak Okpo Street, Uyo, Akwa Ibom State, Nigeria.
A comma is often used after the salutation and complimentary close of a letter.
48.
Dear Madam, Yours sincerely, Dear Sir, Yours faithfully.
The comma is also used to separate elements which break the continuity of a sentence from the rest of the sentence.
These include transitional words, interjections, sentence modifiers, words, phrases and clauses in apposition.
49.
Usually, she comes to work early.
50.
Somebody, I guess, has to do it.
51.
Mr. Okon, the English teacher, is very dutiful.
52.
His position, nevertheless, looks shaky.
A comma should not be used to separate the subject or complement from the verb unless there are other elements which break the continuity of the sentence.
53.
Life, is the art of learning from one’s mistakes (wrong) 53a.
Life is the art of learning from one’s mistakes.
The comma should also not be used between two independent clauses unless a co-ordinating conjunction is also used.
The use of the comma between two independent clauses without a co-ordinating conjunction is called the ‘comma fault’ (Bolander and Semmelmeyer, 1984, p. 279) The following examples illustrate the comma fault.
54.
The student does not take corrections, he continues to make mistakes (comma fault).
55.
The student does not take corrections so he continues to make mistakes (correct) 60ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II A comma should also not be used when a full stop or any other punctuation mark should be used.
Many students make the mistake of overworking the comma and they commit an error known as the ‘comma splice’.
The following passage shows a wrong use of the comma where other punctuation marks should be used.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Replace the comma with the proper punctuation marks.
In our house scolding was the order of the day, my father scolded everyone, and my mother scolded the children all except the eldest, and there was a good reason for the exception, the boy was hardly ever at home, when he did turn up, there was no question of being cross with him, one harsh word and he will vanish again.
(Adapted from Mongo Beti’s Mission to Kala, p. 165) 3.2.2 The Semicolon (;) The semicolon is used to indicate a stronger break than the comma.
It shows a stronger separation between the parts of a sentence but not as strong as the full-stop.
It is not advisable to use many semicolons in sentence construction because it is generally too formal and suggests that one is writing sentences that are too long.
Frequent use of the semicolon results in very involved sentences that may break down if not well controlled.
The semicolon is often used to separate two independent clauses which are closely connected in meaning or two independent clauses which are joined by transitional words or phrases, NOT a coordinating conjunction.
Observe the following examples: 56.
The Vice Chancellor did not accept the committee’s report as presented; he suggested some amendment (sentence closely connected in meaning).
57.
Mr. Essien’s car broke down; consequently, he was late for work.
Note that the use of the semicolon in this way remedies the comma fault mentioned above.
Note also the use of the comma after the transitional word in Sentence No.
58.
The following are some of the common transitional words and phrases: however thus on the other hand furthermore meanwhile that is 61ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II nevertheless moreover at least consequently namely in addition again finally hence as a result therefore in fact possibly in short In clauses or phrases already containing commas, the semicolon is used as a stronger break between such clauses.
58.
At the End-of-term Assembly, Eme Okon, the school sports captain, was elected the school prefect; Ofonmbuk Enoidem, my niece, was elected labour prefect and Glory Akpan, an S.S.2 student, was elected timekeeper.
The semicolon is also often used after words introducing explanations, enumerations or a list in a sentence (that is words like for example, that is, for instance, and namely).
This usage is shown in the following examples: 59.
He is a surgeon; that is a doctor who performs operations.
60.
The school vest is available in four colours; namely, blue, red, green and white.
Note that the semicolon should not be used in the following cases: (a) after the salutation or complimentary close of a letter (particularly an informal letter) Dear Rose, NOT Dear Rose; Yours sincerely, NOT Yours sincerely; (b) after subordinate clauses where a comma should be used: Having seen that the man was dying, the thieves stopped beating him NOT Having seen that the man was dying; the thieves stopped beating him.
3.2.3 The Colon (:) The colon signals the strongest possible break within the sentence.
It indicates that a statement, an explanation or a list is about to follow.
It is used in the following situation: (a) To introduce a list as in the following example: 61.
There are three kinds of skirts: the mini, the midi and the maxi.
62ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 62.
His duties are as follows: receiving mails, filing papers and duplicating examinations.
Note that when the list is in a column form, the first letter of each item should be capitalised as in the following.
63.
Learn how to use the following machines: i. Typewriter ii.
Duplicating machine iii.
Calculator When, however, the items in a list are included in a sentence the first letter of each item is not capitalised as in the example below: 64.
Learn how to use the following machines: typewriter, duplicating machine and calculator.
(b) If a sentence explains, restates, amplifies or contrasts the sentence that precedes it, a colon is used after the first sentence, as in the following example: 65.
Uko is very happy: he has just gained admission into a university.
(c) A colon is often used to stress a word, a phrase or clause that follows: 66.
Educated though he is, he is unduly influenced by a single factor: superstition.
(d) A colon is also used to introduce a long or formal quotation as in the following.
67.
The school principal said: “………………………………..” (e) The colon also divides parts of references, titles, formulae and numerals as in the following: 68.
I was assigned to read chapter 12: Section 19.
69.
The time is 10:45 am.
3.3 Other Punctuations 3.3.1 Capital Letters 63ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Capital letters are used at the beginning of a sentence unless the sentence follows a semicolon or a colon.
70.
This is the car that my father gave me.
But 71.
I love this car; it was my father’s last gift to me.
Capital letters are also used for proper names as in the following.
72.
Inyang, Bassey, University of Uyo, Lake Chad, Nigeria, Africa.
Capital letters are used at the beginning of titles as in 73.
The Okuku of Afaha UdoEyop The Obong of Calabar The Emir of Fika The Oba of Benin Capital letters are also used for the pronoun I and the interjection O as in: 74a.
I work with her always.
74b.
Save us O Lord!
Some writers choose to capitalize pronouns of deities especially God e.g.
74c.
God knows our hearts and He provides our needs.
Capital letters are also used in writing titles e.g.
Ph.D., B.A., M.A., OFR.
Some important words in headings start with capitals e.g.
Application for Employment as a Clerk.
In writing a long title, capital letters begin each word other than the structural words as in 75.
The Beautiful Ones are not yet Born is written by Ayi Kwei Armah.
3.3.2 Parentheses ( ) Parentheses are used in pairs to set off words, phrases, clauses which are explanatory or which are translations or comments.
Usually, materials in parentheses are independent constructions; the sentence can do without them but they give added explanation when included in the sentence.
Observe the use of parentheses in the following: 64ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 76.
A sentence consists of a subject (a nominal group), a predicate (a verbal group) and in most cases one or more complements (which may be nominal, adjectival or adverbial).
77.
Ekpedeme (my daughter’s roommate) is coming to spend the night in our house.
Note that when you open a bracket (used for parenthesis) you have to close it.
When a symbol, letter or number is used in apposition it is placed within parentheses as in: 78.
He paid twenty thousand naira (N20,000.00) for the hall.
79.
The businessman decorated his letterhead with the naira (N) symbol.
When parentheses are used with other punctuation marks, the main part of the sentence should be punctuated as if the portion in parentheses is not there.
If a punctuation mark applies to the whole sentence and not just to the portion in parentheses it should come after the second parenthesis.
Examine the following: 80.
He presented guidelines for evaluation of the seminar (undergraduate and postgraduate), but the guidelines were ignored by the examiners.
If the punctuation mark applies only to the material in parentheses it is placed inside the second parenthesis as in 81.
A knowledge of sentence construction will help you in writing good sentences.
(See module 1 of this course book.)
3.3.3 The Apostrophe (’) The apostrophe is used with nouns to show possession, as in: 82.
This is Mary’s dress.
(singular) 83.
These are the boys’ books (plural) Note that the apostrophe comes before‘s’ in singular nouns and after‘s’ in plural nouns as in examples 82 and 83 above.
Note that the apostrophe is not used in possessive pronouns as in: 84.
Ours, yours, hers, its, theirs NOT Our’s, your’s, her’s, it’s, their’s 65ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II The apostrophe is also used to show contracted forms indicating the omission of one or more letters as in the following contracted forms: 85.
I’m I’ve I’ll You’re You’ve You’d He’s He’d He’ll Note that contracted forms are not acceptable in formal writing except in informal letters and in quoting direct speech.
3.3.4.
Quotation Marks “ ” Quotation marks are used singly or doubly to enclose direct quotations.
It is important to be consistent when using quotation marks; if you start with a single quotation mark finish with that, and if you begin with double quotation marks, also end with those.
As a matter of convention, quotation marks are used for (a) direct speech as in 86.
The teacher said: “Sit down, pupils.” 87.
“Where”, she asked, “are you taking me?” Note that the first word of a direct quotation begins with a capital letter as in No.
86 above.
The first word in the second part of an interrupted quotation is however not captalised as in No.
87.
(b) Titles of magazines, articles, chapters of books, names of songs, titles of poems and other titles are enclosed within quotation marks: 88.
The poem “Piano and Drums” was written by Gabriel Okara.
89.
The musician sang “Gone with the wind” at the funeral.
Note that titles of books are underlined not enclosed within quotation marks and when printed or typeset on computer a title is italicised rather than underlined.
(c) Quotation marks are also used to enclose words used as examples in a sentence as in.
90.
“Patricia” is a proper noun but “sister” is not.
(d) Quotation marks enclose words, phrases or sentences referred to in a sentence, as in the following: 66ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 91.
The word “junction” is often mispronounced by Ibibio learners of English.
92.
The saying “a stitch in time saves nine” is a good warning to act fast.
A quotation which occurs within a quotation is enclosed within single quotation marks.
Note that this is for consistency.
If however single quotation marks were used by the writer the double quotation marks are advisable for quotation within quotations.
Examine the following.
93.
“Is ‘Patricia’ a proper noun?” asked the teacher.
94.
The angry mother said, “You must get all these ‘hand-me-downs’ out of the bedroom immediately”.
Points to Note (a) If several paragraphs are quoted, quotation marks should be placed at the beginning of the first paragraph and at the end of the last paragraph only.
(b) Quotations of more than three lines are usually indented and quotation marks are not used with indentation.
(c) The full stop and the comma are always placed before ending quotation marks but if a complete sentence is quoted, the closing quotation marks are placed after the final stop as in the following: 95.
She shouted, “they do not live here.” 96.
Prof. Eka said, “You will go on leave next month”.
(d) The question mark and the exclamation mark are placed after the ending quotation marks when they refer to the whole sentence as in 97.
Did he say “You will go on leave next month”?
When the question mark or the exclamation mark refers only to the quoted material, it is placed before the ending quotation marks.
98.
She asked, “When will I go on leave?” 99.
I heard her scream, “Alas, she is dead!” (e) The semicolon and colon follow the ending quotation marks if they are not part of the quoted material as in the following: 100.
He said, “You will go on leave next week”: consequently, I started saving for a holiday.
67ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 3.3.5 Brackets [ ] Brackets are normally used in pairs to enclose material added by someone other than the writer of the passage.
These include editorial additions and comments.
101.
The activities of the cultural week [singing, dancing, drama and lectures] went on the whole week.
102.
The playwright [Dr. Chris Egharevba] was present at the first public presentation of his play.
Brackets are also used within parentheses to enclose parenthetical matter within parentheses.
103.
The drugs you ordered (including maloxine, ampicillin, omega H3 [Norvasc ]) were delivered at your office.
Note that many writers use brackets when they mean to be using parentheses or use them interchangeably.
They are, however, not the same.
Brackets are seldom used in business or social writing.
They are generally found in printed material of a technical or scholarly nature.
For your everyday writing you need to use the parenthesis more often.
3.3.6 The Dash ( ) The dash is used to signal an abrupt change of ideas.
It should be used sparingly in business and social writing such as letters, reports, minutes as it sometimes suggests that the writer is vacillating and is not sure of what to say or what punctuation mark to use.
The dash signals a sudden change of thought or an after thought added to the end of a sentence.
Examine the following: 104.
I was sure that the dean – indeed all the members of the faculty Appointments and Promotions Committee wanted him to be appointed.
105.
I shall do the shopping, take care of decoration – give you every help I can.
Sometimes the dash is used to signal a word or phrase which is repeated for emphasis as in the following: 106.
She was invited for the Opening Ceremony – the Opening Ceremony only – not for the cocktail as well.
Note that commas, dashes and parentheses – anyone of them – may be used to signal additional material.
There are no hard and fast rules that 68ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II restrict the use of the one or the other.
In general, when punctuating materials that are additional in a sentence it is conventional to use dashes for visual effect, the commas if the material is short and parentheses if the material is long.
3.3.7 The Hyphen (-) This applies mostly in spelling of some compound words (hair-dresser, peace-loving, know-it-all) and setting off some prefixes (ex-officio, anti- crime, non-Biblical).
Hyphens are also used in syllabicating polysyllabic words (or-ga-ni-sa- tion, re-gain, le-tter, gra-na-ry).
This should be particularly observed in breaking up words at the end of lines.
Monosyllabic words must not be syllabicated.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Punctuate the following and make appropriate changes in form.
1.
Slow men at work 2. mobil producing nigeria limited 3. mr udo said i am travelling by akwa ibom transport to Lagos 4.
27 idak okpo street uyo akwa ibom state dear ekaette i am happy to tell you that i have improved my english tremendously these last months you see our group lecturer made it compulsory for us to read one novel a month and in the last one month i have read six novels i cannot tell you how much i have learnt from this exercise a trial will convince you yours sincerely esther.
4.0 CONCLUSION Incorrect punctuation of English sentences often results in conveying wrong meaning or no meaning at all.
To achieve structurally correct English sentences, you must learn to use punctuation marks appropriately.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit the following points have been made: •Punctuations indicate that one sentence has ended and another is about to start or that it is time to break either for a short time or because a certain quotation, list or another part of the sentence is about to follow.
69ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •Punctuations also signal abbreviations, proper nouns or omissions of certain letters.
•End punctuation marks come at the end of sentences.
•They include the full stop or period, the question mark and the exclamation mark.
•The use of one of these excludes the use of the others.
•Internal punctuation refers to punctuation marks used within the sentence to point out that the flow of thought in the sentence is interrupted.
•Internal punctuations include: the comma, the semi-colon, the colon.
•Other punctuations include quotation marks, the apostrophe, the brackets, the dash, parentheses and the hyphen: these can occur within or at the end of sentences.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Insert the proper end punctuation at the end of each of the following: 1.
Never!
I would rather resign!
2.
Resign you will.
3.
Unwana asked why her brothers had gone out.
4.
Well done!
5.
May I suggest that you give us the money.
6.
Oh Nigeria my dear native land!
7.
He screamed angrily that he did not welcome opposition.
8.
Where are the children?
9.
Prof.
I. Udofot 10.
N.E.P.A ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Replace the comma with the proper punctuation marks.
In our house, scolding was the order of the day.
My father scolded everyone and my mother scolded the children; all except the eldest, and there was a good reason for the exception.
The boy was hardly ever at home.
When he did turn up, there was no question of being cross with him.One harsh word and he will vanish again.
(Adapted from Mongo Beti’s Mission to Kala, p. 165) ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Punctuate the following 1.
Slow, men at work.
2.
Mobil Producing Nigeria Limited 70ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 3.
Mr. Udo said: “I am Travelling by Akwa Ibom Transport to Lagos”.
4.
27 Idak Okpo Street, Uyo, Akwa Ibom State.
Dear Ekaette, I am happy to tell you that I have improved my English tremendously these last months.
You see, our group lecturer made it compulsory for us to read one novel a month; and in the last one month, I have read six novels.
I cannot tell you how much I have learnt from this exercise.
A trial will convince you.
Yours sincerely, Esther.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Punctuate the following passage etim sipped his cup of tea it was the type he liked strong without milk or sugar with an effort of will jumped up and walked to the door and standing on the veranda he took seven deep breaths this done daily he believed would clear stale air from his lungs and enable him to take in fresh air which would keep him healthy and prevent any lung infection was this true he believed firmly he walked round his backyard and came into his neat modern bathroom and took a cool shower which he believed was also necessary for good health.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eka, D. (1996).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of the English English.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Semmelmeyer, M. and Bolander, D. (1984).
Instant English Handbook.
Illinois: Career Publishing Inc. 71ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
(2004).
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. MODULE 2 THE ENGLISH VERB Unit 1 Tense and Aspect Unit 2 Voice and Mood Unit 3 Modal Auxiliaries Unit 4 Non - Finite and Emphatic Forms 72ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT1 TENSE AND ASPECT This unit deals with tense and aspect of verbs.
The verb is the most important word in the sentence because more constructions depend upon the verb than any other part of speech.
Verbs have properties which other parts of speech do not have.
One of such properties which belong exclusively to verbs is tense.
Aspect is related to tense because the verb form also changes to show aspect.
This explains why we choose to look at tense and aspect together since they both have to do with changes in verb forms to show time in the case of tense and manner of perception in the case of aspect.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Tense 3.1.1 The Simple Tenses 3.1.2 The Perfect Tenses 3.2 Aspect 3.3 Progressive Aspect 3.4 Perfective Aspect 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Time is a universal non linguistic concept with three divisions: present, past and future.
Time is not language specific.
Whatever the language you speak, you must relate an event to the time of occurrence to be understood.
Tense is used to relate an event or happening expressed by the verb to a time scale in the present or past.
According to Eka (1996) tense refers to changes in the form of the verb to correspond with our own concept of time (p.97).
Aspect on the other hand, refers to the way the action of the verb is perceived; whether it is in progress or is completed at the moment of speaking.
Tense and aspect are therefore related and the expression of time, present or past, cannot be considered separately from aspect.
The expression of future time is also connected to tense, aspect and mood.
Mood relates the action of the verb to such conditions as certainty, obligation, necessity, possibility and futurity.
(See NCE/DLS Course Book on English Language.
The rest of the discussion in this unit shall be based on Module 2, Unit 4.
See also Semmelmeyer and Bolander, 1984, Chapter 13).
73ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •state the relationship between tense and time •identify the relationship between tense and aspect •express yourself appropriately using the present/past tenses and the progressive/perfective aspect •use the various future time expressions •express the future with the present tense, the past with the present tense and the present with the past tense.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Tense Tense is a property of the verb.
In grammar tense refers to the time an action took place or the time of the state or condition.
Every verb has certain forms which show the time the action occurred.
Aspect, as already explained, refers to how the action of the verb is perceived or regarded; for instance whether the action is in progress at the moment of speaking or completed.
Tense and aspect often interrelate to communicate meaning.
In this unit, the three basic forms of the verb: the present tense, past tense and the past participle with which other tenses can be built are examined.
The expression of other tenses and aspect, for instance, the future in the present, the present in the past and the progressive and perfective aspects in the present and past are also dealt with in this unit.
3.1.1 The Simple Tenses Verbs have six tenses which show differences in the time of action or the time of the state of being: 1.
I see a car in the garage.
2.
I saw a car in the garage yesterday.
3.
I shall see a number of cars on the road when I go to work.
The above three sentences do not mean the same.
The difference in meaning depends largely on the verb form that is used to show the time of the action.
The first sentence means that the action expressed by the verb see is going on at the moment of speaking.
The second sentence shows that the action expressed by the verb saw took place at some time in the past (yesterday).
The third sentence means that the action expressed by the verb shall see will take place at some time in the future.
74ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II The verbs used in Sentences 1-3 are forms of the verb see.
The form of the verb see used in the first sentence is the form used in the present tense.
It expresses or refers to present time.
The verb saw in the second sentence is the form used to express past time.
The verb shall see is the form used to express future time.
Recall that there are six tenses in English (although some grammarians talk about two or three and assign the perfect tenses to aspect): present and past with future time.
The three tenses which we have just used are called the simple tenses.
The other three are called the perfect tenses.
The only difference between the simple tenses and the perfect tenses is that the perfect tenses include the idea of completion.
The word perfect refers to an action or state of being that is completed at the moment of writing or speaking.
Simple Tenses Perfect Tenses Present tense Present perfect tense Past tense Past perfect tense Future tense Future perfect tense The present tense denotes present time.
It is also used to express habitual actions or an idea that is a universal truth (generally accepted as true).
4.
I speak Ibibio.
(present tense) 5.
Aisha walks to school everyday (habitual action) 6.
The sun rises in the east.
(universal truth) The present tense is often used to express future time.
Examine the following: 7.
The plane leaves in half an hour.
8.
If it rains, the football match will be postponed.
The past tense denotes past time.
The past tense of regular verbs is formed by the addition of d or ed to the present tense form as in dance, danced; want, wanted.
We danced at the birthday party.
(addition of d) 9.
I wanted to collect my transcript.
(addition of ed) Sometimes the d in the present tense form changes to t as in: 10.
The parents built a fence round the school.
(d changes to t) The past tense of irregular verbs is formed in various ways.
Sometimes, the middle vowel changes as in run – ran; begin – began; drive – drove.
75ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II At other times the same form is used in both the present and the past tense as in: cut – cut, put - put; hurt – hurt.
In some cases the past tense can be used to refer to the present as in: 11.
Did you want to see me?
(Do you want...) 12.
I wondered whether you would help me.
(= I wonder) The past can also be expressed in the future.
This is expressed by “will”+ perfect infinitive as in the following: 13.
Next January I will have taught in the university for seventeen years.
14.
By midnight today, she will have been missing for three days The future tense denotes future time.
Note that there is no verb form in English corresponding to the future time as we have the present or past tense form.
Other ways of expressing the future are discussed later.
The future tense is formed by combining the auxiliary- shall and will- with the present tense form of the verb.
It is conventional to use shall with the pronoun I and we and will with the other pronouns: you, he/she/it and they.
15.
We shall visit you tomorrow.
( shall, first person) 16.
He will certainly succeed in his plans.
(will, third person) 17.
You will travel with me to Lagos next week.
(will, second person) Note that to express future time, will is used for first person - singular and plural; and shall for second and third persons - singular and plural.
Sometimes future time can be seen from a view point in the past.
This is expressed with “was going to’ and “was about to”.
Such a meaning often implies that the expected happening did not take place; 18.
The car was about to hit the tree but the driver saved it.
19.
She was going to receive a prize but her name was omitted from the list.
3.1.2 The Perfect Tenses The three perfect tenses are the present perfect tense, the past perfect tense and the future perfect tense.
You can easily identify the perfect tenses if you recall that the word perfect is always used in identifying them.
76ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II The present perfect tense describes an action that is completed at the moment of speaking or writing.
It may also indicate an action that is continuing into the present.
The present perfect tense is formed by combining the auxiliary have or has with past participle of the principal verb.
The auxiliary has is always used in the third person singular.
Examine the following: 20.
I have spoken with the vice chancellor.
(have spoken, first person) 21.
You have worked for your promotion.
(have worked, second person) 22.
The driver has washed the car.
( has worked, third person).
The past perfect tense describes an action that was completed before some definite time in the past.
The past perfect tense is formed by combining the auxiliary had with the past participle of the principal verb as in: had gone, had washed, had spoken, had been, had fainted as in the following examples; 23.
Before the doctor arrived, the accident victim had fainted.
24.
I understood the lecture better after I had read over it.
25.
All copies of the book had been sold before I got to the bookshop.
Note that the past perfect describes an action in the remote past; two actions occurred in the past, the one that happened first is put in the past perfect tense while the one that happened last is put in the simple past tense.
The future perfect tense describes actions that will be completed at some definite time in the future.
The future perfect tense is seldom used in informal speech or writing.
Shall have is used in the first person and will have is used in the second and third persons.
26.
The plane will have left by two o’clock .
27.
Your committee will have completed its work by the next senate meeting.
28.
I shall have crossed the River Niger by noon.
Many errors occur because the writer or speaker is not familiar with the correct forms of the past tense or past participle.
Whenever you are not sure of any of these forms, consult a reliable dictionary.
You will find these forms listed after the verb.
You can also avoid errors if you know the auxiliaries that indicate the tense: Note that shall and will are used for the future tense, have and has are used for the present perfect tense 77ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II had for the past perfect tense, shall have or will have for the future perfect tense.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the following terms: tense and aspect Which are the (a) simple and (b) perfect tenses?
How are the tenses formed?
3.2 Aspect In addition to the forms which show tense English verbs have special verbs to show aspect.
There is the progressive form which shows that the action is in progress at the time indicated by a particular tense.
There is also the perfective aspect which shows that the action indicated by the verb is completed at the time indicated by a particular tense.
3.3 Progressive Aspect The progressive aspect refers to activity or event in progress and therefore suggests that the activity is temporary or of limited duration but that it need not be complete; it is not necessary; He was building a house some years ago.
(I do not know whether he finished it) 29.
I have been writing the minutes this morning.
(but this may not be finished) Also consider the following: The boy was drowning.
(But he was quickly rescued) 30.
When I visited them they were (already) having dinner.
The meaning in the last sentence is that dinner had started before I visited them and that it continued after that time.
When combined with always or any other adverb of high frequency to convey the idea of continuity or repetition: 31.
He is always drinking with a silver cup.
(continuity) 32.
She is always coming late to work.
(continuity) The students are reading their books whenever I see them (repetition) The verbs that take the progressive aspect are verbs that express activity – walk, read, write, run etc, or processes – grow, change, improve etc.
78ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Verbs that suggest momentary events e.g jump, knock, kick, nod - if used with the progressive suggest repetition: 33.
He was knocking/jumping/nodding (suggest repeated movement).
Verbs that do not normally appear in the progressive include Verbs of perception: hear, see, smell, taste, feel.
We often use these verbs with can or could e.g.
34.
I can see you NOT I am seeing you; I can hear the teacher NOT I am hearing the teacher.
Verbs referring to a state of mind or feeling such as believe, adore, desire, dislike, forget, love, hate, hope, imagine, know, suppose, want, remember, mean wish; we say: 35.
I forget/remember his name NOT I am forgetting or remembering his name.
Verbs referring to a relationship or a state of being: belong to, be, concern, cost, depend on, remain, resemble, equal, fit, involve etc.
We say I remain grateful to you NOT I am remaining grateful to you.
The present progressive is used for future happening resulting from a present plan, arrangement or programme: 36.
We are having rice and stew for lunch.
37.
She is travelling by air to Abuja this evening.
The present progressive is common with verbs which refer to transition between two states or positions such as: arrive, come, go, travel, fly, land, start, stop, etc.
38.
The examination is starting at 3.o ‘clock.
39.
The governor is arriving in a few minutes.
The present progressive also indicates temporary habit; 40.
This year we are cooking our meals with cooking gas.
41.
The Vice Chancellor is visiting al departments this year.
The present progressive is also often used to express the immediate future: 42.
The bus is leaving in the next five minutes.
43.
He is leaving for London tomorrow.
3.4 The Perfect Aspect 79ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Four uses of the present perfect aspect can be identified: •State leading up to the present time: 44.
The post has been declared vacant for some time now.
•Indefinite events in a period leading up to the present.
45.
All the children have had measles in the last one year.
•Habit in a period leading up to the present time.
46.
She has visited her mother more regularly this year.
•Past event with results in the present time.
47.
The plane has landed (it is here now).
48.
My car has broken down (it is not yet repaired).
The Perfect Progressive Aspect Has a similar meaning to the present perfect aspect except that the period leading up to the present is of limited duration and does not continue up till the present.
Examine the following: 49.
I have done my homework (already- present perfect) 50.
I have been doing my homework (all evening - I have just finished) 51.
You have been fighting (you have a swollen face and torn clothes) In Nos.
49 and 50 above the activity has continued up to the recent past, not up till the present as with the present perfect progressive aspect which, unlike the perfect, usually suggests that the activity continued up till the present.
Compare: 52.
I have read Twelfth Night.
(I have finished it) 53.
I have been reading Twelfth Night.
(I am still reading it) 3.5 The Past Perfect Aspect The past perfect aspect (simple and progressive) indicates past- in- the past, a time further in the past as seen from a specific point in the past.
54.
The room had been vacant for several months (when I got it) 55.
The doctor had fallen ill and could not perform the operation.
56.
The rain had been falling and the streets were still wet.
When describing two events in the past, one following the other, their relationship can be shown by using the past perfect for the earlier event.
80ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Alternatively, we can use the past tense for both and rely on the conjunction (e.g when, after) to show which one happened first.
Examine the following: 57.
The lecture ended before I arrived (the past tense + conjunction, before) 58.
The lecture had ended when I came in (first action in the past perfect).
59.
The patient had died for three hours (when the doctor arrived).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Supply the correct tense/aspect of the verbs in parenthesis 1 When I arrived they (to go) to school.
2 I (never to see) this woman before.
3 My friend (to travel) to Kaduna next week.
4 The prisoner (to escape) a month ago.
5 My parents (to arrive) in a few minutes 4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of the functions performed by the verb in the English sentence makes it compulsory to master all aspects of the English verb.
Tense and aspect as discussed in this unit account for many of the errors committed by second language learners of English.
5.0 SUMMARY The following main points have been made in this unit: i.
In grammar, tense refers to changes in the form of the verb to correspond with our own concept of time.
Tense indicates the time of occurrence of an action, state or condition.
ii.
Aspect on the other hand, refers to the way the action of the verb is perceived; whether it is in progress or is completed at the moment of speaking.
iii.
Tense and aspect are related and the expression of time, present or past, cannot be considered separately from aspect.
iv.
There are six tenses in English: present, past, future, present perfect, past perfect and future perfect.
v. In addition to the forms which show tense English verbs have special verbs to show aspect.
vi.
There is the progressive form which shows that the action is in progress at the time indicated by a particular tense.
81ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II vii.
There is also the perfective aspect which shows that the action indicated by the verb is completed at the time indicated by a particular tense.
viii.
Present time can be expressed by past tense and future time can also be expressed by the present tense, past tense and progressive aspect.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the following terms: tense and aspect 1.
Tense is used to relate an event or happening expressed by the verb to a time scale in the present or past.
Aspect on the other hand, refers to the way the action of the verb is perceived; whether it is in progress or is completed at the moment of speaking.
Tense and aspect are therefore related and the expression of time present or past, cannot be considered separately from aspect.
2.
Which are the (a) simple and (b) perfect tenses?
(a) The simple tenses are: present, past and future tenses.
(b)The perfect tenses are present perfect, past perfect and future perfect.
How the Tenses are Formed •Perfect Tenses are formed by combining the auxiliary have or has/had/ will or shall have with past participle of the principal verb.
•Simple Tenses •The present tense is formed by using the base form of the verb with the appropriate pronoun.
The morpheme {s} is added to the base form to form the third person singular •The past tense denotes past time.
The past tense of regular verbs is formed by the addition of d or ed to the present tense form as in dance, danced; want, wanted •The future tense is formed by combining the auxiliary- shall and will- with the present tense form of the verb.
It is conventional to use shall with the pronoun I and we and will with the other pronouns: you, he/she/ it and they.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Supply the correct tense/aspect of the verbs in parenthesis 1 When I arrived they(to go) to school.
( had gone) 2 I (never to see) this woman before.
(have never seen) 3 My friend (to travel) to Kaduna next week.
(will travel/travels) 82ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 4 The prisoner (to escape) a month ago.
(escaped) 5 My parents (to arrive) in a few minutes (will arrive/are arriving)) 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Supply the correct tense/aspect of the verb in brackets 1.
The woman said she (to be) in a hurry.
2.
He promised he (to go).
3.
If it (to rain), the match will be postponed.
4.
The sick man groaned so much that I thought he (to die).
5.
I left early because I did not think you (to come).
6.
It was clear that they (not to want) me.
7.
The nurse said she (to call) again the next day.
8.
He asked the teacher why the lecture (to be) so long.
9.
He once said he (never, to drink) beer.
10.
Before the ambulance (to arrive) the accident victim (to collapse).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eka, D. (1996).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of English.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Quirk, P. and Greenbaum, S. (1975).
A University Grammar of English.
London: Longman.
Semmelmeyer, M. and Bolander, D. (1984).
Instant English Handbook.
Illinois: Career Publishing Inc. NCE/DLS (1990).
Coursebook on English Language.
Module Two, Kaduna: National Teachers’ Institute.
Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
(2004).
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. 83ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 2 VOICE AND MOOD This unit deals with voice and mood.
A verb does not only undergo changes to show tense but it also changes in form to show voice.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Active and Passive 3.1.1 Formation of Passive Voice 3.1.2 Use of the Passive 3.2 Mood of Verbs 3.3 Indicative 3.4 Imperative 3.5 Subjunctive Forms of Verbs 3.5.1 Use of the Subjunctive 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Voice is a grammatical term which is used to tell whether the subject is the one performing or receiving the action of the verb.
When the subject is performing the action of the verb, we say that the verb is in the active voice; when the verb suffers the effect of the action performed by the verb, we say that the verb is in the passive voice.
If you keep the terms: performer and sufferer which some writers refer to as doer and receiver (cf Semmelmeyer and Bolander1984,) in mind, you will find it easy to understand what voice means.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •be able to form the passive forms of verbs •differentiate between active and passive forms of verbs •explain the uses of the passive voice •identify the different moods of English verbs •identify the subjunctive forms of English verbs •describe the different uses of the subjunctive.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 84ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 3.1 Active and Passive Voice We have already seen that when the subject is performing the action of the verb, we say that the verb is in the active voice; when the verb suffers the effect of the action performed by the verb, we say that the verb is in the passive voice.
Examine the following sentences carefully and note the changes in the form of the verb.
1.
The mechanic repaired the car (The mechanic performs the action; the doer) 2.
The car was repaired by the mechanic (The car suffers the effect of repairing – the receiver) In the first sentence the subject is the mechanic.
He performs the action of repairing while car is the object and suffers or receives the action.
In grammar, we say that the verb in this sentence is in the active voice because the subject is the doer; that is, performing the action of repairing, and the car is the sufferer or receiver.
The second sentence is written in the reverse order; the subject now becomes the receiver of the action instead of the doer.
To express this idea, another verb form was repaired was used.
What happened to the mechanic the performer?
The mechanic is still in the sentence but is now in a phrase introduced by the preposition by.
The verb, was repaired is in the passive voice because it presents the subject of the sentence as the receiver of the action.
In other words, the subject is not active, but passive.
The doer or actor now appears in a phrase but is introduced by the preposition by.
Note that a verb in the passive voice is usually a verb phrase NOT a simple verb.
In the sentence: 3.
Our car was repaired yesterday.
The verb was repaired is in the passive voice.
The subject is the sufferer of the action.
When a verb is in the passive voice, the performer is sometimes omitted.
Sometimes the performer of the action is unknown and since the performer is unknown the prepositional phrase is omitted.
Sometimes the performer is so obvious that it is not necessary to include the prepositional phrase.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 85ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Examine the following sentences.
Which of them are in the passive voice?
1.
The strangers stole our car.
2.
Our car was stolen by the strangers.
3.
The thieves were arrested by the police.
4.
The police charged the thieves to court.
5.
They were sentenced to three years imprisonment by the magistrate.
3.1.1 Formation of Passive Voice An idea cannot be expressed in the passive voice without using an auxiliary or helping verb.
The verb to be is the auxiliary verb that is used to help form the six tenses of the passive voice.
If you are familiar with the forms of the verb to be, you will have no difficulty in forming the passive of any verb that takes an object.
The passive voice is formed by combining the verb to be with the past participle of the principal verb.
The principal verb is the verb that names the action.
The verb was repaired in the sentence: The car was repaired by the mechanic is made up of the auxiliary verb, was, which is a form of the verb to be and the past participle of the principal verb repair which is repaired.
The verb phrase is was repaired.
It is a verb phrase in the passive voice.
The verb phrases in the following sentences are in the passive voice: 1.
The decision will be taken by the governor.
2.
Coloured bulbs have been fixed in the recreation park.
The verb in the first sentence is will be taken.
It is made up of the auxiliary will be which is a form of the verb to be and the past participle of the verb take which is taken.
The verb in the second sentence is have been fixed.
It is made up of the auxiliary verb have been which is a form of the verb to be and the past participle of the verb fix which is fixed.
In the following table, the present, past and future tenses of the regular verb ‘call’ and the irregular verb ‘go’ are shown in the active and passive voices: Three Tenses of the Verb ‘Call’ 86ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II ACTIVE PASSIVE PRESENT TENSE Singular Plural Singular Plural I call We call I am called We are called You call You call You are called You are called He/she/it calls They call He/she/it is called They are called PAST TENSE I called We called I was called We were called You called You called You were called You were called He/she/ it called They called He was called They were called FUTURE TENSE I shall call We shall call I shall be called We shall be called You will call You will call You will be called You will be called He/she/ it will call They will call He will be called They will be called Three Tenses of the Verb ‘Go’ ACTIVE PASSIVE PRESENT TENSE Singular Plural Singular Plural I go We go I am gone We are gone You go You go You are gone We are gone He/she/it goes They go He/she/it is gone They are gone PAST TENSE I went We went I was gone We were gone You went You went You were gone You were gone He/she/ it went They went He was gone They were gone FUTURE TENSE I shall go We shall go I shall be gone We shall be gone You will go You will go You will be gone You will be gone He/she/ it will go They will go He/she/it will be gone They will be gone SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Following the example above give the active and passive forms in three tenses of any verb of your choice.
3.1.2 Use of the Passive The question that naturally arises is which form is better?
Is it the active voice where the subject is the performer or the passive voice where the subject is the sufferer of the action?
The answer is that the active is the better form in most cases.
Wherever the active voice is possible both in speech and writing, the passive should not be used because the active voice is direct and more natural.
Examine the following examples: 3.
We enjoyed the party (active voice) 87ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 4.
The party was enjoyed by us (passive voice) 5.
I sent the letter by courier (active voice) 6.
The letter was sent by me by courier (passive voice) Clearly, the active form is more natural and direct and therefore preferable.
Generally, the active voice is preferable for business writing and for any other form of writing that requires the direct approach.
The use of the active renders your speech and writing more vivid.
Verbs in the active voice are often used in newspaper headlines because they are more vivid and economical in space.
The following headlines are in the active voice: 7.
Nigeria controls the flood of refugees.
8.
Green Eagles captured the gold medal in the African Cup of Nations.
9.
Government sends aid to disaster victims.
The above sentences would lose their vividness if written in the passive voice.
The passive voice is generally used when the subject is indefinite, general or unimportant.
In the sentence: 10.
They refine oil in Port Harcourt.
The subject in the above sentence is so general that it is not clear what ‘They’ refers to whether to the oil workers, or the government or the companies.
If the sentence is put in the passive voice, it becomes clearer.
The passive voice is also used when the action that was performed is more important than the performer of the action.
Examine the following: 14.
The Tempest was written by William Shakespeare (passive) Here, the important thing is the writing of the play not on the writer.
But if you want to emphasise the writer rather than the play, put the verb in the active voice thus.
15.
William Shakespeare wrote The Tempest.
The passive voice is generally used to emphasise the sufferer rather than the performer of the action but in the majority of cases the active voice is more effective than the passive voice.
3.2 Mood of Verbs 88ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II In addition to tense and voice, verbs also have a third property called mood.
The word mood comes from a Latin word which means manner.
When applied to verbs mood refers to the manner in which the verb expresses the action or state of being.
There are three moods in English: the indicative mood; the imperative mood and the subjunctive mood.
The indicative mood is used to make statements and to ask questions.
Most of the verbs that you use everyday are in the indicative mood.
13.
The secretary wrote the minutes of the meeting.
(statement) 14.
Have you received the e-mail I sent yesterday?
(Question) The imperative mood is used to make a request or give a command.
Note that the imperative mood occurs only in the second person and present tense.
The subject is always the pronoun ‘you’ which is hardly ever expressed.
15.
Keep quiet at once.
(command) 16.
Give me your pen, please (request) The subjunctive mood is used to express a wish or an unreal condition (a condition which is contrary to fact).
By an unreal or contrary to fact condition, we mean a condition that is not true or possible in the real world.
An unreal or contrary to fact condition is usually introduced by if or as if.
17.
If I were a millionaire I would pay fees for intelligent but poor students.
18.
I wish my father were alive.
The indicative and imperative moods do not present much problems in English.
The same form of the verb is used to ask a question or make a statement.
The imperative mood can be easily identified because the subject is you, which is usually understood.
The imperative mood always expresses a command or a request.
Although most of the forms of the subjunctive have disappeared from modern English, there are a few forms that you can still recognize.
The verb to be has retained more forms of the subjunctive than any other verb.
Compare the following indicative and subjunctive forms of the verb to be: Indicative and Subjunctive Forms of the Verb ‘to be’ 89ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II INDICATIVE MOOD SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD PRESENT TENSE Singular Plural Singular Plural I am We are (If) I be (If) we be You are You are (If) you be (If) you be He/she/it is They are (If) he/she/it be (If) they be PAST TENSE – SINGULAR I was (If) I were You were (If) You were He/she/it was (If) He were PRESENT PERFECT TENSE – SINGULAR I have been (If) I have been You have been (If) You have been He/she it/ has been (If) He/she/it have been Adapted from Semmelmeyer and Bolander, (1984, p 172) The subjunctive with ‘be’ (present) is seldom ever used in informal speech or writing.
The subjunctive form, have been instead of has been is also passing out of use.
In the above table, the forms of the subjunctive that are different from the indicative are italicised; that is, be in the present tense; were in the past tense, first person singular; and third person singular; have in the present perfect tense, third person, singular.
There is only one change that occurs in the subjunctive in the case of other verbs.
In the present tense third person, singular the s is dropped in the subjunctive.
The verb have has only one form in the subjunctive which is different from the indicative.
In the present tense, third person, singular, have is used instead of has.
Examine the following: 19.
If she have the time, she will come.
(subjunctive) 20.
She has the time and she will come.
(indicative) Note also, the following: 21.
If he run --- (not runs) 22.
If she win --- (not wins) 23.
If it rain --- (not rains 24.
If it find --- (not finds) 25.
If she pass--- (not passes) Note also that the word if is not part of the subjunctive.
The group of words in which the subjunctive is used is very frequently introduced by if, that is why the forms for the subjunctive are usually given with the word if.
90ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Although the subjunctive mood is passing out of use in informal speech and writing, certain uses are still maintained by careful speakers and writers.
The subjunctive expressing a wish and the subjunctive in an unreal or contrary to fact condition are two of these uses.
Use of the Subjunctive As already suggested above, careful speakers and writers use the subjunctive to express a wish, an unreal or contrary to fact condition (not true) and a condition of uncertainty (which may be true or not).
Sometimes, the subjunctive is also used for making a suggestion, in making a demand, or in expressing a need.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Identify the use of the subjunctive in the following: 1.
I wish I were a butterfly.
2.
If I were you I would give up my place for my sister.
3.
If the strike fails, we shall all resign.
4.
I suggest that you study full time next session.
5.
The judge insists that the plaintiff prove his case convincingly.
6.
It is imperative that we start the meeting now.
The subjunctive is also used in certain parliamentary expressions such as: •I move that the nomination be closed.
•He moved that the minutes be adopted.
•I move that the meeting be adjourned.
•She moved that the report of the committee be adopted.
The two most important uses of the subjunctive however are: the subjunctive expressing a wish and the subjunctive expressing an unreal or contrary to fact condition after as, as if and as though.
4.0 CONCLUSION Voice and mood, like tense and aspect are important properties of the English verb which you need to learn and use appropriately so as to produce structurally correct English sentences.
Note that your understanding of voice and mood depends on a prior understanding of tense and aspect.
91ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: •Voice is the property of a verb which indicates whether the subject is performing or suffering the effect (receiving) the action expressed by the verb.
•There are two voices in English: active voice and passive voice.
•A verb is in the active voice when it presents the subject as performing the action.
•A verb is in the passive voice when it presents the subject as receiving or suffering the effect of the action.
•The passive voice is formed by combining some form of the verb to be with the past participle of the verb that expresses the action.
•Mood indicates the manner in which the action or state of being is expressed.
•There are three moods in English; the indicative, the imperative and the subjunctive.
•The indicative mood is used to make a statement or ask a question.
•The imperative mood is used to give a command or make a request.
•The subjunctive mood is used to make a wish, express doubt, uncertainty or unreal condition.
•Though the subjunctive is passing out of use in informal speech or writing, certain uses of the subjunctive are still observed by careful speakers or writers.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examine the following sentences.
Which of them are in the passive voice?
1.
The strangers stole our car.
2.
Our car was stolen by the strangers.
3.
The thieves were arrested by the police.
4.
The police charged the thieves to court.
5.
They were sentenced to three years imprisonment by the magistrate.
The italicized sentences (b, c, and e) are in the passive voice ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 92ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Following the example above give the active and passive forms in three tenses of any verb of your choice Candidates are to choose any verb and give the passive forms in three tenses as in the following: ACTIVE PASSIVE PRESENT TENSE Singular Plural Singular Plural I call We call I am called We are called You call You call You are called You are called He/she/it calls They call He/she/it is called They are called PAST TENSE I called We called I was called We were called You called You called You were called You were called He/she/ it called They called He was called They were called FUTURE TENSE I shall call We shall call I shall be called We shall be called You will call You will call You will be called You will be called He/she/ it will call They will call He will be called They will be called ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Determine the use of the subjunctive in the following: 1.
I wish I were a butterfly.
(expresses a wish) If I were you I would give up my place for my sister.
(Unreal situation) 2.
If the strike fail, we shall all resign.
(condition of uncertainty) 3.
I suggest that you study full time next session.
(making a suggestion) 4.
The judge insists that the plaintiff prove his case convincingly.
(making a demand) 5.
It is imperative that we start the meeting now.
(expressing a need) 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss and illustrate the uses of the passive voice and the subjunctive mood.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 93ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Eka, D. (1994).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of the English Language.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Quirk, P. and Greenbaum, S. (1975).
A University Grammar of English.
London: Longman.
Semmelmeyer, M. and Bolander, D. (1984).
Instant English Handbook.
Illinois: Career Publishing Inc. Strang, B. H. M. (1970).
Modern English Structure (2nd ed.).
Edward London: Arnold.
Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
(2004).
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. 94ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 3 MODAL AUXILIARIES An auxiliary verb, unlike a lexical verb which carries the main information expressed by the verb, is a replacing verb.
There are three kinds of auxiliary verbs: (i) Central or Main Auxiliaries: These include do, be and have; (ii) Modal Auxiliaries: These are: can/could, may/might, shall/should, will/would, must and ought to.
(iii) Marginal Auxiliaries which are used to, dare and need.
In this unit we are going to study Modal auxiliaries.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Modality in Modal Auxiliaries 3.2 Tense of Modals 3.3 Modals and Aspect 3.4 Negation in Modal Auxiliaries 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Modal auxiliaries are sometimes called modal operators.
The term modal refers to the specific way the speaker would like his hearer to understand what he says.
For instance: 1.
Can I have your pen please?
suggests politeness in making a request as opposed to 2.
Give me your pen.
which though a request sounds more like an order.
Modal auxiliaries can be used with verbs in verb phrases as for instance in: can dance, must go, ought to come, should pray.
Modal auxiliaries are also used with other auxiliary verbs such as have, do or be as in: must have, will be, should do.
When modal auxiliaries occur with have and/or be they are usually the first elements of the group followed by have and the main verb as in the following examples: 3.
My father should have been invited (modal + have + main verb) 4.
She must be offended (modal + be + main verb) 95ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 5.
Her grades can be improved (modal + be + main verb) 6.
The assignment should be done today.
(modal + be + main verb) It is suggested that you read Quirk and Greenbaum (1975) for the different modalities and (Eka 1994) for the types of modal auxiliaries.
The discussions in this unit are adapted from these two sources.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •identify modal auxiliaries •describe the different modalities that they express •identify the tense of modal auxiliaries •explain the aspect of modal auxiliaries •use the modal auxiliaries in the negative.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Modality in Modal Auxiliaries Modal auxiliaries express the following ideas: politeness, permission, ability, possibility, willingness, obligation necessity, insistence, negation, authority logical inference and time reference.
These modalities are however expressed by specific modal auxiliaries as follows: Can/Could Can express the following modalities •Ability = be able to, be capable of, know how to 7.
He can speak French but cannot write it well (He is able to speak, capable of speaking).
•Politeness 8.
Can I have your pen?
Could you sign my form?
96ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •Permission = be allowed to, be permitted to 9.
Can I come in} Am I allowed to 10.
May I come in} Note that may is more formal •Possibility 11.
Anybody can make mistakes.
12.
The car can break down.
(It is possible that it can) •Could Could expresses past ability, permission and possibility.
Past Ability 13.
I could not drive when I was 18 •Permission 14.
Could I borrow books from your library (present or future) •Possibility 15 We could go to the dance 16 The light could go off.
•Contingent Possibility or ability (in hypothetical/unreal situations) 17.
If I had more money I would buy many books.
Note that can, could suggest ability (past, present), possibility and permission.
Ability can include the implication of willingness (especially in spoken English) 18.
Can/could you do me a favour?
May/Might May, like can, expresses •Permission (be allowed to) but as earlier noted, may is more formal than can 19.
You may use my library if you like.
Note that in the negative, mustn’t is used instead of may not: 97ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 20.
You mustn’t use my library NOT You may not use my library •Possibility The lights may/might go off.
(It is possible ….)
•Permission (rare) 21.
Might I use your car?
•Possibility 22.
What you say might be true.
Note the use of may as an auxiliary with the subjunctive as in 23.
May I never see her again.
Shall/Should Shall usually expresses •willingness on the part of the speaker in the second and third persons: 24.
You shall do exactly as you wish.
25.
He shall keep his promise.
•Intention on the part of the speaker only on the first person: 26.
I shall see you tomorrow.
27.
We shall succeed in our endeavours.
•Insistence (in restricted and legal usages.)
28.
You shall do as I say (restricted) 29.
The tenant shall keep the house in good order (legal) Of these three modalities it is the one of intention that is most common in modern English.
Shall is not frequently used outside British English.
Will is generally preferred.
30.
Shall/Will I see you tomorrow?
98ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Will has also become common in expressing the future as well as helplessness and perplexity: 31.
How will he get there?
32.
What will I do?
Should Should expresses the following modalities: •Obligation and logical necessity 33.
You should take care of your children (necessity = ought to) 34.
They should be back by now •‘Putative’ be after certain expressions e.g.
It is a pity/odd.
35.
It is odd that you should stay away from my house.
36.
I am sorry that this should have happened.
•Contingent use.
This occurs in the 1st person only (especially - in British English (in the main clause) 37.
If we had the money we should like to go abroad.
38.
If I saw her, I should have given her the good news.
•In rather formal real conditions 39.
If you change your plans, please let me know.
Will/Would Will often expresses the following modalities •Willingness 40.
She will help you if you ask her.
41.
Will you (please, kindly) shut the door?
(used in polite requests) 42.
Will you have another bottle of coke?
•Intention (futurity) 43.
I’ll write as soon as I get your letter.
(mainly in the1st person) 44.
We won’t stay longer than 3 hours •Insistence 99ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 45.
She will do it whatever you say.
This means that she insists on doing it or that I insist on her doing it.
Note that will is never contracted in this usage because it is stressed in speech.
•Prediction (specific) 46.
The lecture will be finished by now (= must by now) •Timeless 47.
Water will boil when heated (= boils) •Habitual 48.
He’ll talk (always) for hours if you give him the chance.
Would Would expresses the following: •Willingness, politeness, insistence 49.
Would you lend me your pen, please.
•Habitual event/activity in the past: 50.
Every morning he would go for a walk (customary behaviour) •Contingent use in main clause of a conditional sentence 51.
She would drink too much if I didn’t stop her.
•Probability 52.
That would be his brother Must •Expresses obligation and (logical) Necessity/Inference: 53.
You must submit the assignment today (you are obliged to).
54.
There must be a reason for his behaviour = (but there cannot be a reason) Ought to 100ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •Ought expresses obligation/logical necessity 54.
You ought to do it.
55.
She ought to be here by now.
Note that ought and should both denote obligation and logical necessity but are less categorical than must and have to.
Ought to is often awkward in questions inviting inversion e.g.
Ought you to do it?
Should is often preferred in such situations e.g.
Should you do it?
Had better is also often used in place of must/ought to.
The effect is milder (less categorical) 56.
Must you travel today?
57.
Well, I don’t have to, but I think I had better (travel) 3.2 Tense of Modals Only some of the modals have corresponding present and past forms.
Examine the following: can could may might shall should will would must (had to) ought to used to need - dare - 58.
He can speak Ibibio now.
59.
He couldn’t even understand it last year The usual past tense of may is could when it denotes permission 60.
Today we may/can go home early.
61.
Yesterday we could only leave in the evening.
3.3 Modals and Aspect When modals express ability or permission, the progressive and perfective aspect are normally excluded and also when shall and will express volition (willingness).
These aspects are freely used with other modal meanings.
101ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •Possibility 62.
He can’t be studying all day.
63.
He may have missed the bus.
64.
She may have been visiting her uncle •Necessity 65.
You must be joking.
66.
He must have stayed up late •Prediction 67.
The lecture will still be holding tomorrow.
•Futurity 68.
The guests would have arrived by now.
3.4 Negation in Modal Auxiliaries Almost all auxiliaries can be used negatively.
Modal auxiliaries also undergo negation.
can cannot can’t may may not mayn’t must must not mustn’t ought to ought not to oughtn’t need not needn’t Note that needn’t expresses the absence of obligation: 69.
You must see him today.
70.
You need not see him today Note also that there is usually a difference in meaning between must and have to.
Must expresses obligation or compulsion from the speaker’s viewpoint: 71.
I must finish this work today.
Have to expresses external obligation.
72.
You have to finish this work today.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 102ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Compare the following 1.
You must go now (I want to read) 2.
It’s a pity you have to go now (It’s time for you to catch the plane) 3.
We must begin before two o’clock (or we shan’t finish before close of work) 4.
We have to begin before 2 o’clock (That’s the scheduled time).
Note also am/is to is used for definite commands and prohibitions.
This form or must is used for instructions.
On notices or orders (have to is never used here).
Examine the following: Pedestrians must use the overhead bridge.
(the traffic wardens instruct them to) Motorcyclists often have to use the side roads (the nature of their work compels them to).
All junior staff are to report to the secretary (Departmental Order).
Police constables have to salute their officers (that is the custom/ convention).
4.0 CONCLUSION Like the main verb, auxiliary verbs play a significant role in English sentences.
They make it possible to express different nuances of meaning that describe various modalities.
You will need to learn to use them appropriately to avoid conveying wrong meaning.
5.0 SUMMARY The main points discussed in this unit are: •Modal auxiliaries are auxiliaries which suggest modality; that is, the specific way the speaker would like his hearer to understand what he/she says.
•Modal auxiliaries express the following ideas: politeness, permission, ability, possibility, willingness, obligation, necessity, insistence, negation, authority logical inference and time reference.
•Modals have corresponding present and past tense forms except need and dare •Modals express progressive and perfective aspects except when they express ability or permission.
•Also when shall and will express volition (willingness), the progressive and perfective aspect are normally excluded.
103ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •Modal auxiliaries also undergo negation.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Compare the following 1.
You must go now (I want to read) - external obligation 2.
It’s a pity you have to go now (It’s time for you to catch the plane) - external obligation 3.
We must begin before two o’clock (or we shan’t finish before close of work) - internal obligation 4.
We have to begin before 2 o’clock (That’s the scheduled time)- internal obligation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the following passage and identify which forms of should/would can differentiate between volition, obligation or pure future: I would injure no man, and should provoke no resentment; I would relieve every distress and should enjoy the benedictions of gratitude.
I would choose my friends among the wise, and my wife among the virtuous; and therefore should be in no danger from treachery or unkindness.
My children should by my care be learned and pious, and would repay to my age what their childhood had received.
From Samuel Johnson’s Rasselas 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eka, D. (1994).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of English.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Quirk, R. and Greenbaum, S. (1975).
A University Grammar of English.
London: Longman.
Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
( 2004).
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. 104ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 4 NON- FINITE AND EMPHATIC FORMS We have already seen in Units 1 and 2 of this module how the English verb changes its form to show tense, aspect, voice and mood.
In this unit we shall see the changes that indicate finiteness /non- finiteness as well as the form used to show emphasis.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Finite and Non- Finite Forms 3.2 Uses of Non- finite Forms 3.3 Emphatic Forms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The finite forms of the verb exist in the simple present tense form and the past form.
They indicate the subject of verb agreement e.g.
•They enjoy themselves daily.
•They enjoyed themselves yesterday.
•He enjoys himself daily.
The non-finite verb does not have the subject concord notion because it neither indicates number nor person.
Three types of the non-finite verb can be isolated.
They are the infinitive which primarily begins with ‘to’ e.g.
to sing, to laugh, to work; the participle (present and past) and the gerund.
Examples of non- finite forms in sentences are: 1.
He likes to sing.
2.
They like singing 3.
This is a deserted house 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •distinguish between finite and non-finite forms of verbs •explain the uses of the non- finite forms of verbs •use the non- finite forms of verbs •identify the emphatic forms of verbs •use emphatic forms of verbs.
105ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Finite and Non- Finite Forms The verb phrase occurs in finite and non- finite phrases which are distinguished as follows: Finite forms of verbs are the forms that show tense distinction.
This means that they occur in one tense or the other.
4.
She studies Home economics 5.
She studied Chemistry in her first year They are also the forms that occur as verb elements in sentences, take subjects, and agree with the subjects in person and number.
The non- finite forms on the other hand do not show tense distinction neither do they take subjects nor show agreement.
Examine the verb forms in the following pair of sentences She hopes to travel next week (finite verb, has a subject which is she and occurs in the present tense) Hoping to travel next week (Verb in the present participle, non- finite form which cannot take a subject.)
Note that any attempt to introduce a subject in the second sentence will produce a sentence like: She hoping to travel next week* This is an unacceptable sentence.
Agreement is particularly shown with the verb be as in: I am, You/We/They/ are, He/ She/ It is.
With most lexical verbs, agreement is restricted to the third person singular present as in 6.
They walk to the office every morning.
7.
He walks to the office every morning.
There is, however no concord with the modal auxiliaries: 8.
I, you, we/ he/ they may use the library whenever you want.
106ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Finite verbs have mood.
In contrast to the indicative mood which is unmarked, the imperative and subjunctive moods are marked (See Module 2, Unit 2, section 4) The non- finite forms are the infinitive (to dance); the present -ing participle (dancing) and the past –ed participle (danced).
Non- finite forms have other uses.
In the examples 1-3 above, they function as other parts of speech.
In Example 1, to sing is a noun phrase acting as the direct object of the verb “likes”.
In Example 2, singing is a gerund also functioning as a direct object of the verb” likes” while the past participle form deserted functions as an adjective modifying the noun “ house” in Example 3.
3.2 Uses of Non-finite Forms The essential facts about the three types of non- finite verbs and their uses are summarized below: (a)The Infinitive The infinitive is usually the base form of the verb preceded by to: to dance, to sing, to go.
It does not change its form to reflect tense hence a non- finite form.
It cannot occur as a verb element in a sentence or clause.
The infinitive as indicated above can perform other functions; 1.
Subject of a sentence 9.
To err is human.
10.
To get to the top is not a one day’s business.
2.
Direct object 11.
My sister likes to cook.
12.
On Saturdays I like to clean my surroundings.
3.
Adjective 13.
The thing to do is rest 14.
On Christmas Day, the place to go is Calabar.
4.
An adverbial of purpose 15.
Okon travelled to Ghana to watch the football match.
16.
He went to see his mother.
107ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 5.
Predicate noun 17.
It is healthy to quarrel 18.
To dance is to exercise.
(b) Present Participle/Gerund This verb form is formed by the addition of –ing to the base form.
When it performs the function of a noun it is called a gerund of verbal noun e.g.
running, dancing, reading, writing.
The functions of the present participle include.
6.
Gerund/Noun 19.
Swimming is a good exercise (gerund used as subject) 20.
I like cooking (gerund used as object) 21.
In driving be careful (gerund used as object of a preposition) 7.
Adjective 22.
The returning students registered last week.
23.
The crying baby was given milk to drink (c) Past Participle The past participle of regular verbs are formed with d or ed added to the base form e.g.
the base form, dance/danced; paint/painted; clean/ cleaned.
The past participle of irregular verbs are formed by the addition of t, d, or ed added to an altered base form; sometimes n or en is added to the base e.g.
jumped, wanted, kicked, written, hidden.
Some past participle forms are identical to the base form e.g.
cost, cut, put.
The past participle forms of be, go, and do are special forms.
They are: been, gone and done.
Past Participle forms perform the following functions: 8.
Adjective 24.
He is a wanted man.
25.
The wall, painted white looked new.
26.
Abused and deserted, the woman ran mad.
9.
As part of verb phrases 27.
The chairman has written his address.
28.
The car has been repaired.
29.
The child has gone home to its mother.
108ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify and state the functions of the non- finite verbs in the following sentences: 1.
Repairing radios is Femi’s work.
2.
To forgive is divine.
3.
Mercy enjoys cooking African dishes 4.
The deserted house became a shelter for mad men 5.
Finishing his assignment early, Jumai decided to travel 6.
She packed out of the haunted house 7.
The relations came to take away the corpse.
8.
Washing dishes and keeping things neat can be tedious.
9.
Visiting is an interesting pastime 10.
The forbidden fruit was the most appetizing.
3.3 Emphatic Forms The emphatic forms of a verb are used to give emphasis to the idea expressed by the verb.
The auxiliaries do, does, and did are seen to give this additional emphasis.
The emphatic forms occur in only two tenses: the present tense and the past tense.
I do agree with you (present tense) He did send the message (past tense) EMPHATIC FORMS PRESENT TENSE SINGULAR SUBJECT PLURAL SUBJECT First person I do eat We do eat Second Person You do eat You do eat Third Person He/she/it does eat They do eat EMPHATIC FORMS PAST TENSE First Person I did eat We did eat Second Person You did eat You did eat Third Person He/she/it did eat They did eat Note that when do, does and did are used in questions, the form is not used for emphasis.
The use of do, does and did in questions is an idiomatic way of asking questions in English.
In the following sentences note that do, does and did are not the emphatic forms of the verb.
Also when do, does and did are used to mean carry out or accomplish the form is not used for emphasis.
Examine the following: We did our shopping in the city.
(did not emphatic form) 109ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Identify the emphatic forms in the following sentences: 1.
She did commit the crime.
2.
Did you go to the party?
3.
You do like rice, don’t you?
4.
They do their assignment promptly.
5.
My mother does attend the prayer meeting every Friday.
6.
They did win the match.
7.
Did they attend the party?
8.
She did attend but he didn’t.
9.
I do love African food.
10.
Does she visit her mother very often?
4.0 CONCLUSION The English verb has several forms that perform different functions and the finite/non-finite and emphatic forms illustrate this fact further.
Learning to recognise these forms and to use them appropriately will ensure the production of structurally correct sentences.
5.0 SUMMARY The following main points have been discussed in this unit: •The verb phrase occurs in finite and non- finite phrases.
•Finite forms of verbs are the forms that show tense distinction.
This means that they occur in one tense or the other.
•They are also the forms that occur as verb elements in sentences, take subjects and agree with the subjects in person and number.
•The non- finite forms on the other hand do not show tense distinction neither do they take subjects nor show agreement.
•The non- finite forms are: the infinitive, the present participle and the past participle.
•The infinitive can function as the subject, direct object, adjective, predicate noun and as an adverbial.
•The present participle can function as an adjective.
•When the present participle performs the function of a noun it is called a gerund.
•The past participle also functions as adjectives and as part of verb phrases.
•The emphatic forms of a verb are used to give emphasis to the idea expressed by the verb; they occur in only two tenses: present and past.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 110ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Functions of the non- finite verbs in the following sentences: 1.
Repairing radios is Femi’s work- subject 2.
To forgive is divine.- subject 3.
Mercy enjoys cooking African dishes.
Object 4.
The deserted house became a shelter for mad men - (adjective) 5.
Finishing her assignment early, Jumai decided to travel (adjective, modifies Jumai) 6.
She packed out of the haunted house (adjective) 7.
The relations came to take away the corpse.
(adverbial) 8.
Washing dishes and keeping things neat can be tedious.
(subject of the verb can) 9.
Visiting is an interesting pastime.
(subject) 10.
The forbidden fruit was the most appetizing.
(adjective) ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Emphatic forms are underlined in the following sentences: 1.
She did commit the crime.
2.
Did you go to the party?
3.
You do like rice, don’t you?
4.
They do their assignment promptly.
5.
My mother does attend the prayer meeting every Friday.
6.
The did win the match.
7.
Did they attend the party?
8.
She did attend but he didn’t.
9.
I do love African food.
10.
Does she visit her mother very often?
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT With appropriate illustrations discuss the non-finite forms of verbs and state their functions.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 111ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Eka, D. (1994).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of the English Language.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Quirk, R. and Greenbaum, S. (1975).
A University Grammar of English.
London: Longman.
Semmelmeyer, M. and Bolander, D. (1984).
Instant English Handbook.
Illinois: Career Publishing Inc. Udofot, I. and Ekpenyong, B.
(2004).
A Comprehensive English Course for Schools and Colleges.
Lagos: Quantum Co. Ltd. 112ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II MODULE 3 GRAMMATICAL MODELS Unit 1 Traditional Grammar Unit 2 Structural Grammar Unit 3 Transformational Generative Grammar Unit 4 Systemic Grammar Unit 5 Government and Binding Grammar UNIT 1 TRADITIONAL GRAMMAR This Module introduces you to some of the approaches that may be used in analyzing the structure of sentences in language.
Specifically, in this unit, you will learn about the Traditional Grammar Model.
When you have gone through it, you should be able to have some understanding of Traditional grammar and how it works.
The unit is organized as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Grammar 3.2 Traditional Grammar 3.3 Strengths and Weaknesses of Traditional Grammar 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are various ways in which we can study the combinations of words and groups of words into meaningful sentences in languages.
These various ways of looking at word and group combinations are generally referred to as “models”, and the different combinations of words and groups of words as “grammars”.
This is why we talk about “models of grammatical analysis”.
A model may therefore be said to be a way in which something is done, a design of structure of which many copies or reproductions are (to be) made.
In the context of this course, we use the term “model” to mean a way of doing something, or a way of studying word combinations in English.
With regard to the term “grammar”, we can say that it is a body of rules which spells out how words and groups of words or sounds in particular 113ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II languages combine to form grammatical and meaningful words and sentences of that language.
It is important for words and groups of words in sentences to be related one to another: They must “hang together for the sentence to be meaningful” (Eka, p.16).
That is why Koutsoudas (p.4) says that “a grammar is a finite set of rules which enumerates (i.e.
generates) an infinite number of grammatical sentences of a language”.
Thus, it is grammar which states the rules of word and sentence formation in languages of the world.
Sometimes we talk about grammar in relation to how the words and sentences in individual languages are formed.
Different languages of the world organize the speech sounds, which occur in them into words in different ways.
Also, different languages have different ways of arranging the words which occur in them in ways different from the arrangements which occur in other languages.
These are referred to as particular grammars of the languages concerned.
Since classical times, various models have evolved at different periods during the development of grammar and language studies.
These models represent the proponents’ view of the forms and the structure of language.
This module will examine some grammatical models as well as their individual features, strengths and weaknesses.
We begin with the Traditional grammar model.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After going through this unit, you should be able to •explain what “grammar” means •describe the origins of the concept “grammar” •explain Traditional grammar and how it works •describe the advantages and the disadvantages of Traditional grammar.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Grammar Traditional grammar as we know it today may be said to have its origins in the work of Greek philosophers – the Conventionalists and the Naturalists – of the 5th century BC.
These philosophers used to include language (grammar) as a part of their philosophical studies.
The Naturalists held the view that there is a one-to-one link between the words in language and the things that those words stand for.
For instance, the Naturalists believed that there is a correspondence between the word pen and the object in the natural world that the word represents.
The Conventionalists on the other hand were of the view 114ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II that words do not have any relationship with the objects the words refer to.
They rather believed that users of a language agree on what name(s) to give to objects.
Other groups of philosophers emerged from these earlier two.
They were called the Analogists and the Anomalists.
These philosophers also developed their ideas about grammar and language.
However, as time went on it no longer mattered whether the ideas put forward b the Naturalists/Analogists were true or those proposed by the conventionalists/Anomalists.
These different groups of philosophers later based their studies of language on both the ideas advanced by the two groups of philosophers, since as they came to realize, they were all studying language.
Grammar as we now know and study, developed from the initial efforts of philosophers during the Classical period.
Traditional (or Classical grammar as it is sometimes also called) became the immediate initial outcome of studying language by Greek philosophers.
3.2 Traditional (Classical) Grammar From the presentation of the concept of grammar in 3.0 above, it would be clear that it has its roots in the work of early Greek philosophers.
Following from this Traditional grammar may be said to refer “to the rules of a language written and influenced by Classical Greek scholars.” (Baugh and Cable, 1951).
It derived largely from Greek scholars and includes the prescriptive approach of the eighteen century grammarians.
Traditional grammar was initially designed to teach Latin language to foreigners; however, at the same time as the Latin language flourished in Europe, the English language was also developing.
Since there was an already developed grammar of Latin in existence and in use, this grammar was used in teaching the English language.
This resulted in the fact that English grammar was written and studied based on the rules, forms and structure of Latin grammar.
Consequently, some concepts that are peculiar to Latin language were borrowed into and imposed on English.
An example of one such borrowings is the case system, which is a feature of Latin language, but carried over into English.
Latin language has six categories in its case system.
They are the Nominative case, the Dative case, the Vocative case, the Accusative case, the Ablative case and the Oblique case.
Traditional grammar emphasized correctness and strict rule adherence.
This led to the demarcation of the words in language into eight parts of speech: Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Adjective, Adverb, Preposition, 115ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Conjunction and Interjection.
The parts of speech have the following definitions: •Noun: A noun is the name of a person, place or thing.
•Pronoun: A pronoun replaces a noun in a sentence •Verb: It serves as an action word •Adverb: It modifies a verb •Adjective: It modifies a noun •Conjunction: It links two constituents •Preposition: It shows the relationship between two entitles referred to in a sentence •Interjection: It carries emotion Baugh and Cable (1951) note that these parts of speech, which were evolved by traditional grammarians were modelled after Priscian’s adaptation of Greek grammar to Latin.
Traditional grammarians tended to prescribe usage rules for English; that is, this model of grammar used to state how the English language should be used.
The following are some of the usage rules prescribed by Traditional grammar for English: •The modal auxiliary was to be used only with the first person pronouns.
I/We, not with pronouns in other persons, e.g.
You or They as in ‘You shall represent the Governor at that meeting’.
•Prepositions must not end sentences.
This rule was a carry-over from classical grammar.
E.g.
‘she was the one they came to’.
•Do not begin a sentence with “because” e.g.
‘Because you were not there, the election did not take place’ •Do not use split infinitives e.g.
‘My wife does not like to have other people cook for her’ •Do not use double negatives e.g.
‘You are going nowhere’ Adherence to the above rules was considered “correct” and “proper” usage, and non-compliance was considered “bad grammar”.
Owing to this tendency for Traditional grammarians to spell out how English should be spoken and written, it is known as Prescriptive grammar.
Within the framework of Traditional grammar sentence analysis involved mainly clause analysis and parsing (Rulka, 1962, p.27).
This process involved the breaking down of sentences into the subject part and the Predicate part, and the identification of the relations between a noun in subject position and the Verb.
This relation they describe as the Subject – Verb relation.
Another relation which traditional grammarians 116ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II identified among words which occur in sentences is the Verb-Object relation.
3.3 Strengths and Weaknesses of Traditional Grammar •Traditional grammar established the eight parts of speech.
These parts of speech were established in English and other languages and are still in use in linguistic discourse till date.
Moreover, the Subject-Verb, Verb-Object relations as well as Case, Mood and other categories apply in most languages of the world.
•Another strength of Traditional grammar is that it is the most widely used model for teaching the English language especially in Africa (Wallwork 1969, Lamidi 2000).
It is also considered to be the easiest form of understanding the grammar of English.
•Traditional grammarians were the first to identify the structural relations which hold among sentence constituents.
Also, the concept of the sentence was defined as a complete thought and classified into statements.
Questions and Commands are original to traditional grammar.
These classifications have remained till today.
Despite the advantages of the Traditional grammar model, there are many criticisms leveled against it.
The following are some of them: •Its prescriptive nature.
The tendency to prescribe rules for languages was a major weakness of this model of grammar.
Modern scholars of language studies observe the behaviour of languages and describe them.
•Traditional grammar is also criticized for not adopting scientific methods in studying language.
Their studies were not empirical such that the claims they that were made about languages forms, structure and behaviour were based on intuitions.
•Traditional grammar did not view individual languages as unique linguistic systems, but was more concerned with legislating on how people should speak and write that language.
(Ndimele, p.78).
•Another weakness of traditional grammar relates to its definition of parts of speech.
For example, the definition of verbs as action words is inconsistent with similar terms in English.
If verbs are action words, what actions do words like “seem”, “appear” “is”, “been”, etc express?
Moreover, it would be difficult to classify the English words “dare”, “need”, “fire” as nouns or verbs since they are capable of being used as either nouns or verbs.
117ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •Traditional grammar is not explicit enough to account for the numerous ways in which natural languages function.
For example, Traditional grammar can not explain what is involved in passivisation or relativisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention two ways that you think Traditional grammar is relevant to the grammars we study today.
4.0 CONCLUSION Traditional grammar can be viewed as the foundation for subsequent grammatical theories.
The concept of grammar has since developed from studying relationships between words and the objects they represent, and prescribing rules of use to describing relationships between the words or group of words themselves, rules that produce various sentence types, and how grammar relates to meaning.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt •that philosophers, not linguists first studied language and evolved grammar .
•the first approach to the study of language- Traditional grammar •the ways that Traditional grammar works; about its advantages and disadvantages.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE The two ways that Traditional grammar may be said to be relevant to the grammar we study today are: 1.
It provided the basis of studying human language; it provided the framework known today as grammar.
2.
It evolved the system of classifying words into parts of speech, a system which is still in use today.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT To what extent would you say that Traditional grammar has contributed to how language can be studied today?
118ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh, A. C. and Thomas Cable (1951).
A History of the English Language.
London: Routeledge.
Eka, David (1994).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of the English.
Language, Uyo: Samuf (Nig.)
Ltd. Koutsoudas, A.
(1966).
Writing Transformational Grammars, London: Longman.
Lamidi, M. T. (2000).
Aspects of Chomskyan Grammar.
Ibadan: Emman Publications.
Wallwork, J. F. (1989).
Language and Linguistics, London: Heinemann.
Ndimele, O. M. (1992).
The Parameters of Universal Grammar: A Government – Binding Approach.
Owerri: African Educational Services.
Rulka, C. (1962).
An English Course for West African Secondary Schools.
London: Macmillan.
119ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 2 STRUCTURAL GRAMMAR In this unit, you will learn about another grammatical model, structural grammar.
When you are through with reading it you should be able to tell the differences between this model and the one you studied in the previous unit.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Structural Grammar 3.1.1 European Structuralists 3.1.2 Immediate Constituent (IC) 3.2 Strengths and Weaknesses of Structural Grammar 3.2.1 Strengths of Structural Grammar 3.2.2 Weaknesses of Structural Grammar 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Structural grammar is generally believed to have evolved at about the same time in two places - Europe and America.
Owing to this fact, each group of structuralists developed the grammar with somewhat different concerns and focus about language.
But modern structural grammar is traceable to an American linguist, Leonard Bloomfield whose contributions to the study of language have helped in shaping modern linguistics.
His ideas have provided a basis for the building and the development of other linguistic theories and grammatical models.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After going through this unit, you should be able to •describe another view of how language works, beside the Traditional view which you studied in the earlier unit •explain key aspects of Structuralism as a grammatical model such as langue/parole, synchronic/diachronic linguistics; Immediate Constituent (IC) Analysis and a technique of representing the structure of sentences.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 120ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 3.1 Structural Grammar You would recall that one major weakness of Traditional grammar was its prescriptive nature.
This might have led to the development of structural grammar.
Two major groups are generally associated with the evolution of structural grammar.
The first group began in Europe after the publication of Ferdinard de Saussure’s book entitled Cours de Linguistique Generale.
This group came to be known as European structuralists.
The second group started in America and was generally referred to as American structuralists.
3.1.1 European Structural Grammar The major ideas of European structural grammar are that language consists of two aspects, langue and parole.
Within this grammar is the same as the form or the expression elements in a language.
For example, the speech sounds, the words, phrases and clauses in a language constitute the form of that language.
Parole on the other hand, according to European structural grammarians, refers to language behaviour, that is, the manner and the use(s) to which the expression elements are put.
According to Lamidi (p.8), “Langue … can be equated with form while parole is equated with substance.” Another feature of European structural grammar is that it emphasized the inter-relationships between langue and parole, stressing that they were not autonomous aspects of language, but, that they were interrelated.
European structural grammar developed the twin notions of synchronic and diachronic linguistics.
According to de Saussure in his book earlier referred to above, synchronic linguistics studies the structure of a language or languages at a particular point in time, while diachronic linguistics deals principally with the historical development or isolated elements of language(s) over a period of time.
European structural grammar specifies that language has two associated levels – an abstract relational level, and the actual utterances of language.
Within this grammar it is claimed that the abstract level is “a system of underlying actual behaviour of a language” (Lyons, p.994) and that the two levels must be distinguished one from the other.
Moreover, within the view of language presented by European structuralists, linguists and those interested in the study of language should focus on the abstract underlying level.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 121ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II State three major ideas about language as advanced by European structural grammar.
3.1.2 American Structural Grammar The second group of structuralists started in America.
This group was made up of scholars who had background in disciplines like anthropology, psychology and linguistics.
These different backgrounds influenced their view of language and how language should be studied.
American structuralists outrightly rejected the traditional grammar approach to the study of language.
Their rejection and eventual discarding of traditional grammar was as a result of the influence of the period in which they lived and worked.
That period was known as the Scientific Age, and everything had to be subjected to the use of scientific methods just as would be done in the sciences.
Thus, they used and recommended the use of scientific approach in studying language.
This approach involved an objective and an observable analysis of linguistic data.
Structural grammarians of the American school claimed that every language is a “unique, coherent and (an) integrated system” (Lamidi, p. 8).
Their methods of categorizing parts of speech and sentence function were different from those adopted by traditional grammarians.
They observed from studying American-Indian languages that words in all languages could not be classified in the same way(s).
For instance, they observed that the distinction between nouns and verbs in some languages does not exist in other languages.
Following these observations, American structural grammarians did not support the practice found among Traditional grammarians of describing one language by analyzing it in terms of the categories derived from the analysis of other languages.
Also, they found that the traditional categories of preposition, article and adverbs could not always be applied consistently.
American structuralism was greatly influenced by the American Linguist, Leonard Bloomfield who claimed that language is human behaviour and that meaning is the relationship between a stimulus and a verbal response.
However, since issues about meaning in language could not be subjected to the scientific methods adopted within structural grammar, Bloomfield’s followers completely neglected meaning-related issues claiming they were vague.
122ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Since they saw each language as a unique system, they designed structural forms by which each language may identify words and their classes.
For instance English nouns possess certain characteristics which distinguish them from other word classes.
Thus nouns are capable of occurring after determiners and they can take plural indicators.
The following frames 1(a-d were devised for identifying nouns in English and any word that fits into the gaps provided were to be classified as nouns.
(1) (a) John bought a ___________________________ (b) The students met the _____________________ (c ) His mother needs some ___________________ (d) Dipo brought these _______________________ The words which fit into the gaps in (2a-c) above are to be classified as verbs; moreover, they are capable of taking an appropriate past tense marker, viz: - d, - ed or zero morpheme.
(2) (a) Kufre ______________ the ball (b) Ngozi _______________ (c) Yemi ________________some rice.
From the data presented here it would appear that in structural grammar words are classified according to the frames in which they occur.
Another branch of structural grammar was developed by Bloomfield (p. 161).
This was referred to as the Immediate Constituent Analysis.
This approach to sentence analysis adopts a “top-to-bottom” procedure.
It involves breaking down sentences into their immediate constituents until the smallest units of grammar known as ultimate constituents are reached.
The Bloomfieldian structuralism evolved the tree structure technique as a way of representing the way that words in sentences are grouped together into a structure.
This technique was initially referred to as “cutting”.
In Fig.1 below, the diagram shows the relationship and the arrangement of the words which make up the sentence: “Some persons are honest”.
The central idea of the Immediate Constituent analysis is to show that sentences in natural languages do not consist simply of an unordered sequence o words; but, that the words which are (structured) into successively larger structural units known as constituents.
A constituent may therefore be thought of as a structural unit or segment of a sentence which may comprise a word or more than one word.
Let us look at the diagram in Fig 1 .The sentence: ’Some persons are honest’ would be seen to be made up of four words but the words but the words can be grouped into two large units referred to as phrases : a noun phrase ‘some 123ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II persons’; and another phrase ‘are honest’ which serves as the predicate.
Each of the two smaller groups of words which make the sentence ‘Some persons are honest’ are said to be immediate constituents of the sentence.
Also, each of the phrases can be broken down into its immediate constituents which are the individual words which make them up.
In Unit 1, it was emphasized that words and groups of words in sentences must be related one to another, that is, they must ‘hang together’ sentences to be meaningful.
As Fig.1 indicates the words ‘some’ and ‘persons’ ‘go together’ that is why they can form a constituent within the same sentence.
These facts show that sentences have a hierarchical structure.
These facts show that sentences have a hierarchical structure.
These facts show that sentences have a hierarchical structure.
This is represented by the branching.
Some persons are honest 3.2 Strengths and Weaknesses of Structural Grammar 3.2.1 Strengths of Structural Grammar Unlike Traditional grammar, Structural grammar considers the spoken language to be superior and therefore primary to the written form of language.
Also, its concern for explicitness, precision and generality were welcome alternatives to the arbitrary traditional ways of studying language.
One of the strengths of Structural grammar consists in its contribution to the development of Generative grammar.
It laid the foundation for the latter grammatical model to build on, particularly in such aspects as the concept of the Immediate Constituent Analysis and the Tree structure technique of phrase structure representation.
3.2.2 Weaknesses of Structural Grammar Despite the strong points which structural grammar has been shown to possess, it has been faulted for the following characteristics: First its inability to explain the underlying meaning of sentences as well as its inability to explain other phenomena like synonymy, paraphrase and 124ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II recursion.
Second, structural grammar can not handle ambiguity in larger sentences e.g.
“They called him lawyer”, which could mean: (1) Some persons engaged the services of a lawyer on behalf of another.
OR (2) Somebody is often referred to as “lawyer” (probably on account of his eloquent defence of other persons when they get into trouble).
This is considered to be a significant weakness because the problem of ambiguity is a serious problem in language use and cannot be neglected in language studies.
Third, structuralists emphasised that a certain order be followed when analysing language.
For example, they insisted on beginning analysis with the sounds and sound system of a language before going on to see how the sounds combine into words, words into phrases, and so on.
This procedure is generally described as separation of levels.
Other linguists said this insistence on a strict order is unnecessary since a scholar may decide to begin the analysis of a language at any level.
4.0 CONCLUSION The structural approach characterised a second phase in the development of grammatical models in general.
Its descriptive and objective approach distinguished it from traditional grammar which was prescriptive.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the main points made in this unit: •There are two groups of scholars who started structural grammar.
•Language has a behaviour that is different from the way it is used even though both are related.
•Structuralists did not consider meaning to be a part of the study of language.
•Structuralists used purely objective and scientific procedures in studying language.
•Structuralists first identified an abstract level as a basis for sentences in language.
•They evolved some of the key techniques of linguistic analysis used by later linguists and language scholars up to date.
125ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II ANSWER SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE The three major ideas about language advanced by European structural grammar include the following: 1.
The interrelationships of language form and language behaviour 2.
There is an underlying system of actual behaviour to every actual utterance.
3.
Language can be studied at a particular point in time and can also be studied in terms of the historical development of its elements.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Compare and contrast Traditional grammar with Structural grammar and show how one is an improvement upon the other.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bloomfield, L. (1933).
Language.
London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. Lamidi, M. T. (2000).
Aspects of Chomskyan Grammar.
Ibadan: Emman Publications.
Lyons, J.
(1981).
Linguistics.
The New Encyclopedia Britannica, Vol..10, 15th Edition.
Malmkjcer, K. (1991).
Immediate Constituent Analysis.
In Kirsten Malmkjaer and James M. Anderson (Eds.)
The Linguistics Encyclopedia, London: Routledge.
126ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 3 TRANSFORMATIONAL GENERATIVE GRAMMAR In this unit, you will learn about another grammatical model, transformational generative grammar.
When you are through with reading it you should be able to tell the differences between this model, and the other two that you studied in the previous units.
The unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Generative Grammar 3.2 Phrase Structure Rules 3.3 Transformational Structure Rules 3.4 Morphophonemic Rules 3.5 Deep and Surface Structure 3.6 Strengths and Weaknesses of Generative Grammar 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Since the 1950’s, particularly as an offshoot of the work done by the American linguist, Noam Chomsky, there have been attempts at producing a type of grammar which will have a ‘very explicit system of rules specifying what combinations of basic elements will result in well formed sentences’ (Yule, 1996, p.101).Such a grammar should have a number of properties which will include generating all the well formed sentences of the language and fail to generate any ill-formed ones.
The grammar would have a finite number of rules but will be capable of generating an infinite number of well formed sentences.
In this way, the ability of language users to create totally new sentences in every situation will be possible within the grammar.
The rules of this grammar should be recursive; that is, should be capable of being applied more than once in generating the structure.
These were some of the ideas that led to transformational generative grammar.
127ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 2.0 OBJECTIVES After going through this unit, you should be able to: •explain the origin of transformational grammar •explain and illustrate what is meant by transformational , phrase structure and morphophonemic rules •describe and illustrate the concept of deep and surface structure •identify the differences between transformational grammar and the other two models that you have studied.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Transformational Generative Grammar Transformational Grammar (TG) was first formulated by Zellig Harris in 1951.
It was expanded by Noam Chomsky in 1957 with the publication of his Syntactic Structures and revised in 1965 with Chomsky’s Aspects of the Theory of Syntax.
The main characteristic of TG is the use of formulas, a practice which is not new in the field of grammatical theory but TG uses formulas with a high degree of accuracy and complexity.
Compared with Traditional grammar TG is said to be a more powerful model combining phrase structure and grammatical transformations (Chomsky, 1957 p.80) In its early stage the concept of ‘kernel’ sentences was central to TG.
The kernel consists of simple, declarative active sentences … all other sentences can be described as transforms (Chomsky, 1957, p.80).
Transforms are ‘these sentences derivable by the largely nonrecursive phrase-structure level of the grammar (Lees, 1957, p. 405).
From the two definitions of ‘kernel sentences and transforms the following deductions can be made: •all compound and complex sentences are transforms; •all question sentences are transforms; •all passive sentences are transforms; 128ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II This means, according to Chomsky (1957, p.45), that: every sentence of the language will either belong to the kernel or will be derived from the strings underlying one or more kernel sentences by a sequence of one or more transformations.
This notion of the kernel sentence as the basis of generating other sentences was abandoned in the revised TG theory of 1965.
A linguistic transformation is a process that involves the change of one linguistic structure to another as for instance, the change of the active to the passive (cf Tomori, 1977, p 66).
This type of change is recognized in traditional grammar too.
The sentences 1.
Etim washed the car 2.
The car was washed by Etim demonstrate this structural change.
Transformational grammar then is a type of grammar that tries to explain the rules which govern structural changes and the formation of utterances.
According to Allen and Buren (1971,p.35) ‘a grammatical transformation T operates on a given string with a given constituent structure and converts it to a new string with a new derived constituent structure.
A given string means a grammatically acceptable morpheme e.g.
Okon killed the snake SVO.
Converted to the passive voice it becomes The snake was killed by Okon.
A string may be a sentence or a part of a sentence as in Etim’s wife; the wife of Etim.
TG tries to explain how a native speaker forms and understands sentences in his native language.
The ability of a native speaker is referred to as Competence.
What the native speaker does when he uses language on specific occasions is referred to as Performance.
Performance therefore reflects a native speaker’s competence.
T.G.
attempts to explain the knowledge found in a native speaker of a language which enables him to form sentences without being taught from his knowledge of the language.
TG.
Rules suggest the principles that can aid sentence formation.
The term generate is often used in T.G.
which is also often referred to as Transformational Generative Grammar.
When a rule is said to generate a sentence it means that the rule describes how the particular string or linguistic element is formed and also how potential sentences can be formed.
This makes transformational grammar a grammar of competence rather than a grammar of Performance like Traditional Grammar.
TG relies on three levels of rules: Phrase Structure, Transformational Structure and Morphophonemics.
Each has its own set of writing rules.
129ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Explain the terms: transformational grammar, competence and performance.
2.
What does it mean to say that a rule generates a sentence in transformational grammar?
3.2 Phrase Structure (or F) Rules A phrase structure grammar is one that analyses utterances in terms of its syntactic constituents (Tomori, 1977, p.67) which are S (Subject) V (verb) O (Object) A (Adjunct) C (Complement).
For instance the sentence Etim killed the snake has the syntactic components or constituents: subject + verb + object.
This phrase structure grammar which is often considered an improvement on Traditional Grammar only analyses the constituents of a sentence without saying anything about how it is derived.
For instance it does not say how the sentence is derived neither does it explain the rules that allow the use of killed rather than kill and why Etim is placed before the and why snake comes after the.
What it does is simply describe the structure of the sentence.
In Phrase Structure Grammar the instruction formulas are known as Rewrite Rules.
These rules are given by Chomsky in Syntactic Structures (1957) as: (1) Sentence - NP + VP.
This means rewrite a sentence as NP (Noun Phrase) + VP (Verb Phrase) or simply the constituents of a sentence are a Noun Phrase and a Verb Phrase.
(2) NP = T + N This means rewrite NP as T and N where T means a determiner such as a or the and N means a noun.
(3) VP = Verb + NP In a sentence such as: The man killed the snake: T = the, N = Man, Snake and Verb = killed.
According to the rules of phrase structure grammar as given by Chomsky the full derivation of the sentence: The man killed the snake is as follows: 130ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II S NP + VP T N + VP T + N + Verb + NP The + N + Verb + NP The man + Verb + NP The man + killed + T + N The man + killed + the + N The + man + killed + the + snake The constituent structure of the sentence can also be shown in what is known as a tree diagram or a phrase marker thus: Sentence NP VP T N Verb NP The man killed T N the snake Key Node = Every point where there is a branch A branch = A line that leads from the node.
There can be as many branches as there are constituents.
A terminal node = A node that has nothing below it except a word.
A terminal string = The last line or the sequence of beneath a PS diagram Sisters = Constituents at the same node In a phrase structure grammar, the phrase structure markers (or phrase markers) include: S - Sentence NP - Noun Phrase V - Verb Phrase PP - Prepositional Phrase T (ART) - Article N - Noun P - Preposition ADJ - Adjective PART - Particle 131ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Constituent structure organisations or word order are described by Phrase Structure (PS) rules or in the words of Chomsky rewrite rules: A.
S - NP VP The constituents of sentences are a Noun Phrase and a verb phrase B. NP - (ART) (ADJ) N means A noun phrase must contain a noun and may contain an article, an adjective or both C. VP - V (NP) (PP) means A verb phrase contains a verb V, a compulsory element and a noun phrase or prepositional phrase as optional element D. PP - N NP means A prepositional phrase contains a preposition and a noun phrase as compulsory elements.
The main limitations of phrase structure grammar are: •The rules directing the formation of utterances only describes the syntactic structures of most utterances.
•It does not stipulate the proper order of application of the rules to produce well formed sentences.
•The taxonomic view of syntax is also found in phrase structure grammar.
This is the tendency to classify linguistic elements into groups to explain them as seen in traditional grammar where words were classified into parts of speech.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the limitations of Phrase Structure Grammar?
3.3 Transformational Structure Rules The second level in transformational grammar is that of transformational structure.
Five transformational rules operate at this level.
These are: 1.
T and.
This is the rule for conjoining sentences e.g.
the scene – of the play – was in Lagos the scene – of the accident – was in Lagos become 132ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II The scene of the play and of the accident was in Lagos 2.
T Af – This is the rule for deriving the correct form of the verb in a sentence e.g.
-ed added to kill as in: The man killed the snake – where the correct form of the verb is killed or She likes rice where the correct form of the verb is likes 3.
Tp is the transformational rule for deriving the passive form from the active form e.g.
Okon washed the car The car was washed by Okon 4.
Tnot is the rule for forming the negative versions from positive sentences e.g.
positive She can draw (Positive) She cannot draw.
(Negative) 5.
Tq is the rule for forming questions from positive sentences e.g.
She can draw.
Can she draw?
3.4 Morphophonemic Rules The third level in transformational grammar is morphophonemic structure.
This is the level where the string of morphemes comprising a terminal string is converted into the sounds of a language.
For instance the morpheme {stand} + {past} becomes stood Rules that govern the phonetic realization of morphemes are called morphophonemic rules.
Transformational grammar was revised in 1965 in Chomsky’s Aspects of the Theory of Syntax to cater for certain loopholes found in syntactic structures.
For instance the rewriting rules did not specify context e.g.
S ﬁ NP + VP does not specify what type of NP can go with what V.P.
In traditional grammar for instance we know that not every verb can take an object; not every English verb is transitive e.g.
In: The dog frightened the boy S ﬁ NP + VP + NP The verb frightened takes a direct object.
but in the sentence: 133ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Two weeks have elapsed S ﬁ NP + VP.
The VP have elapsed does not take a direct object.
Chomsky’s modification introduces subcategorisation rules and selectional rules to show, for instance, what verbs can be used in what sentence patterns.
For instance in the sentences which may fit into the same type of frame: NP+VP+NP The darkness may frighten the girl and John loves Mary Although the two sentences can fit into the same frame, it is not specified what type of NP can go with what type of VP.
This is because it is not every VP in the English language that can go with every NP.
In the terms of traditional grammar, this means that not every verb in English can take a direct object; not every English verb is transitive (Tomori, 1977, p.76).
The rules which Chomsky introduced to restrict certain classes of words to certain syntactic frames are known as subcategorisation rules while the rules introduced to describe the restrictions on the co-occurrence of certain linguistic items are known as selectional rules.
Tomori (1977) illustrates this point with the following sentence: The fierce dog may frighten the boy.
According to the context free rewriting rules of the grammar this sentence can be rewritten thus: S NP+VP +NP may frighten is an example of a verb phrase which takes an object in the English language.
But another sentence: Two weeks elapsed has the rewriting rule: S NP+ VP .
This shows that the verb elapsed is one of the English verbs that do not take an object.
Subcategorisation rules are therefore meant to show what verbs can go together in what sentence patterns (p. 77) 134ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 3.5 Deep and Surface Structure The concept of deep and surface structure was also developed in 1965 by Chomsky.
The deep structure of a sentence refers to the basic (underlying) meaning of a sentence derived from its syntactic and semantic components, while the surface structure is the form in which the sentence appears phonologically or orthographically; that is, according to Eka (1994, p.21) those aspects of the sentence which can be determined through an examination of the ways the sentence is spoken or written.
For instance the sentences a.
Your clothes need washing b.
Your friends keep coming appear to have the same surface structure but their deep structures are different.
Sentence (a) is derived from two basic sentences: Your clothes are dirty; Someone must wash them (b) has only one sentence as its basis – In the language of traditional grammar, (a) is active in form but passive in meaning while (b) is active in both form and meaning.
Also in 1965, the concept of the kernel sentence was abandoned in favour of the concept of the ‘basis of a sentence’ which is explained as ‘the sequence of base phrase-markers that underlies it’ (Chomsky, 1965, p.128).
Thus a sentence is (a) basic string’ if the phrase-marker underlying it is only one as in your friends keep coming.
The sentence: Your clothes need washing has as its basis, the sequence of two phrase markers: your clothes are dirty; someone must wash them.
Transformations that operate on single phrase markers are known as singularly transformations as seen in the following: •Okon embraced Ekaette ﬁ Ekaette was embraced by Okon Tp •We shall succeed ﬁ Shall we succeed Tq •The food was delicious ﬁ The food wasn’t delicious Tnot In the first sentence the singularly transformation operates on an active sentence making it passive; in the second sentence transformation changes a declarative sentence to a question while in the third sentence the transformation changes a positive to a negative sentence.
135ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II When transformations operate on two or more phrase-markers to produce a new phrase marker either by embedding or by conjoining the transformation is known as generalised transformation as in the following: She was leaving She said so ﬁ She said that she was leaving The woman had no child The woman bought the house ﬁ The woman who bought the house has no child SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Illustrate the following transformation rules with your own examples T and, T Af, Tnot, Tq and Tp.
4.0 CONCLUSION Transformational grammar and transformational generative grammar constitute what could be considered the third phase in the development of grammatical models.
Their most significant contribution is the processes and rules evolved to address structural transformations in language.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit the following points have been made: •Transformational grammar (TG) is a type of grammar that tries to explain the rules which govern structural changes and the formation of utterances.
•It tries to explain how a native speaker forms and understands sentences in his native language.
•The ability of a native speaker is referred to as Competence.
•What the native speaker does when he/she uses language on specific occasions is referred to as Performance.
•TG relies on three levels of rules: Phrase Structure, Transformational Structure and Morphophonemics.
Each has its own set of writing rules.
•A phrase structure grammar analyses utterances in terms of its syntactic constituents which are SVOAC •The second level in transformational grammar is that of transformational structure.
136ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •Five transformational rules operate at this level.
These are:Tand, Tp, TAf, Tq and Tnot.
•The third level in transformational grammar is morphophonemic structure.
•This is the level where the string of morphemes comprising a terminal string is converted into the sounds of a language.
•The deep structure of a sentence refers to the basic (underlying) meaning of a sentence derived from its syntactic and semantic components • The surface structure is the form in which the sentence appears phonologically or orthographically.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Explain the terms: transformational grammar, competence and performance.
i. Transformational grammar (TG) is a type of grammar that tries to explain the rules which govern structural changes and the formation of utterances.
ii.
It tries to explain how a native speaker forms and understands sentences in his native language.
iii.
The ability of a native speaker is referred to as Competence.
iv.
What the native speaker does when he uses language on specific occasions is referred to as Performance.
2.
What does it mean to say that a rule generates a sentence in transformational grammar?
When a rule is said to generate a sentence it means that the rule describes how the particular string or linguistic element is formed and also how potential sentences can be formed.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 The limitations of Phrase Structure Grammar The main limitations of phrase structure grammar are: 1.
The rules directing the formation of utterances only describe the syntactic structures of most utterances.
2.
It does not stipulate the proper order of application of the rules to produce well formed sentences.
3.
The taxonomic view of syntax is also found in phrase structure grammar.
This is the tendency to classify linguistic elements into 137ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II groups to explain them as seen in traditional grammar where words were classified into parts of speech.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Illustrate the following transformation rules with your own examples T and, T Af, Tnot, Tq and Tp Candidates are to give their own examples to illustrate the transformational rules as shown below: 1.
T and.
This is the rule for conjoining sentences e.g.
the scene – of the play – was in Lagos the scene – of the accident – was in Lagos become The scene of the play and of the accident was in Lagos 2.
T Af – This is the rule for deriving the correct form of the verb in a sentence e.g.
The man killed the snake – where the correct form of the verb is killed or she likes rice where the correct form of the verb is likes The rule T Af also states how affixes are attached to base words to produce the correct forms of the words in question.
It applies to verbs as well as nouns.
3.
Tp is the transformational rule for deriving the passive form from the active form e.g.
Okon washed the car The car was washed by Okon 4.
Tnot is the rule for forming the negative versions from positive sentences e.g.
She can draw (Positive) She cannot draw.
(Negative) 5.
Tq is the rule for forming questions from positive sentences e.g.
She can draw.
Can she draw?
138ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
To what extent is transformational grammar an improvement on earlier grammars?
2.
Trace the transformational history of the following sentences: (i) The man who came here is a medical doctor (ii) The play was not entertaining.
(iii) Should I come with you (iv) The food was cooked by my mother.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Chomsky, N. (1957).
Syntactic Structures.
Mouton: The Hague.
Chomsky, N. (1965).
Aspects of the Theory of Syntax.
MIT Press.
Eka, D. (1994).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics the English Language.
Uyo: Samuf Educational.
Lees,R.B.(1957).
Review of Chomsky.
Language, 33, 88-97.
Tomori, S.H.O.
(1977).
The Morphology and Syntax of Present – Day English.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books Ltd. Yule, G. (1996).
The Study of Language.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
139ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 4 SYSTEMIC GRAMMAR Systemic grammar is generally considered to have evolved to offer some improvement on the inadequacies of structural and early transformational generative grammars.
In this unit you will learn about the systemic grammar model and assess whether it was really an improvement on other grammars.
This unit is arranged as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Systemic Grammar Model 3.2 Categories of Analysis in Systemic Grammar 3.2.1 Unit 3.2.2 Class 3.2.3 Structure 3.2.4 System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Even though systemic grammar is one of the models of grammatical analysis which exist for use in the study of language, it possesses certain peculiarities both in its conception and applications which set it apart from the other grammatical models.
Perhaps, because it arose in reaction to the claims made by structural and early transformational generative grammar that meaning could not be studied within a theory of grammar, systemic grammar considers meaning and context- related issues as key concerns in the study of any language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After going through this unit, you should be able to: •describe systemic grammar as a more elaborate and a more functional approach to the study of language; •explain the categories which serve as the units of analysis within the systemic grammar framework; and •explain the categories of Unit, Class, Structure and System, and how they work in language analysis.
140ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Systemic Grammar This model of grammar grew out of work done by J. R. Firth.
Firth’s initial work was known by the term context of situation.
Later, Michael A. K. Halliday developed the Systemic Model of grammar based on Firth’s initial theory of Context of Situation.
This is why the Systemic Model of grammar is also sometimes known as Neo-Firthian Grammar.
Systemic grammar is organized into two planes – structure at the surface plane and a system of semantic features at the deep plane (Eka, 1994, p. 25).
This model does not consider grammar as a separate level since it claims that the syntax and the morphology of a language are interrelated and are explicable in terms of units on the grammatical rank scale.
These principles of the grammar have earned it a third name – Halliday’s Scale and Category Grammar.
The claim within systemic grammar is that all languages are capable of being analyzed into Units, Structures, Classes and Systems.
These constitute the categories with which analysis within a systemic model of grammar may be done.
According to this model, sentence and clause are instances of the category called unit; verbs and nouns exemplify the category referred to within this model as class; subject and complement instantiate the category, structure.
The three categories Unit, Class and Structure make up a system of the theory of this grammar.
Let us look at each of these categories in more detail in order to understand their nature.
3.2 Components of the Systemic Model of Grammar 3.2.1 Unit A unit may be explicable in terms of the item, which carries grammatical patterns.
(Eka, 1994, p.26) observes that “whenever a grammatical choice is made, there must be a unit that carries the choice.” As far as systemic grammar is concerned, five units have been identified on the grammatical rank scale of English.
These include sentence, clause, group, word and morpheme.
Each unit is further capable of being broken down into smaller units.
For example, the sentence is capable of further analysis into one or more clauses, and more than one word, etc.
The units as conceived within the systemic model are not autonomous, they have links one with another following a hierarchy.
This hierarchical relationship among the units of a language is referred to by the term 141ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II ”Rank Scale.” The most basic unit is the morpheme and it occurs at the bottom of the scale.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State two cardinal concerns of the systemic model of grammar.
3.2.2 Structure The term “structure” within a systemic model of grammar accounts for the nature of the patterns which may occur or are capable of occurring in a unit.
The Nominal Word Group (NWG) for instance is an example of a structure, and certain patterns make up the structure.
The patterns which are capable of occurring in the NWG structure are: modifier, head and qualifier (mhq).
The pattern labeled modifier refers to words which regularly occur before the head word in a structure or group or phrase.
The head (h) of a phrase is the keyword in the group or phrase.
The keyword in a Nominal group or noun phrase is a noun, for an Adjectival group or phrase; the key word is an adjective, etc.
The pattern qualifier describes a word or group of words which occurs after the head word in a group or phrase.
Consider the sentence in which the patterns of structure have been identified: 1.
The tall young man who called yesterday is a student In the above sentence the Nominal Word Group (NWG) is The tall young man who called yesterday … This can be analyzed as follows: m = “the,” “tall” and “young” h = “man” q = “who called yesterday”.
The sentence is also analyzed as a structure in systemic grammar.
It is regularly composed of the elements subject, predicator, complement and Adjunct (SPCA).
Thus a sentence is a type of structure in the systemic model of grammar and has its own patterns which occur within it.
3.2.3 Class A class in systemic grammar refers to members of the same unit.
Items in a language take certain patterns in the structures in which they occur, and they are often arranged according to the patterns that they take in such structures.
Words which pattern in the same way are said to constitute a class.
There may then be separate classes of nouns, for example abstract nouns, concrete nouns, mass and count nouns, etc.
142ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Verbs may be divided into classes according to whether they are transitive or intransitive; regular or irregular, etc, Members of a class behave in similar ways in the structures in which they occur and have similar privileges of occurrence.
3.2.4 System What defines a system, according to systemic grammar, involves the choice of one item over another item from among a number of similar events in a given structure.
When speaking an utterance or writing a sentence, the choices available in the predicate, for instance fall within the following systems: aspect: this is either perfective or progressive aspect tense: the tense can be present or past voice: the sentence can be said to be either in the active or the passive voice Thus each of aspect, tense and voice constitutes a system, since each provides choices that have to be made by a language user.
These systems are not autonomous, they are interrelated and are often regarded as points on a network of relationships.
Number: this may be singular or plural Person: this refers to participant roles which language users play in a given language situation.
There are usually three such roles: 1st person, 2nd person and third person.
Gender: the subject, object or pronoun in a sentence can be said to be either masculine in gender or neuter in gender.
Polarity: this may be positive or negative Article: this system comprises the term ‘definite’ and ‘indefinite’.
Demonstrative adjectives: may be those with near reference to those with distant reference.
Two additional points need to be mentioned here in discussing systemic grammar.
These relate to the notions of rank scale and delicacy.
Rank scale is used to refer to the phenomenon whereby a unit operates in the structure of a unit which is immediately higher than it in the rank scale.
Thus, clauses can operate in sentences, groups in structure of clauses and so on.
Sometimes (owing perhaps to stylistic reasons) a certain higher level unit is moved down the rank scale to function in a unit of equal rank or of a lower rank.
This phenomenon is referred to as rank shift.
The affected unit is then said to be rank shifted or down-graded.
For instance, a clause can be made to function within the structure of other clauses, or even in the structure of groups.
Consider the sentence: 143ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 2 The letter which you wrote has been returned.
in which the clause: which you wrote functions within the structure of the sentence: The letter … has been returned.
This shows that the dependent clause which you wrote has been rank shifted (downgraded) to function in the structure of the main or independent clause serving the function of qualifier to the nominal group the letter in the m h q structure.
Also, within the Systemic Model of grammar the term delicacy is used to describe the ‘level of differentiation or depth of detail in an analysis’ (Eka, 1994, p.29).
When descriptions of linguistic phenomena or analyses employ the least number of items necessary for the understanding of the said phenomenon, such a description or analysis is said to be generalized and least delicate, that is not detailed.
But when a description or analysis employs more number of items it is said to be detailed and so delicate.
In describing or analyzing the nominal group in English for example, a more generalized form (less delicate) of analysis would be to say that it is usually made up of the m h q elements.
However, a more detailed (more delicate) form of analysis would specify the various classes of the m- element- deictic element, ordinals, epithet, nominal.
It is instructive to note that items within classes in English are capable of analysis into very delicate levels of description.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the components of systemic grammar?
4.0 CONCLUSION Systemic grammar which evolved to account for meaning within grammar could be viewed as a fourth phase in the development of grammatical models.
However, unlike the first three phases which are interrelated, this model stands on its own.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that •the initial concept of systemic grammar was context of situation.
•systemic grammar considers meaning an important aspect of the study of languages.
•systemic grammarians feel that language is a means of communication and the effectiveness of a stretch of language depends on whether those involved in the communication situation understand each other.
•systemic grammar emphasized acceptability in addition grammaticality.
144ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II •like the structuralist and the early transformational grammar the systemic model recognized two planes of language – the surface plane and the deep plane where meaning resides.
•the components of systemic grammar are: unit, structure, class and system and each constitutes a category for grammatical description in the Systemic Model.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State two cardinal concerns of the systemic model of grammar.
Perhaps, because it arose in reaction to the claims made by structural and early transformational generative grammar that meaning could not be studied within a theory of grammar, systemic grammar considers meaning and context related issues as key concerns in the study of any language.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the components of systemic grammar?
The components of Systemic Grammar are: unit, structure, class and system and each constitutes a category for grammatical description in the Systemic Model.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Distinguish between class and system in systemic grammar.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eka, D. (1994).
Elements of Grammar and Mechanics of the English Language.
Uyo: Samuf (Nig.)
Ltd. Halliday, M. K. A., McIntosh, A. and Strevens, P. (1964).
The Linguistic Sign and Language Teaching.
London: Longman.
Tomori, S.H.O.
(1977).
The Morphology and Syntax of Present – day English.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books Ltd. 145ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II UNIT 5 GOVERNMENT AND BINDING MODEL OF GRAMMAR This unit introduces you to the Government and Binding model of grammar, its major aspects and sub-systems.
You learnt in Unit 1 that there are many ways of looking at and studying language, which are generally referred to as grammatical models.
You have learnt about models of grammar like the Traditional (or Classical) model, the Structural model, the Systemic model and the Transformational Generative model.
In this unit you will be exposed to a model of grammar which is considered by many linguists to have offered new ideas about the nature of human languages in general and which is held to be a better apparatus for describing natural languages.
The unit is organized as follows: CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Major aspects of Government-Binding Model of Grammar 3.2 The Interactive Sub-systems of GB 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Government and Binding model of grammar is one of the versions of the Transformational Generative grammar (TGG) which was expounded by Avram Noam Chomsky in his book Syntactic Structures published in 1957.
It is generally considered to have developed to serve as an improvement on the inadequacies of the earlier versions of Chomskyan grammar; namely, the Standard theory, the Extended Standard theory and the Revised Extended Standard theory.
GB is an advanced form of Universal Grammar, that is why it emphasizes the universality of grammar.
It incorporates the principles and features of the earlier versions of Chomskyan grammar; for example the Tree structure representation of the Phrase Structure and Transformational Generative grammar models, the interpretative component responsible for meaning and the phonetic component responsible for how words and sentences are pronounced.
Generally, GB offers an improved analysis of the structure of sentences in natural languages.
146ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II 2.0 OBJECTIVES After going through this unit, you should be able to: •describe the Government-Binding model of grammar; •identify its unique characteristics; and •explain key features of GB such as its universality, modular nature, principles and parameters.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Major Aspects of Government and Binding Model The central notion of the Government-Binding model of grammar may best be understood through an explanation of the two major aspects of which it consists.
These aspects are Principles and Parameters.
This is why the GB model of grammar is sometimes also referred to as the Principles and Parameters Theory (PPT).
The aspect of GB known as the Principles has to do with those features or aspects of languages (in general) which are common to all languages and which do not vary from one language to another.
Such common features are described within Universal grammar as core features.
They are features which all human languages possess.
For instance, all languages have structural units known as words, phrases, clauses and sentences.
Within GB all phrases in all languages have the same structure: in every phrase there is a word that is more important than the other words in that phrase.
That word is described as the head of that phrase.
Thus, in a noun phrase the noun is the head; in a verb phrase, the verb is the head … and so on.
Everything about a phrase – the way it functions, its structure and so on is determined by the nature of the head of the phrase in question.
All phrases are said to have the same structure which may be represented using a Tree structure schema like the one in Fig 1: Fig 1: Structure of a Phrase N N N White house 147ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II Examples of noun phrases in English are the following: (i) female hostel (ii) government policy (iii) the head of Department (iv) All teachers of Mathematics We can represent the VP “carries a basket” on a tree diagram such as the one in Fig 1 above thus: N N N carries a basket Fig 2: Tree Structure representation of the phrase “carries a basket” Examples of verb phrases in English are indicated below: (i) carries a basket (ii) depicts a market scene (iii) wrote on slabs (iv) are selling in the market.
Following the principles of GB which assign the same structure to all phrases in all languages we could identify the heads of the verb phrases as “carries” in (i), “depicts” in (ii), “wrote” in (iii) and “selling” in (iv).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) Identify the heads in the following phrases: (a) village market (b) bicycle repairer (c) writes novels (d) are acting on stage 2) Represent 1(a) and (c) on tree diagrams Parameters on the other hand refer to those aspects of GB which study the variable features which human languages posses.
That is, the differences which exist among languages within the principles which they may share.
For instance, one important difference observed to exist 148ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II among languages with regard to the structure of their phrases is the position which heads occupy.
In some languages, the heads of phrases are uniformly positioned before the other words whereas in others they occur last in the phrase.
Languages in which the heads of phrases occur in phrase – initial position are described as Head-First languages.
English is cited as an example of a Head-First language.
However, it should be pointed out that it is not all phrases that heads occur first e.g.
female hostel where hostel is the head and comes after the modifier (= complement ‘female’).
According to Haegeman (1994), Japanese is an example of a Head-Last Language.
Thus, it would be clear that even though parameters recognize that all languages have certain features in common, it also recognizes that languages differ in certain specific respects.
These differences account for why they are distinct separate languages any way.
3.2 Interactive Sub-Systems of GB GB has been shown to present a wider scope for the study of languages.
Within this model of grammar language operates on inter-connecting levels, with each level making inputs to enable other levels to function.
According to Chomsky (p.5) language grammar comprises interacting sub-systems.
GB is organized into sub-systems more technically known as modules.
Each module has a function but contributes inputs to other modules for the overall functioning of the grammatical system of language.
As a result of this organization into modules, GB is said to have a modular character.
There are seven interactive sub-systems or modules of GB.
They include: the Bounding sub-system, the Government sub-system, the Theta sub-system, the Binding sub-system, the Case sub-system, the Control sub-system and the X-bar sub-system.
The Bounding sub- system imposes restrictions on how phrases may be moved from one sentence position to another; the Government sub-system ensures that the head of a phrase occurs in close proximity to the other elements that co-occur with it; and the function of the Theta sub-system is to assign meaning roles to relevant noun phrases, e.g.
this sub-system ensures that a noun which occurs after a verb, for example, is assigned the appropriate meaning (thematic) role of object.
The Binding sub-system is concerned with the relationships which must hold between nouns, noun phrases or pronouns and their antecedents; the X-bar sub-system deals with the relationship between the head of a phrase and the elements that are dependent on it … and so on for the other sub-systems.
Thus it would be clear that the sub-system interacts one with another 149ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II such that “two or more of them can account for the grammaticality or ungrammaticality of structures” (Lamidi, 2000, p.61).
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has introduced to the GB model of grammar which is a further development of earlier models of grammar like the Transformational Generative Grammar (TGG).
It is important to note that unlike earlier models which were developed with specific languages in mind, GB is based on the universal characteristics of languages.
5.0 SUMMARY The following points have been made in this unit: •Avram Noam Chomsky is the proponent of the Government-Binding model of grammar along with others like Phrase Structure Grammar, Transformational-Generative Grammar, etc.
•GB is a more generalized model of grammar: it studies the grammar of languages in general, not individual language grammars.
•It is enriched and has a wider scope because it incorporates in its models the major principles and features of the other versions of grammar both within and outside Chomskyan linguistics.
•It is concerned with what human languages have in common rather than with what differentiates them.
•It emphasizes universality.
•However, GB recognizes that there exist differences among languages.
•A major characteristic of GB is its modularity.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE (1) The heads in the phrases (i) village market = market (ii) bicycle repairer = repairer (iii) writes novels = writes (iv) are acting on stage= acting N (2a) N N Village market (Head) Tree representation of the phrase “village market” 150ENG 122 THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN ENGLISH II V (b) V N Writes (head) novels Tree representation of the phrase “writes novels” 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain GB’s concept of Principles and Parameters.
Use appropriate illustrations.
2.
What is meant by Head-First and Head-Last languages?
Give some examples from English and your mother tongue or any other language.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Chomsky, N. (1981).
Lectures on Government and Binding: The Pisa Lectures.
Dordrecht: Foris Publications.
Haegeman, Liliane.
(1994).
Introduction to Government and Binding Theory.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lamidi, M. T. (2000).
Aspects of Chomsyan Grammar.
Ibadan: Emman Publications.
151
