 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: 151 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE COURSE GUIDE ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Course Developer Dr. Ogunsiyi Ayotunde Course Writer Dr. Ogunsiyi Ayotunde Course Co- ordinator Christine Ofulue, Ph.D National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
ii  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-290-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iii  Table of Contents Page Introduction ……………………………………………………….
1 What you will learn in this course ………………………………… 1 Course Aims ……………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives ………………………………………………… 2 Working through this Course …………………………………….. 2 Course Materials ………………………………………………….. 2 Study Units ……………………………………………………….. 3 References ……………………………………………………….. 3 Assignment File …………………………………………………… 4 Presentation Schedule ……………………………………………... 4 Assessment ……………………………………………………….. 4 Tutor Marked Assignments ……………………………………….. 4 Final Examination and Grading …………………………………… 4 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………………….. 5 How to get the Most from this Course …………………………….. 5-6 Tutor and Tutorials ……………………………………………….. 6-7 Summary ………………………………………………………….. 7 iv  Introduction ENG 151: Introduction to English as a Second Language (ESL) is a two-unit course available in the first semester of first year for BA English and BA (Ed.)
English programmes.
The course is to serve as a foundation course and it exposes you to such issues and concepts as Domains and Status of Language; the spread of English world-wide, Varieties of English in Nigeria; Standards And Deviations in English.
(El2); Language Nationism And Nationalism; Distinctions between ESL, Pidgin and Creole; Aspects of Teaching English as A Second Language, the teaching of Literature in English as well as the Assessment of learner’s in ESL.
What you will learn in this course The general aim of this course is to introduce you to the study of English as a Second Language.
The classification of any language as a second language relates to the status and function of the language as well as the mode, order and age or period of acquisition.
In some parts of the world, including Nigeria, English functions as a second language.
This course will expose you to the linguistic and sociolinguistic contexts of English as a second language with particular emphasis on the Nigerian situation.
The political, educational, and environmental contexts of ESL in Nigeria shall also be addressed.
Course Aims There are twenty study units in the course and each unit has iotbs je ctives.
You should read the objectives of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
In addition to the objectives of each unit, the overall aims of this course include: (i) To introduce you to the study of English as a second Language; (ii) To familiarize you with the peculiar characteristics of English as a second language; (iii) To expose you to the need for and the demands of teaching English as a second language; and (iv) To prepare you for further studies in English as a second language.
ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Course Objectives Based on the general aims of this course, some objectives for the course as a whole are set out.
These are the things you should be able to do by the time you complete the course.
If you are able to meet the objectives, you would have achieved the aims of the course.
Therefore, on your successful completion of this course, you should be able to: a) Describe the origin and development of English as a Second Language (ESL), particularly in Nigeria; b) Identify the features of English as a Second Language; c) Account for the spread of English as a Second Language; d) Distinguish between English as a Second Language, English as a First Language, and English as a foreign language; e) Explain the need for the teaching of English as a Second Language; f) Conduct successfully any lessons on any aspects of English at the Junior Secondary School level; g) Discuss the place of Literature in English as a second language; h) Describe approaches to language testing and types of language tests.
Working through This Course You have to work through all the study units in the course.
There are twenty study units in all.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule vi  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Study Units The breakdown of the twenty study units are as follows: Unit 1 Definition, Domains and Status of Language: First Language, Second Language.
Unit 2 Domains and Status of Language: Foreign Language, National Language, Official Language.
Unit 3 The Spread of the English Language in the World Unit 4 English as a second Language in Nigeria: Its Implantation.
Unit 5 English as a second Language in Nigeria: Its functions.
Unit 6 Distinctions between English as a second Language (ESL), Pidgin English, and Creole.
Unit 7 Language as an index of nationalism and nationism.
Unit 8 The Concept of Bilingualism: Definitions, Extent and Types.
Unit 9 The Concept of Bilingualism: Its development and Consequences.
Unit 10 ESL and National Language Policy.
Unit 11 English and Indigenous Nigerian Languages.
Unit 12 Varieties of English as a second language in Nigeria.
Unit 13 Standard and Deviations in ESL.
Unit 14 Teaching English as a second Language: Listening and Speaking.
Unit 15 Teaching English as a second Language: Reading and Writing.
Unit 16 Teaching English as a second Language: Vocabulary Grammatical Structures.
vii  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Unit 17 Literature in English as a Second Language.
Unit 18 Teaching Literature in English as a second Language.
Unit 19 Environmental factors in Learning English as a second Language.
Unit 20 Assessment of student’s performance in ESL.
References and Other Resources Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try to get as many as possible of those textbooks and materials listed.
The textbooks and materials are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) and a final examination which you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA) Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit them for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select four which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignments may be presented to you in a separate file.
Just know that for every unit there are viii  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE some tutor-marked assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination which will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination which shall last for two hours, you will be requested to answer three questions out of at least five questions.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve ix  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organise a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the acsasriegfnulmlye.n Tt h ey have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through tchoeu r se and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself oscnh e dule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked x  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and the address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important, therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
Summary This course introduces you to the study of English as a Second Language.
In Nigeria, English functions as a second language.
Its classification as a second language therefore, relates to the status and function of the language as well as the mode, order and age or period of acquisition.
The course describes the linguistic and sociolinguistic contexts of English as a second language with particular reference to the Nigerian situation.
We wish you success with the course.
xi  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE MAIN COURSE Course Code ENG 151 Course Title Introduction to English as a Second Language Course Developer Dr. Ogunsiyi Ayotunde Course Writers Dr. Ogunsiyi Ayotunde Programme Leader Christine Ofulue, Ph.D National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xii  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-290-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria xiii  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Table of Content Page Unit 1 Definition, Domains and Status of Language: First Language, Second Language ………………... 1 – 5 Unit 2 Domains and Status of Language: Foreign Language, National Language, Official Language....................................................... 6 – 10 Unit 3 The Spread of the English Language in the World …………………………………………........ 11– 16 Unit 4 English as a Second Language in Nigeria: its Implantation ………………………………....…...... 17– 20 Unit 5 English as a Second Language in Nigeria: its Functions ………………………………………....... 21 – 24 Unit 6 Distintions between Standard English Pidgin and Creole ……………………………………......... 25 – 28 Unit 7 Language as an Index of Nationalism and Nationism ……………………………………........ 29 – 32 Unit 8 The Concept of Bilingualism: Definition, Types and Extent ………………………………..... 33 – 36 Unit 9 Bilingualism: Is Development and Consequences …………………………………..... 37 – 40 Unit10 ESL and National Language Policy in Nigeria …... 41 – 44 Unit11 English and the Indigenous Nigeria Language …... 45 – 50 Unit12 Varieties of English as a Second Language in Nigeria ……………………………………........51 – 56 Unit13 Standard and Deviation in ESL ………………....... 57 – 64 Unit14 Teaching English as a Second Language: Listening and Speaking ……………………….. 65 – 70 Unit15 Teaching English as a Second Language: Reading and writing ………………………...... 71 – 75 Unit16 Teaching English as a Second Language: Vocabulary and Grammatical Structure ……....….. 76 – 82 Unit17 Literature in English as a Second Language …...… 83 – 87 Unit18 Teaching Literature in English as a Second Language ……………………………... 88 – 92 Unit19 Important Factors in ESL Teaching and Learning ……………………………………..... 93 – 97 Unit20 Assessment of Learners’ Performance in English as a Second Language ………………......... 98 – 102 xiv  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 1 DEFINITIONS, DOMAINS AND STATUS OF LANGUAGE: FIRST LANGUAGE, SECOND LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Intorduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Definitions of Language 3.2.1 First Language 3.2.2 Seconde Language (L2) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about some definitions, domains and status of language.
You will readily agree that language is important in any human society- it gives order and meaning to society.
Can you imagine a language-less society of human beings?
Really, that would be a meaningless society devoid of meaningful existence, a society of disorder, anarchy, hopelessness, helplessness and so on.
Such a society will simply be an animal society.
Indeed, language is one of the major things that distinguish human beings from the lower animals.
With the possession and use of language man becomes a social being, capable of reasoning and socializing, among other things.
Because of its importance, therefore, the study of language becomes worthwhile.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Define language functionally; ii.
Describe language status; iii.
Explain carefully first language and second language; and iv.
Distinguish between first language and second language.
1  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definitions of Language Many definitions have been given to language by language scholars.
Alo (1995) cites some of these definitions, which we reproduce below: “Language is the primary and most highly elaborated form of human symbolic activity…made up of symbols made by sounds produced by the vocal apparatus….” (A.
A Hill) “Language is any set of system of linguistic symbols as used in a more or less uniform fashion by a number of people who are thus enabled to communicate intelligibly with one another” ( Random House, Dictionary of the English Language) “Language is a system of arbitrary vocal symbols used for human communication” (Wardhaugh).
“Language is a system of arbitrary vocal symbols which permit all p eople in a given culture, or other people who have learned the system of that culture to communicate or interact”.
(Finocchiaro).
From the few definitions of language cited above, it should be clear to you that language is a human’s means of communication.
Most of the definitions that have been given to language relate it to the process of human communication.
Although language is not the only means of human communication, it is the most important and organized’ means of human communication.
But let us also note that language performs some other functions apart from communication.
As you proceed in your B.A.
Education (English) programme, you will become familiar with the numerous functions of language.
But meanwhile, let us go back to the definitions of language cited earlier on.
Study the definitions again and identify any features that are common to them.
Having identified the common features, use them to define language in your own way.
Domains and Status of Language It should be clear to you now that language is needed in all areas of human life.
When we talk about the domains of language, roughly we mean the fields or areas of activities of language use.
The fields or areas of activities of language use as well as the intensity of use pdaertetlrym ine the status accorded the language.
Therefore, the status accorded a language is not inherently linguistic.
This is to say that 2  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE language status is determined by factors other than linguistic.
Linguistically, there is no language that is superior to another.
But social, political, historical, economic, demographic etc factors will spell the status given to a language.
Why do you think this is so?
It will be well to observe also that the age and the manner of acquisition of language will also define the status of the language.
3.2.1 First Language (L1) The term “first language” (or L1) is used to refer to the language which a child ‘first acquires after birth.
This is also called the mtoongthueer’ (MT).
Usually, the first language or mother tongue is ‘picked up’ from parents, relatives and other people in the immediate environment.
But let us note that a child may acquire a language other than that spoken by his parents as his first language.
How do you think this can happen?
One illustration will suffice here.
Let’s imagine a Yoruba child born in Kano where Hausa is the language of the immediate community.
It will then mean that this child will be surrounded by the Hausa language; Yoruba, the language of his parents, may not be spoken to him.
In this circumstance, the child will acquire Hausa as his first language.
Simply put, therefore, one’s first language is the language one first encounters after birth and it constitutes one’s linguistic tool needed for the process of socialization or acculturation – that is, the process through which one becomes a full and active member of his society.
Thus, the first language is the language of early education.
This is why it is often advocated that the child should be taught in his first language (or mother tongue) in order to ensure effective learning and guarantee the proper development of the child.
In Nigeria, the English language is not a first language.Rather, languages such as Hausa, Yoruba, Igbo, Efik, Fulfude and so on are first languages or mother tongues or indigenous languages.
But the English language is the first language or mother tongue in places like Britain, the United States, Australia, most of Canada and New Zealand.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
State some benefits of teaching a child in his first language in his early education.
2.
What do you think will happen to a child who is denied the opportunity of being taught in his first language in his early education?
3.
Mention five (5) other indigenous Nigerian languages not mentioned in this section.
3  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.2.2 Second Language (L2) Having understood what First Language is, we shall now proceed to discuss what a Second Language (or L2) means.
The term, ‘Second Language’ is used to refer to a language that is learned and uexsetedn s ively in addition to the first language.
In other words, we use the term second language to describe the language a bilingual or multilingual person acquires and uses extensively after the first language.
A bilingual person is somebody who speaks two languages while a multilingual person is somebody who speaks many languages.
What do you think you are?
(Are you bilingual or multilingual?)
To a bilingual or multilingual person, a second language performs many important functions.
Don’t forget that a second language is used extensively by a bilingual or multilingual person for the purposes of wider communication, education, commerce and industry, socio- economic mobility and so on.
Today, in many parts of the world the English language is used as a second language.
This is exactly the situation in Nigeria, India, Kenya, Ghana, Singapore, Sierra-Leone, among others.
Where English is used as a second language, it develops its own peculiar characteristics different from those of English as a first language.
Such characteristics manifest in the areas of pronunciation, lexis and semantics, and to some extent, grammar (Syntax).
You will learn about some of these characteristics, particularly with respect to the Nigerian situation, later in this course.
For now, let us note that English has a wide, global spread; it is used as either first or second or foreign language in most parts of the world.
But you should understand that it is not only English that can function as a second language.
Any language that is acquired and used widely apart from the first language qualifies as a second language.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Identify any country in West Africa in which a different language apart from English functions as a second language.
2.
What benefits do you think such a language will give its speakers?
4.0 CONCLUSION Language is an important device of human communication used in the expression of feelings and emotions, ideas and desires.
Many factors can be used to classify human languages.
Language classification into first language and second language, for example, relates to the domains 4  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE of use, age and mode of acquisition, as well as language status.
These issues are purely non-linguistic.
In many parts of the world today, the English language enjoys the status of either a first language or a second language.
And still, in some other parts of the world it is used as a foreign language.
Many factors which are historical, political, socio- economic, educational, technological etc.
contribute to the world-wide currency of English.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have dealt with definitions of language and we have also discussed the concepts of a first language and a second language.
While a person’s first language or mother tongue is his language of first contact with the world, his second language is the one that he acquires after the first language and uses for wide-ranging purposes.
A language, which is used as a first language in one community, can be a second language in another community.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What do you understand by the term language?
2.
Distinguish carefully between ‘first language’ and ‘ second language’ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alo, M.A (1995) Applied English Linguistics: An Introduction.
Port Harcourt: Aeddy Link Broughton, G et al (1978) Teaching English as a Foreign Language (2nd Edition).
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul 5  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 2 DOMAINS AND STATUS OF LANGUAGE: FOREIGN LANGUAGE, NATIONAL LANGUAGE.
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Foreign Language 3.2 National Language 3.3 Official Language 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 1, you were introduced to some definitions of language as well as to the concepts of ‘first language’ and ‘second language’.
In this unit, we shall continue with the domains and status of language focusing on the concepts of ‘foreign language’, ‘national language ‘and ‘official language’.
You will recall that language is very essential to man as it is used to perform many functions.
The functions which a language performs, the attitude of the speakers to the language, the origin of the language and the manner of learning or acquisition of the language, among others, determine whether the language will be accorded the status of foreign language, official language or national language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES i.
At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: ii.
Explain the terms foreign language, national language and official iii.
language; iv.
Distinguish between foreign language and official language; v. Identify the distinguishing features of a national language; and vi.
Determine whether or not the English language is an official language vii.
and or a national language in Nigeria.
6  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Foreign Language Generally speaking, a language that is not indigenous to a speaker is a foreign language.
This is why Akindele and Adegbite (1999: 52) say that a foreign language “can be defined as the sequentially second language of a bilingual person”.
They proceed further to say that it could be “the second, third, fourth...language of a multilingual person”.
Strictly speaking, however, a foreign language is that which a bilingual or multilingual person uses for restricted purposes and in which he possesses only partial linguistic competence.
In other words, the speaker of a foreign language has very limited linguistic facility in the language.
If you compare a second language with a foreign language, you will realise that a foreign language is of less utilitarian importance than a second language.
Technically speaking, a foreign language ceases to be foreign when it is used for wide-ranging purposes.
Going by this, we shall regard English as a second language in Nigeria and not a foreign language, although the language is not indigenous to Nigeria.
An important feature of a foreign language, therefore, is that it is used for certain restricted or specialised activities like foreign travels, tourism and contact with foreign cultures (Alo, 1995: 2).
The fact that the speaker’s exposure to a foreign language is minimal accounts for his inadequate linguistic facility in the language.
In Nigeria, French may be used as a foreign language, while English may be used as a foreign language in France, Germany, Japan, Togo etc.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Mention two other countries in West Africa in which English is used as a foreign language.
2.
In view of the fact that Nigeria is surrounded by many French- speaking countries, do you think that French should continue to be used as a foreign language in Nigeria?
3.2 National Language Having learnt about what a foreign language is, let us proceed to consider what is meant by a national language.
According to Akindele and Adegbite (1999: 52 ), a national language “refers to language which has the authority of the government conferred on it as the language of a number of ethnic groups in a given geo-socio-political area”.
In a 7  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE multilingual setting like Nigeria, the use of one language may confer on that language the status of a national language.
Such a language will become a symbol of nationhood and, of course, unity.
However, for a language to be truly a national language, it must originate in tehnev i ronment where it will be used as a national language and it must have a wide spread use in the environment; that is, it must span the whole society in its use.
This is the status of the English language in places like England, Canada and the United States of America, feoxra m ple.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Now, reflect for a moment on the characteristics of a national language.
Considering the characteristics, will you say Nigeria has a national language?
If yes, what language is it?
If no, why do you think Nigeria has no national language?
No doubt, Nigeria is a multilingual country.
Indeed, the actual number of the indigenous Nigerian languages is not yet known.
But the languages have variously been put between 250 and 400.
Out of these numerous indigenous languages, Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba are politically recognised as major languages (to the displeasure, of course, of the speakers of the so-called minority languages).
Although Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba are regarded as major languages none of them enjoys national acceptability and spread to be taken as a national language.
The absence of a truly national language in Nigeria therefore creates ali n guistic vacuum.
It is the English language that is serving to fill in the gap.
But the English language cannot be regarded as a truly national language in Nigeria because (among other things) it is not indigenous to the place.
3.3 Official Language An official language is the language used by the government for the conduct of its day-to-day activities.
An official language is therefore the language of administration, commerce and industry, mass media, education and so on.
In Nigeria, English is used as an official language -It is the language in which government affairs, especially at the state and national levels are conducted.
Among other things, it is also the language of the judiciary, education and the mass media.
In African countries like the Republic of Benin, Cote d’ Ivoire, Chad, Cameroon, French is used as an official 8  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE language.
It has also been suggested that French should be adopted as Nigeria’s second official language.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
List at least three benefits that Nigeria can derive from adopting French as its second official language.
4.0 CONCLUSION In a bilingual or multilingual society, people may assign different roles to their different languages.
The roles assigned the languages will determine the status of the languages as well as the attitude of the speakers towards them.
Similarly, the status accorded a language determines its roles and domains of use.
As you were made to realise in unit 1, factors other than linguistic come into play in this connection.
Most of these factors (if not all) favour the English language in the world today.
This makes the language to enjoy the status of a global language, spoken as either first language, second language or foreign language across the globe.
5.0 SUMMARY Our pre-occupation in this unit has been mainly to elucidate the concepts of foreign language, national language and official language.
If you have followed the discussion so far, you should, by now, be able to accomplish those things which we set out as objectives in 2.0. you should also get the fact straight that Nigeria is a multilingual country, and being so the choice of one indigenous language as a national language is not an easy one.
This is because language is an essential part of culture.
No ethnic group will want its language relegated to the background.
This situation gives English added advantages as official languages, as well as a language functioning in place of a truly national language.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
As carefully as you can, explain what do you understand by Foreign language, national language and official language; 2.
Distinguish carefully between foreign language and official language; 3.
What are the distinguishing features of a national language?
4.
Will you regard English as an official language in Nigeria?
Give reasons to support your answer.
9  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Akindele, Femi and Adegbite Wale (1999) The Sociology and Politics of English in Nigeria: An Introduction Ife: O.A.U Press Limited.
Alo M.A (1995 ) Applied English Linguistics; An Introduction.
Port Harcourt: Aeddy Link Crystal, D (1997) English as a Global Language: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
10  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 3 THE SPREAD OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE IN THE WORLD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Language Spread 3.2 Spread of English as First Language (LI) or Mother Tongue (MT) 3.3 Spread of English as Second Language 3.4 Effects of the World-wide Spread of English 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the world-wide spread of English.
One of the factors that determine the status and importance of a language is its spread.
It can also be said the other way round that the status and importance of a language determine or influence its spread.
There is no gainsaying the fact that today the English language is globally spread.
It is spoken in almost every part of the world.
It is no longer the language of only the Germanic groups of Angle Saxons, but also of the whole world.
In other words, the fact cannot be denied that English is now a global language.
Many factors such as historical, political, economic, cultural, educational, technological and so no contribute to the world- wide currency of the English language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Account for the world-wide spread of English; ii.
Identify at least five (5) places where English is spoken as first language or mother tongue; iii.
List at least, five (5) countries where English is used as a second iv.
language; v. Determine whether or not English should be regarded as a global language.
11  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.1 Language Spread Simply put, by language spread we refer to the dispersal of language; that is, the geographical coverage of its use.
People are scattered all over the surface of the earth and they speak one language or another.
All the known languages of the world do not enjoy the same geographical spread.
This is not because of the linguistic facilities of the languages.
Factors of history, politics, economy, culture, education, and technology, among others, can facilitate or hinder language spread.
All these factors favour the world-wide spread of the English language.
According to Broughton, G et al (1978 :1), English is by far the most widely used of all the living languages.
And as Crystal, D (1997:3) says, English is “the most widely taught foreign language in over 100 countries such as China, Russia, Germany, Spain, Egypt and Brazil…” But the fact that English is the most widely used language does nmoeta n that everybody in the world speaks the language.
And neither does it mean that every country of the world adopts the language as an official language.
The fact of the matter is that English is assigned some special role in almost every country of the world.
In all the places where English is used, we can identify two broad groups of users of English: users of English as first language or mother tongue and users of English as a second language (This is not to forget those we can regard as users of English as a foreign language).
As a mother tongue, according to Broughton, G (et al), English ranks second to Chinese.
But Chinese comprises six mutually unintelligible dialects little spoken outside China itself.
Unlike Chinese, the speakers of English are widely distributed throughout the world.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
What language do you speak as your first language or mother tongue?
2.
Describe the geographical spread of the language within your local government area, state and country.
3.2 Spread of English as First Language (L1) or Mother Tongue (MT) Originally, the English Language was the language of three Germanic groups of people: the Angles, the Jutes and the Saxons who invaded Britain so many years ago.
The language was initially part of the West Germanic, which also belonged to the Indo-European group of languages.
12  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE As we have repeatedly emphasized in this unit, today English enjoys a wide geographical coverage.
Large numbers of people speak English as first language or mother tongue in USA, Canada, Britain, Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand, South Africa as well as many Caribbean countries (Crystal 1997:3).
Initially, the language was the mother tongue of only the people living in the British Isles, numbering between 5 and 7 million, as crystal (1997) puts it.
But the speech community of English as mother tongue expanded rapidly between the end of the reign of Elizabeth I (Elizabeth the first), and the beginning of that of Elizabeth II (Elizabeth the second).
This was between 1588 and 1952.
The expansion which increased the numbers of the speakers of English as mother tongue to about 250 million around this time, took the language outside the British Isles.
The introduction of English to the New World (USA) was a landmark in the history of the language.
You may recall that the discovery of the Americas by Christopher Columbus opened the way for the rush into the “new world” by the British who tihnetrno d uced English to the Americans.
What follows here is a list of some places where English is used as first language or mother tongue.
The list is adopted from Crystal (1997:57-60).
The places are American Samoa, Antigua, Australia, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Brunei, Canada, Cayman Islands, Cook Islands, Dominica, Fiji, Grenada, Ireland, New Zealand, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom, and United States Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Study the map of the world and locate as many of the places mentioned above as possible.
Spread of English as a Second Language Do you remember what a second language is?
It is sequentially the second language of a bilingual or multilingual person used for wide purposes.
The second language is used to ‘complement’ the first language or mother tongue.
In many places in the world, English is used as a second language.
This is the situation in places like Nigeria, Ghana, India, Singapore, Vanuatu, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Cameroon, Gambia, Kenya, Kiribati, Lesotho, Malawi, Marshall Islands, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, Pakistan, Rwanda etc.
It should be noted that it is possible for a language to exist both as a first language and a second language in the same place.
This is possible 13  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE when a number of people in a place speak the language as their mother tongue while some other people in the same place speak the slaanmgeu a ge as a second language.
This is the position of English in some parts of the world such as American Samoa, Antigua & Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas, Canada, Dominica, Fiji, Gibraltar, Guyana, Ireland, India, Jamaica, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa (among others).
Basically, it is historical factors that can be responsible for this development.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Take a map of the world and locate as many of the places mentioned above as possible: 2.
Where English is used as a second language; 3.
Where English exists as both, first language and second language.
3.4 Effects of the World-Wide Spread of English Expectedly, there are many implications of the world-wide spread of English.
In the first place, we can talk of many world varieties oEfn g lish such as British English, American English, Canadian English, Australian English, Indian English, Nigerian English, Ghanaian English, and South African English to mention just a few.
Thus, while English remains one language, it has developed many geographical varieties or dialects.
Language generally is sensitive to its environment.
So with the English Language leaving its native home, it has to take on some other characteristics peculiar to its new environments.
These characteristics reflect mostly in vocabulary and pronunciation.
In terms of vocabulary, words are borrowed from the indigenous languages e.g.
the word “bungalow” taken from the Hindi word “bungali”; the word “Oba”(king) borrowed from the Yoruba language; “canoe”, “squash” borrowed from Indian languages etc.
Another common development is the use of existing English words in a different way.
An example is “corn” in American English to mean “maize” (corn in British English refers to wheat, barley, oats etc).
Thus, “maize” entered British English to refer to what Americans call “corn”.
In addition, new words and expressions are coined to express new realities.
Examples are “chewing stick”, “bush–meat”, been-tos”, “long-leg” etc in Nigerian English.
In terms of pronunciation, peculiar characteristics can also be observed.
For example, in American English there is the retention of final and/or pre-consonantal /r/ as in “farmer”, “car”.
14  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE In Nigerian English, the influence of the mother tongue is notable in the aspect of pronunciation, particularly in the treatment of those vowels which are absent in indigenous Nigerian languages.
In such a situation, there is the phenomenon of sound substitution.
For example, many Yoruba speakers of English will realize “come”/k ^ m/ as /k m/.
Also, variations are notable in prosodic units e.g.
stress, rhythm and intonation.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
There are some words which will be spelled differently in British English and American English.
With the use of a good dictionary, identify 10 of such words.
4.0 CONCLUSION One indication of the popularity of a language is its geographical spread.
Languages differ in terms of their patterns of geographical distribution.
Many factors, which relate to history, politics, religion, economy, education, science and technology can hinder or facilitate the spread of a language.
In the case of the English language, the factors have proved instrumental to the global spread of the language.
When a language enjoys wide spread, it will definitely manifest many different characteristics that are indications of the peculiarities of the places where it is used.
5.0 SUMMARY The English language as, we have shown in this unit, is widely distributed throughout the world.
In some places, it is used as a first language or mother tongue; in some other places, it serves as a second language while in some other places still, it is used as a flaonregiugang e .
It is also interesting to note that in some parts of the world, English exists as both a mother tongue and a second language.
Generally speaking, developments which relate to wars and conquests, immigration and emigration, colonialism, missionary activities, trades, education and so on have aided the world-wide spread of English.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What factors can be held responsible for the world-wide spread of English?
2.
Identify 5 places where English is used as a first language and 5 places where it is used as a second language.
15  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.
In view of its geographical spread, will you regard English as a global language?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Broughton, G et al (1978) Teaching English as a Foreign Language (Second Edition).
London: Routladge & Kegan Paul.
Crystal, D (1997) English as a Global Language: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Francis, W (1967) The English Language: An Introduction.
London: The English Universities Press Limited.
16  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 4 ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE IN NIGERIA: IT’S IMPLANTATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Factors Responsible for the Implantation of the English Language in Nigeria 3.2 Implantation through Trade or Commerce 3.3 Implantation through Religion 3.4 Implantation through Education 3.5 Implantation through Colonisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit deals with the introduction of the English language into Nigeria.
Nigeria had many of his own indigenous languages before the coming of the English language, and it is believed that every language is adequate for users in every culture.
How then, you may wonder, did the English language come to occupy such a vantage position in Nigeria?
In this unit, you will learn more about this phenomenon, that is, how the English language was introduced into Nigeria where it is now playing very important roles.
2.0 OBJECTIVES i.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to: ii.
Explain what is meant by language implantation; iii.
Identify and explain four factors responsible for the implantation of the English language in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Factors Responsible for the Implantation of the English Language in Nigeria The traditional home of English is Britain, from where the language was transported to the different parts of the world.
The transplantation of English to different parts of the world has led to the emergence of many 17  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE geographical varieties of the language e.g.
Nigerian English, South African English, and Caribbean English and so on.
The actual date the English language entered Nigeria is not yet known, but scholars like Adetugbo (1978), and Banjo (1966) believe that the language must have been introduced to the area in the 16th century.
Some factors can be held responsible for the implantation of English in Nigeria.
These factors include trade or commerce, religious activities, colonialism and education.
3.2 Implantation through Trade or Commerce The English language was brought to Nigeria by the traders who had established active trade contact with the West African coastal region as far back as the 16th century.
The type of English that was introduced around this period was Pidgin English.
In addition, the trans-Atlantic slave trade also aided the implantation of the English language in Nigeria.
This was so in at least two ways.
One, during the slave trade period, the slave traders must have used some form of the language to transact business with the local intermediaries.
Two, when the trade was abolished, some of the freed slaves, especially from Sierra-Leone and Liberia, were said to have found their way back to such places as Badagry, Lagos, Abeokuta and so on, where they helped to spread the knowledge of English which they had acquired.
Some of these freed slaves functioned as clerks and interpreters to missionaries and colonial administrators.
3.3 Implantation through Religion The series of exploration activities into various parts of Africa helped to open the continent to the outside word.
Notable among these exploration activities were those of Mungo Park, Clapperton and Lander Brothers.
Immediately after these explorations, Christian missionary activities began.
These missionary activities contributed immensely to the implantation of English in Nigeria.
The missionaries had to train some Nigerians to become clerks and interpreters.
And in doing this, the people were exposed to some form of English.
Missionary activities started in places like Badagry and Abeokuta, where Churches were established and schools opened to train people as catechists and so on.
3.4 Implantation through Education With the Christian missionary activities came western education.
In fact, the coming of the Christian missionaries can be said to be the 18  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE beginning of the formal acquisition of the English language in Nigeria with the establishment of schools where English started to be taught and learnt as a subject on the curriculum.
During the days of the European Christian missionary activities in Nigeria, the type of education that was introduced gave prominence to language-related activities like reading and writing.
This was to aid the missionaries in their activities.
3.5 Implantation through Colonialism Missionary activities and colonialism can be said to work hand in hand on the Nigerian soil.
It also seems that the missionary efforts prepared the way for colonialism.
The British came to Nigeria to colonize it just as they did to many other parts of the world.
One of the major legacies that Nigeria inherited from the British colonial government is the English language Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What do you understand by language implantation?
2.
State three factors that were responsible for the implantation of the English language in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION Considering the various means through which English was introduced to Nigeria, it will not be wrong to say that the language was brought to Nigeria through diplomacy, rather than force.
Since its inception on the Nigeria soil, the language has been playing many vital roles; its impact is felt in almost all facets of life in our society.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed briefly the implantation of English in Nigeria.
It has been shown in the unit that factors such as commercial activities, Christian missionary activities, western education and colonialism contributed seriously to the introduction and development of English in Nigeria.
Today, English is so important in Nigeria that its impact is felt in almost every area of life.
19  ENG 108 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by the process of language implantation?
2.
Identify and explain four factors responsible for the implantation of English in Nigeria 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adetugbo, A (1978) “The Development of English in Nigeria up to 1914: A Socio-Historical Appraisal.” Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeria.
ix (2) pp 89-103 Banjo (1996) Making A Virtue of Necessity : An Overview of tEhneg li sh Language in Nigeria.
Ibadan:: Ibadan University Press 20  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 5 ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE IN NIGERIA: ITS FUNCTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 English as a Language of Education 3.2 English as Language of Trade and Commerce 3.3 English as a Language of Administration 3.4 English as a Language of Unity 3.5 English as a Language of International Diplomacy 3.6 English as a Medium of Creative writing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION You should recall our earlier discussion that language is important to man and his society.
It is an important means of human communication.
Indeed, language is a social tool which man uses for very many purposes.
Since its inception in Nigeria the English language has been performing many vital roles.
In fact, the roles which the language performs in Nigeria have enhanced its status.
In this unit, we shall deal with some of the major functions of English in Nigeria.
When you see these numerous functions, you will be able to appreciate the advantages which the ability to speak the language can afford a Nigerian.
2.0 OBJECTIVES i.
By the end of this unit, you should be able to: ii.
State and explain the major functions which English performs in Nigeria; iii.
Justify the continued use of English in Nigeria; and iv.
Predict the future of English in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 English as a Language of Education Let us recall here that western education came to Nigeria with Christian religion and colonial activities.
You will also remember that the form of education that was introduced in Nigeria in the wake of Christianity 21  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE and colonialism was that which emphasized language-related activities such as reading and writing in addition to arithmetic.
This was basically in order for the missionaries and the colonial administrators to realize their objectives.
Since then, English has been an important subject on the curriculum of every level of education in Nigeria.
Apart from being a major subject on the curriculum, English is today a medium of education right from the upper primary school to the tertiary level.
This means that other subjects, apart from the indigenous and foreign languages like, Yoruba, Hausa, Igbo, French, Arabic etc, are taught in the English language right from upper primary school to the university level.
It will not be an exaggeration to say that failure in English these days in Nigeria will amount to educational failure.
For one to gain admission to any tertiary institution in the country, a credit pass in English is required in most cases.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Think of some other aspects of our educational system in Nigeria which demand the use of English.
3.2 English as a Language of Trade and Commerce If you will recall, we said that trade was one of the major factors which brought the English language to Nigeria.
In the country till today, the language has remained a language of trade and commerce.
It facilitates trade among people of different linguistic backgrounds (ethnic groups) in the country.
In addition to the local trading activities, the English language also serves the purpose of international trade in Nigeria.
It is a major means of communication between Nigeria and its international trade partners.
3.3 English as a Language of Administration The English language came to Nigeria partly through colonial administration.
Since then, it has been the language of political administration, the language of the civil service in the country.
Most, if not all, government affairs especially at the state and national levels are conducted in English.
Important government documents like the constitution are written essentially in English.
In fact, it has become essential for any political aspirant in the country to be able to speak English.
Because of its roles in administration, the English language is an official language in Nigeria; it is the lingua franca of administration.
22  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.3 English as a Language of Unity There are many ethnic groups with different linguistic backgrounds in Nigeria.
The English language marries these different ethnic groups together in a way, in the sense that it facilitates inter-ethnic communication.
Considering this, therefore, it can be said that English is a language of unity in Nigeria.
But it should be noted that the fact that a group of people speak the same language does not necessarily guarantee unity among them.
What we are saying is that English is one of those things which Nigerians can say they have in common and, since it plays an integrative role by facilitating inter-ethnic communication, it can be said to be the language of unity.
Apart from being a language of national unity, it can also be said that English achieves for Nigeria international unity.
Today, Nigeria is a member of the world speech communities of the English language.
3.5 English as a Language of International Diplomacy World-wide today, English is the language of international diplomacy.
The conduct of international affairs throughout the world is carried out in English.
Also, some world organisations like U. N. O, UNESCO and so on use English as their major means of communication.
In fact, to be relevant in world diplomacy these days, a country should be able to use English.
In this wise, we can regard English as a global language.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Mention two international organisations apart from U. N. O. and UNESCO which use English as a major means of communication.
2.
Are there African international organisations that also adopt English as their major means of communication?
Mention them.
3.6 English as a Medium of Creative Writing The use of English as a medium of creative writing in Nigeria has led to the development of literary English in the country.
Today, many Nigerian creative writers adopt English as the medium of their writings.
Nigeria can boast of such creative writers as Wole Soyinka, Chinua Achebe, J.P Clark, Chukwuemeka Ike, Niyi Osundare, and Femi Osofisan and so on.
These writers have helped in extending the possibilities of the English language in Nigeria.
23  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Mention any Nigerian creative writer who has achieved an international fame through his writings.
2.
Describe the fame and state when it was achieved.
4.0 CONCLUSION.
Considering the various roles which English plays in Nigeria, it becomes incontestable that the language has come to stay in the country.
The language occupies a prestigious position because of its numerous roles.
It is this utilitarian factor that essentially makes English to be a second language in Nigeria.
You will recall that a second language is that which is learned and used extensively in addition to the mother tongue.
When placed vis-à-vis the indigenous Nigerian languages, definitely English occupies a very prominent position; it enjoys prominence or what is technically termed dominance configuration.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed in this unit the major functions which English performs in Nigeria.
The language is used as a medium of instruction in schools; it is the language of administration; it is the language ocof m merce and industry; it is the language of national unity; it is the language of international diplomacy; it is also a medium of creative writing.
For a long time to come, English will continue to play these roles in the country.
English is, indeed, an important legacy wNhigicehri a inherited from Britain (its formal colonial master).
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What major function does English perform in Nigeria?
a.
Do you think English should continue to be used in Nigeria?
b.
What is the future of English in Nigeria?
7.0 FURTHER/FURTHER READINGS Akindele F & Adegbite, W (1999) The sociology of English in Nigeria: An introduction Ile- Ife: Obafemi Awolowo University Press.
Ogu, J (1999) A Historical Survey of English and the Nigerian situation.Ibadan: Kraft Books Limited.
24  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Ubahakwe, E (1979) Varieties and functions of English inNigeria.
Ibadan:African University press.
25  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 6 DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN STANDARD PIDGIN AND CREOLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 What is ESL?
3.2 Definition and Characteristics of Pidgin 3.3 What is Creole?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION English as used by educated persons is called Standard English.
However, there are other varieties of English which developed as result of the influence of other languages.
This gave rise to such varieties of English as Pidgin and Creole.
In this unit, you will learn about the characteristics of Creole and Pidgin and how these differ from Standard English.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Define English as a second language (ESL); ii.
State what you understand by Pidgin and Creole; iii.
Distinguish between Pidgin and Creole.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 What is ESL?
According to Afolayan (1991:8), ESL can be regarded as both a variety of English and a discipline.
As a variety of English, ESL describes the form of English, which exists in a place where the language is learned and used widely in addition to the first language(s) or mother tongues(s).
In this situation, English exists with other language(s).
This is therefore a bilingual or multilingual situation.
This situation will have some implications for the form of the English language, since the mother tongue(s) will influence the language one way or another.
This type of 26  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE influence is termed mother tongue interference and it can manifest in the areas of phonology, semantics and grammar.
In other words, ESL as a variety will be expected to differ somewhat from EMT (that is, English as Mother Tongue).
This is to say, for example, that the English language in Nigeria will exhibit some peculiarities in the aspects of phonology (pronunciation), lexis and semantics and grammar.
This is so because the situation in which English is used in Nigeria is not the same with that of Britain or any other place where the language is used as a first language or mother tongue.
ESL as a discipline relates to a formal educational programme and will naturally relate to such issues as theories and practices of teaching English as a second language.
However, it is in the first sense (that is ESL as a variety) that we are using the term ESL here.
3.2 Definition and Characteristics of Pidgin The term ‘pidgin’ is thought to have originated from the Chinese pronunciation of the English word ‘business’.
Pidgin is a language made up of elements of two or more languages and used for minimal contact, especially trade contact between the speakers of the languages.
Pidgin is not usually the mother tongue of any particular people.
According to Fromkin and Rodman (1978:268), the “most notable pidgin that exists today is called “Tok Pisin” it was formerly called Melanesian Pidgin English.
This form of pidgin is extensively used in Papua New Guinea.
Characteristically, pidgin is a rudimentary form of a language of minimal contact.
It uses simplified vocabulary and grammar.
But this is not to say that it is not rule-governed.
Grammatical categories like case, tense, mood and voice are generally not present in pidgin.
In many places, pidgin has come to have negative connotations.
This might be because most of the best-known pidgins are all associated with European colonial empires.
The Encyclopaedia Britannica once described pidgin using negative or unpalatable words.
Pidgin, according to this book, is an unruly bastard jargon, filled with nursery imbecility, vulgarism and corruption.
In recent times, however, there has been greater recognition of the fact that pidgins reflect human creative linguistic ability.
In Nigeria, pidgin is commonly used by the people in the Southern parts of the country.
It is common among the Ibo, Ijaw, Ibibio, Urhobo and a lot of other ethnic groups near the coast.
This is because of the fact that when the traders and missionaries came then, they entered the country 27  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE from the coastal parts and pidgins began to develop so as to ensure that there was a form of communication.
Pidgin English is a mixture of English and the indigenous languages.
In the South-South, South-East and South-West parts of Nigeria, Pidgin English is a popular language.
Some television stations cast news in pidgin in addition to local languages and English.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What purposes do you think Pidgin English serves in Nigeria today?
2.
How would you feel if what the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria could speak is only pidgin?
3.3 What is Creole?
Creole can be regarded as an advanced form of pidgin.
When a pidgin comes to be used as a mother tongue of a group of people, it becomes a Creole.
Creole is a language that has its origin in extended contact between two language communities, one of which is generally European.
The main difference between a pidgin and a Creole is that a Creole has the status of a mother tongue.
Creole may also arise when communities with mutually intelligible languages are kept apart, as was the case with African Negroes in the Americas (South and North) who were separated to prevent insurrection (rebellion).
In this situation, the communities resort to pidgin as the only viable lingua franca, and this then becomes a Creole e.g.
Jamaican Creole.
Pidgins and Creoles share certain characteristics.
They are syntactically simpler than the languages upon which they are based.
For example, inflexions are minimal and reduplication is common e.g.
quick quick, small, small.
There is also serial verb structure as in “Dat chief, him woman go start begin teach am” Creoles and pidgins based on English exist in all the continents of the world and can be divided into two main groups: Atlantic vshaoriwetiinegs, c ertain West African features and Pacific varieties, related to the English used especially in the late 19th century and early 20th century on the China coast.
While most of the vocabulary comes from English, it also includes Portuguese words such as “savvy” (sabi) and “piccaninny” (pikin).
In Sierra-Leone, Krio (Creole) spoken by about 200,000 people (Fromkin and Rodman 1978: 270) developed partly from an English-based pidgin.
28  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 4.0 CONCLUSION There are diversities of languages in the human society.
Languages can be classified according to their functions, mode and order of acquisition, origin and status.
The concept of English as a second language (in the sense of a variety of English) relates to functions as well as order or mode of acquisition.
In their own case, pidgin and Creole are related in the sense that Creole is an advanced form of pidgin.
Both pidgin and Creole are based on two or more other languages from which they draw their vocabularies.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have explained the concept of English as a second language (ESL) and described pidgin and Creole as well as state their characteristics.
You will do well to note that pidgin and Creole have some similarities and differences.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What do you understand by English as a second language?
2.
Explain what you understand by pidgin and Creole and distinguish carefully between the two 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Afolayan, A (1991) “The concept of ‘English as a Second Language’ as an Applied Linguistic Policy for Development” Journal of English as A Second Language (JESEL) No 3.pp6-21.
Fromkin, V and Rodman, R (1978) An Introduction to Language (Second Edition).
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winton.
29  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 7 LANGUAGE AS AN INDEX OF NATIONALISM AND NATIONISM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Language and Nationism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION Language is related to almost every human activity e.g.
culture, economy, politics, education and so on.
The topic of our concern in this unit relates to language and politics.
Whenever the concepts of nationalism and nationism are discussed, language cannot be ignored.
So in this unit we shall see how language is related to nationalism and nationism.
Our discussion in this unit will further reinforce the importance of language to man and his society.
It will also dwell on some of the language problems facing a developming country like Nigeria.
2.0 OBJCETIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Define nationalism; ii.
Explain what you understand by nationism; and iii.
State how language is related to nationalism and nationism.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Language and Nationism As you have learnt, language is a system of human communication, which makes use of sounds and symbols.
It is very much related to human culture-it is part of culture and it also serves as a means oexf p ressing culture.
Language is very much related to the political concepts of nationalism and nationism.
30  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE According to Fishman (1968) the term ‘nation’ should be considered as a politics -geographical entity while ‘nationality’ might be considered as a socio-cultural entity.
This means that the term ‘nation’ refers to a political and geographical entity or unit while ‘nationality’ refers to an entity or unit which can be socio-culturally defined.
What then is ‘nationalism’?
According to Akindele and Adegbite (1999:70), ‘nationalism’ denotes the feeling of belonging to a nationality.
They also explain nationality as a sociological unit.
People belonging to a nationality exhibit solidarity or the feeling of oneness as they subscribe to common socio-cultural and linguistic habits.
In Nigeria, as Akindele and Adegbite say, nationality: coincides with ethnic group boundaries like Yoruba, Hausa, Igbo, Edo, Itsekiri, Ijaw and son on.
They also note that these ethnic group boundaries extend beyond state boundaries.
Reflect on this for a moment.
Then, mention the Hausa-dominated states in Nigeria.
In addition, mention the Yoruba-dominated states in Nigeria as well.
As at now, Nigeria cannot be said to be a single nationality; it is made up of many nationalities.
But a nation like England is also a nationality, and being a nationality it is not pre-occupied with the problem of language choice.
In other words, nationality is not confronted with the problem of language choice.
In England, for example, it is definitely the English language.
In this sense, the English language defines the England nationality.
Language and Nationism As Fishman (1968) says, nationism suggests political integration.
According to Akindele and Adegbite (1999:71), ‘nationism’ as a concept denotes the feeling of belonging to a nation.
As we have said earlier, the term ‘nation’ denotes a political and geographical entity.
In the opinion of Akindele and Adegbite (Ibid), the term ‘nation’, as a political entity does not necessarily mean a sociological unit.
They cite U.S.A, Australia, France and West Germany as examples of nations, which are also, nationalities, while Nigeria, Ghana and Liberia are African nations that are yet to transform to nationalities.
Unlike a nationality, a nation which is yet to become a nationality has the problem of language choice to contend with.
English is the national language in England, but as at now Nigeria has no truly national language.
In Nigeria, there are over 200 ethnic groups, each with its own language.
Thus, Nigeria can be said to consist of over 2n0at0io nalities.
In this situation, the choice of which language should be regarded as a national language cannot be a simple one.
Certainly, no ethnic group will want it’s language to be relegated to the background.
Even the mere political recognition of Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba as major 31  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE indigenous Nigeria languages does not go down well with the speakers of the so-called minority languages.
So, a nation like Nigeria cannot yet be regarded as a nationality until it has succeeded in its choice of a truly national language.
Certainly, lack of a national language can lead to a divisive tendency in a nation.
In order to contain this problem, English is used in Nigeria to fill the vacuum created by the absence of a true national lTahnugsu,a g eE.
n glish becomes a medium of communication across ethnic boundaries.
It is in this sense that we can regard English as playing an integrative role in the country.
The language weds together different nationalities that make up the Nigerian nation.
The transformation into a nationality remains the highest goal of Nigeria as a socio-political entity or unit, and the issue of language choice is a major determining factor.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Is there any country in Africa that can be regarded now as both a nation and a nationality?
2.
Explain the integrative role of the English language in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION In a nationality, there is no problem of language choice as the entity is already linguistically integrated.
What is paramount in a nationality relates to language maintenance and development.
On the other hand, language choice is a serious problem confronting a nation that is yet to transform into a nationality.
This is the situation in which countries like Nigeria, and Ghana are now.
In Nigeria, English is being used as a national language.
It is the only language that guarantees inter-ethnic communication.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have explained the two different but related concepts of nationalism and nationism.
In addition, we have brought out how language is related to the two concepts.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define the concepts of ‘nationalism’ and ‘nationism’.
(a) How is language related to nationalism and nationism?
(b) Will you regard Nigeria as a nation and or nationality?
Give linguistic reasons to support your answer.
32  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Akindele, F and Adegbite, W (1999) The Sociology and Politics of Englishin Nigeria:An Introduction.
Ile-Ife Obafemi Awolowo University Press.
Fishman, J et al (eds) 1968) Language Problems of Developing Nations.
New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 33  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 8 THE CONCEPT OF BILINGUALISM: DEFINITION, TYPES AND EXTENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Definition of Bilingualism 3.2 Types of Bilingualism 3.3 Extent of Bilingualism 3.3.1 Coordinate Bilingualism 3.3.2 Compound Bilingualism 3.3.3 Incipient Bilingualism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION The concept of English as a Second Language (ESL) is related to that of bilingualism in the sense that ESL exists in a bilingual situation.
In this unit, therefore, you will learn about the concept of bilingualism, with a focus on its definition, types and extent.
Today, many parts of the world can be said to be bilingual and this has some implications for language policies and language education in such areas.
As at now, opinions differ on the place of bilingualism in education, particularly as it relates to the controversy of whether bilingualism should be regarded as an asset or liability in education.
The question is whether being bilingual is an advantage or a disadvantage to one educationally.
Really, this controversy is not our concern at this level, but it is well for us to be aware of it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Define the concept of bilingualism; ii.
Identify and explain types of bilingualism; iii.
Distinguish between compound and co-ordinate bilingualism as well as between individual and societal bilingualism.
34  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definition of Bilingualism Many definitions have been given to the term bilingualism.
According to Bloomfied (1933:56), bilingualism refers to the native-like control of two languages.
Francis (1958) also echoes this idea by taking a bilingual person to be somebody with a perfect control of two languages.
In his own case, Haugen (1961) defines bilingualism loosely as a practice of two languages.
Furthermore, Mackey (1968) sees bilingualism as an alternative use of two or more languages by the same individual.
These definitions have their merits and demerits.
For example, Bloomfied’s definition is inadequate because it only describes one type of bilingualism.
The same thing goes for Francis.
Haugen’s definition of bilingualism is also too loose.
Mackey’s definition of bilingualism is more realistic and adequate for our purpose in this unit.
Therefore, we shall regard bilingualism as the use of two languages by an individual or a community.
The two languages exist side by side and are used by the individual or the community.
In other words, bilingualism is a product of a language contact situation – it is a consequence of two languages in contact, with the possibility of cross-linguistic influence between the two languages.
This means simply that there is the possibility of the two languages influencing each other.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
How do you think an alternative use of two languages by the same individual is possible?
3.2 Types of Bilingualism From the definitions of bilingualism that you have seen in 3.1, it should become obvious to you that bilingualism is not of one type.
Two broad types of bilingualism which have been identified are individual bilingualism and societal bilingualism.
Individual bilingualism is a phenomenon in which an individual is capable of an alternative use of two languages.
He may decide to use language A or language B, depending on the subject of discourse, participants and setting, among other factors.
An educated Nigerian, for instance, is a bilingual person in the sense that he or she can speak his or her indigenous language and English.
Societal bilingualism describes a situation whereby two different languages exist and function independently within the society 35  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE concerned.
When there is a functional differentiation between the two languages, there is what is called bilingualism with diglossia.
Diglossia therefore describes a situation in which the two languages that exist side by side in a society have their separate domains of use.
For example, in most cases in Nigeria English will be used for official, national affairs while the indigenous languages will be used for informal family discussions.
There may also be bilingualism without diglossia.
This obtains when there is no functional differentiation between the two languages existing side by side in a community.
This means the two language can be used in all domains.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Distinguish between individual bilingualism and societal bilingualism 3.3 Extent of Bilingualism By extent of bilingualism we refer to the degrees of individual bilingualism.
When we talk of the degrees of individual bilingualism, we can have coordinate bilingualism, compound bilingualism and incipient bilingualism.
3.3.1 Coordinate Bilingualism Coordinate bilingualism is a situation where a person is able to speak two different languages with equal or partially equal facility.
A coordinate bilingual is able to keep the systems of his two languages apart.
He understands the roles of each of his languages perfectly well and he is able to communicate in the two languages effectively well.
Thus, a coordinate bilingual has “a near native-like competence in his two languages” (Akindele and Adegbite, 1999:34).
3.3.2 Compound Bilingualism Compound bilingualism describes a situation in which a person does not have equal competence in his two languages.
A compound bilingual cannot keep the system of his two languages apart and so, traces of mother tongue interference are noticeable in his use of language.
Many Nigerian bilinguals (English and mother tongue) are rather of the compound type.
36  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.3.3 Incipient Bilingualism This describes a situation in which a person understands and speaks well one of the two languages existing in his community (especially his mother tongue), but understands the second language only partially.
Examples are semi-literate speakers of English among the Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba and other language groups.
4.0 CONCLUSION Bilingualism is a product of languages in contact.
Because language and culture are closely related, bilingualism predisposes biculturalism.
In other words, a bilingual person can be said to be bicultural.
Just as bilingualism exists in degrees, biculturalism too is a matter of degree.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the definition of bilingualism, types of bilingualism as well as extent or degree of bilingualism.
Just as an individual can be bilingual, a society community or community can also be bilingual.
Today, bilingualism is a common phenomenon in the world.
Many people and many places all over the world are bilingual.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGEMENTS 1.
What do you understand by the term bilingualism?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akindele, F and Adegbite, W (1999) The Sociology and Politics of English in Nigeria: An Introduction.
Ile-Ife: Obafemi Awolowo University Press.
Bloomfied, L (1933) Language.
New York: Holt.
Francis, W (1958) the Structure of American English.
New York: Ronald Press co. Haugen, E (1961) “The Bilingual Individual” of Reading.
In Saporta Psycholiguistics: A Book of Readings.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Mackey, F(1968) “The Description of Bilingualism” In Fishman, J (ed) Readings in the Sociology of Language.
Th Hague: Mouton and Co. 37  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 9 BILINGUALISM: IT’S DEVELOPMENT AND CONSEQUENCES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Factor Responsible for the Development of Bilingualism 3.2 Consequences of Bilingualism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION You have just dealt with the definition, types and extent of bilingualism.
You have noticed that some people have defined the concept in different ways.
In addition, you have also seen that bilingualism can be individual or societal and that individual bilingualism varies in degree.
In order to conclude our discussion of bilingualism, we shall turn in this unit to its origin and effects.
Anywhere it develops, bilingualism is brought about by some factors, and having developed, it leads to some consequences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Describe the origin of bilingualism; ii.
State at least three consequences of bilingualism.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Factors Responsible for the Development of Bilingualism Many factors can be responsible for the genesis and development of bilingualism.
Among these factors are colonialism, conquest, trade and commerce, annexation and borderline areas.
In Africa, colonialism is a major factor that led to bilingualism.
You will recollect that European colonialists came to colonize different parts of Africa the way they did to some other parts of the world.
British and French governments came to dominate different parts of Africa.
English and French as foreign languages were consequently introduced in 38  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Africa.
This led to the development of Anglophone and Francophone African countries.
Of course, the African countries had (and still have) their own indigenous languages.
The introduction of English and French, for example, then led to the development of bilingualism where the indigenous languages of Africa existed side by side with an English or French.
Another factor that can yield bilingualism is conquest.
For example, U.S.A was originally dominated by the Indians.
But later the place was conquered and taken over by British migrants who brought the English language and culture to the area.
Australia also had a similar experience.
Bilingualsim may also arise as a result of commercial activities.
If you can recollect, trade was one of the factors that led to the implantation of the English language in Nigeria.
Through the activities of the European traders who had to transact business with the local inhabitants, the vehicular language of pidgin developed along the coast of West Africa.
In addition European languages like English, French and Portuguese started to be used in the areas.
People can also become bilinguals in the indigenous languages in their community through trade and commerce.
For example, trading activities between Yoruba and Hausa, Hausa and Igbo can lead to bilingualism in Yoruba and Hausa languages, and Hausa and Igbo languages.
Annexation can also lead to bilingualism.
Annexation occurs when and where a community forcefully acquires another community.
In this situation, exchange of languages occurs although one language may eventually supersede the other.
The language of the stronger community that annexes the weaker community may supersede the language of the annexed community.
Reflect on this for a moment.
Why do you think it is possible in such a situation for one language to supersede the other?
Think of any place in the world where this has happened.
Bilingualism can also be brought about by the existence of borderline areas.
Such is the situation in Idiroko and Bakassi areas.
Have you ever been to any of these places?
You can take a trip to any of the areas and observe the language behaviors there 39  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Can religion lead to the development of bilingualism?
Relate your discussion to: The implantation of the English language in Nigeria; and The development of Islam in Nigeria.
3.2 Consequences of Bilingualism One consequence of bilingualism which you should readily think of is biculturalism.
This is because language is part of culture, and the ability to speak two languages predisposes one to being bicultural.
Learning to speak a language definitely means more than learning about the rules of syntax, phonology and semantics of the language; it also involves learning about the culture of the people who speak the language.
Bilingualism can also lead to the sociolinguistic phenomena of code- switching and code-mixing.
Code- switching is a phenomenon of making one utterance in one language and another in a different language within the same discourse e.g.
‘omo o ya.
Let us go’ (code- switching involving Yoruba and English).
On the other hand, code -mixing is a phenomenon of making use of elements of two languages in the same utterance e.g.
‘Awon students naa perform well; (English code- mixed with Yoruba).
Apart from this, bilingualism can also lead to language borrowing.
Languages are like human beings, they borrow from one another.
In Nigeria, for example, the English language has borrowed such words as Oba, Obi, Emir etc from the indigenous Nigerian languages; ‘Oba’ from Yoruba, ‘Obi from Igbo and ‘Emir’ from Hausa (first from Arabic to Hausa and then to English).
The indigenous languages also borrow from English (most of the time with phonological modifications).
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Cite five words which your indigenous language has borrowed from English.
One other effect of bilingualism which we should mention here ims o ther tongue interference.
This is a phenomenon in which tshyest e m of one’s first language or mother tongue intrudes into the system of the second language.
Mother tongue interference is pronounced in the area of pronunciation.
Mother tongue interference can also be noticed to some extent in syntax and semantics.
In Nigeria, most people speak English with Yoruba accent, Hausa accent, Igbo accent and so on.
40  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE The way people fare with the supra-segmental phonemes or units of stress and intonation often reflects mother tongue interference.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Cite five examples of mother tongue interference in the pronunciation of English in Nigeria; and five examples of mother tongue interference in each of syntax and semantics.
4.0 CONCLUSION Bilingualsim is a sociolinguistic-phenomenon; it is a product of language in society.
Whenever and wherever languages are in contact, bilingualism is bound to develop, and many non-linguistic factors can bring languages into contact.
Bilingualism is now a world-wide phenomenon which should be seen as a merit rather than a demerit; it is a sociolinguistic reality of our own period and place in the world today.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has been devoted to the origin and consequences of bilingualism.
We should note here that apart from the individual and the societal biligualism which we observed under types of bilingualism in unit 8, bilingualsim can also be stable or transitional.
In Canada, Nigeria, Ghana and many other parts of the world where two languages are in perpetual contact, bilingualism is said to be stable, whereas in places like Germany, Turkey and some other places in the world where tongue influences diminish, bilingualism is said to be transitional.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the origin of bilingualsim 2.
What are the possible consequences of bilingualism?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akindele, F and Adegbite, W (1999) The Sociology and Politics of English in Nigeria: An Introduction.
Ile-Ife: Obafemi Awolowo University Press.
41  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 10 ESL AND NATIONAL LANGUAGE POLICY IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Language in Pre-Primary and Primary Education 3.2 Language in Secondary Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION By National Language Policy in this context is meant an official, government policy statement that guides government actions in respect of language issues.
In Nigeria there is no separate document that can be called language policy.
What we can call the Nigeria national language policy is contained in the National Policy on Education (1977) (revised 1981).
In this unit, therefore, we shall examine the relevant language provisions in the National Policy on Education.
We shall emphasize the roles assigned the English language in Nigeria at the various levels of education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that this unit will prepare you to be able to: i.
Describe the language policy in the National Policy on Education; ii.
State the position of the English language in the overall educational system in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Language in Pre-Primary and Primary Education The government of Nigeria appreciates the importance of language in the education of its citizens.
With specific reference to pre-primary and primary education, the National Policy on Education (1977) states that: The medium of instruction will be principally the mother-tongue or the language of the immediate community 42  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE The medium of instruction is initially the mother tongue or the language of the immediate community, and at a later stage English.
The first clause above is in respect of pre-primary education while the second clause relates to primary education.
In order to realize these objectives, it is the intention of the government to: Develop the orthography of many more Nigerian Languages, and produce textbooks in Nigerian languages; Set up a language centre as part of the educational service under the Federal Ministry of Education.
The priority given to the mother-tongue or the language of the immediate community is in realization of the importance of the indigenous languages in the early education of the Nigerian children.
At the primary school, the policy does not categorically state the stage of the change-over to English.
But what is in practice is that the mother- tongue or the language of the immediate community is used as the medium of instruction for the first three years, after which English becomes the medium of instruction.
There is no doubt that this provision is confronted with some problems.
The government has not actually put any concrete programme on ground in respect of the development of the indigenous languages.
Also the shift from the indigenous language to English at the primary school also often poses some problems to the learners as they become tongue-tied and passive when the teachers start to use English.
This often forces the teachers to oscillate between an indigenous language and English.
The roles of the indigenous languages in the early education of the children cannot be over-emphasized.
In fact, language scholars such as Bamgbose (1976,1977), Afolayan (1979) have repeatedly emphasized the roles of the mother-tongue in the early education of the Nigerian child.
Also, the success of the Ife Project of using Yoruba to teach other subjects (apart from English) at the primary school level reinforces the importance of the indigenous language in early education.
However, there has not been a follow-up to the project.
3.2 Language in Secondary Education The National Policy on Education (1981) states that English and two Nigerian languages are to be learnt by the Junior Secondary school students.
It is suggested that in selecting two Nigerian languages, students should study the language of their own area in addition to any of the three major Nigerian languages.
This will be subject to the 43  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE availability of teachers.
Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba are recognized as the major Nigerian languages.
For the senior secondary school, the policy states that English and one Nigerian language should be studied.
The policy is silent on the medium of instruction at the secondary level.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
What do you think are the advantages of conducting early education in the child’s mother tongue?
2.
What is the medium of instruction in Nigerian secondary schools?
4.0 CONCLUSION Languages play an important role in the process of education because language is a major means through which education takes place.
Because of the vital role of language in education, therefore, there is the need for a viable and practical language policy, especially in a bi or multilingual setting like Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY We have indicated in this unit that there is no separate document in Nigeria as at now which can be called language policy.
Government official statements in respect of language issues in education are contained in the National Policy on Education formulated in 1977 and revised in 1981.
From the statements, it is clear that government realizes the importance of language in education and for maintaining unity.
From the statements also, it is clear that the Nigerian government has in mind bilingual education for its citizens.
However, most of the statements still remain mere statements of intention as government is yet to put in place concrete measures in realization its objectives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Describe the language provisions in the National Policy on Education.
2.
What do you think is the position of the English language in the over-all educational system in Nigeria?
44  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Afolayan, A (1977) “The New Language Policy and Effective Instruction in Schools”.
Language in Education in Nigeria Vol 1.
Proceedings of the Language symposium organised by the National Language centre, Federal Ministry of Education, Lagos, Nigeria.
Akindele F and Adegbite, W (1999) The Sociology and Politics of English in Nigeria: An Introduction.
Ile-Ife.
Obafemi Awolowo University Press.
Bamgbose, A (ed) (1977) Language in Education in Nigeria Lagos: National Language Centre Ogun, J (1992) A Historical Survey of English and the Nigerian Situation Lagos: Krafe Books Limited.
45  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 11 ENGLISH AND THE INDIGENOUS NIGERIAN LANGUAGES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 The Language Situation in Nigeria 3.2 Interaction of English and the Indigenous Nigeria Languages 3.2.1 Effects of the Indigenous Languages on the English Language 3.2.2 Effects of English on the Indigenous Nigerian Languages 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION English was not the first European language to be spoken in Nigeria.
In fact, an Oba of Benin was reputed to have spoken fluent Portuguese as far back as the 16th century.
But English soon displaced Portuguese in Nigeria due to reasons not yet obvious.
But it can be guessed that the fact that Portuguese activities were limited to the royal courts contributed to its easy displacement by the English language.
As the Romans imposed Latin on their conquered territories, the British also imposed English on their colonies, including Nigeria.
However, the imposition was rather diplomatic.
Trading activities, missionary activities western education etc contributed immensely to the introduction of English in the country.
Since its introduction, in Nigeria, English has been existing alongside the numerous indigenous languages in addition to such languages as Arabic and French.
In this unit we shall talk about the interaction of English and tihned ig enious Languages with emphasis on the effects of English on the indigenous languages as well as the effects of the indigenous languages on the English language.
46  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Describe the language situation in Nigeria; ii.
State some effects of the indigenous languages on English in Nigeria.
iii.
Mention some effects of English on the indigenous languages in Nigeria 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 The Language Situation in Nigeria With what you have learnt in this course, it should be clear to you by now that Nigeria is a multilingual country.
Multilingualism is a phenomenon of linguistic pluralism within a single polity.
According to Stewart (1968:531), national multilingualism refers to the use of more than one language in a single polity.
Multilingualism exists in varying degrees in many areas of the world, e.g.
Asia, Africa, Latin America etc.
As at now, the actual number of the indigenous languages in Nigeria cannot be determined, but it has been variously put between 150 and 400.
Furthermore, these indigenous languages have dialects, some of which are not even mutually intelligible.
Out of these numerous languages, Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba have the political recognition as ‘major languages’.
The three languages can be regarded as regional lingua francas: Hausa is predominant in the North, Igbo in the East and Yoruba in the West.
In addition to the indigenous languages in Nigeria, we have such languages as English, French, Arabic, German, Russian and Pidgin English.
French, German, Arabic and Russian are taught in our schools and Universities as foreign languages.
Within the society, they are used for very restricted activities.
But English enjoys the status of a second language; it is used extensively for the conduct of day-to-day activities.
Arabic is used mostly only in religious contexts while Pidgin English flourishes mainly in commercial contexts, and spoken informal situations.
Definitely, the picture painted above is that of multilingualism and there is a movement towards a diglossic relationship; that is a functional differentiation of the languages.
But in practical terms, bilingualism is predominant.
47  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.2 Interaction of English and the Indigenous Nigerian Languages Languages are like human beings.
Just like human beings interact with one another, languages in a multilingual setting also interact with one another.
In such a situation, there will be cross-linguistic influence.
Since the English language exists side by side with the ilnandgigueangoeuss i n Nigeria, it exerts some influence on the languages.
In like manner, the indigenous languages also influence the English language.
So, it is a two-way affair.
3.2.1 Effects of the Indigenous Languages on the English Language The effects of the indigenous languages in Nigeria on the English language can be seen in terms of the colorations that have been given the English language in the country.
These reflect at various levels of language description: phonology, grammar, lexis and semantics.
At the phonological level, the influence of the mother tongue is pronounced.
This manifests in the treatment of the segmental and supra- segmental units.
With the segmental units of vowels and consonants, for example, there is the phenomenon of sound substitution.
For example, there are some vowels and consonants which are present in English but absent in Yoruba.
So when the Yoruba speakers of English encounter these sounds, they substitute them with sounds which are present in Yoruba eg /^/, /O/.
So “come” will be rendered as /k›m/ instead of /k^m/; “thin” will be realized as /tin/ instead of /oin/.
With the supra-segmental units of stress and intonation there is a similar tendency.
Nigerian languages are said to be tonal in nature rather than stress timed.
Like English in these languages, tone is used for lexical distinction.
An average Yoruba speaker of English, for example, is likely to assign equal prominence to every syllable in a bi- opro l ysyllabic words (A polysyllabic word is that which contains many syllables).
But this is not so in native English speech, where only one syllable is given the primary stress in a polysyllabic words.
Self Assessment Exercise If you are a speaker of Yoruba, describe two more examples of each of the situations cited above.
If you speak another indigenous language, state two examples for each of the situations described above.
That is, how your indigenous language affects the treatment of the segmental and the supra-segmental units of English.
48  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE At the grammatical level, the influences of the indigenous languages are minimal, but they are nonetheless present.
For example, there is the use of the plural pronoun, “they”, for a single person among the Yoruba speakers of English.
There may also be a translation of Yoruba structure into English e.g “I am coming” said by somebody taking an excuse to leave.
At the lexical level, some words from the indigenous languages have entered the English language e.g “Oba” (King), “dodo” (Friend plantain), “iroko” (a type of tree) etc from Yoruba; “Obi” (a title), “Ogbono” (a type of soup) etc from Igbo; “Emir” (a title), “seriki” (a title) etc from Hausa.These are regarded as loan words from the indigenous languages.
In the area of semantics (that is, meaning), the influence of indigenous languages and cultures can also be noted on the English language, especially in the aspect of kinship terms.
Such kinship terms as father, mother, brother, sister etc have been broadened in meaning in Nigerian English.
“Father” in Nigerian English means more than one’s male biological parent, so also the word “mummy”.
3.2.2 Effects of English on the Indigenous Nigerian Languages The English language has significant linguistic influence on the indigenous languages in Nigeria.
According to Bamgbose (1995:11), one clear linguistic influence of English on the Nigerian languages relates to the presence of a large vocabulary of English in these languages.
Such items in Yoruba include “titi (street), “diga” (digger), “sibi” (spoon), “buredi” (bread), “redio” (radio) and so on.
All these words can be regarded as loan translations with phonological modification.
Through this process, the vocabulary of the Yoruba language is expanded.
The same thing goes for all the other indigenous languages in Nigeria.
Self Assessment Exercises If your indigenous language is Yoruba, cite more examples of the process described above.
If you speak another indigenous Nigerian language, give some examples in your language of the process.
It should also be noted that the interaction of English and the indigenous languages in Nigeria has led to the emergence of Nigerian Pidgin.
Nigerian Pidgin draws its vocabulary from English and the indigenous 49  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE languages.
From the indigenous languages come such items as “wahala”, “katakata”, “ogogoro”, megida” etc in Nigerian pidgin.
The sociolinguistic phenomena of code mixing and code-switching are also another effect of the interaction of English and the indigenous languages.
An educated Nigerian can hardly undertake an extensive discourse in his mother tongue without code-mixing English items or switching completely to English at the end of a complete utterance.
Examples are: “Mi o ri man yen lana” (code-mixing), meaning “I didn’t see the man yesterday” “O pari.
Let’s go” (code-switching) (That’s all, Let’s go) Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Cite more examples of code-mixing and code-switching involving English and your indigenous language.
4.0 CONCLUSION Language interaction is a common feature in bi or multilingual settings.
Nigeria is a multilingual country in which many indigenous languages exist and some foreign languages as well.
Although foreign to Nigeria, English has become a second language in the country, which is extensively used in addition to the mother tongues.
Since its inception in Nigeria, English has been existing side by side with the indigenous languages and this has led to some cross-linguistic influence.
5.0 SUMMARY The language situation in Nigeria which we have described in this unit is that of multilingualism.
In this multilingual situation, English enjoys a great prominence as the language of government, education, commerce and industry, international diplomacy and so on.
If placed in a diglossic relationship with the indigenous Nigerian languages, there is no doubt that English will be regarded as “H” language (that is, High language-a language that enjoys dominance over its rivals).
Both English on the one hand and the indigenous languages on the other have continued to influence each other (socio linguistically).
50  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Describe the language situation in Nigeria 2.
Illustrate clearly the cross-linguistic influence between English and the indigenous Nigerian Languages.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bamgbose, A (1995) English in the Nigerian Environment” In Bamgbose, A; Banjo, A and Thomas, A (eds) New Englishes: A West AFRICAN Perpective.
Ibadan: Mosuro pp 9–26.
Jowitt, D (1991) Nigerian English Usage.
Zaria: Longman.
Stewart, W (1968).
“A Socio-linguistic Typology for Describing National Multilingualism”.
In Fishman, J (ed) Readings in the Sociology of Language.
The Hague: Moutons and Co. pp 531-545.
51  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 12 VARIETIES OF ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 The English Language in Nigeria 3.2 Varieties of English in Nigeria 3.2.1 Geographical Varieties 3.2.2 Varieties According to Medium 3.2.3 Varieties According to Education 3.2.4 Other Varieties 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nigeria is a country with many ethnic groups and languages.
In 1914 when Lord Fredrick Lugard’s amalgamated all the protectorates into one country (Nigeria), he did not amalgamate the indigenous languages.
The language that is trying to link all the tribes together is English.
The language was implanted into the country and it is a neutral language, which nobody can lay claim to.
If you make a linguistic excursion into the country, you will find that no two languages are totally alike.
Because of our linguistic background and even cultural background, it will be discovered that the English that we are using in Nigeria has different varieties.
We do not speak the language alike; we do not pronounce all words alike.
Different scholars with each scholar coming up with different varieties have examined this issue of varieties of English in Nigeria from various perspectives.
In this unit, we will examine the varieties of English that are eidaesniltyif i able across the country.
This will serve as a good launching pad in the study of further varieties of the language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Explain the English language situation in Nigeria ii.
Identify the major varieties of English in Nigeria 52  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE iii.
Bring out other varieties of English that are identifiable in Nigeria 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 The English Language in Nigeria The English language is a second language in Nigeria because it is not our mother tongue or first language.
We already had our indigenous languages before the advent of English.
The English language came into the country through commerce and trade, missionary activities and colonial masters.
This also helped the educational growth of the country since the language is being used as the medium of instruction right from the later part of primary school.
You will observe that the language came into the country from the coastal areas like Calabar, Abeokuta, Port Harcourt, Lagos, Badagry and other towns along the coast.
Through trade and religions matters, the language began to spread into the hinterland and people began to communicate in English, by that time, the whites began to govern Nigeria and many Nigerians who could speak some smattering of the language were interested in working for the whites as cooks, messengers, housekeepers etc.
With the use of English as the language of government, the language became the official language of the country.
It is the language that can unite us across linguistic boundaries.
However, because of the linguistic background of the individual speakers, some differences are noticeable in our use of the language.
This is because our indigenous languages have some features which are not the same as those of English, and when we put English into use, the difference can be noticed.
This is why we talk of varieties of tlhaneg uage in Nigeria today.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Can you identify the reason that led to the implantation of English in Nigeria?
3.2 Varieties of English in Nigeria As identified in the previous section, English in Nigeria can be divided into different varieties.
The varieties can be identified using certain criteria as guides.
We shall now look at some of the easily identified varieties that we have in Nigeria.
53  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.2.1 Geographical Varieties If you look at the geography of the country, you will discover tNhiagt e ria can be grouped into four major parts i.e., the Western, Eastern, Southern and the Northern parts.
These can be further divided if we use the ethnic boundary as a guide.
Also, the three major languages –Y o ruba, Igbo and Hausa can also serve as guides.
The Yoruba people are in the West, the Ibo people in the East and the Hausa people in the North.
With these three major languages as guides, the use of English of a Yoruba person who is bilingual in English and Yoruba will be slightly different from that of a Hausa/English or Igbo/English bilingual.
This is true of other local languages that are not major.
Because of tdhieffseer e nces, varieties set in.
If a Yoruba/English bilingual speaker and an Igbo/English bilingual speaker use English, the effect of their first language – their mother tongue – will be reflected in how they speak.
That is why we can have Yoruba English, Igbo English, Hausa English, Efik English and so on.
All these are varieties of English.
The areas where these varieties are easily noticeable are those of pronunciation and semantic inferences.
If a Yoruba person, Hausa person, or Igbo person speaks English, one will definitely know through the observation of how languages are articulated.
These varieties are guided by the geographical and the ethnic boundaries.
3.2.2 Varieties According to Medium By medium in this context, we are referring to the means through which someone uses a language.
As you know, English can be written and can be spoken just like our indigenous languages.
In the written form, there should be uniformity in the osyrtshteomgr;a tphhey g r ammatical rules guiding sentence construction should also be uniform.
This type of medium is always a formal type of variety.
With writing, one cannot know the geographical or the ethnic region of the writer since there seems to be uniformity in our writing mode.
What can be used to measure one’s level of language usage is his level of education.
The type of text one is writing can also help to determine the varieties of the language one is using.
Oral medium is not as formal as the written medium.
You know in the spoken medium of a language, many things are involved.
The articulation of the words and sentences can be noticed.
Again, the 54  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE context of usage and the situation can determine the type of style to be used.
The meanings of some lexical items or how an item is referred to can be different in many areas and this can be easily identified in the spoken medium.
In the area of pronunciation, varieties can be easily noted.
When a Hausa speaker of English pronounces “people” or when an Igbo speaker of English pronounces “follow”, the varieties will be easily identified.
This can be noted in the speech of Yoruba/English, Efik/English or other bilingual speakers.
So, spoken and written forms can help us determine the varieties of English.
3.2.3 Varieties According to Education The level of education of a speaker can also help us determine another variety of English.
The use of English of a school certificate holder will be different from that of a graduate.
The type of English that is taught and learnt in school is taken as the standard form.
If a well-educated speaker of the language handles the language, his own variety of the language will be easily identifiable and the issue of standard Nigerian language can then be addressed.
This is because; it has been a delicate issue to select the standard Nigerian English which must be appropriate and acceptable to all the users of the language.
3.2.4 Other Varieties As you have learnt earlier, many scholars have worked on the language issue in Nigeria and they have provided as many varieties as possible.
Apart from geographical, spoken, written, educated and uneducated varieties of Nigerian English, we also have types such as Technical Nigerian English, literary Nigerian English and interactional Nigerian English.
The technical variety is the type used in teaching, in legal setting, in the mass media either print or electronic.
The problem with this type of English is the issue of uniformity in its application.
The issue of speech is another problem here because it is sometimes difficult to comprehend what other people that do not come from the same cultural background with you say.
The literary variety is the type of usage found in literature texts.
Level of education also matters here.
Writers with low educational background may be more difficult to understand than those of high educational background.
You can compare the work of Amos Tutuola with that of Soyinka, Achebe and others.
The structural organization of the text and choice of language use can be easily identified in the texts of educated and uneducated writers 55  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE When we talk of interactional Nigerian English, we refer to the type employed in day-to-day conversation.
This involves spoken language but the problem there is that of acceptability and intelligibility.
These then lead us to the variety we can call standard Nigerian English.
The standard Nigerian English should be the one that is standard in every respect.
The type that has international acceptability and intelligibility at all levels of language use will be termed standard variety.
The problem is how to arrive at that variety that will be called standard’.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
From what you have learnt so far, can you still think of any other variety of English in Nigeria?
2.
Within your own geographical area, do speakers have the same variety of English?
4.0 CONCLUSION It will be recalled from what we have been told that Nigeria has many varieties of English.
It depends on how the language is being used.
However, you should not see this as a lapse because in every place where language is used, there are varieties; it is not limited to Nigeria only.
What may surprise you is that we can speak some varieties of language which the owners of English as first language may find difficult to understand.
That can be part of the beauty of creativity and hybridization in language use.
5.0 SUMMARY In the unit, we have learnt about the implantation of English in Nigeria and the different varieties of English that can be easily identified in Nigeria.
All these are instances of the dynamism of the language.
The fact that we have as many indigenous languages as possible is a good catalyst to the birth of as many varieties as possible in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify and explain the major varieties of English in Nigeria today.
2.
State and explain some criteria that can be used to mark out a sstandard Nigerian English.
56  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Spencer J.
(ed) (1971) The English Language in West Africa.
London: Longman.
Schmied, J (1991) English in Africa: An Introduction.
London: Longman.
Ubahakwe, E, (1979) Varieties and Functions of the English Language in Nigeria.
Lagos: A.U.P 57  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 13 STANDARD AND DEVIATION IN ESL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 The Meaning of Standard and Deviation 3.2 Second Language 3.3 Influence of Mother Tongue on Second Language 3.4 Levels of Deviation in EL2 3.4.1 Phonological Deviation 3.4.2 Grammatical Deviation 3.4.3 Lexical Deviation 3.5 Extension/Degree of Deviation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION Users of English are located all over the world, each using the language to reflect his geographical area.
This gives rise to such geographical varieties of English as British English, American English, Nigerian English e.t.c.
This unit is concerned with the study of the structure and use of English in the Nigerian social and cultural environment.
The aim is to show the general pattern of Standard English, and English as a Second Language with a view to revealing the systematic nature of the differences between the former and the latter variety.
The Unit describes the peculiar features of ESL at the levels of Pronunciation, Grammar and Lexis.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Explain the concepts of standard and deviation; ii.
Identify and explain types (levels) of deviation iii.
State and describe three factors that determine the extent (degree) of deviation in ESL.
58  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 The Meaning of Standard and Deviation By standard in this study, is meant the Mother Tongue variety of a language, or the educated variety.
Deviation, on the other hand, refers to the variety or varieties characterised by local-features modification, of non-native speakers of a language.
In other words, the educated native speaker variety or form of a language is its standard form whereas, the deviant is that which is coloured by local features of those for whom the language is not first language or Mother-Tongue.
3.2 Second Language A second language according to Adegbite W and Akindele F [1992: 40] is a language which is sequentially the second language of a bilingual person.
According to them, it is the variety in which a bilingual person conducts his everyday activities but shares this role with another language in which the speaker has the greater linguistic facility or knowledge.
This is the speaker’s S (L1), or Mother Tongue.
Kachru (1983) quoted in Adegbite and Akindele (1992) refer to English as a Second Language (ESL) as an institutionalized variety which has the following features: It undergoes process of nativization of the registers; it styles have taken place in both formal and in contextual terms.
it is marked by localised features.
3.3 Influence of Mother Tongue on second Language Simply put, the mother tongue or the L1 is the language in which a bilingual or multi lingual person conducts his everyday activities and in which he or she has the greatest linguistic facility or intuitive knowledge (Adegbite and Akindele 1992).
This implies that a speaker’s L1 does not necessarily mean the language of his mother.
It may be sequentially first language of a person, the one he uses in expressing his worldview, culture and tradition.
In Nigeria, there are over 250 ethnic groups with over 450 indigenous tongues.
To most people in these ethnic groups, English is the L2.
The interaction of English and these various indigenous languages gives birth to such ethnic varieties as Yoruba English, Hausa English, Igbo 59  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE English e.t.c.
The question now is how do these languages influence the learning of English?
Igboanusi (2000), in his article, ‘Contrastive Analysis: Some Problem Areas for the Igbo Learners of English’, points out that when speakers who have acquired the habit of one language want to learn a second language, there is the tendency for the speech habits of their flairnsgt u age to interfere in their effort at learning and using the second language.
He defines interference as the influence exerted by the linguistic systems of the first language on that of the secondary language.
In this article, Igboanusi points out Smith’s (1979:345) classification taxonomy of interference as “negative interference” and ‘positive transfer’.
The latter pertains to difficulties in using the target language which are mainly attributed to mother tongue and the former implies the ease or facilitation in learning the L2 resulting from similarities between L1 and L2.
Since we are concerned with deviation in this study, we shall binet e rested in that phenomenon known as negative interference.
In the section that follows, you shall read about this but before then, tfhoell o wing conclusions, as contained in Odini’s (1989:152) paper and reported by Igboanusi (Ibid) need to be drawn: Transfer occurs in both informal and formal contexts; Transfer occurs in all linguistic subsystems; Transfer occurs among children as well as among adults; Typological factors can affect the likelihood of transfer; Transfer can sometimes involve usual structure; and Non-structural factor can affect the likelihood of transfer.
3.4 Levels of Deviation in ESL In this section, you shall read about the various instances of deviation in Nigerian (L2) English.
Language generally is learnt at four levels: Writing, Reading, Listening and speaking.
These constitute the basic communication skills in language.
Deviation is mostly perceived in the productive aspects of language learning: that is, speaking and writing.
In these aspects, deviation is noticed at the following levels: (a) Phonology Phonological deviation.
(b) Lexis Lexical deviation.
(c) Grammar Grammatical deviation.
60  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Having identified the levels and types of deviation, let us now discuss them in detail: 3.4.1 Phonological Deviation This refers to the transfer of the rules guiding the production of speech sounds of a dominant language in a speech community to the sound system of a subordinate or target language.
This can be realised at the following levels: Phonemic stress intonation.
Deviation is dominant at the phonemic level.
This is because of the differences between the sound patterns of the mother tongue of Nigerian learners of English and the sound patterns of the English language.
Some English sounds are not present at all, in indigenous languages.
Examples of such sounds are the voiceless and voiced dental fricative, / O/, / /; voiced and voiceless palatal fricative / /, / /; and long English vowel sounds /l:/, /a:/, /u:/ e.t.c.
Because of this, it becomes very difficult for most Nigerian bilinguals to acquire these sounds.
A Yoruba speaker of English for instance tends to produce ‘think’ as /tink/ ‘dhat’ as /dat/ while ‘she’ as /si/, measure as /mes / while some Hausa speakers will produce ‘fever’ as /fifæ/, ‘people’ as /fifu/ e.t.c.
There are also noticeable deviations at the prosodic levels: Syllable Stress Intonation At the syllabic level, most L2 speakers of English tend to transfer the syllabic rules in indigenous languages on the target language English.
The fact is that the two are entirely different models.
The morphological structure of the words of these indigenous languages follow cvcv or vcvc [constant vowel; vowel- constant patterns whereas the English language has consonant clusters.
As a result of this, the Nigerian speakers of English often insert, immediately after the production of a consonant sound, a vowel sound.
Consider the differences in the following pronunciations.
61  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 1.
Words Native English pronunciation L2 speakers pronunciation.
2.
Little /litl/ /litu/ 3.
Bottle /b tl/ /b tu/ 4.
Table /teibl/ /tebu/ Stress: stress is the most important supra-segmental unit which poses problems for non-native speakers.
Stress, according to Daniel Jones (1956) is the degree of force with which a syllable is uttered.
Tdihfifse r s from one language to another.
Nigerian languages are tonal and intonational while English is stress-timed and intonational.
This creates some problems for Nigerian English bilinguals in learning English sounds.
A Yoruba- English bilingual for instance, stresses every syllable in the utterance he produces in English or places stress wrongly on some words.
Compare the following for instance, Words Native English pronunciation L2 speakers pronunciation.
1.Character ‘character Character 2.Education Edu’cation education 3.Advice ‘advice ad’vice 4.Madam ‘madam Ma’dam Intonation: At the level of intonation, there is also deviation.
Because all the syllables are stressed, a carry-over effect from the indigenous to understand what part of utterances a Nigerian English bilingual is trying to emphasize.
Consider the sentence “I am coming home” for instance.
In a normal English utterance, ‘home’ is stressed or emphasized.
It is also difficult for a Nigerian English bilingual to understand how different intonational patterns on a single utterance can give different meanings to the sentence.
For example You have some money (Tone 1 statement) You have some money?)
(Tone 2 question) You have some money?)
(Tone 3 Doubt) The sentences above are the same in form but the tonal rendition brings the differences in meaning.
3.4.2 Grammatical Deviation Osisanwo W (1994:3) defines grammar as a body of descriptive statements about the morphological and syntactic structure of a language.
Alo M.A (1998:55) provides a careful description of those 62  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE two components of grammar when he explains that syntax is the division of grammar which deals with the way words are combined into phrases and phrases into sentences and the rules governing them; and morphology as the component of grammar which deals with the internal structure of words and how new words can be formed.
In Nigeria, most bilinguals in the English language produce utterance both in speaking and writing that conform to the grammar of their indigenous languages.
We find among primary school and secondary school students such as: ‘They are calling you’ where they refers to a singular subject; “The book fell down from the table” instead of the book fell off the table e.t.c.
For further readings on this, Adegbite and Akindele (1992:33) –Sociology of Language.
3.4.3 Lexical Deviation Lexis deals with vocabulary and word organisation in a language.
Lexical deviation in Nigerian use of English takes two forms.
The first form is traceable to linguistic factors while the second is traced to cultural factors.
From the former perspective, we have issues relating to direct translation language into English.
Culturally, there are certain lexical items that are not present in English but have been introduced into Nigerian English because the notions they express are found in Nigerian culture e.g ‘bride price’ Lexical deviation is also noticeable in the use of kinship terms such as ‘father’ ‘mother’ ‘son’ e.t.c.
These kinship terms have been given semantic extension in the Nigeria speech community.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Identify three features of ESL 2.
Define phonological deviation, grammatical deviation and lexical deviation.
3.5 Extent \Degree of Deviation The following factors determine the degree of phonological, lexical and grammatical deviation in non-native English.
level of education level of exposure 63  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE first language Can you explain each of the factors as it relates to deviation?
4.0 CONCLUSION It is not possible for us to exhaust our discussion on this isstsauned a r do af n d deviation in ESL in this small unit.
However, we have been able to show that deviation in ESL in Nigeria is conditioned by two basic factors: the first one is linguistic and the second is cultural.
It can be said therefore that phonological, lexical and grammatical deviation in ESL cannot be seen absolutely as errors, but also as inevitable linguistic features of a language contact situation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the following: • The concepts of standard and deviation from socio linguistic perspectives; • The meaning of Second Language; • Mother Tongue influence on Second Language acquisition; • Levels\types of deviation in ESL; and • Extent of deviation in Nigerian ESL.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What do you understand by standard and deviation?
2.
Describe the following forms of deviations with adequate illustrations from Nigerian English: Phonological deviation Grammatical deviation Lexical deviation 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adegbite W and Akindele F(1992)-Sociology of language.
Alo M.A 1998-Style in Language and Communication.
A eddy link.
Port Harcourt Igboanusi H.S(200) ”Contrastive Analysis: some problem Areas for the Igbo learners of English in Babajide A.O ad (2000)-studies in English Language.
Ibadan: Enicrownfit publishers 64  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Osisanwo W (1994) Aspects of English structure: Nigeria Fetor Publishers.
65  ENG 15`1 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 14 TEACHING ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE: LISTENING AND SPEAKING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 What is listening?
3.2 What is speaking?
3.3 How to Develop Audio-Oral Skills 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about two basic skills of language as they affect the Teaching of English as a second language.
The skills are listening and speaking.
You will agree that these skills are very important because at every point in time, human beings are either listening or speaking.
In fact, no normal human being can do without performing these skills almost all the time.
Sometimes they carry out both actions almost simultaneously.
This then means that there is the need to listen effectively and at the same time speak effectively.
Without effective listening and speaking, human communication will be incomplete and in actual fact communication will not even be carried out.
With English as our second language, the skill of listening and speaking become those to be learned adequately since the language is not our mother tongue.
Because of the importance of these skills and because of the position of English as our second language, effective teaching and learning of these skills becomes very important.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Describe effectively both listening and speaking skills ii.
Explain carefully the relevance of these skills in human’s communicative process.
iii.
Link the teaching of English as a second language with the acquisition of these skills.
66  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 What is listening?
Before communication can take place successfully and before a feedback can be given when at least two people are involved in communication, effective listening must have taken place.
In fact in any language teaching, listening is a major objective.
You will agree with me that listening is a complicated activity, which first includes learning.
The hearing has to be sifted so as to ensure selective listening.
Here, the listener is able to separate sense from ordinary noise.
After the separation, he can now interpret the sense and eventually react to what he has heard.
It is important for one to be able to understand what he has heard.
Because there is the need to understand what one hears, he who understands what he hears is the one who has listened effectively while the one who hears but does not understand what he hears has not listened effectively.
From this explanation, you will discover that the emphasis of listening is not just on hearing speech but in understanding the speech that is heard.
The knowledge of English as a second language should be brought to bear on this since English is the medium of instruction in our schools.
3.2 What is Speaking?
Speaking is the voicing out of some audible sounds.
What is voiced out would have been collated by our thinking processes, and when it is adequately produced, it will be meaningful to an effective listener.
When we speak, we are usually expressing or addressing ourselves to other people and as such, our speech has to be sensible and easily understood by the hearers.
You are aware that people speak so as to express their innermost thoughts and because of this what we say must always be sensible.
Since the language we speak is shared with other members of our immediate environment, our speech should not be radically different from theirs.
The sounds i.e those of the vowels and consonants that will be joined together should be well articulated.
As you know, English is our second language and therefore, we cannot speak exactly like those who have the language as their mother tongue or first language much as they too cannot speak our mother tongue the way we do.
However, the variety that we are using must be aancc e ptable one.
Each speaker has to be able to adapt his speech to the situation because when we speak, we do so either in response to theanother or, to express delight or anger, to communicate with 67  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE outsiders as immediate friends etc.
There should therefore be acceptable articulation of the sounds, maintenance of normal speed and the collation of the sound so as to bring out the expected meaning.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
From what you have learned so far, what can you say are the main differences between ‘hearing’ and ‘listening’?
3.3 How to develop audio- oral skills Let us start by explaining the term ‘audio-oral’.
Audio has to do with our sense of hearing and listening while oral deals with the voicing out of some sounds.
Audio-oral is therefore a combination of both the skills of speaking and listening.
These skills go together most of the time although there may be times when one listens without speaking.
In the real sense however, listening is a prerequisite to speaking.
In developing these skills, learners should be able to use their knowledge of English to describe objects, report events and explain situations.
They should be able to pronounce sounds of English that are not present in first language correctly without being misunderstood.
Ear- training must be properly handled especially to ensure that learners can differentiate between sounds that are closely similar and to avoid mistaking one sound for the other.
To ensure effective listening and speaking, it is important to take note of the following exercises: Train learners in saying individual words that have some troublesome phoneme.
Examples are minimal pairs like fan, van, sun, shun, right, light, chair, cheer, dare, there e.t.c.
Apart from these types of pairs, sentences containing such words can be constructed as well; Appropriate stress patterns must be taken into consideration.
Information is another important thing that must be taken care of.
It is a fact that poor listening, insufficient exposures to spoken English, inadequate practice of oral English are some of the problems causing poor listening and speaking.
Therefore, one good step to take to solve these problems is listening to recorded cassettes.
Plays on radio and television can as well be useful.
As listening goes on, learners should as well be trained to interpret what they hear.
68  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE To develop both listening and speaking skills taking into account English as a second language, Obanya (1982) has offered some suggestions.
He says that Learners should be exposed to various media through which oral English can be communicated; They should listen attentively to spontaneous conversation among speakers of English as a second language; They should react verbally and spontaneously in English to the messages conveyed through face-to-face conversation Learners should be exposed to a wider variety of educated speakers of English using English to talk on a variety of topic in various situations Learners should be able to listen attentively to and make mental or written notes of the major points in speeches, talks or broadcasts relating to topic within his experience Learners should be able to interpret what they have heard in terms of going beyond what is explicitly said to probe motives, allusions, insinuations, and all other possible clues Learners should be able to discuss spontaneously with other speakers of Standard English on a variety of topics Learners should acquire self-confidence in the manipulation of spoken English.
From the above, it will be seen that listening and speaking are onerous tasks for the learner.
Because English is our second language, there is the need to exercise adequate training so as to identify sounds and comprehend spoken texts Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Pronounce the following words: Cut, cat; then, den Sit, seat; hair, here Seat, sheet; know, low 69  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 2.
Are the following words the same in pronunciation?
Conduct (verb) ; Conduct (noun) Export(verb) ; Export(noun) Insult (verb) ; Insult (noun) Import(verb) ; Import(noun) 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has examined the development of listening and speaking skills bearing in mind the teaching of English as a second language.
Learners are expected to understand all sorts of educated speakers of English and they are as well expected to be able to speak the language effectively.
All the areas where there are problems should be adequately tackled.
Such areas include either the presence or the absence of a phoneme in one language when compared with the other.
In fact, interference has been the major problem militating against the effective use of English as the second language.
Practice exercises can help to solve the problem.
Therefore, in listening and speaking skills, executrices like pronouncing exercise, structure exercise, oral composition, dramatisation and role play will enhance their teaching of in a second language situation 5.0 SUMMARY The unit has intimated us what listening and speaking are.
It again tells us that in the teaching of English as a second language the skills of listening and speaking which are primary have to be adequately handled.
This is because of the fact that English is our second language and knowledge of our first language often interferes in our knowledge of the second language.
A number of ways through which the skills can be taught are mentioned in the unit and these will help in the ehfafnedcltiinvge o f the skills.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Make a list of interference problems you hear in the English speech of persons around you.
2.
Indicate the Mother-tongue of the Speakers.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Obanya P. (1982) Secondary English Teaching, Ibadan: Macmillan.
Obanya P. (1980) General Methods of Teaching.
Ibadan: Macmillan.
70  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Ubahakwe, U.
(ed) (1978) Varieties and functions of English in Nigeria, African University Press.
71  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 15 TEACHING ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE: READING AND WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 What is Reading?
3.1.1 Problems of Reading 3.2 What is writing?
3.3 How to Develop reading Skills 3.4 How to develop writing Skills 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION Reading and writing are skills that are necessary in the present times since most of what is going on in the world today is through reading and writing.
For success in life, the skills of reading and writing should be adequately developed.
Again, in a situation where English is the second language like in Nigeria, adequate emphasis has to be placed on reading and writing skills.
This is because if one cannot read, he will be lost in the present scheme of things.
The same thing applies to the ability to write so as to be able to communicate to people within and outside one’s immediate society.
Searching for more knowledge and understanding is made easy because of your ability to read and write.
These skills are especially important to you in your studies in an Open and Distant system such as the National Open University of Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, it is expected that you should be able to do the following: i.
Explain reading and writing skills; ii.
State the problems of teaching the skills using ESL as the medium; and iii.
State ways of developing these skills.
72  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 WHAT IS READING?
Reading has to do with the ability to identify letters, linking them together to form words and linking the words together to form sentences.
One should be able to read such words that are linked together and understand what such a collection of words means.
Reading starts from there and it develops progressively.
You should note that reading is of different types depending on the purpose of the reading.
It can be extensive and intensive.
Extensive reading is wide reading, which is not as deep as intensive type.
It is like reading for pleasure when compared with reading for examination, which is intensive reading.
Whatever type it might be, one important thing is the understanding of what one is reading.
This is because one can read and may not comprehend what he has read.
Reading becomes effective when one has understood what he has read.
However, no matter what type the reading might be, there are certain problems associated with reading and we shall touch on them below.
3.1.1 Problems of Reading In order to assist learners to read effectively, one should be mindful of the following: Bad eyesight is a major problem which can badly affect one’s reading ability.
Medical treatment is usually recommended for this; Head wagging is another problem.
Instead of the eyes to be moving, a deficient reader will be moving the head as if it is the head that is pronouncing the words; Vocalisation, which is saying the words while reading, slows down reading a great deal.
Other Problems Include the Following Slow reading rate Inability to understand the linguistic patterns effectively.
The problems are more than those stated but those will serve as a kind of clue to the problems that are hampering efficient reading.
73  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE For effective reading to take place, the problems stated have to bade e quately handled especially when the medium of expression is English, which incidentally is a second language in Nigeria.
Before we proceed, let us have a pause here.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Can you itemize some other problems that can hamper reading of English texts in Nigeria?
2.
What solutions can you suggest for these problems?
3.2 What is writing?
Writing is very important to the human race and the art of writing is not just putting pen to paper.
It consists of having something to say that is worth saying and knowing how best to convey it in writing.
It then means that the subject of what we have to write will determine its form.
You should know that to be able to write well, one must have acquired the skills of listening and speaking in the language concerned.
Being able to listen and understand and speak English bears on what one is writing.One must also have acquired a wide range of English vocabulary to be able to convey meaningful ideas through writing.
3.3 How to Develop Reading Skills Reading is a complex skill which has different stages of development.
In the development of this skill, the first step is the ability to recognize letters on paper.
This is an elementary stage which is known a‘ms e chanical stage’.
The second stage is the ability to correlate these letters on paper with language learning.
This is the ‘phonic stage’.
The third step is the ability to identify letters on paper with the meanings they symbolize.
This stage is an intellectual one and it entails other factors depending on the purpose of one’s reading.
The purpose may be to survey a text by glancing quickly and nthoot ro ughly through the material being read.
This is known as ‘survey reading’.
It might also be called ‘scanning’.
One might want to dskoi m ming – a situation where a particular item of information is being sought from a mass of information.
Superficial reading is just to have a superficial comprehension.
Content-study reading is to study in detail the content of the text being read while linguistic study reading is where you study the language in which the text is written.
Since reading is intended to aid hearing, speaking and writing, it is advocated that the skill is properly developed.
This can be through 74  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE asking questions on the language being taught and requiring answer in the same.Training for reading skill is normally done through comprehension which is normally termed’ the acquisition of information about meaning or the extraction of meaning from a text’.
Learners should as well summarize or retell passages read to ensure comprehension.
Sentence structure, paragraph structure and comprehension, vocabulary development also will aid effective and efficient reading in English.
3.4 How to Develop Writing Skill Writing is the visual representation of the spoken language and it can be in different forms.
It might be to narrate, to describe, to argue or to imagine one thing or the other.
In a situation where English is a second language, I want you to have it at the back of your mind that there is the need for adequate knowledge of the other skills since they are related.
Adequate knowledge of English is the needed panaca that can promote the ability to write.
Writing can be at different levels of complexity.
Paragraph at the earlier stage, controlled writing can serve as a launching pad for the development of the skill.
This is done by asking learners to substitute missing or deleted words from certain parts of a story or by providing a set of pictures accompanied with an incomplete passage, and asking the learner to complete the passage.
Paragraph writing can also be guided.
Here, learners have more freedom to write guided by questions that will lead to what they will write.
Paragraph in a free or creative writing, the learner has the total freedom to manipulate language the way he likes based on his knowledge and skills of vocabulary, grammar, ideas etc.
It is advisable to give exercises to learners in the different forms writing as these will continue to widen the knowledge of the learner.
The purpose of writing should also be another guiding principle.
Learners should be taught to focus on the purpose of any writing task so as to select appropriate words, grammar, language expressions and appropriate ideas.
4.0 CONCLUSION As noted earlier, writing and especially, using English as a second language to carry out the exercise is herculean.
The same thing goes for reading.
The two skills are complementary.
75  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been discussing both reading and writing skills especially in the context of English as a second language.
We have intimated you of the need to acquire the knowledge of the language so as to manipulate it effectively in reading and writing.
Since English is widespread across the globe, the ability to read and to write in tlhaneg uage is like placing oneself in the global Internet of language.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define reading and writing as basic language skills 2.
List some major ways of developing the skills of reading and writing in EL2 situation 7.0 REFERNCES/FURTHER READINGS McCree, H. (1969) From Controlled to Creative Writing.
African Obanya P. (1982) Secondary English Teaching.
Ibadan: Macmillan.
Obanya, P. (1964) General Method of Teaching.
Ibadan: Macmillan University Press.
Unoh, S.O.
(1979) Remember Ibadan University 76  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 16 TEACHING ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE: VOCABULARY AND GRAMMATICAL STRUCTURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Developing the Learner’s Vocabulary in ESL 3.2 Is the Teaching of Grammar Necessary in an ESL Situation?
3.3 Some Methods of Teaching Grammatical Structures of English 3.3.1 The Grammar-Translation Method 3.3.2 The Direct Method 3.3.3 The Audio-Lingual Method 3.3.4 The Cognitive Code-Learning Method 3.3.5 Communicative Competence in Language Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION In teaching English as a second language, all the four basic skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing should be emphasized in order to ensure that the learners have a good mastery of the language.
In addition to these basic language skills, vocabulary and grammatical structures should also be taught.
By vocabulary in this context, we mean the stock of words.
For users of English as a second language to be able to communicate effectively in the language, they should be equipped with a good amount of the vocabulary of English.
Apart from the stock of words, users of English as a second language should also be familiar with the grammatical structure of English.
This is particularly necessary in a second language situation if the cases of mother-tongue interference at the grammatical level are to be reduced.
The knowledge of the grammatical structure of English will enable the learners of English as a second language to improve their communicative competence in the language.
This unit will describe vocabulary and grammar as well as the methods for teaching these.
77  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Mention and describe at least three strategies for developing learner’svocabulary in ESL; ii.
Explain what you understand by grammar; and vocabulary; iii.
Describe the approaches of teaching ESL grammar and vocabulary; iv.
Describe the methods of teaching grammar and vocabulary.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Developing the Learner’s Vocabulary in ESL Words are the building blocks of language.
There are two broad groups of words in language: content words and structural or grammatical words.
Content words are those that carry the bulk of meaning ilnan guage and they include nouns, lexical verbs, adverbs, adjectives.
Structural or grammatical words are those that do not carry much meaning, but express some structural or grammatical relationship.
They include prepositions and conjunctions etc.
In second language teaching the development of a learner’s vocabulary is a very important activity.
We can identify learner’s active and passive vocabulary.
The learner’s active vocabulary consists of those words while he knows and makes use of in his language often.
On the other hand, his passive vocabulary consists of words which he knows but which do not feature often in his language use.
Below are the suggested strategies that can be adopted in developing the learner’s vocabulary: Use of the dictionary: Learners of English as a second language should be taught how to use the dictionary.
A good dictionary supplies useful information in respect of pronunciation of words, dimensions of meaning and range of usage, word classes among others.
Frequent use of the dictionary will be productive.
Reading activities: Through qualitative and quantitative reading, the learners will become familiar with many words.
In fact, extensive reading i.e.
wide reading develops the reader’s vocabulary power.
So, in a second language situation, learners should be involved in adequate reading activities.
78  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Use of synonyms: Synonyms are words that are similar in meaning.
No two words in any language have exactly the same meaning because their social values will be different; they will have different connotations.
Such is the case with “thrifty” and “stingy”.
The latter tends towards negative orientation while the former does not.
Also, when two words are synonyms, one may be informal while the other is formal e.g.
“go” and “proceed; “start” and commence” But the relevant point to us here is that familiarity with the lexical relationship of synonymy will help to expand the learner’s vocabulary.
Use of antonyms: Antonyms are words that are opposite in meaning.
Examples are “wide” and “narrow”, “dead” and “alive”.
There are different types of antonyms e.g.
gradable antonyms and complementary antonyms.
With complementary antonyms, the negative ness of an item in the pair means the assertion of the other e.g.
“not dead” means “alive”.
This is not so with the gradable antonyms.
For example “not hot” does not necessarily mean “cold”.
Between “hot” and “cold” are some possibilities e.g.
“warm”, “lukewarm” etc.
The use of antonyms is a good means of developing the vocabulary of learners.
Registers: Registers here refer to words and expressions specially used in various occupations and fields of endeavours.
For example we can have the registers of building, agriculture, medicine, photography etc.
In a second language situation, the learners should be exposed to a wide range of registers.
They should know the appropriate English words to be used in many areas of human activity.
3.2 Is the Teaching of Grammar Necessary in an ESL Situation?
We take grammar here to refer to the description of the form of a language.
That is, the description of its rules.
If English as a second language is to be effectively taught, it is necessary to expose the learners to the grammatical structure of the language.
Thus the question should not be whether or not the grammar of English should be taught, but rather how it should be taught.
A good knowledge of the grammatical structures of English will help the learners to use the language effectively and minimize the errors of mother tongue interference.
The knowledge of the grammatical structures of English will also enable the teacher to know what to teach and how to arrange and teach tlhaneg uage material in a systematic order.
In this sense, grammar does not mean teaching the rules of prescription.
We know that all languages are rule-governed, but in an ESL situation, the emphasis should be on the description of how language is used rather than the prescription of how it should be used.
79  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.3 Some Methods of Teaching the Grammatical Structure of English Many methods of teaching the grammatical structure of English have been identified.
These methods relate to the theories and practice of teaching English as mother tongue, foreign language and second language.
The methods are the grammar – translation method, the direct method, the audio-lingual method, the cognitive code-learning method and communicative language teaching method.
3.3.1 The Grammar-Translation Method According to Williams (1990:31-32), this method dominated language teaching in Europe during the 19th century.
In the classroom situation, as Williams notes, the method would involve the following activities, among others.
Rote: memorization of vocabulary items with their native – language equivalents; Translation of sentences from the foreign language to the native language of the learners (and vice versa); Explicit statements and explanations of the rules governing the use of structures to be learned; Explicit teaching of terminology as it applies to the grammars of the native language and the foreign language etc.
This method emphasizes the study of the form and rules of language rather than the communicative use of language.
Applying the principles of the grammar translation method, language learning is seen as a process of learning the rules of language and how these rules aaprep l ied.
There is no systematic practice in oral skills that is, listening and speaking skills.
Students are required to translate texts from English to mother tongue and vice versa.
3.3.2 The Direct Method According to Williams (1990) the direct method is characterized by the following: There is no translation from the target language to the learners’ mother tongue.
A target language is the language being learnt.
In our situation it is English; 80  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Lessons begin with dialogues or brief stories spoken by the teacher in the conversational style in the target language; Questions based on the oral presentation by the teacher are asked in the target language and answered in the target language; The class is immersed in the totality of the target language, learning the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing.
The Direct method emphasizes the primary of speech and the direct association of words and structures with objects and actions.
The method is also activity-based and discourages explicit grammatical explanations.
The learners are to arrive at their own understanding about the structures being learnt, through the actions, activities involved in the process of learning.
The Direct Method, however, has its own demerits.
It may be too demanding on the teacher and the learners may be tongue-tied, not knowing what to do or say.
In a second language situation, the mother- tongue cannot be totally disregarded.
3.3.3 The Audio-Lingual Method The original name given to this method was Aural-Oral method.
The method emphasizes aural-oral skills, that is, listening and speaking skills.
It relies heavily on the use of dialogue.
The learning material is introduced in dialogue form and used as a basis for structural drills.
Also, mimicry and memorization of structural items are involved.
In fact, the audio-lingual method is based on the theory of behaviorism, especially the stimulus-Response (S-R) connection.Structural linguistics also has its influence on the methods.
However, the method has some drawbacks, which include the following: Its mechanical laboratory drills may not represent language in real-life situation; It over-emphasizes the aural aspect to the detriment of those who are visual-minded; It insists, of course wrongly, on error-free learning.
3.3.4 The Cognitive Code-Learning Method As Williams (1990) observes, this method is a reaction against the audio-lingual method.
The method takes language learning to be a 81  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE process of rule-formation rather than habit-formation.
It does not allow pronunciation drills and it discourages the automatic repetition of phrases and sentences.
The method also uses group work and individualized instruction and makes allowance for the use of mother- tongue and translation.
3.3.5 Communicative Competence Language Teaching The major concerns of this method are appropriateness of usage, contextual usage, transactional usage and interactional usage.
The method is both situational and functional and it involves group activities, situational drills, dialogues and role-plays.
It situationalizes and contextualizes the teaching of grammar.
With communicative language teaching, all aspects of ELS are taught e.g.
phonology, syntax, lexis and semantics.
The entire learning environment is judiciously used, with the learner at the centre.
The problems with this method include the fact that it is demanding on the teacher.
Also, those who do not properly understand its principles may feel that it disregards the teaching of grammar, whereas it does not.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Explain how you can conduct any grammar lesson to a JSS class, making use of any one of the five methods or approaches discussed above.
4.0 CONCLUSION In addition to the teaching of the four basic skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing, the teaching of vocabulary and grammatical structure is also important in a second language situation.
In the teaching of vocabulary, the teacher should involve the learners in quantitative and qualitative reading as well as other creative activities.
With the teaching of grammatical structures, the teacher may have to go eclectic, making use of what is best in the various methods.
This also calls for creativity on the part of the teacher.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed briefly the teaching of vocabulary and grammatical structure.
We have also looked at the various language teaching methods and recommended that in the teaching of grammar the teacher should be creative in method.
82  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Mention and describe three strategies of developing the learner’s vocabulary in EL2 (a) What do you understand by the term grammar?
(b) State and describe two methods or approaches of teaching grammar in an EL2 situation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Boadi L.A et al (1968) Grammatical Structure and its Teaching.
Lagos: African University Press.
Williams, D (1990) English Language Teaching: An Integrated Approach.
Ibadan: Spectrum.
83  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 17 LITERATURE IN ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Definition and Characteristic of Literature 3.2 Definition and Features of African Literature 3.3 Language Problems and African Literature 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about literature in a second lsaitnugautiaogne.
Language is the vehicle through which literature is learnt and taught and as such, language and literature are intertwined.
You will learn in this unit the characteristics of Literature in general and African literature in particular.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Define what is meant by literature ii.
State the characteristics of literature iii.
Explain the features of African literature iv.
Describe the problems inherent in African literature v. Differentiate between English literature and literature in English.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definition and Characteristics of Literature The term literature has been defined in many ways: Literature has been defined as “a form of imaginative writing, in prose or verse”.
At another level, literature has been defined as a wdorcitutemne n tation or a body of writing of a people.
Bennison Gray, in his 84  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE voluminous book – Phenomenon of Literature offers a suggestion on the definition and many people have subscribed to his definition.
He said “all literary works are fictitious”.
This implied that before a piece of writing can be qualified as literature, it must be fictitious.
You need to know that the word fiction is derived from a Latin word ‘fictio’ which means “to make up” or “feign” or “invent” something.
The term fiction has therefore distinguished literature from other activities.
Literature is conducted in language and the language of literature is rendered in such a way as to have connective assertion.
Event is an important factor in literature; it is an occurrence which can be situated in time and place.
At another level, literature is told \using “moment-by- moment” narration.
With the above description and some of the characteristic features highlighted, literature can be safely described as a moment-by moment of events that are not verifiable.
Literature and History are similar in the way both are told but unlike literature, history is verifiable and it uses summary method but literature cannot be verified and it can be in form of prose, poetry or drama.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Have you read any literature book before?
If yes, can you tell us some important events that take place in that book?
2.
In terms of language use and the arrangement of events, can you now compare literature with other written texts that you have read?
3.2 Definition and Features of African Literature You will recall that in some of the definitions proffered, literature is associated with writing.
However, it has been noted that to say that literature exists only when writing exists is a wrong assumption.
Writing developed in Africa lately when compared with the continent of the whites.
Does it then mean that literature began in Africa only of recent?
The answer is ‘no’.
Literature has been existing in Africa right from the beginning of man.
Even contrary to European history, writing is not unknown in Africa before the coming of the whites.
In East Africa, there was a long tradition of writing in Swahili which was a hybrid orthography of Arabic and Bantu.
Let us now examine African literature.
Literature can be oral or written but in Africa, about 90% of literary activity is conducted in oral medium.
Therefore, Africa has more literature than we are aware of.
However, if we take literature to be a curious expression of fictional event, then what is African literature?
Is it any novel written by an African or any literature written in an African language?
What we 85  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE should note is that African literature should be a literature by Africans in whatever language.
This is because such literature will always be informed by African consciousness and awareness.
In Africa today, we can talk of many literary artists like Chinua Achebe, Wole Soyinka, Niyi Osundare, T.M.
Aluko, Sembene Ousmane, Ayi Kwei Armah and others from West Africa.
In East Africa, we can remember Okot pN’gBuigteik , wa Thiongo, and many others.
Also in South Africa, we can name writers like Alex la Guma, Lewis Nkosi and others.
Most of the writings of African literary artists are informed by the culture of the blacks and the use of language also reflects their identity.
Many writers today write in the colonial language but one can ask if this language will be adequate to capture the essence of African experience.
Nurudeen Farah, a Somalian writer advocates that a writer should write in whatever language but it should be written in such a way that will allow translation other their languages.
However, the final position is for Africans to evolve an African lingua franca side by side with other respective ethnic languages of the people.
Whichever way we look at it, African literature is basically written by Africans and the characteristics of African ways of life, culture and other traits are present in them.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Take a literary text written by an African and bring out some of the features that are African in such a text 2.
In terms of language use, how do you see Soyinka’s Work in the Interpreters and Forest of a Thousand Demons?
3.3 Language Problems and African Literature Language is the storehouse of the culture of a people.
It is the vehicle through which society moves.
In Africa, one of the major problems is the multiplicity of our languages and nobody will see his language as inferior to the other.
We have earlier said that language is the vehicle of literature and from whatever ethnic group one comes from, there is literature embedded there.
Because of this multiplicity of languages, literature texts have been produced in many languages.
Among the Yoruba, Igbo, Hausa, Fulani, Tiv, Efik etc in Nigeria, many literary works have been produced.
The same is true in other parts of Africa.
These have limited the elasticity of many of such literary texts.
If a text is written in Swahili or Acol: (East African Language), people from other ethnic groups will not be able to read such and this cuts across.
This is the major problem in Africa.
That is why a writer like Wole Soyinka has been an advocate of evolving an African lingua franca side by side with other ethnic language.
He said if we adopt a language like Swahili, we could still use our different ethnic languages as subordinates 86  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE to the superordinate language.
The problem with this is the difficulty of such a move in a multi-ethnic and multilingual continent like Africa.
Some literary works written in indigenous languages have been translated into English – Soyinka’s Forest of a thousand Demons is a translation of Ogboju Ode ninu Igbo Irunmole by Fagunwa.
Again Okot p’Biteh’s Song of Lawino is translated from Acoli language to English.
The problem with such is that the original meaning might be lost when an indigenous language is translated into a second language like English.
At present, the language problem is still persisting and if we do not think that a solution is in the sight.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Compare Soyinka’s Forest of a thousand Demons With Fagunwa’s Ogboju Ode in terms of language use; 2.
Read any of Amos Tutuola’s texts and examine the meanings of some of his sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION From what we have learnt in this unit, we will discover that African literature exists but that the problem of language constitutes an impediment to the spread of many of the works.
In every culture or ethnic group, there is abundance of both oral and written literary works.
5.0 SUMMARY African literature and other literary works can be placed side-by-side in the world today.
The work is being written in local languages as well as in English, our second language.
We have learnt that language is our major problem and we have not been able to reach a consensus about what language will be a unifying one in Africa.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Soyinka’s Forest of a Thousand Demons and Okot p’ Bitek’s Song of Law ino are two African literary work translated into English from indigenous languages.
Bring out some concepts of Africanism in the two texts; What do you think should be the characteristics of African literature that will make it different from foreign ones?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 87  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Ogude .S.E (1983) Genius in Bondage Ile-Ife: University Press Moody H.L.B (1972) The Study of Literature London: George Allen and Unwin Soyinka, W. (1976) Myth, Literature and the African World.
Cambridge.
88  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 18 TEACHING LITERATURE IN ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Purposes of Teaching Literature in English as a Second Language 3.1.1 Techniques for Developing the Teaching of Literature 3.2 Criteria for Selection of Texts in a Second Language Situation 3.3 Evaluation in the Teaching of Literature in English as a Second Language 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION In one of the units earlier treated, we delved into the definition of literature and its characteristics.
Also, we have dealt with African literature and the Second Language issue.
Having touched on these, it is pertinent to go practical i.e to go pedagogical in handling literature in English as a second language.
Literature in English as a second language has to be taught effectively because this will widen the horizon of the students taught and their creative ingenuity will be improved.
In this unit therefore, attempt will be made to explain the purposes and approaches to literature teaching.
The criteria for text selection and means by which students understanding can be assessed will also be highlighted.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
State the purposes of teaching literature in English as a second language ii.
Itemize the various approaches to literature teaching; iii.
Explain some of the criteria that should be used in selecting the texts of literature to be studied and to; 89  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE iv.
Point out how the knowledge gained by the students can be assessed.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Purpose of Teaching Literature in English as a Second Language The teaching of literature in English in a second language situation is an arduous task.
The language in which it is written is originally a foreign language to us and as such, one has to be cautious in the teaching of the subject.
I want you to be informed that at the general level, the purposes of literature teaching are to transmit the people’s cultural values, to help in the development of character, to help readers to cope with modern life, to educate and to develop one’s critical thinking.
Again, I want you to look at the specific purposes for the study olift e rature in a second language situation.
The major purpose here is the promotion of competence in the use of the second language.
The link with language is an important factor in the study of literature and this link is an important channel for widening one’s knowledge, developing critical thinking processes and awareness in all spheres of life.
3.1.1 Techniques for Developing the Teaching of Literature You should know that the study of literature is more of a linguistic task for the second language student than for those who have English as their first language.
To teach literature prose, poetry or drama, there must be good and adequate planning.
Reading helps to familiarize one with the text and it develops the skills of the readers.
So, in addition to factual questions, high ability questions should be asked.
These lead to analysis, evaluation and appreciation of the text.
Teachers should not limit themselves to a particular genre and to generate interest in the different types of literature, the teacher should ensure that materials are appropriate to the student’s background.
Literature, as we know, is language put to use, it is language effectuated and as a result, it must be properly handled.
Various approaches that will elicit positive effects must always be used.
This will improve tlheaer n ers’ knowledge of literature, his use of English as a Second Language.
90  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Self Assessment Exercise 1.
State and explain the purposes of teaching literature in English as second language in Nigeria today.
3.2 Criteria for Selection of Texts in a Second Language Situation It should be clear to you that the teaching of literature as a Second Language is a vital issue in Nigeria today.
As a result of this, attention must be paid to ensure proper selection of texts to be used.
Before selecting a literature text, we must focus on the relevance of such a text.
Such a text must cater for both the psychological and tlhineg u istic needs of second-language students.
Another criterion that should be looked into in the selection of literature text that would be used is the psychological stage of development that is in correspondence with the age of the students.
Materials should then be selected in accordance with the readiness of students to cope with the issues involved.
Eg age, maturity, intelligence level etc should be considered You should also know that selection of literature texts should not be based only on psychological but also on linguistic factor.
Readability should be the basic linguistic factors.
The text selected should not be too difficult for the groups that will read such a text.
Literature should not be presented to students as puzzles but as some thing of enjoyment.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Give and explain three out of many factors that should be considered in the selection of literature texts in Nigeria.
3.3 Evaluation in the Teaching of Literature as a Second Language In this section, the language factors are basic in assessment just as they are in teaching interpretation of literature.
Three major issues, according to Williams (1990) should be taken into consideration when evaluating the teaching of literature.
These issues include comprehension, analysis and response sophistication.
91  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Comprehension is a very important factor of interpretive ability.
This is because comprehension of literature texts calls for the ability to integrate lexical items and grammatical information so as to arrive at the deserved meaning.
Open-ended questions can be asked and at times the multiple choice format can also be used to find out the level of comprehension.
In the areas of analysis, the interpretation of the text should go beyond the ordinary recognition of literary meaning.
The responses of the students should focus on their abilities to make explicit analysis of the author’s work and method.
The analysis will take care of ldietevriacreys l ike plot, characterization, language and style.
For response sophistication, a sophisticated reader should be able to suspend judgement that is purely personal.
Focus should be on the work of the writer.
Personal reactions and emotions should be done away with and they should not interfere with the analysis or interpretation of the text understanding.
The interpretation should be objective.
With the discussion above, you will understand that much needs be done in the teaching of literature in English as a second language.
Much attention should be on the central message of the text under study.
This central message is the theme.
Other attendant issues that have been touched on earlier can then come in.
When these are mpraorpsehralyll,e dth a n the objectives of the teaching would have been achieved.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
If you are asked to assess works of literature in English in a second language setting, what will be your guide in the assessment?
4.0 CONCLUSION It should be made abundantly clear that the teaching of literature in English in a second language situation is an onerous task, more so when the work is produced in English, a second language.
Two things are to be grappled with and these are linguistic factor and the literary factor.
One should not lose sight of the knowledge of the language that is used as the vehicle that will convey the needed message.
The beauty of the literary work should also be looked into.
Whatever genre it is-be it prose, drama or poetry, adequate comprehension that will lead to objective analysis is imperative.
5.0 SUMMARY 92  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE In this unit, focus had been on the teaching of literature in English, particularly in a second language situation.
Our focus has been on the purposes of teaching literature in English taking into consideration the second language issue.
Once purposes are identified, one has a focus.
Again, the unit has touched upon some of the techniques that might guide or develop the teaching of literature in a second language situation.
We have also mentioned some notable criteria that can guide the selection of literary texts that should be used.
Also, the understanding of a literary text has to be assessed so as to know whether or not the text has been comprehended.
The unit has therefore given us some clues on the teaching of literature in English in a second language situation like Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What factors are to be considered in the teaching of Literature in English as a second language?
2.
Justify the assessment of the students’ performance in literature in English.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Moody H.L.B (1971) The Teaching of Literature in Developing Countries.
London: Longman.
Moody H.L.B (1972) The Study of Literature (literary studies and creative writing) London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. Williams, D (1990) English Language Teaching: An Iintegrative Approach Ibadan: Spectrum.
93  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 19 ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN ESL TEACHING AND LEARNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Educational Context 3.1.1 Time Factor 3.1.2 Intensity of Teaching and Learning 3.1.3 Class Size 3.1.4 Physical Arrangement in the Class 3.1.5 Availability of Educational Materials 3.2 The Social Context 3.3 The Learner 3.4 The Teacher 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION Different types of English teaching programmes can be identified e.g teaching English as a mother tongue, teaching English as a slaencgounadg e, teaching English as a foreign language, teaching English for academic purposes etc.
The nature and demands of each of tEhnegseli s h teaching programmes differ, particularly in terms of the learning context, time, class, size, physical arrangement of class, teachers’ skill and knowledge, learners’ background, availability of learning materials.
This unit will discuss the importance of these factors and how they affect teaching and learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
State and explain some environmental factors that can affect learning English as a second language; ii.
Describe the roles of the teacher and the learner in ESL teaching and learning programmes.
94  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Educational Context What we regard as the educational context of ESL learning here concerns such factors that obtain within the formal school setting.
Such factors include time of duration or learning, intensity of teaching and learning, size of the class and the physical arrangement of the class.
3.1.1 Time Factor Of prime importance is the time available for the teaching and learning of English.
In teaching and learning English as a mother tongue, the learner is naturally immersed in the language almost all the time.
This is not so in a second language situation where the learner is exposed to the language in a very limited time.
The time available for learning will definitely determine what can be achieved.
The longer the duration of exposure, the better for the learner.
In the Nigerian situation, there is often inadequate time for learning English and this slows down learning progress.
In learning English as a second language, all the basic skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing should be emphasized.
Therefore, a reasonable amount of time should be devoted to the skills.
But in most cases, in the Nigerian context, there is no equitable allocation of time to these basic language skills.
3.1.2 Intensity of Teaching and Learning Closely related to the factor of time is the issue of the intensity otefa c hing and learning.
For effective learning of English as a second language, teaching must be intense, but not to the extent of leading to fatigue.
Intensity here will be partly determined by the frequency of the learner’s contact with English.
When the contact is not frequent, learning will be negatively affected.
It can even be said that tfhreeq u ency of contact is a more significant variable than the total amount of contact 3.1.3 Class Size By class size here, we refer to the number of students in a class.
A common feature of English teaching programme in Nigeria is large classes.
When classes are too large, effective teaching and learning will not take place.
The teacher will not be able to pay a reasonable attention to every student and the quality of teaching is affected.
Consequently, the amount of learning will also reduce.
Most aspects of ESL teaching 95  ENG 151` INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE cannot be effectively done when classes are too large e.g.
speech work, essay writing and so on.
3.1.4 Physical Arrangement in the Class There should be easy movement of the learners and the teacher tfoa c ilitate effective teaching and learning.
If classes are too large, physical arrangement is likely to be affected.
In addition to good physical arrangement, the classroom should be well illuminated and ventilated.
A poorly illuminated and ventilated classroom will not allow effective teaching and learning.
Unfortunately, many schools in Nigeria are in a bad state.
Some are even in a state that is dangerous to the safety of teachers and learners.
3.1.5 Availability of Educational Materials The availability of some educational materials is crucial to effective teaching and learning of English as a second language.
Such materials include text-books, audio-visual, materials (e.g video, tape-recorder, television etc), and so on.
Unfortunately, most of our schools lack functional language laboratories and well-stocked libraries.
Certainly, this situation cannot ensure effective learning of English as a second language.
3.2 The Social Context The question of attitudes characteristic of the society to which tlheaer n er belongs comes under this factor.
If the society has positive attitudes towards a particular language, there is a strong tendency for its citizens to want to learn the language.
In Nigeria, for example, English occupies a prestigious position as a second language and consequently there is a strong urge for the people to learn the language in most cases.
The language plays an integrative role in the country and people develop integrative motivation in learning the language.
3.3 The Learner The learner is also an important factor to consider in ESL learning, especially with the learner-centred approach now in vogue.
Issues that relate to the learner concern his previous language learning experience, (that is, his language background), his exposure to the target language, his interest in the target language, the motivation in him for learning the target language, his readiness and maturity to learn the language and so on.
If the learner lacks interest in the language, if he is not ready and or mature to learn the language, if he is not properly and adequately 96  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE exposed to the language and if he is not well motivated, second language learning cannot succeed.
3.4 The Teacher In this situation, the teacher serves as a model.
There is therefore the need for him to be a good model.
Consequently, the teacher’s skills and knowledge, his personality and professional proficiency, his attitude and so on will have bearing on the success or otherwise of ESL teaching and learning programme.
In second language teaching, it is important for the teacher to be dynamic and creative.
He should bring all his resources to bear on his business.
He should also be sensitive to the needs of his students and be aware of the social context within which he operates.
In a second language situation, the teacher should see himself as a facilitator of learning.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Is there any difference between learning English as a mother tongue and learning English as a second language?
2.
Explain the social context of learning English in a second language learning situation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Language teaching and learning is a dynamic activity which is multi- dimensional.
This is because many factors which can be linguistic, cultural, political, educational, and economic and so on will have some bearing on it.
For an effective teaching and learning of English as a second language anywhere in the world, awareness should be demonstrated of the educational context, political context, economic context and socio-cultural context.
All these variables will have implications for the contents and methodology of the programme.
5.0 SUMMARY In Nigeria, like in some other places in the world, English is learnt as a second language.
In this setting ELS becomes a variety of English modified by the demands and features of its new environment.
Consequently its teaching and learning will exhibit some peculiarities which must be taken into account if the programme is to be fruitful.
These peculiarities will border on the syllabus, the roles assigned the language, the economic contexts, the socio-cultural context, the methodology, the learner and the teacher among other things.
97  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Identify and explain some major environmental factors that can affect EL2 learning.
2.
What place does the teacher and the learners occupy in EL2 teaching and learning programme?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Afolayan, A (1992) “Ineffectiveness in the Presentation of English in Nigeria: sources and Remedies” in Bamgbose, A et al (EDS) New English’s: A West African Perspective.Ibadan: Mosuro.
Pp 113-129.
Williams, D (1990) English Language Teaching.
An integrative Approach.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
98  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE UNIT 20 ASSESSMENT OF LEARNERS’ PERFORMANCE IN ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Purpose of Assessment of Learners’ Performance in English as a Second Language 3.2 Types of Testing in English as a Second Language 3.2.1 Types of Discrete-point Testing 3.2.2 Integrative Point Testing 3.2.3 The use of Objective Testing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we shall attempt to give some guides to the assessment of learners’ performance in English as a second language.
When students are assessed, the focus is to determine their competence as well as performance in the use of language.
While competence is referred to as an underlying ability, performance can be observed and elicited.
A language test or assessment will therefore be a sample of language behaviour.
When such is being done, the student is presented with a set of items to be answered, or task to be performed.
Assessment in language is therefore a means of eliciting students’ performance in the use of English as a second language.
It is aonu tc ome of the competence that the learners have in the language study.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to be able to: i.
Identify the purposes of language test ii.
Specify different basic testing approaches that are relevant to English as a second language iii.
Construct instruments that can be used for assessment in English as a second language 99  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.1 Purposes of Assessment of Learners’ Performance in English as a Second Language Just like in other subjects, language tests are given with a variety of purposes in mind.
However, in a second language situation, two major purposes can be identified and these are (a) to determine how much the learner has learnt from the stipulated syllabus.
This is called Achievement testing, (b) to determine the strength and weaknesses found in the language used by the students.
This is known as diagnostic testing.
Achievement testing helps the teacher to find out the progress made in the aspect of language that the teacher has taught.
The teacher is guided by the syllabus.
Has he gone through all area of the syllabus?
If so, he would want to find out how successful he has been in this task otefa c hing the students.
Diagnostic testing also tells us how much the learners have learnt in the language but in addition, the purpose is to plan what to be done next with the learners.
Here, the teachers will not assess all aspects of what he taught but rather areas of weakness and strength.
Apart from the above, there are other types of tests and these include Proficiency tests and Aptitude tests.
Proficiency tests are not tied closely to the specific of course content.
Rather they set out to measure learners’ ability to carry out some communicative task in the second language.
For example, if one is to study in Britain, he may be given a proficiency test to find out if his command of English is adequate for studying in Britain.
Test on English as a foreign language (TOEFL) is a popular test to test one’s proficiency.
Aptitude tests are used to assess the extent to which a learner csuancc eed in learning a particular language.
The difference between this and proficiency tests is that aptitude tests estimate the amount of skill needed for learning a language which in different from the language competence needed for studying subjects other than foreign languages.
The factors to be looked for here are the environment in which the learning is taking place, the past academic achievement of the learner; and the method which is used in teaching the language.
So, with the above, we have stated the purposes of assessing learners’ performance especially in the study of languages.
100  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 3.2 Types of Testing In English as a Second Language In assessing learners, one can use the objective or subjective testing method.
Objective tests include multiple choice test, true-false items, matching items etc while the subjective test does not give clues.
It includes essay questions.
We shall touch on these later.
Two important approaches to language testing that will reflect a difference in contact and method of teaching are ‘discrete-point’ and ‘integrative testing’ which we shall now discuss.
3.2.1 Discrete-Point Testing This type of test tries to test one item at a time.
It can finodcuivsi d u aoln bits in pronunciation, grammar, lexical choice and so on.
Because of dealing with isolated bits of content, the name discrete-point is therefore appropriate.
In such a testing procedure, one corrects choice in required like in sentence completion, multiple choice or same- different format.
Using this approach, learners can be given objective questions, fill in the gap question or any form of question that will be discrete in nature of the response.
3.2.2 Integrative-Point Testing This does not focus on isolated bits of test content.
Rather, it seeks to measure ability to make appropriate responses by bringing together different language skills and knowledge of different aspects of the language.
It includes listening and reading comprehension tests in which inferences are drawn, deductions are made, and the main point is to be grasped by weaving together details of vocabulary and grammar.
In assessing competence here especially in reading comprehension, questions to discover relationships of thought in sentences and paragraphs can be asked.
Also projective questions that require the reader to associate or integrate data can be asked.
Integrative tests try to tap areas that make up the learners’ communicative competence; they measure the learner’s ability to bring together his competence in language structure and skill that will help learners to perform real life communicative actions.
This type of testing also integrates the discrete items at the points of phonology, vocabulary and grammar.
101  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE Having known that questions can be asked either in the objective or essay form, and that objective tests can be of different types I think we need to know more about it but before then, let us look at this exercise.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What approach of testing would you use to test learners performance in the areas of pronunciation and vocabulary development?
3.2.3 The Use of Objective Testing Objective assessment can be used in various ways to measure learners’ performance in English.
When constructing True-False items, you should avoid long and involved statements.
You should not establish a pattern of true or false answer; let the learners think for themselves.
Also in writing completion test, do not omit too many words, especially, long phrases.
In the same view, when constructing multiple choice questions, distractors alternatives should be avoided.
Many of the test items should present problems, which require critical thinking.
Again the position of the correct answer should be varied.
When writing matching item i.e.
those that require the recall of relationship between pairs of items, there should be more distractors in the response column than the stimulus column.
It could be simple matching of two columns and it can be complex matching of three or more columns.
Efforts should be made to ensure that the test is able to give more diagnostic information than essays.
This is because in objective testing, item analysis is easier done with multiple items than essay tests.
Be that as it may, assessment can take different forms.
What will guide one is the purpose for which the assessment is being done.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Construct objective tests of multiple choices; fill in the gap, matching type.
Five of each is needed 4.0 CONCLUSION From what we have been saying all along, assessment of lpeearrfnoerrms’a n ce is very beneficial.
It helps the teacher to know the competence, the positive and the negative areas of his students; it also 102  ENG 151 INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE helps the teacher to examine his own pedagogy and make corrections where needed.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has focused on the assessment of learners’ performance in English as a second language.
It has looked into the purposes of assessment and different types of assessment.
Teachers of English as a second language should therefore be conversant with this since it goes a long way in seeing that the purposes of one’s teaching are realized.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Construct tests of about ten items each that can be scored on a discrete-point basis.
The tests should cover areas of phonology, grammar and vocabulary.
2.
Identify and explain the different forms of assessment that you can use to assess the performance of your students in English as a second language.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Harris, D.P.
(1979) Testing English as a Second Language.
Bombay: McGraw Hill.
Oller, J.
(1979) Language Test at School London: Longman.
Williamson, D. (1990) English Language Teaching: An integrative Approach.
Ibadan: Spectrum.
103
