FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: FRE 122 COURSE TITLE: FRENCH GRAMMAR II FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II COURSE GUIDE COURSE DEVELOPER Dr. Olu AKEUSOLA French Department Adeniran Ogunsanya College of Education, Otto/Ijanikin, Lagos – Nigeria Unit Writer Dr. Olu AKEUSOLA French Department Adeniran Ogunsanya College of Education, Otto/Ijanikin, Lagos – Nigeria Programme Leader Dr. Christine Ofulue National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator Ms Lucy Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 1FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS Introduction What you will learn in this course Course Objectives Working through This Course Course Materials Study Units Set Textbooks Assignment File Assessment Tutor-marked Assignments (TMAs) Final examinations and grading Course marking scheme Course overview How to get the most from this course Tutors and tutorials Summary 2FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II This course is a one-semester course in the first year of B.A.
(Hons) Degree in French Studies.
It is three (3) credit course of twenty units.
It intends to introduce you (students) to the Basic Grammar of French Language.
FRE 122 as GRAMMAR II, is like the Basic Grammar that prepares you for a more advanced grammar that will be taught in FRN 205: GRAMMAR III.
Grammar, being the life wire of any human language is highly important for it allows the learners to read, understand and analyse the grammatical structure, with which the contents of other language courses are documented.
This course is thus essential and will be beneficial to any French student because it will enhance your linguistic capability to cope with the grammatical structure of French Language.
It will also enable you to put into practice the grammar of French you acquire in the course of this programme.
In this course guide, we hope to tell you briefly what the course is all about, the course materials you will use to achieve the objectives of the course, suggestions on some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
We also provide a detailed separate Assignment File for you.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The general aim of FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II is to introduce you to the basic grammar of French language.
This basic grammar is centred around conjugation of French verbs.
It will expose you to various techniques of how to conjugate various groups of French verbs into various tenses.
3FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Course Aims The aims of this course are: • To let you know the importance of verbs in the grammar of any human language like French.
• To identify various types of verbs in French Language.
• To teach you various techniques, through which you can conjugate French verbs into various tenses, taking into consideration their mood (mode) and aspects.
These aims will be achieved through: • A detailed introduction of verbs as the most important aspect of parts of speech.
• Presentation of various types of verbs in French language.
• Provision of some grammatical traits that could help you in identifying some verbs and their conjugation groups.
Introduction of techniques and grammatical rules that will help you in conjugating French verbs of various conjugation groups.
Course Objectives It is on completion of the entire units of this course that the aims set above could be completely achieved.
Each unit has its specific objectives.
The unit objectives are found at the beginning of each unit.
You need to read them before you start working on the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress in the course.
There is need for you to always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit to ensure that you have done what is required.
4FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II We would like to itemise the objectives of the course in an explicit and methodical manner.
If you are able to meet these objectives as stated below, you would have achieved the aims of this course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: 1.
State the importance of verbs in the grammar of any natural language.
2.
Identify the three types of French verbs (according to their endings) 3.
Classify French verbs into regular and irregular groupings 4.
State the techniques and steps to follow when conjugating French regular and irregular verbs into various tenses 5.
Stating the modal conditions that set indicative, subjunctive, imperative and conditional moods apart.
6.
Identifying the endings and other grammatical traits with which one could classify the conjugation of each of these verbs on consideration of their tenses and moods.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course you are required to read the study unit, read set books and other materials related to French grammar.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises.
You will also have to submit your Tutor-Marked Assignments to your tutors.
The course will take you between 20 and 25 weeks to complete find below the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 5FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File There are twenty study units in this course.
They are: Unit 1: Identification of conjugation groups Unit 2: Conjugation of er and other regular verbs into présent de l’indicatif Unit 3: Conjugation of re irregular verbs into présent de l’indicatif Unit 4: Conjugation of ir/oir irregular verbs into présent de l’indicatif Unit 5: Conjugation of impersonal and reflexive verbs into présent de l’indicatif Unit 6: Conjugation of er and other regular verbs into futur simple Unit 7: Conjugation of irregular verbs into futur simple Unit 8: Conjugation of impersonal and reflexive verbs into futur simple Unit 9: Conjugation of verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé Unit 10: Conjugation with auxiliary être into passé composé Unit 11: Conjugation of impersonal and reflexive verbs into passé composé Unit 12: Agreement of passé composé Unit 13: Conjugation of er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait Unit 14: Conjugation of irregular verbs into present de l’imparfait Unit 15: Conjugation of impersonal and reflexive verbs into l’imparfait Unit 16: Conjugation of verbs into imperative (positive and negative) Unit 17: Conjugation of verbs into conditionnel présent Unit 18: Conjugation of verbs into conditionnel passé Unit 19: Conjugation of verbs into subjonctif présent Unit 20: Conjugation of verbs into subjonctif passé As it could be seen above, Units 1 to 5 are based on the simple conjugations of various verbs into présent de l’indicatif.
Units 6-12 talk on more technical conjugations such as futur simple and passé composé.
As from Units 13 to 20, the 6FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II conjugations become tougher.
But if you follow the simplified manner with which we present the conjugations, you will find them easier to comprehend.
Each unit can be studied in one to two weeks.
Each unit has its specific objective, reading materials, explanation and set of reading materials.
It also contains self-assessment exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments.
All these will assist you in achieving the learning objectives of the unit and the whole course.
Set Textbooks AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
Assignment File There is an Assignment File where more than twenty assignments are provided.
The assignments carry 40% of total mark for the course.
The mark you obtain the in assignment will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
ASSESSMENT The assessment of this course is divided into two main parts.
The first parts are the tutor-marked assignments and the second part is a written examination.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated by the tutor.
The work submitted to your tutor for assessment will count for 40% of your total course mark.
You will sit for a final examination of three hours duration at the end of the course.
This examination will also count for 60% of your total course mark.
7FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMAs) There are twenty tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit only six of the twenty assignments of which the highest four marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% toward your total course mark.
When you have completed your assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor- marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for FRN 108 will be of three hours’ duration and carry a total mark of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will reflect the types of self-testing, and tutor-marked assignments.
You need to revise before you sit for the examination.
You may also need to revise the self-assessment tests and tutor marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course Marking Scheme The table below shows the breakdown of the course marking.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1-6 Six assignments, best four marks of the six count @ 10% each =40 of course marks Final 60% of overall course marks examination Total 100% of course marks 8FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Course Overview There are twenty (20) units in this Course.
You are to spend one week on each unit.
Assignment 1 will come at the end of the unit 3.
Assignment 2 at the end of unit six.
Assignment 3 after finishing unit nine.
Assignment 4 at the end of unit 12.
Assignment 5 at the end of unit sixteen and assignment 6 comes up after completing unit 20.
HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE The advantage of distance learning is that, you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at your convenient time and place.
The course material replaces the lecturer that stands before you in a face of face situation.
Each of the units has a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated into the other units and the course as a whole.
You also have a set of learning objectives of the units.
Those objectives tell you what you should be able to know on completion of the unit.
Having finished the unit, you need to go back to those objectives to confirm whether you have achieved these objectives.
The main body starts with a explanation and techniques on how to conjugate French verbs.
Self-assessment tests are spread all over the units.
Working through these tests will help you tremendously to achieve the objectives of the units and prepare you for the assignments and examination.
Do each as you meet them in the unit.
SUMMARY FRN 108: GRAMMAR II intends to introduce you to the basic techniques of how to conjugate various French verbs.
On successful completion of this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of French grammar as it affects conjugations of various verbs to various tenses, moods and aspects.
9FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II You will be able to: • State the importance of verbs in the grammar of any natural language.
• Identify the three types of French verbs (according to their endings) • Classify French verbs into regular and irregular groupings • State the techniques and steps to follow when conjugating French regular and irregular verbs into various tenses • State the modal conditions that set indicative, subjunctive, imperative and conditional moods apart.
• Identify the endings and other grammatical traits with which one could classify the conjugation of each of these verbs on consideration of their tenses and moods.
10 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II FRE 108: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT ONE COURSE DEVELOPER Dr. Olu AKEUSOLA French Department Adeniran Ogunsanya College of Education, Otto/Ijanikin, Lagos – Nigeria Unit Writer Dr. Olu AKEUSOLA French Department Adeniran Ogunsanya College of Education, Otto/Ijanikin, Lagos – Nigeria Programme Leader Dr. Christine Ofulue National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator Ms Lucy Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 11 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II IDENTIFICATION OF CONJUGATION GROUPS TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Importance of Verbs in French Grammar 3.1 Identification of conjugation groups 3.2 Er Groupings and their examples 3.3 Re Groupings and their examples 3.4 Ir and Oir Groupings and their examples 3.5 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to this course.
You will read to know about French verbs, their conjugation groupings and their endings.
This unit will teach you the general introduction into what French verb is all about.
You will also learn some basic techniques of how to identify each of the verbs that belong to various groupings.
Knowledge gained from this unit will facilitate your proper understanding of how to conjugate French verbs.
It is important to note that your understanding this course better depends on the way and manner with which you handle this unit.
Therefore, we implore you to learn to identify these groupings well through their identification traits.
12 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • state the importance of verbs in French language grammar • list correctly the conjugation groupings of French verbs • identify some verbs with er ending • identify some verbs with re ending • identify some verbs with ir/oir ending You are now invited into the world of French verbs.
3.0 IMPORTANCE OF VERBS IN FRENCH GRAMMAR Verbs in French language, just like in any other languages of the world, are the most important linguistic elements.
There is no other part of speech that could exist alone as a sentence and have meaning without a verb in it.
Whereas a sentence can be formed by a verb alone.
If we should say “Go!”, it is a complete sentence that could portray a full meaning that a sentence with a subject, verb and object could have.
A verb could be defined as a grammatical word that states the action(s) performed or the relationship that exists between a subject and an object of a given sentence.
As the link and the presenter of the actions performed or the relationship that exist between the ‘performer’ and the ‘action performed’, verbs is then the most important aspect of the nine grammatical parts of speech in French grammar.
Any of your sentences in French grammar will be incomplete if you should fail to add at least a verb to it.
3.1.
IDENTIFICATION OF CONJUGATION GROUPS French verbs are classified into three conjugation groups, in consonance with the ending of their infinitive.
They are the er verbs, the re verbs and the ir/oir verbs.
The possibility of each of these verbs to be conjugated in 13 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II accordance with a rule that is applicable to a whole group introduces another sub-division of regular and irregular verbs.
A regular verb is a verb whose conjugation follows the normal and general rule established for its group while an irregular verb violates and contradicts the general principle of conjugation of verbs in its group (or a group of verbs that does not have a definite and appropriate way of conjugation).
You should therefore note that there are three conjugation groups of verbs in French Language namely the er verbs, the re verbs and the ir/oir verbs.
The er verbs are verbs that have er letters at their tail end, the re verbs are the verbs that contain re at their tail ending while the ir/oir verbs are the verbs that end in ir/oir.
3.2 ER GROUPINGS AND THEIR EXAMPLES As earlier said, the er verbs are verbs that have er letters at their tail end.
In French grammar, the ending of a verb is called ‘terminaison’.
Therefore a verb that has the er ‘terminaison’ is so far tagged the er verb in French grammar.
Most verbs in this group are regular verbs.
It is only the verb aller that has the er ending that could be noted to be irregular in conjugation.
Apart from the verb aller (to go) which is irregular, almost all the verbs in this group are regular verbs.
You should also note that the group contains the largest number of French verbs.
Most of the borrowed verbs (from another language) as well as newly formed or coined verbs are also part of this group.
Examples of these verbs could be found in: abandonner (to abandon – to leave – to give up etc …) abîmer (to damage – to spoil) accepter (to accept – to agree to) Acclamer (to cheer – to acclaim) Accompagner (to go with) - to accompany) Accuser (to accuse) Agresser (to attack) 14 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Agacer (to irritate – to tease) Aider (to help) Aimer (to like/love) Ajouter (to add) Bavarder (to talk) Caresser (to caress – to stroke) Commencer (to start) Danser (to dance) Effacer (to clean – to erase – to wipe off) Fabriquer (to make – to produce - to manifacture) Gêner (to disturb – to hamper) Habiter (to live in) Identifier (to identify) Jurer (to swear) Kidnapper (to kidnap) Labourer (to plougl) Manger (to eat) Nager (to swim) Oublier (to forget) Parler (to speak – to talk) Quitter (to leave) Rester (to stay) Semer (to sow) Tricher (to cheat) Uriner (to urinate) Viser (to aim at) Zigzaguer (to zigzag (along) ) 3.3 RE GROUPINGS AND THEIR EXAMPLES 15 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II As explained in our introduction, you have been told that the re verbs are verbs that have re letters at their tail end.
Apart from the er group that contain the largest number of verbs generally and largest number of regular verbs in particular, most verbs in this group (as well as the third group) are irregular verbs.
Examples of these verbs could be seen in: - abattre (to cut down – to knock down) - accroître (to increase) - dire (to say) - faire (to do – to make) - fendre (to split – to crack – to break) - mordre (to bite) - pondre (to lay) - répondre (to answer) - tendre (to tighten – to stretch – to set etc) - vendre (to sell) 3.4 IR/OIR GROUPINGS AND THEIR EXAMPLES As a follow up to our explanation at the beginning of this unit, the ir/oir verbs are verbs that have ir/oir letters at their tail end.
You should remember also that most verbs in this category are irregular verbs.
Examples of these verbs could be seen in: Abolir (to abolish – to do away with) Accomplir (to carry out – to achieve – to perform) Affermir (to consolidate) Affranchir (to free – to stamp) Anéantir (to annihilate) Applaudir (to clap – to applaud) Arrondir (to round – to round up) Accomplir (to accomplish – to perform – to achieve) Asservir (to enslave – to subjugate) 16 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Attendrir (to soften – to melt) Faiblir (to weaken – to wane) Gémir (to moan – to groan) Haïr (to hate – to detest) Jaillir (to spart out) Languir (to languish) Maudire (to curse) Mourir (to feed) Obscurcir (to darken) Pâlir (to go pale) Ralentir (to slow down) Saisir (to seize – to grasp) Trahir (to betray) Unir (to unite - to bind) Vomir (to vomit) 3.5 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Give the three group of verbs in French, and conjugate any two in the “ présent de l’indicatif”.
Possible Answers: i) 1et group = er 2ēme group = ir 3ēme group – re ii) Verbe Manger au présent de l'indicative.
Je mange Nous Mangeons tu manges vous managez il/elle mange ils/elles Managent iii) Verbe Prendre au Présent de I'indicative Je prends Nous Prenons Tu Prends Vous Prenez il/elle Prend ils/elles Prennent 17 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned the importance of verbs in French language grammar.
You have also learned how you can list correctly the conjugation groupings of French verbs.
By now we believe you can identify some verbs with er ending, some verbs with re ending and some other verbs with ir/oir ending.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the basic techniques of how to identify the conjugation grouping of French verbs.
You have learned how you can identify some verbs with er ending, some verbs with re ending and some other verbs with ir/oir ending.
By now we believe that your vocabulary should have been enriched through the translated examples of verbs we gave you under each group.
We intentionally did this so as to enrich your vocabulary.
A good grammarian needs to store many vocabularies in his/her memory.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What is a verb and of what importance a verb to the grammar of French language?
2.
With at least ten example par group, identify the three groups of verbal conjugation in French grammar.
7.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
18 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT TWO CONJUGATION OF ER AND OTHER REGULAR VERBS INTO PRESENT DE L’INDICATIF TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of er and other regular verbs into present de l’indicatifs 3.1 Exceptionalities in the Conjugation of er and other regular verbs into present de l’indicatifs 3.1.1 The -cer verbs 3.1.2 The -ger verbs 3.1.3 The e-er verbs 3.1.4 The é: er Verbs 3.1.5 The eler and eter verbs 3.1.6 The -yer verbs 3.1.7 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the conjugation of er and other regular verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
In this unit, you will read to know about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
It is in this unit also that we would like to expose you to some minor peculiarities that 19 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II are known for some er verbs (irrespective of the notion of their being regular).
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate your properly into how to conjugate French verbs in the ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
We would like to sound a warning that your better understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle this unit.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating er verbs as they will be taught here.
3.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the Stem/Radical of er verbs • Identify the er ending/terminaison of er verbs • identify the morphemes (suffixation) with which the endings could be replaced thus facilitating grammatically correct conjugation • identify some verbs that are noted as being regular but have some peculiarities You are now invited into the world of conjugation of er verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF ER AND OTHER REGULAR VERBS INTO ‘PRESENT DE L’INDICATIF’ Apart from the verb aller (to go) (conjugated below) which is irregular, almost all the verbs in the er group are regular verbs: Aller Je vais – I am going/I go Tu vas - You are going/You go Il/elle va – He /she is going/ He/she goes Nouns allons –We are going/we go 20 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Vous allez – you are going/you go Ils/elles vont – They are going/they go The general rule of the conjugation of these other er verbs is getting the infinitive divided or separated into the stem/radical and the ending.
You then replace the ending, by adding these underlisted new endings to the stem or radical so as to form our conjugated verbs: e for 1st person singular es for 2nd person singular e for 3rd person singular ons for 1st person plural ez for 2nd person plural ent for 3rd person plural For example, we want you to follow this technique and conjugate the verb parler (to speak) into ‘présent de l’indicatif’: Parl er Verbal stem/Radical Verbal ending/terminaison.
The radical/stem of the infinitive parler is parl while the ending is er.
The rule says that we drop this er ending and replace it as follow: e for 1st person singular = Je Parle es for 2nd person singular = Tu Parles e for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle Parle ons for 1st person plural = Nous Parlons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous Parlez ent for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles Parlent (Note 1: We implore you to please note that verb conjugated into the French present indicative tense has two meanings cum grammatical functions in English.
It could function as simple present - Je parle = I speak – and it could be present continuous tense – Je parle = I am 21 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II speaking.
Care should be taken when translating from English to French or vice versa.
Note 2: Although the 2nd person plural form – vous – is for two or more people.
It is allowed in French to be used as a mark of respect for a single person also.
So you could say: --- Où allez – vous monsieur?
Where are you going sir?
Another example of the er group verbs is Verb Aimer (to like/to love) The radical/stem of the infinitive aimer is aim while the ending is er.
The rule says that we drop this er ending and replace it as follow: J’aime: I like/love Tu aimes: You like/love Il/elle aime: He/she likes/loves Noun aimons: We like/love Vous aimez: You like/love Ils/elles aiment: They like/love A lot of verbs are conjugated in this form.
(Note 3: You will discover that we wrote J’aime instead of Je aime.
In French when a verb to be conjugated has initial vowel, there will be an assimilation of a vowel whereby the vowel ending the pronoun would be dropped for that of the verb.
And the vowel that is omitted is represented by an apostrophe (‘).
3.1.
EXCEPTIONALITIES IN THE CONJUGATION OF ER AND OTHER REGULAR VERBS INTO PRESENT DE L’INDICATIFS Although verbs in the er group are said to be regular, there are some small peculiarities you have to know for some sections of these verbs.
These sets are special and they need to be treated thus.
Their examples are as follow: 3.1.1 The -cer verbs: 22 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II In French, letter c plays a dual phonological role when you use it in words.
It sounds like /k/ when it precedes vowels a, o, u.
Whereas it sounds /s/ when it is in front of vowels i, e. In case it precedes any of the vowels a, o, u and you want it to be pronounced /s/ instead of its normal /k/, phonological rule says that you must put ‘cedille’ (ç) at the bottom of the c. So you should not be surprised to see this ‘strange’ mark in the conjugation of verbs like (placer – to place): Je place Nous plaçons Tu places Vous placez Il/elle place Ils/elles placent 3.1.2 The -ger verbs: Like letter c, letter g plays a dual role also in the French phonology.
It sounds /g/ when it precedes vowels like a, o, u.
But it sounds /З/ when it precedes vowels i, e. In a situation where the infinitive dictates that the g must have / З/ sound even when it is to be followed by either a, o, or u, the French phonological cum grammatical rule says that you must add an additional e before you write the a, o, or the u.
So in verbs like manger – (to eat), you normally have nous mangeons: Je mange Nous mangeons Tu manges Vons mangez Il/elle mange Ils/elles mangent Note: The -guer verbs (such as blaguer) are not affected by this rule.
3.1.3 The e-er verbs: The -ecer.
-emer, -ener, -eper, -erer, -eser, -ever, -evrer verbs have one peculiarity.
In their infinitive, they have closed silence e in the last syllable of their stem.
It is this e that is next to the single or double consonants that end their stem/radical: lev/er.
When conjugating, this e changes its silence e sound to an opened è sound in the first person, second 23 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II person, third person singular and third person plural.
And to mark this change in pronunciation, you must put an accent ‘grave’ on the e so as to become è that falls in this category: lever – to rise.
Je lève Nous levons Tu lève Vous levez Il/elle lève Ils/elles lèvent.
3.1.4 The é: er Verbs There are some other verbs in French grammar whose letter e in the last syllable of the infinitive is carrying an acute accent (aigu) – é - already in the infinitive.
This acute accent, (/), when the verb is conjugated, normally changes to a grave accent (\) – è - in the first person, second person, third person singular and third person plural.
This peculiarity is found among the -ébrer, -écer, -écher, -écrer, -éder, -égler, -égner, éguer, -éler, -émer, - éner, -éper, -équer, -érer, -éser, -éter, -étrer, -éver verbs.
Example: célébrer to celebrate: Je célèbre Nous célébrons Tu célèbres Vous célébrez Il/elle célèbre Ils/elles célèbrent (Note: You will discover that this peculiarity does not affect the 1st and 2nd person plural of groups’ 3.1.3 and 3.1.4 of our exceptions.
There is no problem of change in the pronunciation of e at these levels).
3.1.5 The eler and eter verbs When conjugating the eler or eter verbs, the single l or t in the infinitive is doubled in the first person, second person, third person singular and third person plural.
This change becomes inevitable so as to allow for easy pronunciation.
you must note that the e before the l or t is pronounced /ə/ in the infinitive.
Whereas you would want it pronounced /Σ/ when used in the 24 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 1st, 2nd, 3rd persons singular and 3rd person plural.
In order to facilitate this pronunciation, you must double l or the t. And that is why the pronunciation of e would not change from being /e/ in the 1st and 2nd persons plural where we do not normally double these consonants.
Examples are: Appeler – to call J’appelle Nous appelons Tu appelles Vous appelez Il/elle appelle Ils/elles appellent Jeter - to throw Je jette Nous jetons Tu jettes Vous jetez Il/elle jette Ils/elles jettent (Note: There are some exceptions to this general rule.
Some -eler and -eter verbs do not double their l or t in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd persons singular and 3rd person plural, so as to enhance the evolution of the pronunciation of the vowel e, before the consonant t or I from /ə/ to /Σ/ sound.
They are verbs like modeler, celer, déceler, receler, ciseler, démanteler, écarteler, geler, congeler, surgeler, marteler, peler, acheter, racheter, bégueter, and corseter.
They only take accent grave (\) on the e at the 1st, 2nd, 3rd persons singular and 3rd person plural.
Example is acheter: to buy: J’achète Nous achetons Tu achètes Vous achetons Il/elle achète Ils/elles achètent 3.1.6 The -yer verbs: You must have been taught that in phonetics (as well as in French phonology), consonant y is taken to be a semi-vowel or semi- 25 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II consonant.
It is also viewed by some linguists as the variant of /i/ sound.
That is to say it could easily change to vowel ‘i’ or the vowel ‘i’ changes to y.
That explains why the semi– owel y in the infinitive of yer verbs changes to i in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd persons singular and 3rd persons plural.
A better example of this peculiarity could be seen in the conjugation of the infinitive envoyer (to send) in the present tense: J’envoie Nous envoyons Tu envoies Vous envoyez Il/elle envoie Ils/elles envoient (Note: You must note that the y do not change in the 1st and 2nd persons plural.
It is retained so as to maintain a good and balanced pronunciation at these levels.
And you should have been noting also that any peculiarity introduced into any of the verbs do not normally affect these sections of the conjugation.
This is as a result of special and different way these two sets are pronounced.
They differ in pronunciation from the other four).
3.1.7 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the verb “Mager” and “Célébrer” in the “Présent de l’indicatif” Je Célèbre Nous Célébrons Tu Célèbres Vous Célébrez Il/Elle Célèbre Ils/elles Célèbrent 6.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned the rules governing the conjugation of er verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
Although this group of conjugation is said to have the largest number of regular verbs, yet you have discovered some peculiarities in the conjugation of some verbs in this category.
By now we believe you can conjugate different categories of verbs with er ending.
26 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 7.0 SUMMARY You must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basic techniques of how to conjugate er verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
You must have learned also some peculiarities in the conjugation of some verbs in this category.
By now we believe that your verbal vocabulary and technique of conjugation of verbs should have been enriched through the explanation and examples of verbs we gave you under each classification.
8.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 3.
Conjugate the following verbs into présent de l’indicatif: a. Parler, b. Nager, c. Balayer, d. Lancer, e. Surlever, f. Célébrer, g. Monter, h. Rejeter, i. Payer, j. Blaguer.
9.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
27 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT THREE CONJUGATION OF RE IRREGULAR VERBS INTO PRESENT DE L’INDICATIF TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of irregular verbs into présent de l’indicatif 3.1 Three common irregular verbs 3.2 Techniques and Examples guiding the Conjugation of re verbs into présent de l’indicatif 3.2.1 The ’ttre’ verbs 3.2.2 The ‘NDRE’ Irregular verbs’ 3.2.3 The ‘AINCRE’ Verbs 3.2.4 The group of ‘faire’ and ‘dire’ 3.2.5 The AIRE, AITRE, OITRE, OIRE and others Verbs.
3.2.6 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the conjugation of re as irregular verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
In this unit, you will read to know about the modern techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French re irregular verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
28 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate your properly into how to conjugate re irregular verbs in the ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
We would like to repeat our warning that your better understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle this unit.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating irregular verbs as they will be taught here.
4.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the Stem/Radical of re irregular verbs.
• Identify the re ending/terminaison of these irregular verbs • identify the morphemes (suffixation) with which the endings could be replaced thus facilitating grammatically correct conjugation You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of re irregular verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF RE IRREGULAR VERBS INTO PRESENT DE L’INDICATIF As you have been told earlier, only the er verbs have the largest number of regular verbs.
Apart from these er verbs, other verbs, such as the re verbs that we are about to treat for you in this unit, are irregular.
The general rule of conjugating the re verbs is that you break the infinitive into two: the stem/radical and the ending.
You then replace the ending er with s, s, t, ons, ez, ent.
But we must sound a warning that all verbs in this category, being irregular, change their radical/stem.
They only end in these s, s, t, ons, ez, ent.
A verb is said to be irregular when its stem (and even the endings in some other cases like infinitive faire, dire) changes from one person to the other.
Compare these two conjugations (of parler – to speak and être – to be): Parler: Je Parle Nous Parlons 29 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Tu Parles Vous Parlez Il/Elle Parle Ils/Elles Parlent être Je suis Nous sommes Tu es Vous êtes Il/Elle est Ils/Elles sont You will observe that while the parl stem of the infinitive parler are invariable in the first person, second person and third person singular and plural, the same thing cannot be said of the stem of the infinitive être.
It changes from person to person hence the classification of irregularity.
Before we go further, you can go through the conjugation of these three common irregular verbs often used by French speakers: 3.1 THE 3 COMMON IRREGULAR VERBS: There are three common irregular verbs that we frequently use in our day- to-day discussion.
They are être (to be), avoir (to have) and aller (to go): (a) Etre (b) Avoir Je suis Nous sommes J’ai Nous avons Tu es Vous êtes Tu as Vous avez Il est Ils sont Il a Ils ont (c) Aller Je vais Nous allons Tu vas Vous allez Il va Ils vont NOTE: Although there is similarity in the conjugation of the 3rd person plural of these 3 verbs, you should note that the 3rd person plural of être takes a consonant ‘s’ while that of avoir has none and there is a v in the place of the ‘s’ in the conjugation of aller.
30 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 3.2 TECHNIQUES AND EXAMPLES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF RE VERBS INTO PRÉSENT DE L’INDICATIF The general rule established for conjugating verbs in this group state that you divide the infinitive into the stem and ending.
You will then drop the re ending of the infinitive and replace it by s, s, t/d, ons, ez, ent, endings.
The t/d in the 3rd person singular is saying that in case the infinitive concerned is among the dre, andre, endre, ondre, ordre groups, you will not add the consonant ‘t’ of the 3rd person singular to the consonant d that ends the radical.
Instead, you will use the consonant d to stand – in for the consonant t that ends the 3rd person singular in the conjugation of other groups.
For example: rend/re, prend/re.
(a) Rendre – to give back Je rends Nous rendons Tu rends Vous rendez Il rend Ils rendent (b) Prendre – to take Je prends Nous prenons Tu prends Vous prenez Il prend Ils prennent NOTE: In the case of prendre and other verbs in its group, you should drop the consonant d in the plural form and you double the n in the stem of the 3rd person plural.
3.2.1 The ’ttre’ verbs: You should note when conjugating that this set of verbs drops one of the double t in their singular form but maintain them in plural.
(a) Battre – to beat Je bats Nous battons Tu bats Vous battez Il bat Ils battent 31 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (b) Mettre – to put Je mets Nous mettons Tu mets Vous mettez Il met Ils mettent 3.2.2 The ‘NDRE’ Irregular verbs’ You should take into cognizance that this group of verbs drops the d that ends their radical/stem in all facets of conjugation.
They take additional gn before their verbal endings in the plural form.
This strange addition is to facilitate pronunciations.
(a) Peindre – to paint Je peins Nous peignons Tu peins Vous peignez Il peint Ils peignent (b) Joindre – to join Je joins Nous joignons Tu joins Vous joignez Il joint Ils joignent 3.2.3 The ‘AINCRE’ Verbs You need to know that this group maintains the c that ends the stem of their infinitive in the plural form.
But this single consonant c is replaced by qu in the plural form.
And the t is dropped in the 3rd person singular form: (a) Vaincre – to conquer Je vaincs Nous vainquons Tu vaincs Vous vainquez Il vainc Ils vainquent (b) Convaincre – to convince Je convaincs Nous convainquons Tu convaincs Vous convainquez 32 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Il convainc Ils convainquent 3.2.4 The group of ‘faire’ and ‘dire’ We want you to be aware also that these two verbs have a similar peculiarity; their ending in the 2nd person plural is completely different from that of the others.
Even the 3rd person plural of faire is also different.
They are irregular: (a) Faire – to do /make Je fais Nous faisons Tu fais Vous faîtes Il fait Ils font (b) Dire – to say/tell Je dis Nous disons Tu dis Vous dîtes Il dit Ils disent 3.2.5 The AIRE, AITRE, OITRE, OIRE Verbs and others.
You must learn to master it that this group encompasses a lot of irregular verbs.
Some allow their vowel i that ends the stem to change to y in the 1st and 2nd persons plural, some do not only maintain the vowel i, they take an addition s after it before taking the verbal ending, some go to the extent of duplicating the additional s, whereas some change their radical (stem) completely: (a) Distraire – to entertain Je distrais Nous distrayons Tu distrais Vous distrayez Il distrait Ils distraient (b) Plaire – to please Je plais Nous plaisons Tu plais Vous plaisez Il plait Ils plaisent 33 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (c) Connaître – to know (object) Je connais Nous connaissons Tu connais Vous connaissez Il connaît Ils connaissent (d) Naitre – to be born Je nais Nous naissons Tu nais Vous naissez Il nait Ils naissent (e) Croire – to believe Je crois Nous croyons Tu crois Vous croyez Il croit Ils croient (f) Boire – to drink Je bois Nous buvons Tu bois Vous buvez Il boit Ils boivent (g) Conclure – to conclude Je conclus Nous concluons Tu conclus Vous conluez Il conclut Ils concluent (h) Absoudre – to absolve J’absous Nous absolvons Tu absous Vous absolvez Il absout Ils absolvent (i) Suivre – to follow Je suis Nous suivons Tu suis Vous suivez Il suit Ils suivent (j) Vivre – to live 34 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Je vis Nous vivions Tu vis Vous vivez Il vit Ils vivent (k) Lire – to read Je lis Nous lisons Tu lis Vous lisez Il lit Ils lisent (g) Rire – to laugh Je ris Nos rions Tu ris Vous riez Il rit Ils rient (h) Cuire – cook Je cuis Nous cuisons Tu cuis Vous cuisez Il cuit Ils cuisent 3.2.6 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into the “Présent l’indicatif.
(a) Plaire, (b) descendre, (c) battre.
Verbe Plaire au Présent de l'indicatif.
a) Je Plais Nous Plaisons Tu Plais Vous Plaisez il/elle Plait Ils/elles Plaisent b) Verbe descendre au présent de l'indicatif.
Je descends Nous descendons Tu descends Vous descendez il/elle descend Ils/elles descendent 35 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II c) Verbe battre au présent de l'indicatif.
Je bats Nous battrons Tu bats Vous battez il/elle bat Ils/elles battent 8.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned the rules governing the conjugation of re verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
And like we warned you from the beginning of the unit, all verbs in this category are irregular.
By now we believe you can conjugate different categories of verbs with re ending.
9.0 SUMMARY You must have adequately acquired in this unit some basic techniques of how to conjugation of re verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
You must have also learned some peculiarities in the conjugation of some verbs in this category.
By now we believe that your verbal vocabulary and technique of conjugation of re verbs should have been enriched through the explanation and examples of verbs we gave you under each classification.
10.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 4.
Conjugate the following verbs into présent de l’indicatif: a. lire, b. dire, c. faire, d. descendre, e. pendre, f. cuire, g. distraire, h. connaître, i. suivre, j. battre.
11.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
36 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT FOUR CONJUGATION OF IR/OIR IRREGULAR VERBS INTO PRESENT DE L’INDICATIF TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of ir/oir irregular verbs into présent de l’indicatif 3.1.1 The ir verbs with double s in their plural form 3.1.2 Second sets of ‘ir’ verbs 3.1.3 The ‘ir’ verbs that take endings of ‘er’ verbs 3.1.4 Other ‘ir’ verbs 3.1.5 THE OIR VERBS 3.1.6 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the conjugation of other irregular verbs, such as ir and oir verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
In this unit, you will learn about the modern techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French irregular verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
The knowledge you gain from this unit will initiate your properly into how to conjugate all French irregular verbs in the ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
We would like to insist on our warning that your better 37 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle these first three units.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating irregular verbs as they will be taught here.
5.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the Stem/Radical of irregular verbs such as ir and oir.
• Identify the ir and oir ending/terminaison of these irregular verbs • identify the morphemes (suffixation) with which the endings could be replaced thus facilitating grammatically correct conjugation You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of irregular verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF IR/OIR IRREGULAR VERBS INTO PRESENT DE L’INDICATIF You need to know from the onset that the ir verbs could be divided into two groups.
Those that belong to a group that has double s in the plural form when conjugated and the others that do not normally double their consonant at these levels.
The general rule of conjugating the ir/oir verbs, as it is done for the re verbs, is that you break the infinitive into two: the stem/radical and the ending.
You then replace the ending ir/oir with s, s, t, ons, ez, ent.
But we must repeat our warning that all verbs in this category, being irregular, change their radical/stem.
They only end in these s, s, t, ons, ez, ent.
3.1.1 The ir verbs with double s in their plural form.
You should note that these verbs follow the general rule in the conjugation of their singular form.
But they introduce double s before taking the verbal endings in the plural form.
38 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Their examples are finir – to finish, haïr – to hate: Je finis Nous finissons Tu finis Vous finissez Il/elles finit Ils/elles finissent 3.1.2 Second sets of ‘ir’ verbs We would like you to remember that the other ‘ir’ verbs, although their stem may change, do not have double s or double any of their consonants in all their plural form except the 3rd person plural of some of their conjugation.
Verbs in this group are very numerous than that of the first type.
Examples could be found in: (a) Tenir – to hold Je tiens Nous tenons Tu tiens Vous tenez Il/elle tient Ils/elles tiennent (b) Venir – to come Je viens Nous venons Tu viens Vous venez Il/elle vient Ils/elles viennent (c) Sentir – to smell/taste Je sens Nous sentons Tu sens Vous sentez Il sent Ils sentent (d) Vêtir – to clothe/to dress Je vêts Nous vêtons Tu vêts Vous vêtez Il vêt Ils vêtent 3.1.3 The ‘ir’ verbs that take endings of ‘er’ verbs You should also take cognizance of the fact that there are some ‘ir’ verbs, although they belong to the group conjugated above, that end in e, es, e, 39 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ons, ez, ent as if they are er verbs.
The infinitive of these verbs only drops the ‘ir’ from their radical to take the e, es, e, ons, ez, ent endings.
Examples of this set could be found in verbs like: (a) Offrir – to offer J’offre Nous offrons Tu offres Vous offrez Il offre Ils offrent (b) Couvrir – to cover Je couvre Nous couvrons Tu couvres Vous couvrez Il couvre Ils couvrent (c) Cueillir – to pluck Je cueille Nous cueillons Tu cueilles Vous cueillez Il cueille Ils cueillent (d) Assaillir – to attack J’assaille Nous assaillons Tu assailles Vous assaillez Il assaille Ils assaillent 3.1.4 Other ‘ir’ verbs: You should learn about other forms of ir verbs.
These sets belong to a group whose peculiarities are difficult to explain.
Sometimes their radical changes completely from what is given in the infinitive.
And in some other cases.
you only modify the radical.
But they all belong to the s, s, t, ons, ez, ent, endings.
Their examples could be found in verbs like: (a) Bouillir – to Boil Je bous Nous bouillons Tu bous Vous bouillez 40 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Il bout Ils bouillent (b) Dormir – to sleep Je dors Nous dormons Tu dors Vous dormez Il dort Ils dorment (c) Courir – to run Je cours Nous courons Tu cours Vous courez Il court Ils courent (d) Mourir – to die Je meurs Nous mourons Tu meurs Vous mourez Il meurt Ils meurent (e) Servir – to serve Je sers Nous servons Tu sers Vous servez Il sert Ils servent (f) Fuir – to run away Je fuis Nous fuyons Tu fuis Vous fuyez Il fuit Ils fuient (NOTE: As the semi-vowel y in the yer verb changes to i in the singular form and 3rd person plural, so also the i in the group of fuir changes to y in the 1st and 2nd persons plural form here) 3.1.5 THE OIR VERBS Like we have been drumming it into your hears from unit three, the ‘oir’ verbs are purely irregular.
So you should learn to accept and treat them that way.
Like the re and ir verbs, each of the oir verbs contains two or more peculiarities that we have 41 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II treated in verbs of the other groups.
It is therefore difficult for us to reclassify them again for detailed discussion on them.
We could only give you examples and insight into the conjugation of some of them: (a) Recevoir – to receive Je reçois Nous recevons Tu reçois Vous recevez Il reçoit Ils reçoivent (b) Voir – to see Je vois Nous voyons Tu vois Vous voyez Il voit Ils voient (c) Pouvoir – to be able Je peux Nous pouvons Tu peux Vous pouvez Il peut Ils peuvent (d) Savoir – to know (knowledge) Je sais Nous savons Tu sais Vous savez Il sait Ils savent (e) Devoir – to be obliged Je dois Nous devons Tu dois Vous devez Il doit Ils doivent (f) Mouvoir – to move Je meus Nous mouvons Tu meus Vous mouvez Il meut Ils meuvent 42 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (g) Valoir – to be worth Je vaux Nous valons Tu vaux Vous valez Il vaut Ils valent (h) Vouloir – to want: wish Je veux Nous voulons Tu veux Vous voulez Il veut Ils veulent (i) Asseoir – to sit J’assieds Nous asseyons Tu assieds Vous asseyez Il assied Ils asseyent (j) Asseoir – to sit J’assois Nous assoyons Tu assois Vous assoyez Il assoit Ils assoient 3.1.6 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into “Prèsent de l'indicatif” a) Sortir, b) Valoir c) Asseoir.
Possible answers : (a) Verbe “Sortir au Présent de l'indicatif”.
Je sors Nous Sortons Tu sors Vous Sortez ìl/elle sort Ils/Elles Sortent 43 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (b) Verbe “Vouloir au Présent de l'indicatif”.
Je veux Nous voulons Tu veux Vous voulez Il veut Ils veulent (c ) Verbe “Asseoir au présent de l'indicatif”.
J’assois Nous assoyons Tu assois Vous assoyez Il assoit Ils assoient 10.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the rules governing the conjugation of ir and oir verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
This group, as you should have discovered, has the largest number of irregular verbs.
With our simplified explanation, we are convinced that the complication in understanding irregular verbs, which is a common problem to French learners like you would have been alleviated.
By now we believe you can conjugate different categories of verbs with ir and oir ending.
11.0 SUMMARY Having gone this far in the conjugation of verbs, we are sure that you must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basic techniques of how to conjugation of ir and oir verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
Your knowledge of conjugation of irregular verbs must have been enriched also.
By now we are confident that you should have acquired enough verbal vocabulary as well as simple techniques of conjugation of irregular verbs into présent de l’indicatif.
44 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 12.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 5.
Conjugate the following verbs into présent de l’indicatif: a. savoir, b. venir, c. courir, d. offrir, e. partir, f. finir, g. sortir, h. pouvoir, i. valoir, j. tenir.
13.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
45 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT FIVE CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL AND REFLEXIVE VERBS INTO PRESENT DE L’INDICATIF TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of Impersonal verbs into présent de l’indicatif 3.1.
General techniques guiding the Conjugation of Reflexive verbs into présent de l’indicatif 3.2.
Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will present to you the technique of conjugation of Impersonal and Reflexive verbs.
In this unit, you will learn about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs.
These impersonal, as well as Reflexive verbs are common in French language.
You will see them as either er, re, ir or even oir verbs.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units two to four will be useful in this unit.
What we will do mostly in this unit is to teach you how to identify French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs, then teach you the peculiarities of these verbs so that you could apply your already gained knowledge in the conjugation of simple er, re, ir and oir verbs to them thus conjugating them correctly.
You can them understand why we have continuously been 46 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II warning you that your better understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle these first four units.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs as they will be taught here.
6.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the French Impersonal verbs.
• Identify the French Reflexive verbs • Explain the peculiarities of these two verbs.
• Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these two verbs.
You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of Impersonal and reflexive verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL VERBS INTO PRESENT DE L’INDICATIF Impersonal verbs are verbs that could not be conjugated into numerous persons and classes, such as first, second, third persons, singular and plural form, like the others.
They are verbs that could not be used for human beings.
And being that they are for abstract things, they could only be conjugated into the 3rd person singular form.
Even their conjugation into the third person singular form is limited to masculine personal pronoun, il, alone.
This explanation is to warn you that you cannot use the third person singular of feminine form to conjugate it!
We would like to note also that it is not every other verb that you can conjugate using this method.
This type of conjugation is only noted for impersonal verbs alone.
Examples could be found in: 47 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (a) Pleuvoir – to rain Il pleut (b) Falloir – to be necessary Il faut (c) Advenir – to happen Il advient (d) S’agir de – to be about Il s’agit de (e) Brûmer – to mist (hazy) Il brume (f) Venter – to blow wind Il vente 3.1 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF REFLEXIVE OR PRONOMINAL VERBS INTO PRESENT DE L’INDICATIF Reflexive verbs are what the French grammarian call “Les verbes pronominaux’ hence our calling them reflexive or pronominal verbs in English so as to facilitate the ease of reference for French learners like you.
Reflexive or pronominal verbs are verbs used to refer to an action that the subject does to himself/herself.
In a situation whereby you want account for an action that you do to yourself or the action that another person does to himself or herself, you express this action through the use of reflexive or pronominal verbs in French grammar.
48 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II In order to conjugate these verbs into présent de l’indicatif, this set of verbs takes additional (direct/personal) pronoun in their conjugation.
The pronouns me te se nous vous and se are used to mark this action of reflexive or pronominal of the verbs.
For example, if the subject or the speaker wants to say that I bath myself, he would say: Je me lave.
NOTE: We would like you to note that in the normal conjugation of the infinitive lave, you are to conjugate it as Je lave …….
(meaning I wash……… /I am washing …) But in the case of reflexive or pronominal action whereby you want to say that you perform the action to yourself, another reflexive pronoun of the same person and grammatical class with that of the subject (personal pronoun) will be inserted to denote that action of reflexive in the sentence, hence the inclusion of the reflexive pronoun, me, in the given example.
(a) Se laver – to take ones bath Je me lave – I bath myself Tu te laves – You bath yourself Il/elle se lave – he/she baths himself/herself Nous nous lavons – we bath ourselves Vous vous lavez – you bath yourselves Ils se lavent – They bath themselves (b) Se taire – to keep quiet Je me tais – I keep quiet Tu te tais – You keep quiet Il/elle se tait – he/she keeps quiet Nous nous taisons – we keep quiet Vous vous taisez – you keep quiet Ils se taisent – They keep quiet (c) Se convertir – to convert oneself 49 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Je me convertis – I convert myself Tu te convertis – You convert yourself Il/elle se convertit – he/she convert himself/herself Nous nous convertissons – we convert ourselves Vous vous convertissez – you convert yourselves Ils se convertissent – They convert themselves (d) S’asseoir – to take ones seat Je m’assois – I sit down/take my seat Tu t’assois – You sit down/take your seat Il/elle s’assoit – he/she sits down/take him/her seat Nous nous assoyons – we sit down/take our seat Vous vous assoyez – you sit down/take your seat Ils s’assoient – They sit down/take their seat Or (d) S’asseoir – to take ones seat Je m’assieds – I sit down/take my seat Tu t’assieds – You sit down/take your seat Il/elle s’assied – he/she sits down/take him/her seat Nous nous asseyons – we sit down/take our seat Vous vous asseyez – you sit down/take your seat Ils s’asseyent – They sit down/take their seat NOTE: We would like you to note that there are two grammatically accepted form of conjugation of the verb S’asseoir in French.
Which ever form you chose is correct.
(e) S’appeler – to call oneself Je m’appelle – I call myself (I am called) Tu t’appelles – You call yourself Il/elle s’appelle – He/She calls himself/herself 50 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Nous nous appelons – We call ourselves Vous vous appelez – You call yourselves Ils/elles s’appellent – They call themselves (NOTE: You should please not that the contraction in the conjugation of s’appeler comes as a result of the contact in-between the vowel e of pronouns me, te, se and the infinitive of the verb appeler that has initial vowel a.
3.2 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into “ Présent de l'indicatif” a) Se taire, (b) se laver (c) se convertir (a) Verbe “Se taire’ au Présent de l'indicatif” Je me tais Nous nous taisons Tu te tais Vous vous taisez il /elle se tait ils/elles se taisent b) Verbe “Se Laver au Présent de l'indicatif” Je me lave Nous nous lavons Tu te laves Vous vous lavez il/elle se lave ils/elles se lavent (c ) Verbe “Se convertir au Présent de l’indicatif” Je me convertis Nous nous Convertissons Tu te Convertis Vous vous convertissez il /elle se convertit ils/elles se Convertissent 12.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the rules governing the conjugation of Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
As you should 51 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II have discovered, the impersonal verb is a verb that you can only conjugate with third person masculine pronoun thus making the verb to refer to inanimate things that are not human beings.
You have been taught also that a reflexive verb refers to an action that the subject does to himself.
With the way and manner that we simplified the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding the impersonal and reflexive verbs, which is a common problem to French learners like you would have been alleviated.
By now we believe you can conjugate impersonal and reflexive verbs into présent de l’indicatif in French.
13.0 SUMMARY With this unit tackling the conjugation of impersonal and reflexive verbs into présent de l’indicatif, we have completed the cycle of conjugation of verbs into présent de l’indicatif in French.
You should remember that having used the unit one to do the general classification of French verbal conjugation groupings, we treated the Conjugation of er and other regular verbs into present de l’indicatif in your Unit 2.
The Unit 3 treated the Conjugation of re irregular verbs into present de l’indicatif while the Unit 4 explained the Conjugation of ir/oir irregular verbs into present de l’indicatif to you.
It is in this Unit 5 that we taught you the Conjugation of impersonal and reflexive verbs into present de l’indicatif.
Having gone this far in the conjugation of verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’, we are sure that you must have been adequately informed in all these five units on the basic techniques of how to conjugate different verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’.
14.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 6.
Conjugate the following verbs into présent de l’indicatif: 52 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II a.
Se comprendre, b.
Se taire, c. Se voir, d. S’offrir, e. falloir, f. pleuvoir, g. venter, h. S’agir, i.
Se lever, j.
Se balancer.
15.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
53 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT SIX CONJUGATION OF ER AND OTHER REGULAR VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of er and other regular verbs into futur simple.
3.1.
Exceptionalities to these general rules.
3.2.
Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught the method of conjugation of er and other regular verbs into futur simple.
We hope to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French er and other regular verbs into futur simple.
You will recall that in the last five units we have been talking of conjugation of verbs into présent de l’indicatif.
The significance of that is that we have been teaching you how to conjugate French verbs to express actions that one is doing at present, doing habitually or doing in present continuous manners.
We have now got to a stage whereby you have to learn how to express actions that will be done in the future.
Futur simple could be translated as 54 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (simple) future tense in English.
It is used to express any action that will be done in the future or at a later date or time that exceeds the present.
Although we are talking of future tense here, it is a methodical development on the conjugation of verbs into present tense.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units two to five will also be useful in this unit.
Let us insist on our warning you that your better understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle all these units we have been teaching you earlier.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating er and other regular verbs into futur simple of French grammar as they will be taught here.
7.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the futur Stem/Radical of er verbs • Identify the futur er ending/terminaison of er verbs • identify the futur morphemes (suffixation) with which the endings could be replaced thus facilitating grammatically correct conjugation of futur simple tense • Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these verbs.
You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of er and other regular verbs into futur simple.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF ER AND OTHER REGULAR VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE Like we have told you in our introduction to this unit, the Futur simple could be translated as (simple) future tense in English.
We use it to express 55 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II any action that will be done in the future or at a later date or time that exceeds the present.
When you want to talk about what you will do or what any other person will do later than when you are talking, we use the future tense in grammar.
It is the French grammar’s equivalent of future tense that we call Futur simple.
Just like in the conjugation of present de l’indicatif, there are slight differences in the conjugation of this tense to different types of verbal groupings.
It is in realization of these dissimilarities in their conjugation that we decided to teach the conjugation er and other regular verbs into futur simple in this unit.
To conjugate er and other regular verbs, such as manger, into future tense, you should identify the infinitive of the verb concerned (e.g.
manger), you then add the following endings (ai, as, a, ons, ez, ont) to the entire infinitive of the verb concerned: ai for 1st person singular as for 2nd person singular a for 3rd person singular ons for 1st person plural ez for 2nd person plural ont for 3rd person plural Manger Je mangerai (I shall eat/I will eat) Tu mangeras (You will eat) Il mangera (He will eat) Nous mangerons (We shall eat/We will eat) Vous mangerez (You will eat) 56 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Ils mangeront (They will eat) NOTE: We would like to call your attention to these futur simple endings (ai, as, a, ons, ez, ont).
If you could recollect very well and quickly, they look like the verbal conjugation of the verb avoir into présent de l’indicatif.
You can quickly compare these endings and the présent de l’indicatif conjugated form of the verb avoir for ease of reference: (b) Avoir J’ai Nous avons Tu as Vous avez Il a Ils ont If you consider the highlighted ending parts of the futur simple conjugation of manger as well as that of the verb avoir conjugated into present de l’indicatif, you will realize very close similarities in them.
The differences you could note could be at the level of 1st and 2nd persons plural whereby the verb avoir is written as avons and avez respectively.
You can through this enlightenment on the similarities to postulate a method for yourself that future tense could be formed in French language by adding completely the 1st, 2nd , 3rd Person singular and 3rd Person plural of auxiliary avoir, while the stem av will be removed from the 1st and 2nd persons plural form leaving only the ons and ez form of the verb avoir conjugated into present de l’indicatif, to the ending of the infinitive of the er and other regular verb you want to conjugate into futur simple.
Let us then follow these patterns to conjugate some er verbs into the futur simple: a. Parler ai for 1st person singular = Je Parlerai as for 2nd person singular = Tu Parleras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle Parlera ons for 1st person plural = Nous Parlerons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous Parlerez 57 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles Parleront b. Commencer ai for 1st person singular = Je Commencerai as for 2nd person singular = Tu Commenceras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle Commencera ons for 1st person plural = Nous Commencerons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous Commencerez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles Commenceront c. Aimer ai for 1st person singular = J’aimerai as for 2nd person singular = Tu aimeras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle aimera ons for 1st person plural = Nous aimerons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous aimerez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles aimeront d. Appeler ai for 1st person singular = J’appelerai as for 2nd person singular = Tu appeleras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle appelera ons for 1st person plural = Nous appelerons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous appelerez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles appeleront 3.1 EXCEPTIONALITIES TO THESE GENERAL RULES We would like you to note that although er verbs are said to be regular at most of the conjugation groupings, just as we have some verbs in this category at the present de l’indicatif level that have some peculiarities noted for them, so also we have some er verbs that take exceptions to these 58 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II general rules in the conjugation of their futur simple.
In as much as we cannot because of these minor dissimilarities categorize them as being irregular, we then decided to treat them as peculiarities under this category.
Better examples of these er verbs with peculiarities could be seen in verbs such as aller, payer, balayer, rudoyer, envoyer, renvoyer etc.
We need to implore you that you should take their peculiarities that we are about to treat as irregularities and learn them as presented to you: e. Aller ai for 1st person singular = J’irai as for 2nd person singular = Tu iras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle ira ons for 1st person plural = Nous irons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous irez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles iront f. Payer ai for 1st person singular = Je paierai as for 2nd person singular = Tu paieras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle paiera ons for 1st person plural = Nous paierons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous paierez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles paieront (Balayer, Rudoyer are conjugated like Payer) g. Envoyer ai for 1st person singular = J’enverrai as for 2nd person singular = Tu enverras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle enverra ons for 1st person plural = Nous enverrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous enverrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles enverront 59 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (Renvoyer is conjugated like Envoyer) 3.2 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into “futur simple” a) Aller (b) Manger (c ) Parler.
(a Verbe “Aller au Futur simple” J'irai Nous irons Tu iras Vous irez Il/Elle ira Ils/Elles iront (b Verbe “Manger au Futur simple” Je mangerai Nous mangerons Tu mangeras Vous mangerez il/elle mangera ils/elles mangeront ( c) Verbe “ Parler au Futur simple” Je parlerai Nous parlerons Tu Parleras Vous Parlerez il /elle Parlera ils/elles parleront.
14.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught you the rules governing the conjugation of er and other regular verbs into futur simple.
You have also been told of some exceptionalities to these general riles.
We believe by now you can conjugate er and other regular verbs into futur simple.
15.0 SUMMARY Having laid our foundation for the teaching of conjugations through the simplified presentation of conjugation of present de l’indicatif in Units two to five, this Unit six has gone a little further in the conjugation techniques by tackling the conjugation er and other regular verbs into futur simple.
Much as we discussed the er verbs, in this unit, as regular verbs, we were 60 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II quick in identifying and treating some elements of irregularities of these er verbs at the futur simple level; these irregularities are what we treated as peculiarities.
16.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 7.
Conjugate the following verbs into futur simple: a. Aller, b. Rudoyer, c. Monter, d. Nager, e. Recommencer, f. Renvoyer, g. Blaguer, h. Balayer, i. Laver, j. Discuter.
17.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
61 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT SEVEN CONJUGATION OF IRREGULAR VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of irregular verbs to futur simple.
3.1.
Conjugation of re verbs to futur simple.
3.2.
Conjugation of ir verbs to futur simple.
3.3.
Conjugation of oir verbs to futur simple.
3.4.
Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall that in Unit Six, we taught you the method of conjugation of er and other regular verbs into futur simple.
In this unit, you will be taught how to conjugate other irrregular verbs into futur simple.
Like we did in the previous unit, we hope to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French irregular verbs into futur simple.
8.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the futur Stem/Radical of the irregular verbs • Identify the futur ending/terminaison of irregular verbs 62 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II • identify the futur morphemes (suffixation) with which the endings could be replaced thus facilitating grammatically correct conjugation future simple tense • Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these irregular verbs.
You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of irregular verbs into futur simple.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF RE AND OTHER IRREGULAR VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE Like we have told you in unit six, the Futur simple could be translated as (simple) future tense in English.
We use it to express any action that will be done in the future or at a later date or time that exceeds the present.
When you want to talk about what you will do or what any other person will do later than when you are talking, we use the future tense in grammar.
It is the French grammar’s equivalent of future tense that we call Futur simple.
You will recall that in Unit six, we have treated how to conjugate er and other regular verbs into Futur simple.
If you recall very well in our Unit One where we told you that verbs in French language could be divided into three groups according to their endings.
And if we have treated the conjugation of er and other regular verbs into Futur simple in Unit Six, the onus is then on us in this unit to treat the conjugation of re, ir/oir into Futur simple.
It is the combination of verbs with re, ir/oir endings that we put together to be treated as irregular verbs in this unit.
3.1 CONJUGATION OF RE VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE To conjugate re verbs, such as prendre, into future tense, you should identify the infinitive of the verb concerned (e.g.
prendre), you drop the last vowel e of the infinitive and you then add the following endings (ai, as, a, ons, ez, ont) to the entire infinitive of the verb concerned: 63 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ai for 1st person singular as for 2nd person singular a for 3rd person singular ons for 1st person plural ez for 2nd person plural ont for 3rd person plural Prendre = Prendre Je prendrai (I shall take/I will take) Tu prendras (You will take) Il prendra (He will take) Nous prendrons (We shall take /We will take) Vous prendrez (You will take) Ils prendront (They will take) Let us then follow these patterns to conjugate some re verbs into the futur simple: a. Battre (to beat) ai for 1st person singular = Je Battrai as for 2nd person singular = Tu Battras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle Battra ons for 1st person plural = Nous Battrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous Battrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles Battront (Conjugation of débattre, combattre, mettre, soumettre, plaire, connaître, paraître, naître, croître, croire, boire, conclure, 64 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II absoudre, coudre, moudre, suivre, vivre, revivre, survivre, revivre, lire etc, follow this pattern.)
b. Craindre (to be afraid/to fear) ai for 1st person singular = Je craindrai as for 2nd person singular = Tu craindras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle craindra ons for 1st person plural = Nous craindrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous craindrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles craindront (Conjugation of rendre, joindre, plaindre, contraindre, comprendre, rompre, corrompre, interrompre, vaincre, convaincre, dire, contredire, prédire, redire, dedire, rire, sourire, écrire, récrire, inscrire, cuire etc, follow this pattern.)
c. Faire (to do/to make) ai for 1st person singular = Je ferai as for 2nd person singular = Tu feras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle fera ons for 1st person plural = Nous ferons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous ferez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles feront (Conjugation of défaire, refaire etc, follow this pattern.)
d. Etre (to be) ai for 1st person singular = Je serai as for 2nd person singular = Tu seras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle sera ons for 1st person plural = Nous serons 65 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ez for 2nd person plural = Vous serez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles seront 3.2 CONJUGATION OF IR VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE We need to tell you that, among the irregular verbs of French language, apart from re verbs, ir verbs are the verbs that contain more verbs that follow the same pattern of conjugation into futur simple.
To conjugate ir verbs, such as finir, into future tense, you should identify the infinitive of the verb concerned (e.g.
finir), you then add the following endings (ai, as, a, ons, ez, ont) to the entire infinitive of the verb concerned: a. Finir (to finish) ai for 1st person singular = Je finirai as for 2nd person singular = Tu finiras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle finira ons for 1st person plural = Nous finirons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous finirez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles finiront (Conjugation of obéir, désobéir, haïr, partir, sortir, sentir, mentir, partir, repartir, répartir, vêtir, dévêtir, revêtir, couvrir, ouvrir, offrir, souffrir, accueillir, cueillir, bouillir, dormir, servir, revivre, lire etc, follow this pattern.)
b. Tenir (to hold) ai for 1st person singular = Je tiendrai as for 2nd person singular = Tu tiendras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle tiendra ons for 1st person plural = Nous tiendrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous tiendrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles tiendront 66 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (Conjugation of venir, revenir, parvenir, subvenir etc, follow this pattern.)
c. Courir (to run) ai for 1st person singular = Je courrai as for 2nd person singular = Tu courras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle courra ons for 1st person plural = Nous courrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous courrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles courront (Conjugation of mourir etc, follow this pattern.)
3.3 CONJUGATION OF OIR VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE You need to know that, among the irregular verbs of French language, the oir verbs have the largest number of irregular verbs that do not follow the same pattern of conjugation into futur simple.
It is thus difficult to proffer a general rule that could cover all of them.
You are hereby advised as a learner that you master their stem in the future and other forms of the conjugation could be done easily.
It is this futur stem of these irregular verbs that you add the following endings (ai, as, a, ons, ez, ont) to: a. Avoir (to have) ai for 1st person singular = J’aurai as for 2nd person singular = Tu auras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle aura ons for 1st person plural = Nous aurons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous aurez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles auront b. Recevoir (to receive) ai for 1st person singular = Je recevrai 67 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II as for 2nd person singular = Tu recevras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle recevra ons for 1st person plural = Nous recevrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous recevrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles recevront (Conjugation of apercevoir, concevoir, décevoir, percevoir, etc, follow this pattern.)
c. Voir (to see) ai for 1st person singular = Je verrai as for 2nd person singular = Tu verras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle verra ons for 1st person plural = Nous verrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous verrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles verront (Conjugation of entrevoir, revoir etc, follow this pattern.)
d. Savoir (to Know how) ai for 1st person singular = Je saurai as for 2nd person singular = Tu sauras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle saura ons for 1st person plural = Nous saurons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous saurez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles sauront e. Devoir (to be compelled) ai for 1st person singular = Je devrai as for 2nd person singular = Tu devras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle devra 68 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ons for 1st person plural = Nous devrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous devrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles devront f. Pouvoir (to be able) ai for 1st person singular = Je pourrai as for 2nd person singular = Tu pourras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle pourra ons for 1st person plural = Nous pourrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous pourrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles pourront g. Vouloir (to wish) ai for 1st person singular = Je voudrai as for 2nd person singular = Tu voudras a for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle voudra ons for 1st person plural = Nous voudrons ez for 2nd person plural = Vous voudrez ont for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles voudront (Conjugation of valoir, équivaloir, prévaloir, revaloir etc, follow this pattern.)
3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into “Future Simple” (a) Vouloir (b) Avoir (c ) Prendre Verbe “Vouloir au Future simple” Je Voudrai Nous Voudrons Tu Voudras Vous Voudrez il/elle voudra ils/elles voudront 69 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Verbe “avoir au Futur simple” J’aurai Nous aurons Tu auras Vous aurez il/elle aura ils/elles auront Verbe “avoir au Futur simple” Je prendrai Nous Prendrons Tu Prendras Vous prendrez il/elle Prendra ils/elles Prendront 16.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned the rules governing the conjugation of re, ir and oir verbs into futur simple.
You have also been told that most verbs in this category are irregular verbs and that you should be careful in learning the future stem of these infinitives so as to end the future endings to them.
We believe by now you can conjugate re, ir and oir verbs into futur simple.
17.0 SUMMARY As a follow up to Unit six, this Unit seven has gone a little further in the conjugation techniques by tackling the conjugation of re, ir and oir verbs into futur simple.
We also laid emphasis on the fact that most verbs in this category are irregular verbs and that you should be careful in learning the future stem of these infinitives so as to end the future endings to them.
18.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 8.
Conjugate the following verbs into futur simple: a. Rendre, b. Refaire, c. Plaire, d. Sortir, e. Revenir, f. Mourir, g. Valoir, h. Revoir, i. Concevoir, j. être.
70 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 19.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
71 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT EIGHT CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL AND REFLEXIVE VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of Impersonal verbs into futur simple 3.1.
General techniques guiding the Conjugation of Reflexive verbs into futur simple 3.2.
Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will present to you the technique of conjugation of Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into futur simple.
In this unit, you will learn about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs.
Like we said it in Unit five, these impersonal, as well as Reflexive verbs are common in French language.
You will see them as either er, re, ir or even oir verbs.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units two to seven will be useful in this unit.
What we will do mostly in this unit is to teach you how to identify French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs, then teach you the peculiarities of these verbs so that you could apply your already gained knowledge in the futur simple conjugation of simple er, re, ir and oir verbs to them thus conjugating them correctly.
You can them understand why we have continuously been warning you that your better 72 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle all the previous units.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into futur simple as they will be taught here.
9.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the French Impersonal verbs.
• Identify the French Reflexive verbs • Explain the peculiarities of these two verbs.
• Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these two verbs into futur simple.
You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of irregular verbs into ‘futur simple’.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE As we have told you in Unit five, Impersonal verbs are verbs that could not be conjugated into numerous persons and classes, such as first, second, third persons, singular and plural form, like the others.
They are verbs that could not be used for human beings.
And being that they are for abstract things, they could only be conjugated into the 3rd person singular form.
Even their conjugation into the third person singular form is limited to masculine personal pronoun, il, alone.
This explanation is to warn you that you cannot use the third person singular of feminine form to conjugate it!
We would like to note also that it is not every other verb that you can 73 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II conjugate using this method.
This type of conjugation is only noted for impersonal verbs alone!
Examples could be found in: (g) Pleuvoir – to rain Il pleuvra (h) Falloir – to be necessary Il faudra (i) Advenir – to happen Il adviendra (j) S’agir de – to be about Il s’agira de (k) Brûmer – to mist (hazy) Il brumera (l) Venter – to blow wind Il ventera 3.1 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF REFLEXIVE OR PRONOMINAL VERBS INTO FUTUR SIMPLE Like we explained in Unit five, the Reflexive verbs are what the French grammarian call “Les verbes pronominaux’ hence our calling them reflexive or pronominal verbs in English so as to facilitate the ease of reference for French learners like you.
Reflexive or pronominal verbs are verbs used to refer to an action that the subject does to himself/herself.
In a situation whereby you want account for an action that you do to yourself or 74 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II the action that another person does to himself or herself, you express this action through the use of reflexive or pronominal verbs in French grammar.
In order to conjugate these verbs into futur simple, this set of verbs takes additional (direct/personal) pronoun in their conjugation.
The pronouns me te se nous vous and se are used to mark this action of reflexive or pronominal of the verbs.
The futur simple endings are then added to the stem of the main verb so as to complete the conjugation of the verb concerned into futur simple.
For example, if the subject or the speaker wants to say that I will/shall bath myself, he would say: Je me laverai.
NOTE: We would like you to note that apart from the introduction of another reflexive pronoun of the same person and grammatical class with that of the subject (personal pronoun) that you will insert so as to denote that action of reflexive in the sentence, You will be expected to bring into use also your knowledge of conjugation of er, re, ir, oir into futur simple that you have acquired in Units six and seven.
(e) Se laver – to take ones bath Je me laverai – I will/shall bath myself Tu te laveras – You will bath yourself Il/elle se lavera – he/she will bath himself/herself Nous nous laverons – we will bath ourselves Vous vous laverez – you will bath yourselves Ils/Elles se laveront – They will bath themselves (f) Se taire – to keep quiet Je me tairai – I will/shall keep quiet Tu te tairas – You will keep quiet Il/elle se taira – he/she will keep quiet 75 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Nous nous tairons – we will keep quiet Vous vous tairez – you will keep quiet Ils/Elles se tairont – They will keep quiet (g) Se convertir – to convert oneself Je me convertirai – I will/shall convert myself Tu te convertiras – You will convert yourself Il/elle se convertira – he/she will convert himself/herself Nous nous convertirons – we will convert ourselves Vous vous convertirez – you will convert yourselves Ils/Elles se convertiront – They will convert themselves (h) S’asseoir – to take ones seat Je m’assoirai – I will/shall sit down/take my seat Tu t’assoiras – You will sit down/take your seat Il/elle s’assoira – he/she will sit down/take him/her seat Nous nous assoirons – we will sit down/take our seat Vous vous assoirez – you will sit down/take your seat Ils/Elles s’assoiront – They will sit down/take their seat Or (f) S’asseoir – to take ones seat Je m’assiérai – I will/shall sit down/take my seat Tu t’assiéras – You will sit down/take your seat Il/elle s’assiéra – he/she will sit down/take him/her seat Nous nous assiérons – we will sit down/take our seat Vous vous assiérez – you will sit down/take your seat Ils/Elles s’assiéront – They will sit down/take their seat NOTE: We would like you to note that, just like in the conjugation of present de l’indicatif that we did in Unit five, there are two grammatically accepted form of 76 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II conjugation of the verb S’asseoir into futur simple of French grammar.
Which ever form you chose is correct.
(i) S’appeler – to call oneself Je m’appellerai – I will call myself (I will be called) Tu t’appelleras – You will call yourself Il/elle s’appellera – He/She will call himself/herself Nous nous appellerons – We will call ourselves Vous vous appellerez – You will call yourselves Ils/elles s’appelleront – They will call themselves 3.2 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into “Futur simple” (a) Voir (b) Se taire (c ) s'agir (a) Verbe “voir au futur simple” Je verrai Nous verrons Tu verras Vous verrez il verra ils/elles verront (b) Verbe “Se tairai au Future Simple” Je me tairai Nous nous tairons Tu te tairas Vous vous tairez il/elle se taira il / elles se tairont (c ) Verbe “S’agir au Futur Simple Il S’agira 18.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the rules governing the conjugation of Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into ‘futur simple’.
As you should have 77 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II discovered, the impersonal verb is a verb that you can only conjugate with third person masculine pronoun of futur simple thus making the verb to refer to inanimate things that are not human beings.
You have been taught also that the futur simple of reflexive verb refers to an action that the subject will do to himself.
With the way and manner that we simplified the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding the futur simple form of impersonal and reflexive verbs, which would have been a problem to French learners like you would have been alleviated.
By now we believe you can conjugate impersonal and reflexive verbs into futur simple in French.
19.0 SUMMARY With this unit tackling the conjugation of impersonal and reflexive verbs into futur simple, we have completed the cycle of conjugation of verbs into futur simple in French.
Having gone this far in the conjugation of verbs into ‘futur simple’, we are sure that you must have been adequately informed in all these eight units on the basic techniques of how to conjugate different verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’ and the futur simple.
20.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 9.
Conjugate the following verbs into futur simple: a. Advenir, b.
Se voir, c. Se taire, d. S’offrir, e. falloir, f. pleuvoir, g. venter, h. S’agir, i.
Se lever, j.
Se comprendre.
21.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
78 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
79 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT NINE CONJUGATION OF VERBS WITH AUXILLIARY AVOIR INTO PASSE COMPOSE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé.
3.1 Techniques guiding the Conjugation of er verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé.
3.2 Techniques guiding the Conjugation of re verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé.
3.3 Techniques guiding the Conjugation of ir/oir verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé.
3.4 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION We hope to teach you in this unit, the method of conjugation of verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé.
We would like to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating verbs with auxiliary avoir into French passé composé.
You will recall that in the first five units we have been talking of conjugation of verbs into présent de l’indicatif.
While in Units six to eight, we have been teaching you about how to conjugate verbs into futur simple.
The significance of all these previous lessons is that while we have been 80 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II teaching you how to conjugate French verbs to express actions that one is doing at present, doing habitually doing in present continuous manners with the conjugation of présent de l’indicatif, we have also been using the conjugation of futur simple to teach you how French learners like you can express actions that one is doing in the future.
Now we have just got to a stage where you will be taught how to express actions that are done in the past.
Any action that has been done in the past, before the time that you are reporting the action, is expressed in French through passé composé.
A passé composé tense expresses an action that has been done and concluded a second, a minute, an hour, a day, a week, a month, a year or even a decade in the past before the time the speaker is reporting it.
Although we are talking of passé composé here, it is a methodical development on the conjugation of verbs into present tense as well as future tense.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units two to eight will also be useful in this unit.
Let us insist on our warning you that your better understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle all these units we have been teaching you earlier.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé of French grammar as they will be taught here.
10.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the auxiliary avoir.
• Identify the past participle of various verb groupings • Demonstrate how to conjugate the passé composé by adding the auxiliary avoir to the past participle of the verb concerned.. 81 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II You are now invited to follow the method that could facilitate the conjugation of verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé.
11.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF VERBS WITH AUXILIARY AVOIR INTO PASSÉ COMPOSÉ Like we have told you in our introduction to this unit, we use passé composé to express actions that are done in the past, any action that has been done in the past, before the time that you are reporting the action.
It is a tense that expresses an action that has been done and concluded a second, a minute, an hour, a day, a week, a month, a year or even a decade in the past before the time the speaker is reporting it Unlike the conjugations of présent de l’indicatif and future simple whereby the conjugation centres on the single major verb, the conjugation of verbs into passé composé entails the usage of an auxiliary and the past participle of the main verb.
It is the combination of this auxiliary and the main verb that gives the tense its name: passé composé.
Composé is a French word that means compounded, that contains more than one linguistic element.
Passé composé could thus be literally translated as compound past that relates past actions/tense i.e.
the past perfect tense.
We also need to warn you at this level also that ‘Le passé composé’ is used in French as the simple past in English.
A lot of Anglophone Students make the mistake of translating the tense as being perfect tense: J’ai été means I was but not I have been.
The general rule of conjugating this tense says that you add, the past participle of the verb we want to conjugate, to the present tense of the auxiliary avoir or être (as the case may be): - (Auxilliaire avoir ou être + participle passé du verbe concerné) If the rule insists on your adding auxiliary avoir, conjugated into the présent de l’indicatif, to the past participle of the main verb, you then need 82 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II to recollect your knowledge of conjugating the verb avoir into présent de l’indicatif: Avoir J’ai Nous avons Tu as Vous avez Il a Ils ont Let us then follow this pattern and the rules governing it to conjugate the verb manger into passé composé: ex: Manger - to eat J’ai mangé Nous avons mangé Tu as mangé Vous avez mangé Il a mangé Ils ont mangé 11.1 TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF ER VERBS WITH AUXILIARY AVOIR INTO PASSÉ COMPOSÉ To form the past participle of all er verbs is easy; you drop the r at the end of the infinitive and put an acute accent (/) on the final ‘é’.
Manger becomes mangé.
It is this past participle that you precede with the personal pronoun and the auxiliary avoir in order to form your passé compose.
You can see examples in er verbs such as: (a) Parler - to speak J’ai parlé (I spoke) Tu as parlé (You spoke) Il/Elle a parlé (He/She spoke) Nous avons parlé (We spoke) Vous avez parlé (You spoke) Ils/Elles ont parlé (They spoke) (b) Commencer - to start 83 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II J’ai commencé (I started) Tu as commencé (You started) Il/Elle a commencé (He/She started) Nous avons commencé (We started) Vous avez commencé (You started) Ils/Elles ont commencé (They started) 11.2 TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF RE VERBS WITH AUXILIARY AVOIR INTO PASSÉ COMPOSÉ Majority of verbs in this category form their past participle by replacing the re ending by t or s. Apart from some irregular verbs such as être that has été as its past participle, most other re verbs end in t or s as their past participle.
Example could be seen in faire whose past participle is fait, dire whose past participle is dis.. (a) Etre - to be J’ai été (I was) Tu as été (You were) Il/Elle a été (He/She was) Nous avons été (We were) Vous avez été (You were) Ils/Elles ont été (They were) (b) Faire - to do/make J’ai fait (I did/made) Tu as fait (You did/made) Il/Elle a fait (He/She did/made) Nous avons fait (We did/made) Vous avez fait (You did/made) Ils/Elles ont fait (They did/made) 84 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (c) Dire - to say J’ai dis (I said) Tu as dis (You said) Il/Elle a dis (He/She said) Nous avons dis (We said Vous avez dis (You said) Ils/Elles ont dis (They said) 11.3 TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF IR/OIR VERBS WITH AUXILIARY AVOIR INTO PASSÉ COMPOSÉ Having told you that majority of verbs, apart from the er verbs are irregular, this irregularity also affects the formation of their past participle.
As finir has fini, partially following the er verbs pattern to form its past participle, the same could not be said of voir whose past participle is vu.
You are then advised to learn the irregular past participle as you acquire your vocabularies.
(a) Finir - to finish J’ai fini (I finished) Tu as fini (You finished) Il/Elle a fini (He/She finished) Nous avons fini (We finished) Vous avez fini (You finished) Ils/Elles ont fini (They finished) (b) Voir - to see J’ai vu (I saw) Tu as vu (You saw) Il/Elle a vu (He/She saw) Nous avons vu (We saw) 85 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Vous avez vu (You saw) Ils/Elles ont vu (They saw) 3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjuate the followingVerbs into “Passe’ Compose’: Regarder , Dire, Vouloir.
(1) Verbe “ regarder au Passé composé” J 'ai regardé Nous avons regardé Tu as regardé Vous avez regardé il/elle a regardé ils/elles ont regardé (2) Verbe Dire au Passé composé” J’ai dis Nous avons dis Tu as dis Vous avez dis il/elle a dis ils/elles ont dis (3) Verbe “Vouloir au Passé composé” J‘ai voulu Nous avons voulu Tu as Voulu Vous avez voulu il/elle a voulu ils/elles ont voulu 20.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the rules governing the conjugation of verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé.
You have also been told of how to form the auxiliary avoir as well as how to identify the past participle of er, re ir and oir verbs.
We believe by now you can conjugate most verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé.
21.0 SUMMARY With the solid foundation for the teaching of conjugations through the simplified presentation of conjugation of présent de l’indicatif that we have laid for you in Units two to five and the techniques of conjugation of future 86 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II simple that we methodically handled in Unit six to eight, this Unit nine has gone a little further in the conjugation techniques by tackling the conjugation verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé composé.
22.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 10.
Conjugate the following verbs into passé composé: a. Mentir, b. Noter, c. Discuter, d. Regarder, e. Savoir, f. Vouloir, g. Prendre, h. Refaire, i. Définir, j.
Dire.
23.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
87 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT TEN CONJUGATION OF VERBS WITH AUXILLIARY ETRE INTO PASSE COMPOSE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
3.1 Techniques guiding the Conjugation of er verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
3.2 Techniques guiding the Conjugation of re verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
3.3 Techniques guiding the Conjugation of ir/oir verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
3.4 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall that we introduced you into the world of conjugation of verbs into passé composé in Unit 9 where we initiated you into the method of conjugation of verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé compose.
In this Unit, we hope to teach you the method of conjugation of verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
We would like to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating verbs with auxiliary être into French passé composé.
88 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Just like we explained to you in Unit nine, any action that has been done in the past, before the time that you are reporting the action, is expressed in French through passé composé.
A passé composé tense expresses an action that has been done and concluded a second, a minute, an hour, a day, a week, a month, a year or even a decade in the past before the time the speaker is reporting it.
In as much as we will be talking on how to conjugate verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé here, it is a methodical development on the conjugation of verbs into present tense as well as future tense.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units two to nine will also be useful in this unit.
Let us insist on our warning you that your better understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle all these previous units we have been teaching you.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé of French grammar as they will be taught here.
12.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the auxiliary être.
• Identify the past participle of various verb groupings • Demonstrate how to conjugate the passé composé by adding the auxiliary être to the past participle of the verb concerned.. You are now invited to follow the method that could facilitate the conjugation of verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
13.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF VERBS WITH AUXILIARY ETRE INTO PASSÉ COMPOSÉ Like we said in Unit nine as well as our introduction to this unit, we use passé composé to express actions that are done in the past, any action that 89 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II has been done in the past, before the time that you are reporting the action.
It is a tense that expresses an action that has been done and concluded a second, a minute, an hour, a day, a week, a month, a year or even a decade in the past before the time the speaker is reporting it Unlike the conjugations of présent de l’indicatif and future simple whereby the conjugation centres on the single major verb, the conjugation of verbs into passé composé entails the usage of an auxiliary and the past participle of the main verb.
It is the combination of this auxiliary and the main verb that gives the tense its name: passé composé.
Composé is a French word that means compounded, that contains more than one linguistic element.
Passé composé could thus be literally translated as compound past that relates past actions/tense i.e.
the past perfect tense.
We also need to warn you at this level also that ‘Le passé composé’ is used in French as the simple past in English.
A lot of Anglophone Students make the mistake of translating the tense as being perfect tense: J’ai été means I was but not I have been.
We would like to call your attention to the general rule we provided in Unit 9 which says that you add, the past participle of the verb we want to conjugate, to the present tense of the auxiliary avoir or être (as the case may be): - (Auxilliaire avoir ou être + participle passé du verbe concerné).
Before you start asking the question so as to know the rationale behind the choice of auxiliary to be used with one particular verb or the other, we decided to provide a possible solution to your ‘could be’ problem.
Please note that while we used auxilliary avoir for the verb manger, in Unit 9, the auxiliary être is what we will use for such verbs as aller, venir in this unit.
Although some grammarians came with some ‘academic jargons’ that could be used in deciding on this area of conjugation, this argument would be too bookish for our level.
We would thus want to suggest that the 90 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II following verbs when they are to be conjugated, should take auxiliary être: Aller (to go), descendre (to come down), rester (to rest), monter (to climb), tomber (to fall), naïtre (to be born), sortir (to go out), partir (to go) venir (to come), so also all other verbs that have something to do with venir like advenir, provenir, devenir etc, entrer (to enter), rentrer (to enter again), arriver (to come/arrive), retourner (to return).
Most other verbs, apart from these ones and their variants, are conjugated with auxiliary avoir.
The implication of this explanation here is that if there are well over twelve thousand verbs in French grammar and only about less than thirty of them are conjugated with auxiliary être, the easier method then is to memorise those verbs conjugated with auxiliary être so that you will know that any verb not in that category will be conjugated with auxiliary avoir.
If this new rule insists on your adding auxiliary être, conjugated into the présent de l’indicatif, to the past participle of the main verb, you then need to recollect your knowledge of conjugating the verb être into présent de l’indicatif: Etre Je suis Nous sommes Tu es Vous etes Il est Ils sont Elle est Elles sont Let us then follow this pattern and the rules governing it to conjugate the verb aller into passé composé: ex: aller - to go Je suis allé(e) Nous sommes allé(e)s Tu es allé(e) Vous etes allé(e)s Il est allé Ils sont allés Elle est allé(e) Elles sont allées 91 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II NOTE: You would have noted that additional vowel e or consonant s or both es are added to the ending of some past participle when we used the auxiliary être.
The French grammatical rules compel all the verbs that take auxiliary être to agree with gender and the number of the Subject (either pronoun or noun) that precedes it.
These agreement rules shall be explained to you better in Unit twelve.
13.1 TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF ER VERBS WITH AUXILIARY ETRE INTO PASSÉ COMPOSÉ To form the past participle of all er verbs is easy; just like you were taught in Unit 9, you drop the r at the end of the infinitive and put an acute accent (/) on the final ‘é’.
Monter becomes Monté.
It is this past participle that you precede with the personal pronoun and the auxiliary être in order to form your passé composé.
You can see examples in er verbs such as: (a) Monter - to climb Je suis monté(e) (I climbed) Tu es monté(e) (You climbed) Il est monté (He climbed) Elle est monté(e) (She climbed) Nous sommes monté(e)s (We climbed) Vous etes monté(e)s (You climbed) Ils sont montés (They climbed) Elles sont montées (They climbed) {Er verbs such as Aller (to go), rester (to rest), tomber (to fall), retomber (to fall again), entrer (to enter), rentrer (to enter again), arriver (to come/arrive), retourner (to return) are conjugated following this pattern.
13.2 TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF RE VERBS WITH AUXILIARY ETRE INTO PASSÉ COMPOSÉ As we told you in Unit nine, majority of verbs in this category form their past participle by replacing the re ending by t or s. But some irregular verbs 92 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II such as naître has né as its past participle.
You could note that this grouping of verb is not common in the category of verbs that take auxiliary être, that is why we will provide you with the past participle of all the verbs of this category that take auxiliary être.
Example could be seen in descendre whose past participle is descendu.
(a) Descendre - (to come down) Je suis descendu(e) (I came down) Tu es descendu(e) (You came down) Il est descendu (He came down) Elle est descendu(e) (She came down) Nous sommes descendu(e)s (We came down) Vous etes descendu(e)s (You came down) Ils sont descendus (They came down) Elles sont descendues (They came down) 13.3 TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF IR/OIR VERBS WITH AUXILIARY ETRE INTO PASSÉ COMPOSÉ Like we told you in Unit nine, majority of verbs, apart from the er verbs are irregular, this irregularity also affects the formation of their past participle.
As Sortir has Sorti, partially following the er verbs pattern to form its past participle, the same could not be said of venir whose past participle is venu.
You are then advised to learn the irregular past participle as you acquire your vocabularies.
(a) Sortir - to go out Je suis sorti(e) (I went out) Tu es sorti(e) (You went out) Il est sorti (He went out) Elle est sorti(e) (She went out) Nous sommes sorti(e)s (We went out) 93 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Vous etes sorti(e)s (You went out) Ils sont sortis (They went out) Elles sont sorties (They went out) {Ir verbs such as sortir (to go out), ressortir (to go out again), partir (to go), repartir (to go again) are conjugated following this pattern.
(b) Venir - to come Je suis venu(e) (I came) Tu es venu(e) (You came) Il est venu (He came) Elle est venu(e) (She came) Nous sommes venu(e)s (We came) Vous etes venu(e)s (You came) Ils sont venus (They came) Elles sont venues (They came) {Ir verbs such as venir (to come), so also all other verbs that have something to do with venir like advenir, provenir, devenir etc, are conjugated following this pattern.
3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into passé compose: Partir, Retourner.
(i) Verbe “Partir au Passé Composé” Je suis Partie(e) Nous sommes Parti(e)s Tu es Parti(e) Vous êtes Parti(e)s il est Parti ils sont Partis elle est Partie Elles sont Parties (2) Verbe “Retourner au Passé” Je suis retourné(e) Nous sommes retourné(e)s Tu es retourné(e) Vous êtes retourné(e)s 94 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II il est retourné ils sont retournés Elle est retournée Elles sont retournés 22.0 CONCLUSION You have been taught, in this unit, the rules governing the conjugation of verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
You have also been told of how to form the auxiliary être as well as how to identify the past participle of er, re ir and oir verbs.
We believe by now you can conjugate most verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
23.0 SUMMARY With the solid foundation for the teaching of conjugations through the simplified presentation of conjugation of présent de l’indicatif that we have laid for you in Units two to five and the techniques of conjugation of future simple that we methodically handled in Unit six to eight as well as the method of conjugation verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé compose that we taught in Unit nine, this Unit ten has gone further in the conjugation techniques by tackling the conjugation verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
24.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 11.
Conjugate the following verbs into passé composé: a. Venir, b. Aller, c. Retomber, d. Rentrer, e. Partir, f. Resortir, g. Retourner, h. Renaître, i. Devenir, j. Descendre.
25.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
95 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
96 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT ELEVEN CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL AND REFLEXIVE VERBS INTO PASSE COMPOSE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of Impersonal verbs into passé composé 3.1.
General techniques guiding the Conjugation of Reflexive verbs into passé composé 3.2.
Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught the technique of conjugation of Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into passé composé.
You will also learn about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into passé composé.
Like we said it in Units five and eight, these impersonal, as well as Reflexive verbs are common in French language.
You will see them as either er, re, ir or even oir verbs.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units two to ten will be useful in this unit.
What we will do mostly in this unit is to teach you the peculiarities of these verbs so that you could apply your already gained knowledge in the passé composé conjugation of simple er, re, ir and oir verbs to them thus conjugating them correctly.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the 97 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into passé composé as they will be taught here.
14.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the French Impersonal verbs.
• Identify the French Reflexive verbs • Explain the peculiarities of these two verbs.
• Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these two verbs into passé composé .
You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of irregular verbs into ‘passé composé’.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL VERBS INTO PASSE COMPOSE As we have told you in Units five and eight, Impersonal verbs are verbs that could not be conjugated into numerous persons and classes, such as first, second, third persons, singular and plural form, like the others.
They are verbs that could not be used for human beings.
And being that they are for abstract things, they could only be conjugated into the 3rd person singular form.
Even their conjugation into the third person singular form is limited to masculine personal pronoun, il, alone.
This explanation is to warn you that you cannot use the third person singular of feminine form to conjugate it!
We would like to note also that it is not every other verb that you can conjugate using this method.
This type of conjugation is only noted for impersonal verbs alone!
When you want to conjugate this type of verbs to passé composé then, you should apply the passé composé rules as applicable to verbs with auxiliary avoir or être at the third person singular 98 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II level only.
The passé composé rules for this type of verbs could then be modified as follow: Third person singular of auxiliary avoir or être plus the past participle of the verb concerned.
The implication of this rule is that there are some of these verbs that are either conjugated with auxiliary avoir while very few others are conjugated with auxiliary etre.
The venir oriented verbs as well as impersonal reflexive verbs in this category, such as advenir and s’agir (de) respectively, are conjugated with auxiliary être, while a lot of other impersonal verbs are conjugated with auxiliary avoir.
Examples could be found in: (m) Pleuvoir – to rain Il a plu (n) Falloir – to be necessary Il a fallu (o) Advenir – to happen Il est advenu (p) S’agir de – to be about Il s’est agi de (q) Brûmer – to mist (hazy) Il a brumé (r) Venter – to blow wind Il a venté 3.1 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF REFLEXIVE OR PRONOMINAL VERBS INTO PASSE COMPOSE 99 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Just like we explained in Units five and eight, the Reflexive verbs are what the French grammarian call “Les verbes pronominaux’ hence our calling them reflexive or pronominal verbs in English so as to facilitate the ease of reference for French learners like you.
Reflexive or pronominal verbs are verbs used to refer to an action that the subject does to himself/herself.
In a situation whereby you want account for an action that you do to yourself or the action that another person does to himself or herself, you express this action through the use of reflexive or pronominal verbs in French grammar.
In order to conjugate these verbs into passé composé, this set of verbs takes additional (direct/personal) pronoun in their conjugation.
The pronouns me te se nous vous and se are used to mark this action of reflexive or pronominal of the verbs.
The passé composé rules are then applicable to these doubled pronouns.
As for the passé composé rules as applicable to reflexive verbs, the rule allows all reflexive verbs to be conjugated with only auxiliary être.
The passé composé rules for this type of verbs could then be modified as follow: auxiliary être that is preceded by the two personal pronouns plus the past participle of the verb concerned.
For example, if the subject or the speaker wants to say that I bathed myself, he would say: Je me suis lavé(e).
NOTE: You should please note that apart from the introduction of another reflexive pronoun of the same person and grammatical class with that of the subject (personal pronoun) that you will insert so as to denote that action of reflexive in the sentence, you will be expected to bring into use also your knowledge of conjugation of er, re, ir, oir into passé composé that you have acquired in Units nine and ten.
(j) Se laver – to take ones bath Je me suis lavé(e) – I bathed myself 100 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Tu t’es lavé(e) – You bathed yourself Il s’est lavé – He bathed himself Elle s’est lavée – She bathed herself Nous nous sommes lavé(e)s – we bathed ourselves Vous vous êtes lavé(e)s – you bathed yourselves Ils se sont lavés – They bathed themselves Elles se sont lavées – They bathed themselves (k) Se taire – to keep quiet Je me suis tu(e) – I kept quiet.
Tu t’es tu(e) – You kept quiet.
Il s’est tu – He kept quiet.
Elle s’est tue – She kept quiet.
Nous nous sommes tu(e)s – we kept quiet.
Vous vous êtes tu(e)s – you kept quiet.
Ils se sont tus – They kept quiet.
Elles se sont tues – They kept quiet.
(l) Se convertir – to convert oneself Je me suis converti(e) – I converted myself Tu t’es converti(e) – You converted yourself Il s’est converti – He converted himself Elle s’est convertie – She converted herself Nous nous sommes converti(e)s – we converted ourselves Vous vous êtes converti(e)s – you converted yourselves Ils se sont convertis – They converted themselves Elles se sont converties – They converted themselves (m) S’asseoir – to take ones seat 101 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Je me suis assis(e) – I sat down Tu t’es assis(e) – You sat down Il s’est assis – He sat down Elle s’est assise – She sat down Nous nous sommes assis(e)s – we sat down Vous vous êtes assis(e)s – you sat down Ils se sont assiss – They sat down Elles se sont assises – They sat down (n) S’appeler – to call oneself Je me suis appelé(e) – I was called/ I called myself Tu t’es appelé(e) – You were called/ you called yourself Il s’est appelé – He was called/ He called himself Elle s’est appelée – She was called/ She called herself Nous nous sommes appelé(e)s – we were called/ We called ourselves Vous vous êtes appelé(e)s – You were called/ You called yourselves Ils se sont appelés – They were called/ They called themselves Elles se sont appelées – They were called/ They called themselves 3.2 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into passé composé: Se voir, venter (1) Verbe “Retourner au Passé composé ” Je me suis vu(e) Nous nous sommes vu(e)s Tu t’es vu(e) Vous vous êtes vu(e)s il s’est vu ils se sont vus Elle s’est vue Elles se sont vues (2) Verbe “Venter au Passé composé ” Il a venté 102 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 24.0 CONCLUSION You have been taught, in this unit, the rules governing the conjugation of Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into ‘passé composé’.
As you should have discovered, the impersonal verb is a verb that you can only conjugate with third person masculine pronoun of passé composé thus making the verb to refer to inanimate things that are not human beings.
You have been taught also that the passé composé of reflexive verb refers to an action that the subject did to himself.
With the method and technique that we simplified the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding the passé composé form of impersonal and reflexive verbs, which would have been a problem to French learners like you would have been alleviated.
By now we believe you can conjugate impersonal and reflexive verbs into passé composé in French.
25.0 SUMMARY With this unit tackling the conjugation of impersonal and reflexive verbs into passé composé, we have completed the cycle of conjugation of verbs into passé composé in French.
What is left now is to teach the agreement rules of the passé composé .
This is what we will tackle well in Unit twelve.
Having gone this far in the conjugation of verbs into ‘passé composé’, we are sure that you must have been adequately informed in all these eleven units on the basic techniques of how to conjugate different verbs into ‘présent de l’indicatif’, futur simple and the passé composé.
26.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 12.
Conjugate the following verbs into passé composé: 103 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II a. Advenir, b.
Se voir, c. Se taire, d. S’offrir, e. falloir, f. pleuvoir, g. venter, h. S’agir, i.
Se lever, j.
Se comprendre.
27.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
104 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT TWELVE CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL AND REFLEXIVE VERBS INTO PASSE COMPOSE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Agreement of passé composé 3.1 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught the technique of the Agreement of passé compose.
You will also learn about the techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in identifying areas that need the Agreement of passé composé in French grammar.
You will recall that we introduced you into the world of conjugation of verbs into passé composé in Unit 9 where we initiated you into the method of conjugation of verbs with auxiliary avoir into passé compose.
In Unit 10 we also taught you the method of conjugation of verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé.
In this Unit, we would like to teach you about the Agreement of passé composé in French grammar.
Just like we explained to you in Units nine and ten, any action that has been done in the past, before the time that you are reporting the action, is expressed in French through passé composé.
A passé composé tense 105 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II expresses an action that has been done and concluded a second, a minute, an hour, a day, a week, a month, a year or even a decade in the past before the time the speaker is reporting it.
In as much as we will be talking on the agreement of passé composé here, it is a methodical development on various conjugations of verbs that you have learned.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units two to eleven will also be useful in this unit.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of properly according the agreement rules of passé composé of French grammar as they will be taught here.
15.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the grammatical level of French passé composé that needs agreement.
• Identify the French lexical items with which the agreement could be accorded.
• Effectively accord these agreements correctly.
You are now invited to follow the method of according the agreement of ‘passé composé’ in French grammar.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE AGREEMENT OF PASSE COMPOSE Like we said in Units nine to eleven as well as our introduction to this unit, we use passé composé to express actions that are done in the past, any action that has been done in the past, before the time that you are reporting the action.
It is a tense that expresses an action that has been done and 106 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II concluded a second, a minute, an hour, a day, a week, a month, a year or even a decade in the past before the time the speaker is reporting it Conjugation of passé composé is different from that of the conjugations of présent de l’indicatif and future simple whereby their conjugation centres on the single major verb.
The conjugation of verbs into passé composé entails the usage of an auxiliary and the past participle of the main verb.
It is the combination of this auxiliary and the main verb that gives the tense its name: passé composé.
Composé is a French word that means compounded, that contains more than one linguistic element.
Passé composé could thus be literally translated as compound past that relates past actions/tense i.e.
the past perfect tense.
The general rule we provided in Units 9 and ten says that you add, the past participle of the verb we want to conjugate, to the present tense of the auxiliary avoir or être (as the case may be): - (Auxilliaire avoir ou être + participle passé du verbe concerné).
We also explained the rationale behind the choice of auxiliary to be used with one particular verb or the other by providing a possible solution to your ‘could be’ problem by saying that the following verbs when they are to be conjugated, should take auxiliary être: Aller (to go), descendre (to come down), rester (to rest), monter (to climb), tomber (to fall), naïtre (to be born), sortir (to go out), partir (to go) venir (to come), so also all other verbs that have something to do with venir like advenir, provenir, devenir etc, entrer (to enter), rentrer (to enter again), arriver (to come/arrive), retourner (to return).
Most other verbs, apart from these ones and their variants, are conjugated with auxiliary avoir.
We also alerted that you would have noted that additional vowel e or consonant s or both es are added to the ending of some past participle when we used the auxiliary être.
We tried to explain then that the French 107 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II grammatical rules compel all the verbs that take auxiliary être to agree with gender and the number of the Subject (either pronoun or noun) that precedes it.
It is the combination of these agreement rules that we would like to teach in this unit: AGREEMENT OF PASSE COMPOSE 1.
There must be no agreemet in between the subject and the past participle if the auxiliary avoir is used in a direct and simple sentence: - J’ai mangé de la viande.
2.
But in a situation where the compliment of the direct object comes before the verb that has avoir as its auxiliary verb, the past participle of this main verb must agree in gender and in number with the object.
The feminine object therefore introduces an additional e to the ending of the past participle while the plurality is marked by an additional s (if it is masculine plural) or additional es (if it is feminine plural): ----- La viande que j’ai mangée.
----- Les livres que vous m’avez donnés.
----- j’ai vu des filles.
(cid:1) Je les ai vues.
3.
When an auxiliary être is used, the past participle must agree in gender and in number with the subject.
The feminine subject introduces an additional e to the ending of the past participle while the plurality is marked by an additional s (if it is masculine plural) or additional es (if it is feminine plural): --- Il est parti.
(cid:1) Elle est partie.
--- Elles sont sorties.
(cid:1)Ils sont sortis.
--- Nous sommes sorti(e)s. 108 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 4.
Pronominal or reflexive verbs will agree in gender and in number if the reflexive pronoun used with the verb has its antecedent in the (main) subject thus referring to the subject also: --- Yetunde s’est lavée.
--- Nous nous sommes lave(e)s. 5.
But there will be no agreement if the action is not referring to the subject but to a direct object placed after the past participle of the sentence: ---- Elle s’est lavé la main.
---- Elles se sont lavé les vêtements.
6.
In a situation where the compliment of direct object ‘en’ comes before the auxiliary avoir there will be no accord: ---- Les hommes célèbres, j’en ai connu.
7.
The past participle of the verb faire (fait) followed by an infinitive does not agree in gender and in number with the subject, nor with the object: ---- Je les ai fait comprendre 8.
The past participle of verbs like couru, coûté, valu are invariable when they are used in their real sense but they agree in gender and in number when they are used in a figurative sense: --- Les cinq Naira que ce pantalon m’a coûté.
--- Les efforts que ce travail m’a coûtés.
--- Combien de Kilomètres avez-vous couru avant de le rattraper?
--- Combien de commissions avez-vous courues pour le Président?
--- Ce sont les dix Naira que ce travail a valu.
--- Vous pensez que ma vie n’a value que celle de chien?
109 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 3.1 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Rewrite the following sentences by conjugating the verbs in the them into passé composé thus laying emphasis on the agreement (accord) where necessary.
1 les branches (rayer) ma voiture.
– 2. ils (bondir) de joie lorsqu’ils (savoir) leur note.
– 3. j’(commencer) à réaliser un herbier.
– 4. mes grands-parents (aller) en Iran ; ils m’(rapporter) un vase craquelé.
– 5. l’équipe de France (triompher) en demi-finale.
Possible answer : 1 les branches ont rayé ma voiture.
– 2. ils ont bondi de joie lorsqu’ils ont su leur note.
– 3. j’ai commencé à réaliser un herbier.
– 4. mes grands- parents sont allés en Iran ; ils m’ont rapporté un vase craquelé.
– 5.
L’équipe de France a triomphé en demi-finale.
26.0 CONCLUSION You have been taught, in this unit, the rules governing the agreement of passé composé.
You have also been told of how to recognize the sentences that need the grammatical agreement of passé composé.
We believe by now you can accord the agreement rules of passé composé.
27.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the conjugations of verbs through the simplified presentation of conjugation of présent de l’indicatif that we have laid for you in Units two to five and the techniques of conjugation of future simple that we methodically handled in Unit six to eight as well as the method of conjugation verbs with auxiliaries avoir and être into passé compose that we taught in Units nine to eleven, this Unit twelve has gone further in the conjugation techniques by tackling the agreement of passé composé.
We believe by now that you can accord the agreement when you stumble on them in French language structure.
110 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 28.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 13.
Accord the passé compose to these sentences where necessary: a. Fatima a mangé de la viande.
b. Voila la viande que Fatima a mangé.
c. Funsho et Yetunde se sont lavé.
d. Ils se sont lavé les vêtements.
e. Les femmes célèbres, j’en ai connu.
f. Olu les a fait comprendre.
g. Les dix Naira que cette chemise m’a coûté.
h. Les efforts que ce travail m’a coûté.
i. Combien de Kilomètres as-tu couru avant de le rattraper?
j. Combien de commissions as-tu couru pour le Président?
29.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
111 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT THIRTEN CONJUGATION OF ER AND OTHER REGULAR VERBS INTO L’IMPARFAIT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of er and other regular verbs to L’imparfait.
3.1 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught the method of conjugation of er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait.
We hope to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait.
You will recall that in the last twelve units we have been talking of conjugation of verbs into présent de l’indicatif, futur simple and passé composé.
The significance of that is that we have been teaching you how to conjugate French verbs to express actions that one is doing at present, doing in the future and one is doing in past.
We have now got to a stage whereby you have to learn how to express actions that we do in the past but in a continuous manner: what one has the habit of doing in the past.
L’imparfait could be translated as past continuous tense in English.
It is used to express any action that is done in the past but in a continuous manner.
We implore you to learn the 112 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait of French grammar as they will be taught here.
16.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify l’imparfait Stem/Radical of er verbs • Identify the l’imparfait er ending/terminaison of er verbs • identify the l’imparfait morphemes (suffixation) with which the endings could be replaced thus facilitating grammatically correct conjugation l’imparfait tense • Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these verbs.
You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF ER AND OTHER REGULAR VERBS INTO L’IMPARFAIT Like we have told you in our introduction to this unit, l’imparfait could be translated as past continuous tense in English.
We use it to express any action that is done in a past continuous manner or that one has the habit of doing in the past.
When you want to talk about what you have done or what you usually do in the past, you are to express yourself in l’imparfait tense in French grammar.
Just like in the conjugation of présent de l’indicatif, there are slight differences in the conjugation of this tense to different types of verbal groupings.
It is in realization of these dissimilarities in their conjugation that we decided to teach the conjugation er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait in this unit.
113 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II To conjugate er and other regular verbs, such as parler, into l’imparfait, you should identify the infinitive of the verb concerned (e.g.
parler), you should also know how the verb is conjugated into présent de l’indicatif.
It is at the level of the 1st person plural (nous) of the said conjugation that you will pick the stem of the verb concerned (parl).
You then drop its usual ons ending, added to it before, so as to add the following endings (ais, ais, ait, ions, iez, aient) to this new special stem/radical: ais for 1st person singular ais for 2nd person singular ait for 3rd person singular ions for 1st person plural iez for 2nd person plural aient for 3rd person plural Parler - Nous parl/ons Je parlais (I was speaking) Tu parlais (You were speaking) Il/Elle parlait (He/She was speaking) Nous parlions (We were speaking) Vous parliez (You were speaking) Ils/Elles parlaient (They were speaking) Manger - Nous mange/ons Je mangeais (I was eating) Tu mangeais (You were eating) Il/Elle mangeait (He/She was eating) Nous mangions (We were eating) Vous mangiez (You were eating) Ils/Elles mangeaient (They were eating) 114 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (NOTE: We dropped the vowel e before i in the 1st and 2nd person plural forms because the vowel i could perform the same function of softening the ‘g’ as does by the vowel e).
Let us then follow these patterns to conjugate some er verbs into the l’imperfait: a. Nager - to swim ais for 1st person singular = Je nageais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu nageais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle nageait ions for 1st person plural = Nous nagions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous nagiez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles nageaient b. Commencer ais for 1st person singular = Je commençais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu commençais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle commençait ions for 1st person plural = Nous commençions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous commençiez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles commençaient c. Aimer ais for 1st person singular = J’aimais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu aimais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle aimait ions for 1st person plural = Nous aimions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous aimiez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles aimaient 115 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II d. Appeler ais for 1st person singular = J’appelais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu appelais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle appelait ions for 1st person plural = Nous appelions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous appeliez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles appelaient 3.1 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into “L’imparfait”.
a) Renvoyer (b) Blaguer (c ) Parler.
1) Verbe “ Renvoyer á l’imparfait”.
Je revoyais Nous renvoyions Tu renvoyais Vous renvoyiez il/Elle renvoyait ils/Elles renvoyaient (2) Verbe “ blaguer á l’imparfait” Je blaguais Nous blaguions Tu blaguais Vous blaguiez il/Elle blaguait ils/Elles blaguaient (3) Verbe “Parler á l’imparfait” Je parlais Nous Parlions Tu Parlais Vous Parliez il/ Elle Parlait ils/ Elles Parlaient 28.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught you the rules governing the conjugation of er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait.
You have also been told how to get the special stem/radical with which you could conjugate this tense.
We 116 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II believe by now you can conjugate er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait.
29.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the conjugations of verbs through the simplified presentation of conjugation of présent de l’indicatif that we have laid for you in Units two to five and the techniques of conjugation of future simple that we methodically handled in Unit six to eight as well as the method of conjugation of verbs into passé compose that we taught in Units nine to eleven, this Unit thirteen has gone further in the conjugation techniques by introducing you into the world of conjugation of l’imparfait in French grammar.
30.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 14.
Conjugate the following verbs into l’imparfait: a. Aller, b. Rudoyer, c. Monter, d. Nager, e. Recommencer, f. Renvoyer 31.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
117 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT FOURTEEN CONJUGATION OF IRREGULAR VERBS INTO L’IMPARFAIT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of irregular verbs to l’imparfait 3.1.
Conjugation of re verbs to l’imparfait 3.2.
Conjugation of ir/oir verbs to l’imparfait.
3.3.
Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall that in Unit Thirteen, we taught you the method of conjugation of er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait.
In this unit, you will be taught how to conjugate other irregular verbs into l’imparfait.. Like we did in the previous unit, we hope to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French irregular verbs into l’imparfait.. Like we told you in Unit thirteen, we have now got to a stage whereby you have to learn how to express actions that we do in the past but in a continuous manner: what one has the habit of doing in the past.
l’imparfait could be translated as past continuous tense in English.
It is used to express any action that is done in the past but in a continuous manner.
We then 118 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating ir and other irregular verbs into l’imparfait of French grammar as they will be taught here.
17.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the l’imparfait Stem/Radical of the irregular verbs • Identify the l’imparfait ending/terminaison of irregular verbs • identify the l’imparfait morphemes (suffixation) with which the endings could be replaced thus facilitating grammatically correct conjugation l’imparfait tense • Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these irregular verbs.
You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of irregular verbs into l’imparfait.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF RE AND OTHER REGULAR VERBS INTO L’IMPARFAIT Like we have told you in unit thirteen, l’imparfait could be translated as past continuous tense in English.
We use it to express any action that is done in a past continuous manner or that one has the habit of doing in the past.
When you want to talk about what you have done or what you usually do in the past, you are to express yourself in l’imparfait tense in French grammar.
You will recall that in Unit thirteen, we have treated how to conjugate er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait.
If you recall very well in our Unit One where we told you that verbs in French language could be divided into three groups according to their endings.
And if we have treated the conjugation of er and other regular verbs into l’imparfait in Unit thirteen, 119 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II the onus is then on us in this unit to treat the conjugation of re, ir/oir into l’imparfait.
It is the combination of verbs with re, ir/oir endings that we put together to be treated as irregular verbs in this unit.
3.1 CONJUGATION OF RE VERBS INTO L’IMPARFAIT Just like we said in Unit thirteen, when you want to conjugate re and other irregular verbs into l’imparfait, you should identify the infinitive of the verb concerned, you should also know how the verb is conjugated into présent de l’indicatif.
It is at the level of the 1st person plural (nous) of the said conjugation that you will pick the stem of the verb concerned.
You then drop its usual ons ending, added to it before, so as to add the following endings (ais, ais, ait, ions, iez, aient) to this new special stem/radical: ais for 1st person singular ais for 2nd person singular ait for 3rd person singular ions for 1st person plural iez for 2nd person plural aient for 3rd person plural Prendre = Nous pren/ons Je prenais (I was taking) Tu prenais (You were taking) Il/Elle prenait (He was taking) Nous prenions (We were taking) Vous preniez (You were taking) Ils/Elles prenaient (They were taking) 120 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Let us then follow these patterns to conjugate some re verbs into the l’imparfait: a. Battre (to beat) = Nous batt/ons ais for 1st person singular = Je battais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu battais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle battait ions for 1st person plural = Nous battions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous battiez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles battaient (Conjugation of débattre, combattre, mettre, soumettre, etc, follow this pattern.)
b. Craindre (to be afraid/to fear) ais for 1st person singular = Je craignais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu craignais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle craignait ions for 1st person plural = Nous craignions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous craigniez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles craignaient (Conjugation of joindre, peindre, plaindre, contraindre, etc, follow this pattern.)
c. Convaincre (to convince) ais for 1st person singular = Je convainquais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu convainquais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle convainquait ions for 1st person plural = Nous convainquions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous convainquiez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles convainquaient 121 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (Conjugation of vaincre etc, follow this pattern.)
d. Faire (to do/to make) ais for 1st person singular = Je faisais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu faisais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle faisait ions for 1st person plural = Nous faisions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous faisiez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles faisaient (Conjugation of défaire, refaire etc, follow this pattern.)
e. Etre (to be) ais for 1st person singular = J’étais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu étais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle était ions for 1st person plural = Nous étions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous étiez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles étaient (NOTE : We would like you to note that être is the only Known verb that does not follow this general rule of conjugation into l’imparfait.)
3.2 CONJUGATION OF IR/OIR VERBS INTO L’IMPARFAIT Just like we said above, when you want to conjugate ir and other oir verbs into l’imparfait, you should identify the infinitive of the verb concerned, you should also know how the verb is conjugated into présent de l’indicatif.
It is at the level of the 1st person plural (nous) of the said conjugation that you will pick the stem of the verb concerned.
You then drop its usual ons ending, added to it before, so as to add the following endings (ais, ais, ait, ions, iez, aient) to this new special stem/radical: 122 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II a. Finir (to finish) = Nous finiss/ons ais for 1st person singular = Je finissais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu finissais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle finissait ions for 1st person plural = Nous finissions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous finissiez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles finissaient b. Tenir (to finish) = Nous ten/ons ais for 1st person singular = Je tenais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu tenais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle tenait ions for 1st person plural = Nous tenions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous teniez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles tenaient (Conjugation of most ir verbs such as venir, sentir, vêtir etc, follow this pattern.)
c. Avoir (to have) = Nous av/ons ais for 1st person singular = J’avais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu avais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle avait ions for 1st person plural = Nous avions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous aviez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles avaient d. Voir (to have) = Nous voy/ons ais for 1st person singular = Je voyais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu voyais 123 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle voyait ions for 1st person plural = Nous voyions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous voyiez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles voyaient e. Devoir (to be obliged/ compelled) = Nous dev/ons ais for 1st person singular = Je devais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu devais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle devait ions for 1st person plural = Nous devions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous deviez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles devaient 3.3 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into “L’imparfait”.
a) Prendre, b) Courir, c) savoir (1) Je Prenais Nous Prenions Tu Prenais Vous Preniez il /Elle Prenait ils/Elles Prenaient (2) Verbe Courir à l’imparfait Je courrais Nous Courrions Tu Courrais Vous courriez il /Elle Courrait ils/Elles Courraient (3) Verbe tenir á l’imparfait Je Savais Nous Savions Tu Savais Vous Saviez Il /Elle Savait ils/Elles Savaient 30.0 CONCLUSION 124 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II In this unit, we have taught you the rules governing the conjugation of re and other irregular verbs into l’imperfait.
You have also been told how to get the special stem/radical with which you could conjugate this tense.
We believe by now you can conjugate re and other irregular verbs into l’imperfait.
31.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the conjugations of verbs through the simplified presentation of conjugation of présent de l’indicatif that we have laid for you in Units two to five and the techniques of conjugation of future simple that we methodically handled in Unit six to eight as well as the method of conjugation of verbs into passé compose that we taught in Units nine to eleven, this Unit fourteen has gone further in the conjugation techniques by introducing you into the method of conjugation of ir and other irregular verbs into l’imperfait in French grammar.
32.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 15.
Conjugate the following verbs into l’imparfait: a. savoir, b. venir, c. courir, d. offrir, e. partir, f. finir, g. sortir, h. pouvoir, i. valoir, j. tenir.
33.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
125 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT FIFTEEN CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL AND REFLEXIVE VERBS INTO L’IMPARFAIT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of Impersonal verbs into L’imparfait 3.1.
General techniques guiding the Conjugation of Reflexive verbs into L’imparfait 3.2.
Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will present to you the technique of conjugation of Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into l’imparfait.
In this unit, you will learn about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into l’imparfait.
Like we told you in Unit five, these impersonal, as well as Reflexive verbs are common in French language.
You will see them as either er, re, ir or even oir verbs.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units five to fourteen will be useful in this unit.
What you will do mostly in this unit is to identify French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs, then apply the peculiarities of these verbs so that you could apply your already gained knowledge in the conjugation of l’imparfait of er, re, ir and oir verbs to them thus conjugating them correctly.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and 126 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II methods of conjugating French Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into l’imparfait as they will be taught here.
18.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the French Impersonal verbs.
• Identify the French Reflexive verbs • Explain the peculiarities of these two verbs.
• Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these two verbs into l’imparfait.
You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of Impersonal and reflexive verbs into ‘l’imparfait’.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL VERBS INTO L’IMPARFAIT Just like we told you in Unit five, Impersonal verbs are verbs that could not be conjugated into numerous persons and classes, such as first, second, third persons, singular and plural form, like the others.
They are verbs that could not be used for human beings.
And being that they are for abstract things, they could only be conjugated into the 3rd person singular form.
Even their conjugation into the third person singular form is limited to masculine personal pronoun, il, alone.
We insist that this explanation is to warn you that you cannot use the third person singular of feminine form to conjugate it!
We would like to note also that it is not every other verb that you can conjugate using this method.
This type of conjugation is only noted for impersonal verbs alone.
Examples could be found in: (s) Pleuvoir – to rain Il pleuvait 127 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (t) Falloir – to be necessary Il fallait (u) Advenir – to happen Il advenait (v) S’agir de – to be about Il s’agissait de (w) Brûmer – to mist (hazy) Il brumait (x) Venter – to blow wind Il ventait 3.1 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF REFLEXIVE OR PRONOMINAL VERBS INTO L’IMPARFAIT Like we said in Unit five, Reflexive verbs are what the French grammarian call “Les verbes pronominaux’ hence our calling them reflexive or pronominal verbs in English so as to facilitate the ease of reference for French learners like you.
Reflexive or pronominal verbs are verbs used to refer to an action that the subject does to himself/herself.
In a situation whereby you want account for an action that you do to yourself or the action that another person does to himself or herself, you express this action through the use of reflexive or pronominal verbs in French grammar.
In order to conjugate these verbs into l’imparfait, this set of verbs takes additional (direct/personal) pronoun in their conjugation.
The pronouns me te se nous vous and se are used to mark this action of reflexive or 128 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II pronominal of the verbs.
We then add l’imparfait ending to the main verb, as explained in Units 13 and 14.
For example, if the subject or the speaker wants to say that I was bathing myself, he would say: Je me lavais.
NOTE: We would like you to note that in the normal conjugation of the infinitive laver into l’imparfait, you are to conjugate it as Je lavais …….
(meaning I was washing …..…) But in the case of reflexive or pronominal action whereby you want to say that you perform the action to yourself, another reflexive pronoun of the same person and grammatical class with that of the subject (personal pronoun) will be inserted to denote that action of reflexive in the sentence, hence the inclusion of the reflexive pronoun, me, in the given example.
(o) Se laver – to take ones bath Je me lavais – I was bathing myself Tu te lavais – You were bathing yourself Il/elle se lavait – he/she was bathing himself/herself Nous nous lavions – we were bathing ourselves Vous vous laviez – you were bathing yourselves Ils se lavaient – They were bathing themselves (p) Se taire – to keep quiet Je me taisais – I was keeping quiet Tu te taisait – You were keeping quiet Il/elle se tait – he/she was keeping quiet Nous nous taisions – we were keeping quiet Vous vous taisiez – you were keeping quiet Ils se taisaient – They were keeping quiet (q) Se convertir – to convert oneself Je me convertissais – I was converting myself Tu te convertissais – You were converting yourself 129 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Il/elle se convertisait – he/she was converting himself/herself Nous nous convertissions – we were converting ourselves Vous vous convertissiez – you were converting yourselves Ils se convertissaient – They were converting themselves (r) S’asseoir – to take ones seat Je m’assoyais – I was sitting down/taking my seat Tu t’assoyais – You were sitting down/ taking your seat Il/elle s’assoyait – he/she was sitting down/ taking him/her seat Nous nous assoyions – we were sitting down/ taking our seat Vous vous assoyiez – you were sitting down/ taking your seat Ils s’assoyaient – They were sitting down/ taking their seat Or (g) S’asseoir – to take ones seat Je m’assieds – I was sitting down/ taking my seat Tu t’assieds – You were sitting down/ taking your seat Il/elle s’assied – he/she was sitting down/ taking him/her seat Nous nous asseyons – we were sitting down/ taking our seat Vous vous asseyez – you were sitting down/ taking your seat Ils s’asseyent – They were sitting down/ taking their seat NOTE: We would like you to note that there are two grammatically accepted form of conjugation of the verb S’asseoir in French.
Which ever form you chose is correct.
(h) S’appeler – to call oneself Je m’appelais – I was calling myself (I wss called) Tu t’appelais – You were calling yourself Il/elle s’appelait – He/She was calling himself/herself Nous nous appelions – We were calling ourselves Vous vous appeliez – You were calling yourselves 130 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Ils/elles s’appelaient – They were calling themselves (NOTE: You should please not that the contraction in the conjugation of s’appeler comes as a result of the contact in-between the vowel e of pronouns me, te, se and the infinitive of the verb appeler that has initial vowel a.
3.2 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into “L’imparfait”.
a) S’offrir, b) Se lever, c) Brumer (1) Verbe “s’offrir á l’imparfait”.
Je m’offrais Nous nous offrions Tu t’offrais Vous vous offriez il/Elle s’offrait ils/Elles s’offraient (2) Verb “Se lever á l’imparfait” Je me levais Nous nous levions Tu te levais Vous vous leviez il/Elle se levait ils/Elles se levaient (3) Verb “ Brumer” il brumait 32.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the rules governing the conjugation of Impersonal and Reflexive verbs into ‘l’imparfait’.
As you should have discovered, the impersonal verb is a verb that you can only conjugate with third person masculine pronoun thus making the verb to refer to inanimate things that are not human beings.
You have been taught also that a reflexive verb refers to an action that the subject does to himself.
With the method 131 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II that we used in simplifying the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding the impersonal and reflexive verbs, which is a common problem to French learners like you would have been alleviated.
By now we believe you can conjugate impersonal and reflexive verbs into l’imparfait in French.
33.0 SUMMARY With this unit tackling the conjugation of impersonal and reflexive verbs into l’imparfait, we have completed the cycle of conjugation of verbs into l’imparfait in French.
In consonance with our general classification of verbs and what to expect in the course that we did in our Guide, we are now moving from simple conjugation to fairly complex ones.
But no matter their difficulties, the moment you read what has been taught earlier and you follow the step by step of our presentation, we believe you will easily catch up with whatever we are going to teach in subsequent units.
34.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 16.
Conjugate the following verbs into l’imparfait: a.
Se comprendre, b.
Se taire, c. Se voir, d. S’offrir, e. falloir, f. pleuvoir, g. venter, h. S’agir, i.
Se lever, j.
Se balancer.
35.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
132 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT SIXTEEN CONJUGATION OF VERBS INTO IMPERATIF PRESENT (POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE) TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of verbs into impératif présent (positive) 3.1 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of verbs into impératif présent (negative) 3.2 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the conjugation of all verbs into ‘impératif présent (positive and negative)’.
In this unit, you will read to know about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French verbs into ‘impératif présent (positive and negative)’.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate your properly into how to conjugate French verbs in the ‘impératif présent (positive and negative)’.
We would like to sound a warning that your better understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle other units we have taught earlier.
Therefore, we implore you to revise the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating all verbs as they were taught earlier so as to understand better this unit.
19.0 OBJECTIVES 133 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the Stem/Radical of all verbs • Identify the ending/terminaison that could be used in conjugating verbs into ‘impératif présent (positive and negative)’ • Demonstrate how various verbs could be conjugated into ‘impératif présent (positive and negative)’ You are now invited into the world of conjugation of verbs into ‘impératif présent (positive and negative)’.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF VERBS INTO IMPERATIF PRESENT (POSITIVE) The imperative is used in French, just like in English language, to give out command (order) to others.
It has only three forms.
You could form it by taking the present tense form of the 2nd person singular, 1st and 2nd persons plural of the verb concerned.
You will then eliminate the pronoun earlier attached to these conjugated verbs.
If the verb belongs to the er group, the rule compels us to drop the s ending the 2nd person singular.
Its rule is always called 2-1-2, meaning 2nd person sngular, 1st and 2nd persons plural.
Examples could be seen in Parler and Prendre: Parler: 2 parle!
Prendre: 2 prends!
1 parlons!
1 prenons!
2 Parlez!
2 prenez!
NOTE: In the case of irregular verbs, their imperative form is sometime borrowed from the subjunctive form: Etre savoir vouloir 2 sois 2 sache!
2 veuille (veux) 1 soyons 1 sachons!
1 voulons 2 soyez 2 sachez!
2 veillez (voulez) 134 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II NOTE: When you are dealing with the verb vouloir, you could either use the veuille/veillez or the veux/voulez (in brackets) option.
However, the 1st person plural form is homogenous for the two options.
In the case of reflexive verbs, apart from the application of this 2-1-2 rules to conjugate the verbs into positive imperative, we also add a personal pronoun in the Compliment of Direct Object (COD) class, of the same grammatical number and person of the verb concerned; as suffix to the verb concerned: moi, nous, vous.
e.g.
Se regarder S’appeler 2 regarde-moi!
2 appelle-moi!
1 regardons-nous!
1 appelons-nous!
2 regardez-vous!
2 appelez-vous!
3.1 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF VERBS INTO IMPERATIF PRESENT (POSITIVE) As said earlier, if the imperative is used in French, just like in English language, to give out command (order) to others, it must have the positive as well as the negative forms.
In as much as orders could be given positively in any natural language, so can it be given negatively.
Just like in the positive form, it has only three forms too.
You could also form it by taking the present tense form of the 2nd person singular, 1st and 2nd persons plural of the verb concerned.
You will then eliminate the pronoun earlier attached to these conjugated verbs.
If the verb belongs to the er group, the rule compels us to drop the s ending the 2nd person singular.
Its rule is always called 2-1-2, meaning 2nd person singular, 1st and 2nd persons plural.
The only difference that distinguishes positive from negative is the introduction of some adverbs of negation such as: ---- ne ……………….pas - not ---- ne ……………….point - not at all 135 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ---- ne ……………….nulle -not in any way ---- ne ……………….plus - no more ---- ne ……………….guère - hardly ---- ne ……………….jamais - never ---- ne ……………….rien - nothing ---- ne ……………….personne - nobody ---- ne ……………….que -only, not more than These negation adverbs are used to change a sentence into a negative form.
These adverbs are split ones; on splitting them into two, as indicated by the dotted lines, the necessary imperative verb in that sentence is thus inserted into the space provided in-between them (to replace the dotted lines in the middle) e.g.
Parler: 2 ne parle pas!
Prendre: 2 ne prends jamais!
1 ne parlons guère!
1 ne prenons nulle!
2 ne parlez point!
2 ne prenez rien!
2 ne sois là 2 ne veuille (veux) que 1 ne soyons personne 1 ne voulons pas 2 ne soyez que 2 ne veillez (voulez) rien 2 ne sache rien!
1 ne sachons que!
2 ne sachez guère!
We would like you to note also that in the case of reflexive verbs, if you want to conjugate them into negative imperative, apart from the application of this 2-1-2 rules, you will also add a personal pronoun (but not in the Compliment of Direct Object (COD) class this time around) of the same grammatical number and person of the verb concerned; me, nous, vous.
But instead of their coming at the end of 136 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II the verb as done in the positive categorization, these pronouns will come before the verb (immediately after the ne, the first part of the adverb of negation.
e.g.
Se regarder S’appeler 2 ne me regarde pas!
2 ne m’appelle plus!
1 ne nous regardons plus!
1 ne nous appelons pas!
2 ne vous regardez guère!
2 ne vous appelez jamais!
3.2 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into ‘l’impératif présent positif “first and then negatif.
a) Savoir, b) Se regarder.
(1) Verbe “Savoir à l’impératif positif et négatif” Sache !
Ne sache pas !
Sachons !
Ne sachons pas !
Sachez !
Ne sachez pas !
(2) Verbe “Se regarder à l’impératif positif et négatif ”.
Regarde-moi !
Ne me regarde pas !
Regardons-nous !
Ne nous regardons pas !
Regardez-vous !
Ne vous regardez point !
34.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned the rules governing the conjugation of ‘impératif présent’.
You have also discovered the positive form as well as negative form in the conjugation of some verbs in this category.
By now we believe you can conjugate different verbs ‘impératif présent (positive and negative)’.
137 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 35.0 SUMMARY You must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basic techniques of how to conjugate most verbs into ‘impératif présent’.
You must have learned also some peculiarities in the conjugation of the positive and the negative forms of these conjugations.
By now we believe that your verbal vocabulary and technique of conjugation of verbs should have been enriched through the explanation and examples of verbs we gave you under each classification.
And we believe that you can handle any conjugation of imperative, be it positive or negative, that comes your way.
36.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 17.
Conjugate the following verbs into ‘impératif présent positif first and then negatif’: a. Parler, b. Nager, c. Balayer, d. Lancer, e. Surlever, f. Célébrer, g. Monter, h. Rejeter, i. Payer, j. Blaguer.
37.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
138 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT SEVENTEEN CONJUGATION OF VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PRESENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of er verbs into conditionnel présent.
3.1.
Exceptionalities to these general rules as they affect the er verbs.
3.2 Conjugation of re verbs into conditionnel présent.
3.3 Conjugation of ir/oir verbs into conditionnel présent.
3.4 Conjugation of impersonal verbs into conditionnel présent.
3.5 Conjugation of reflexive verbs into conditionnel présent.
3.6 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught the method of conjugation of French verbs into conditionnel présent.
We hope to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French regular and other irregular verbs into conditionnel présent.
You will recall that in the last fifteen units we have been talking of conjugation of verbs into présent de l’indicatif, futur simple, passé compose, l’imperfait and imperatif (positive and negative).
The significance of that is that we have been teaching you how to conjugate French verbs to express actions 139 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II that one is doing at present, doing in the future, one is doing in the immediate past as well as continuous past and what one commands to be done.
We have now got to a stage whereby you have to learn how to express actions that will be done on conditions.
Conditionnel présent could be translated as Present Conditional Tense in English.
It is used to express any action that will be done in the present, if all necessary conditions are fulfilled.
Although we are talking of Conditionnel présent here, it is a methodical development on the conjugation of verbs into futur simple.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units six to eight will also be useful in this unit.
Let us insist on our warning you that your better understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle all these units we have been teaching you earlier.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating French verbs into Conditionnel présent of French grammar as they will be taught here.
20.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the Conditionnel présent Stem/Radical of verbs • Identify the Conditionnel présent ending/terminaison of verbs • identify the Conditionnel présent morphemes (suffixation) with which the endings could be replaced thus facilitating grammatically correct conjugation of Conditionnel présent tense • Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these verbs.
140 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of verbs into Conditionnel présent.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF ER AND OTHER VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PRESENT Like we have told you in our introduction to this unit, the Conditionnel présent could be translated as Present Conditional Tense in English.
It is used to express any action that will be done in the present, if all necessary conditions are fulfilled.
The conditional tense looks much like the future tense.
It is used to express conditional statements.
Its formation also looks like that of future tense.
What you are expected to do is to take the stem of verbs conjugated to future tense, you remove the future endings and you then add the following conditional endings (ais, ais, ait, ions, iez, aient) to the stem thus replacing the future tense endings with these new conditional endings: ais for 1st person singular ais for 2nd person singular ait for 3rd person singular ions for 1st person plural iez for 2nd person plural aient for 3rd person plural e.g.
Manger Je mangerais I would/should eat Tu mangerais You would eat Il mangerait He would eat Nous mangerions We would eat Vous mangeriez You would eat 141 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Ils mangeraient They would eat NOTE: You will observe that the endings of this conjugation look like that of l’imparfait.
But we would like you to be careful and remember that while l’imparfait uses the stem derived from present de l’indicatif, the Conditionnel présent uses, on the other hand, the stem of verbs conjugated into future tense (futur simple) Let us then follow these patterns to conjugate some verbs into the Conditionnel présent: a. Parler ais for 1st person singular = Je Parlerais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu Parlerais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle Parlerait ions for 1st person plural = Nous Parlerions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous Parleriez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles Parleraient b. Aimer ais for 1st person singular = J’aimerais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu aimerais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle aimerait ions for 1st person plural = Nous aimerions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous aimeriez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles aimeraient 3.2 EXCEPTIONALITIES TO THESE GENERAL RULES AS THEY AFFECT THE ER VERBS Just like in the case of futur simple, we would like you to note that although er verbs are said to be regular at most of the conjugation groupings, just as 142 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II we have some verbs in this category at the futur simple level that have some peculiarities noted for them, so also we have some er verbs that take exceptions to these general rules in the conjugation of their Conditionnel présent.
In as much as we cannot because of these minor dissimilarities categorize them as being irregular, we then decided to treat them as peculiarities under this category.
Better examples of these er verbs with peculiarities could be seen in verbs such as aller, payer, balayer, rudoyer, envoyer, renvoyer etc.
We need to implore you that you should take their peculiarities that we are about to treat as irregularities and learn them as presented to you: c. Aller ais for 1st person singular = J’irais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu irais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle irait ions for 1st person plural = Nous irions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous iriez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles iraient d. Envoyer ais for 1st person singular = J’enverrais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu enverrais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle enverrait ions for 1st person plural = Nous enverrions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous enverriez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles enverraient (Renvoyer is conjugated like Envoyer) 3.2 CONJUGATION OF RE VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PRESENT e. Battre (to beat) ais for 1st person singular = Je Battrais 143 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ais for 2nd person singular = Tu Battrais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle Battrait ions for 1st person plural = Nous Battrions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous Battriez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles Battraient (Conjugation of débattre, combattre, mettre, soumettre, plaire, connaître, paraître, naître, croître, croire, boire, conclure, absoudre, coudre, moudre, suivre, vivre, revivre, survivre, revivre, lire etc, follow this pattern.)
f. Etre (to be) ais for 1st person singular = Je serais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu serais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle serait ions for 1st person plural = Nous serions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous seriez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles seraient 3.3 CONJUGATION OF IR/OIR VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PRESENT g. Finir (to finish) ais for 1st person singular = Je finirais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu finirais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle finirait ions for 1st person plural = Nous finirions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous finiriez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles finiraient (Conjugation of obéir, désobéir, haïr, partir, sortir, sentir, mentir, partir, repartir, répartir, vêtir, dévêtir, revêtir, couvrir, 144 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ouvrir, offrir, souffrir, accueillir, cueillir, bouillir, dormir, servir, revivre, lire etc, follow this pattern.)
h. Avoir (to have) ais for 1st person singular = J’aurais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu aurais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle aurait ions for 1st person plural = Nous aurions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous auriez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles auraient i. Voir (to see) ais for 1st person singular = Je verrais ais for 2nd person singular = Tu verrais ait for 3rd person singular = Il/Elle verrait ions for 1st person plural = Nous verrions iez for 2nd person plural = Vous verriez aient for 3rd person plural = Ils/Elles verraient (Conjugation of entrevoir, revoir etc, follow this pattern.)
3.4 CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PRESENT j. Pleuvoir – to rain Il pleuvrait k. Falloir – to be necessary Il faudrait l. Advenir – to happen Il adviendrait 145 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II m. S’agir de – to be about Il s’agirait de n. Brûmer – to mist (hazy) Il brumerait o. Venter – to blow wind Il venterait 3.5 CONJUGATION OF REFLEXIVE OR PRONOMINAL VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PRESENT p. Se laver – to take ones bath Je me laverais – I would/should bath myself Tu te laverais – You would bath yourself Il/elle se laverait – he/she would bath himself/herself Nous nous laverions – we would bath ourselves Vous vous laveriez – you would bath yourselves Ils/Elles se laveraient – They would bath themselves q.
Se convertir – to convert oneself Je me convertirais – I would /should convert myself Tu te convertirais – You would convert yourself Il/elle se convertirait – he/she would convert himself/herself Nous nous convertirions – we would convert ourselves Vous vous convertiriez – you would convert yourselves Ils/Elles se convertiraient – They would convert themselves 146 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 3.6 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs in the Conditionnel present: a) manger, b) envoyer, c) Aller.
(1) Verbe “ manger au conditionnel présent” Je mangerais Nous mangerions Tu mangerais Vous mangeriez il/Elle enverrait ils/Elles mangeraient (2) Verbe “ envoyer au conditionnel présent”.
J’enverrais Nous enverrons Tu enverrais Vous enverriez il/Elle enverrait ils/Elles enverraient (3) Verbe “Aller au conditionnel présent”.
J’irais Nous irions Tu irais Vous iriez il/ Elle irait ils/Elles iraient 36.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught you the rules governing the conjugation of er, re, ir/oir as well as impersonal cum reflexive verbs into Conditionnel présent.
You have also been told of some exceptionalities to these general riles.
We believe by now you can conjugate er, re, ir/oir as well as impersonal and reflexive verbs into Conditionnel présent.
37.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the conjugations of verbs through the simplified presentation of conjugation of présent de l’indicatif that we have laid for you in Units two to five and the techniques of conjugation of future simple that we methodically handled in Unit six to eight as well as the method of 147 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II conjugation of verbs into passé compose that we taught in Units nine to eleven, the conjugation of l’imparfait that we taught in Units thirteen to fifteen and the conjugation of imperative (positive and negative) that we taught in Unit sixteen, we decided to bring you further into the conjugation techniques by introducing you into the world of conjugation of conditionnel présent in French grammar.
38.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 18.
Conjugate the following verbs into conditionnel présent: a. Rudoyer, b Voir., c. Prendre, d. S’appeler, e. Recommencer, f. Rendre, g. Pleuvoir, h. savoir, i.
Se laver, j. Brumer.
39.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
148 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT EIGHTEEN CONJUGATION OF VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PASSE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of auxiliary avoir verbs into conditionnel passé.
3.1 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of auxiliary être verbs into conditionnel passé.
3.2 Conjugation of impersonal verbs into conditionnel passé.
3.3 Conjugation of reflexive verbs into conditionnel passé.
3.4 Conjugation of reflexive verbs into conditionnel passé.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught the method of conjugation of French verbs into conditionnel passé.
We hope to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French regular and other irregular verbs into conditionnel passé.
You will recall that in the last unit, we have taught you the conjugation Conditionnel présent.
We have now got to a stage whereby you have to learn how to express actions that will be done on conditions but in the past.
Conditionnel présent could be translated as Past Conditional Tense in English.
It is used 149 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II to express any action that would have been done in the past, if all necessary conditions were fulfilled.
Armed with the Knowledge of Conditionnel présent that we have just taught you, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating French verbs into Conditionnel passé of French grammar as they will be taught here.
21.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the Conditionnel présent of auxiliary avoir or être.
• Identify the past participle of various verb groupings • Demonstrate how to conjugate the Conditionnel passé by adding the Conditionnel présent of auxiliary avoir or être to the past participle of the verb concerned.. You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of verbs into Conditionnel passé.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF AUXILLIARY AVOIR VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PASSE Like we have told you in our introduction to this unit, the Conditionnel passé could be translated as Past Conditional Tense in English.
It is used to express any action that would have been done in the past, if all necessary conditions were fulfilled.
The general rule of conjugating this tense says that you add, the past participle of the verb we want to conjugate, to the Conditionnel présent of auxiliary avoir or être (as the case may be): - (Auxilliaire de Conditionnel présent de verbe avoir ou être + participle passé du verbe concerné).
If 150 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II you look at these rules closely, you will observe that they resemble the rules of passé composé.
The only difference is where the passé composé is asking for the auxiliary avoir or être conjugated into présent de l’indicatif, the conditionnel passé is asking for the auxiliary avoir or être conjugated into conditionnel présent .
We therefore implore you to please revise all the Units on passé compose, most especially, Units nine to ten, so as to comprehend this Unit better.
If the rule insists on your adding the Conditionnel présent of auxiliary avoir or être to the past participle of the main verb, you then need to recollect, at this level, your knowledge of conjugating the verb avoir into Conditionnel présent : Avoir J’aurais Nous aurions Tu aurais Vous auriez Il aurait Ils auraient Let us then follow this pattern and the rules governing it to conjugate the verb manger into Conditionnel passé: a. Manger - to eat J’aurais mangé Nous aurions mangé Tu aurais mangé Vous auriez mangé Il aurait mangé Ils auraient mangé b. Parler - to speak J’aurais parlé (I would have spoken) Tu aurais parlé (You would have spoken) Il/Elle aurait parlé (He/She would have spoken) Nous aurions parlé (We would have spoken) 151 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Vous auriez parlé (You would have spoken) Ils/Elles auraient parlé (They would have spoken) c. Etre - to be J’aurais été (I would have been) Tu aurais été (You would have been) Il/Elle aurait été (He/She would have been) Nous aurions été (We would have been) Vous auriez été (You would have been) Ils/Elles auraient été (They would have been) d Dire - to say J’aurais dis (I would have said) Tu aurais dis (You would have said) Il/Elle aurait dis (He/She would have said) Nous aurions dis (We would have said) Vous auriez dis (You would have said) Ils/Elles auraient dis (They would have said) e. Finir - to finish J’aurais fini (I would have finished) Tu aurais fini (You would have finished) Il/Elle aurait fini (He/She would have finished) Nous aurions fini (We would have finished) Vous auriez fini (You would have finished) Ils/Elles auraient fini (They would have finished) f. Avoir - to have J’aurais eu (I would have had) 152 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Tu aurais eu (You would have had) Il/Elle aurait eu (He/She would have had) Nous aurions eu (We would have had) Vous auriez eu (You would have had) Ils/Elles auraient eu (They would have had) 3.1 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF VERBS WITH AUXILIARY ETRE INTO CONDITIONNEL PASSÉ Just like we told you under the conjugation of verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé in Unit ten, the following verbs when they are to be conjugated into conditionnel passé , should take auxiliary être: Aller (to go), descendre (to come down), rester (to rest), monter (to climb), tomber (to fall), naïtre (to be born), sortir (to go out), partir (to go) venir (to come), so also all other verbs that have something to do with venir like advenir, provenir, devenir etc, entrer (to enter), rentrer (to enter again), arriver (to come/arrive), retourner (to return).
Most other verbs, apart from these ones and their variants, are conjugated with auxiliary avoir.
If the general rule of conjugating this tense says that you add, the past participle of the verb we want to conjugate, to the Conditionnel présent of auxiliary avoir or être (as the case may be): - (Auxilliaire de Conditionnel présent de verbe avoir ou être + participle passé du verbe concerné).
And that we have applied the Conditionnel présent of auxiliary avoir in the first part of this unit, we have now got to the point of applying the Conditionnel présent of auxiliary être.
If the rule insists on your adding the Conditionnel présent of auxiliary avoir or être to the past participle of the main verb, you then need to recollect, at 153 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II this level, your knowledge of conjugating the verb être into Conditionnel présent : être Je serais Nous serions Tu serais Vous seriez Il serait Ils seraient Let us then follow these rules and the rules governing it to conjugate the following verbs into Conditionnel passé: g. aller - to go Je serais allé(e) Nous serions allé(e)s Tu serais allé(e) Vous seriez allé(e)s Il serait allé Ils seraient allés Elle serait allé(e) Elles seraient allées NOTE: Just like it happened in Unit ten, you would have noted that additional vowel e or consonant s or both es are added to the ending of some past participle when we used the auxiliary être.
The French grammatical rules compel all the verbs that take auxiliary être to agree with gender and the number of the Subject (either pronoun or noun) that precedes it.
These agreement rules have been explained to you better in Unit twelve.
We implore you to please go and revise them.
h. Monter - to climb Je serais monté(e) (I would have climbed) Tu serais monté(e) (You would have climbed) Il serait monté (He would have climbed) Elle serait monté(e) (She would have climbed) Nous serions monté(e)s (We would have climbed) 154 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Vous seriez monté(e)s (You would have climbed) Ils seraint montés (They would have climbed) Elles seraint montées (They would have climbed) {Er verbs such as Aller (to go), rester (to rest), tomber (to fall), retomber (to fall again), entrer (to enter), rentrer (to enter again), arriver (to come/arrive), retourner (to return) are conjugated following this pattern.
i. Descendre - (to come down) Je serais descendu(e) (I would have come down) Tu serais descendu(e) (You would have come down) Il serait descendu (He would have come down) Elle serait descendu(e) (She would have come down) Nous serions descendu(e)s (We would have come down) Vous seriez descendu(e)s (You would have come down) Ils seraient descendus (They would have come down) Elles seraient descendues (They would have come down) j. Sortir - to go out Je serais sorti(e) (I would have gone out) Tu serais sorti(e) (You would have gone out) Il serait sorti (He would have gone out) Elle serait sorti(e) (She would have gone out) Nous serions sorti(e)s (We would have gone out) Vous seriez sorti(e)s (You would have gone out) Ils seraient sortis (They would have gone out) Elles seraient sorties (They would have gone out) {Ir verbs such as sortir (to go out), ressortir (to go out again), partir (to go), repartir (to go again) are conjugated following this pattern.
155 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II k Venir - to come Je serais venu(e) (I would have come) Tu serais venu(e) (You would have come) Il serait venu (He would have come) Elle serait venu(e) (She would have come) Nous serions venu(e)s (We would have come) Vous seriez venu(e)s (You would have come) Ils seraient venus (They would have come) Elles seraient venues (They would have come) {ir verbs such as venir (to come), so also all other verbs that have something to do with venir like advenir, provenir, devenir etc, are conjugated following this pattern.
3.3 CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PASSE l. Pleuvoir – to rain Il aurait plu m. Falloir – to be necessary Il aurait fallu n. Advenir – to happen Il serait advenu o. Brûmer – to mist (hazy) Il aurait brumé p. Venter – to blow wind Il aurait venté 156 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 3.5 CONJUGATION OF REFLEXIVE OR PRONOMINAL VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PASSE q.
Se laver – to take ones bath Je me serais lavé(e) – I would have bathed myself Tu te serais lavé(e) – You would have bathed yourself Il se serait lavé – He would have bathed himself Elle se serait lavée – She would have bathed herself Nous nous serions lavé(e)s – we would have bathed ourselves Vous vous seriez lavé(e)s – you would have bathed yourselves Ils se seraient lavés – They would have bathed themselves Elles se seraient lavées – They would have bathed themselves r. Se taire – to keep quiet Je me serais tu(e) – I would have kept quiet.
Tu te serais tu(e) – You would have kept quiet.
Il se serait tu – He would have kept quiet.
Elle se serait tue – She would have kept quiet.
Nous nous serions tu(e)s – we would have kept quiet.
Vous vous seriez tu(e)s – you would have kept quiet.
Ils se seraient tus – They would have kept quiet.
Elles se seraient tues – They would have kept quiet.
3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following into”Conditionnel Pasé.
a) Brumer , b) Recommencer.
(1) Verbe “Bruner au Conditionnel Passé” Il aurait brumé 157 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II (2) Verbe “ Recommencer au Conditionnel Passé” J’aurais recommencé Nous aurions recommencé Tu aurais recommencé Vous auriez recommencé il/Elle aurait recommencé ils/Elles auraient recommencé 38.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught you the rules governing the conjugation of er, re, ir/oir as well as impersonal cum reflexive verbs into Conditionnel passé.
You have also been told of some exceptionalities to these general riles.
We believe by now you can conjugate er, re, ir/oir as well as impersonal and reflexive verbs into Conditionnel passé.
39.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the conjugations of verbs through the simplified presentation of conjugation of présent de l’indicatif that we have laid for you in Units two to five and the techniques of conjugation of future simple that we methodically handled in Unit six to eight as well as the method of conjugation of verbs into passé compose that we taught in Units nine to eleven, the conjugation of l’imparfait that we taught in Units thirteen to fifteen and the conjugation of imperative (positive and negative) that we taught in Unit sixteen and then the conjugation of conditionnel present that we taught in Unit seventeen, we decided to bring you further into the conjugation techniques by introducing you into the world of conjugation of conditionnel passé in French grammar.
40.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 19.
Conjugate the following verbs into conditionnel passé: 158 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II a. Rudoyer, b Voir., c. Prendre, d. S’appeler, e. Recommencer, f. Rendre, g. Pleuvoir, h. savoir, i.
Se laver, j. Brumer.
41.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
159 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II UNIT NINETEEN CONJUGATION OF VERBS INTO SUBJONCTIF PRESENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of er verbs into subjonctif présent.
3.1.
Exceptionalities to these general rules as they affect the er verbs.
3.2 Conjugation of re verbs into subjonctif présent.
3.3 Conjugation of ir/oir verbs into subjonctif présent.
3.4 Conjugation of impersonal verbs into subjonctif présent.
3.5 Conjugation of reflexive verbs into subjonctif présent.
3.6 Conjugation of reflexive verbs into subjonctif présent.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught the method of conjugation of French verbs into subjonctif présent.
We hope to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French regular and other irregular verbs into subjonctif présent.
You will recall that in the last eighteen units we have been talking of conjugation of verbs into présent de l’indicatif, futur simple, passé compose, l’imperfait and imperatif (positive and negative) and conditionnels (présent and passé).
160 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II The significance of that is that we have been teaching you how to conjugate French verbs to express actions that one is doing at present, doing in the future, one is doing in the immediate past as well as continuous past, what one commands to be done and what one could do hypothetically if all necessary conditions are met.
We have now got to a stage whereby you have to learn how to express actions of wish or supposition.
Subjonctif présent could be translated as Present Form of Subjunctive Tense in English.
It is used to express statements of doubt in French language.
When a speaker wants to talk about a personal wish, emotion, doubt and things that could not be real in life, he uses the subjunctive tense: - Je souhaite que je sois professeur.
- I wish I could be a teacher.
In as much as we are talking of Subjonctif présent here, it is a methodical development on the conjugation of verbs into futur simple and Conditionnel présent.
The knowledge you have gained from other units, most especially Units six to eighteen will also be useful in this unit.
Let us insist on our warning you that your better understanding of conjugation generally depends on the way and manner with which you handle all these units we have been teaching you earlier.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating French verbs into Subjonctif présent of French grammar as they will be taught here.
22.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the Subjonctif présent Stem/Radical of verbs 161 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II • Identify the Subjonctif présent ending/terminaison of verbs • identify the Subjonctif présent morphemes (suffixation) with which the endings could be replaced thus facilitating grammatically correct conjugation of Subjonctif présent tense • Demonstrate the techniques of conjugating these verbs.
You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of verbs into Subjonctif présent.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF ER AND OTHER VERBS INTO CONDITIONNEL PRESENT Like we have told you in our introduction to this unit, the Subjonctif présent could be translated as Present Form of Subjunctive Tense in English.
It is used to express statements of doubt, personal wish, emotion and things that could not be real in life in French language.
To form the conjugation of Subjonctif present, of regular and some irregular verbs, you are to take the stem/radical from the 3rd person plural (ils/elles) conjugated form of the verb in the présent de l’indicatif, you remove its ent ending and then add the following subjunctive endings, (e, es, e, ions, iez, ent) to this special radical or stem.
And in order to properly express this wish or doubt, a clause using the verb falloir (to be necessary), conjugated into présent de l’indicatif, is introduced at the beginning of the sentence: e for 1st person singular es for 2nd person singular e for 3rd person singular ions for 1st person plural iez for 2nd person plural ent for 3rd person plural 162 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II e.g.
Manger = Ils/Elles mang/ent Il faut que je mange It is necessary, I eat Il faut que tu manges It is necessary, you eat Il faut qu’il mange It is necessary, he eats Il faut que nous mangions It is necessary, we eat Il faut que vous mangiez It is necessary, you eat Il faut qu’ils mangent It is necessary, they eat Let us then follow these patterns to conjugate some verbs into the Subjonctif présent: a. Parler = Ils parl/ent e for 1st person singular = Il faut que je parle es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu parles e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il parle ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous parlions iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous parliez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils parlent b. Aimer e for 1st person singular = Il faut que j’aime es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu aimes e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il aime ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous aimions iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous aimiez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils aiment 3.3 EXCEPTIONALITIES TO THESE GENERAL RULES AS THEY AFFECT THE ER VERBS 163 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Just like in the case of present de l’indicatif and futur simple, we would like you to note that although er verbs are said to be regular at most of the conjugation groupings, just as we have some verbs in this category at these levels that have some peculiarities noted for them, so also we have some er verbs that take exceptions to these general rules in the conjugation of their Subjonctif présent.
In as much as we cannot because of these minor dissimilarities categorize them as being irregular, we then decided to treat them as peculiarities under this category.
Better examples of these er verbs with peculiarities could be seen in verb such as aller.
We need to implore you that you should take these peculiarities that we are about to treat as irregularities and learn them as presented to you: c. Aller e for 1st person singular = Il faut que j’aille es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu ailles e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il aille ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous allions iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous alliez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils aillent 3.2 CONJUGATION OF RE VERBS INTO SUBJONCTIF PRESENT d. Battre (to beat) e for 1st person singular = Il faut que je batte es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu battes e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il batte ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous battions iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous battiez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils battent (Conjugation of débattre, combattre, mettre, soumettre etc, follow this pattern.)
164 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II e. Etre (to be) e for 1st person singular = Il faut que je sois es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu sois e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il soit ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous soyons iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous soyez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils soient NOTE : We will need to warn you that être, being an exceptionally irregular verb, does not follow the general pattern.
Hence the difference in stem formation and conjugation.
3.3 CONJUGATION OF IR/OIR VERBS INTO SUBJONCTIF PRESENT f. Finir (to finish) e for 1st person singular = Il faut que je finisse es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu finisses e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il finisse ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous finissions iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous finissiez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils finissent (Conjugation of obéir, désobéir, haïr, partir, sortir, sentir, mentir, partir, repartir, répartir, vêtir, dévêtir, revêtir, couvrir, ouvrir, offrir, souffrir, accueillir, cueillir, bouillir, dormir, servir, revivre, lire etc, follow this pattern.)
g. Avoir (to have) e for 1st person singular = Il faut que j’aie es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu aies e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il aie 165 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous ayons iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous ayez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils aient NOTE : We will need to warn you also that avoir, being an exceptionally irregular verb, does not follow the general pattern.
Hence the difference in stem formation and conjugation.
h. Voir (to see) e for 1st person singular = Il faut que je voie es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu voies e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il voie ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous voyions iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous voyiez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils voient (Conjugation of entrevoir, revoir etc, follow this pattern.)
3.4 CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL VERBS INTO SUBJONCTIF PRESENT i. Pleuvoir – to rain Il faut qu’il pleuve r. Falloir – to be necessary Il faut qu’il faille s. Advenir – to happen Il faut qu’il advienne t. S’agir de – to be about Il faut qu’il s’agise de 166 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II u. Brûmer – to mist (hazy) Il faut qu’il brume v. Venter – to blow wind Il faut qu’il vente 3.5 CONJUGATION OF REFLEXIVE OR PRONOMINAL VERBS INTO SUBJONCTIF PRESENT w. Se laver – to take ones bath e for 1st person singular = Il faut que je me lave es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu te laves e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il se lave ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous nous lavions iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous vous laviez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils se lavent x.
Se convertir – to convert oneself e for 1st person singular = Il faut que je me convertisse es for 2nd person singular = Il faut que tu te convertisses e for 3rd person singular = Il faut qu’il se convertisse ions for 1st person plural = Il faut que nous nous convertissions iez for 2nd person plural = Il faut que vous vous convertissiez ent for 3rd person plural = Il faut qu’ils se convertissent 3.6 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following into”Subjonctif Présent.
: a) finir , b) Etre c) Se laver.
167 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 1.
Verbe “finir au subjonctif présent” (1) Il faut que je finisse Il faut que tu finisses Il faut qu‘il/Elle finisse Il faut que nous finissions Il faut que vous finissiez Il faut qu’ils/Elles finissent (2) Verbe “ Etre au subjonctif présent”.
Il faut que je sois Il faut que tu sois Il faut qu’il/Elle soit Il faut que nous soyons Il faut que vous soyez Il faut qu’ils/Elles soient.
(3) Verbe “Se laver au Subjonctif présent”.
Il faut que je me lave Il faut que tu te laves Il faut qu’il/elle se lave Il faut que nous nous lavions Il faut que vous vous laviez Il faut qu’ils/elles se lavent 40.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught you the rules governing the conjugation of er, re, ir/oir as well as impersonal cum reflexive verbs into subjonctif présent.
You have also been told of some exceptionalities to these general riles.
We believe by now you can conjugate er, re, ir/oir as well as impersonal and reflexive verbs into subjonctif présent.
41.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the conjugations of verbs through the simplified presentation of conjugation of présent de l’indicatif that we have laid for you in Units two to five and the techniques of conjugation of future simple 168 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II that we methodically handled in Unit six to eight as well as the method of conjugation of verbs into passé compose that we taught in Units nine to eleven, the conjugation of l’imparfait that we taught in Units thirteen to fifteen, the conjugation of imperative (positive and negative) that we taught in Unit sixteen and the conjugation of conditionnels présent and passé that we taught in Units seventeen and eighteen , we decided to bring you further into the conjugation techniques by introducing you into the world of conjugation of subjonctif présent in French grammar.
42.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 20.
Conjugate the following verbs into subjonctif présent: a. Plaidoyer, b Savoir., c. Rendre, d. S’appeler, e. Recommencer, f. Pendre, g. Pleuvoir, h. Valoir, i.
Se laver, j. Brumer.
43.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
169 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II NIT TWENTY CONJUGATION OF VERBS INTO SUBJONCTIF PASSE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of auxiliary avoir verbs into subjonctif passé.
3.1 General techniques guiding the Conjugation of auxiliary être verbs into subjonctif passé.
3.2 Conjugation of impersonal verbs into subjonctif passé.
3.3 Conjugation of reflexive verbs into subjonctif passé.
3.4 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be taught the method of conjugation of French verbs into subjonctif passé.
We hope to teach you about the easier techniques with which a French grammar learner like you could apply in conjugating French regular and other irregular verbs into subjonctif passé.
You will recall that in the last unit, we have taught you the conjugation of subjonctif présent.
We have now got to a stage whereby you have to learn how to express actions of wish or supposition in the past.
Subjonctif passé 170 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II could be translated as Past Form of Subjunctive Tense in English.
It is used to express statements of doubt in the past.
When a speaker wants to talk about a personal wish, emotion, doubt and things that could not be real in life but which he would have loved to do in the past, he uses the past form of subjunctive tense: - J’ai souhaité que j’aie été professeur.
- I wished I could have been a teacher.
Armed with the Knowledge of subjonctif présent that we have just taught you, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of conjugating French verbs into subjonctif passé of French grammar as they will be taught here.
23.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the subjonctif présent of auxiliary avoir or être.
• Identify the past participle of various verb groupings • Demonstrate how to conjugate the subjonctif passé by adding the subjonctif présent of auxiliary avoir or être to the past participle of the verb concerned.. You are now invited to follow the method of conjugation of verbs into subjonctif passé.
3.0 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF AUXILLIARY AVOIR VERBS INTO SUBJONCTIF PASSE Like we have told you in our introduction to this unit, the subjonctif passé could be translated as Past Form of Subjunctive Tense in English.
It is used 171 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II to express any action of wish or doubt that would have been done in the past.
The general rule of conjugating this tense says that you add, the past participle of the verb we want to conjugate, to the subjonctif présent of auxiliary avoir or être (as the case may be): - (Auxilliaire de subjonctif présent de verbe avoir ou être + participle passé du verbe concerné).
If you look at these rules closely, you will observe that they resemble the rules of passé composé and conditionnel passé .
The only difference is where the passé composé is asking for the auxiliary avoir or être conjugated into présent de l’indicatif and the conditionnel passé is asking for the auxiliary avoir or être conjugated into conditionnel present, the subjonctif passé will be asking for the auxiliary avoir or être conjugated into subjonctif present.
And in order to properly express this wish or doubt, a clause using the verb falloir (to be necessary), conjugated into passé composé, is introduced at the beginning of the sentence.
We therefore implore you to please revise all the Units on passé compose and conditionnel passé, most especially, Units nine, ten and eighteen, so as to comprehend this Unit better.
If the rule insists on your adding the subjonctif présent of auxiliary avoir or être to the past participle of the main verb, you then need to recollect, at this level, your knowledge of conjugating the verb avoir into subjonctif présent as we taught you in Unit nineteen: Avoir Que j’aie Que nous ayons Que tu aies Que vous ayez Qu’il ait Qu’ils aient 172 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Let us then follow this pattern and the rules governing it to conjugate the verb manger into subjonctif passé: a. Manger - to eat Il a fallu que j’aie mangé Il a fallu que tu aies mangé Il a fallu qu’il ait mangé Il a fallu que nous ayons mangé Il a fallu que vous ayez mangé Il a fallu qu’ils aient mangé b. Parler - to speak Il a fallu que j’aie parlé Il a fallu que tu aies parlé Il a fallu qu’il ait parlé Il a fallu que nous ayons parlé Il a fallu que vous ayez parlé Il a fallu qu’ils aient parlé c. Etre - to be Il a fallu que j’aie été Il a fallu que tu aies été Il a fallu qu’il ait été Il a fallu que nous ayons été Il a fallu que vous ayez été Il a fallu qu’ils aient été d Dire - to say Il a fallu que j’aie dis 173 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Il a fallu que tu aies dis Il a fallu qu’il ait dis Il a fallu que nous ayons dis Il a fallu que vous ayez dis Il a fallu qu’ils aient dis e. Finir - to finish Il a fallu que j’aie fini Il a fallu que tu aies fini Il a fallu qu’il ait fini Il a fallu que nous ayons fini Il a fallu que vous ayez fini Il a fallu qu’ils aient fini f. Avoir - to have Il a fallu que j’aie eu Il a fallu que tu aies eu Il a fallu qu’il ait eu Il a fallu que nous ayons eu Il a fallu que vous ayez eu Il a fallu qu’ils aient eu 3.2 GENERAL TECHNIQUES GUIDING THE CONJUGATION OF VERBS WITH AUXILIARY ETRE INTO SUBJONCTIF PASSÉ Just like we told you under the conjugation of verbs with auxiliary être into passé composé and conditionnel passé in Units ten and eighteen, the following verbs when they are to be conjugated into subjonctif passé , should take auxiliary être: Aller (to go), descendre (to come down), rester (to rest), monter (to climb), tomber (to fall), naïtre (to be born), sortir (to go 174 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II out), partir (to go) venir (to come), so also all other verbs that have something to do with venir like advenir, provenir, devenir etc, entrer (to enter), rentrer (to enter again), arriver (to come/arrive), retourner (to return).
Most other verbs, apart from these ones and their variants, are conjugated with auxiliary avoir.
If the general rule of conjugating this tense says that you add, the past participle of the verb we want to conjugate, to the subjonctif présent of auxiliary avoir or être (as the case may be): - (Auxilliaire de subjonctif présent de verbe avoir ou être + participle passé du verbe concerné).
And that we have applied the subjonctif présent of auxiliary avoir in the first part of this unit, we have now got to the point of applying the subjonctif présent of auxiliary être.
If the rule insists on your adding the subjonctif présent of auxiliary avoir or être to the past participle of the main verb, you then need to recollect, at this level, your knowledge of conjugating the verb être into subjonctif présent : être Que je sois Que nous soyons Que tu sois Que vous soyez Qu’il soit Qu’ils soient Let us then follow these rules and the rules governing it to conjugate the following verbs into subjonctif passé: g. aller - to go Il a fallu que je sois allé(e) Il a fallu que nous soyons allé(e)s Il a fallu que tu sois allé(e) Il a fallu que vous soyez allé(e)s Il a fallu qu’il soit allé Il a fallu qu’ils soient allés Il a fallu qu’elle soit allé(e) Il a fallu qu’elles soient allées 175 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II NOTE: Just like it happened in Units ten and eighteen, you would have noted that additional vowel e or consonant s or both es are added to the ending of some past participle when we used the auxiliary être.
The French grammatical rules compel all the verbs that take auxiliary être to agree with gender and the number of the Subject (either pronoun or noun) that precedes it.
These agreement rules have been explained to you better in Unit twelve.
We implore you to please go and revise them.
h. Monter - to climb Il a fallu que je sois monté(e) Il a fallu que nous soyons monté(e)s Il a fallu que tu sois monté(e) Il a fallu que vous soyez monté(e)s Il a fallu qu’il soit monté Il a fallu qu’ils soient montés Il a fallu qu’elle soit monté(e) Il a fallu qu’elles soient montées {Er verbs such as Aller (to go), rester (to rest), tomber (to fall), retomber (to fall again), entrer (to enter), rentrer (to enter again), arriver (to come/arrive), retourner (to return) are conjugated following this pattern.
i. Descendre - (to come down) Il a fallu que je sois descendu(e) Il a fallu que nous soyons descendu(e)s Il a fallu que tu sois descendu(e) Il a fallu que vous soyez descendu(e)s Il a fallu qu’il soit descendu Il a fallu qu’ils soient descendus Il a fallu qu’elle soit descendu(e) Il a fallu qu’elles soient descendues j. Sortir - to go out Il a fallu que je sois sorti(e) Il a fallu que nous soyons descendu(e)s Il a fallu que tu sois sorti(e) Il a fallu que vous soyez sorti(e)s Il a fallu qu’il soit sorti Il a fallu qu’ils soient sortis Il a fallu qu’elle soit sorti(e) Il a fallu qu’elles soient sorties 176 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II {Ir verbs such as sortir (to go out), ressortir (to go out again), partir (to go), repartir (to go again) are conjugated following this pattern.
k Venir - to come Il a fallu que je sois venu(e) Il a fallu que nous soyons venu(e)s Il a fallu que tu sois venu(e) Il a fallu que vous soyez venu(e)s Il a fallu qu’il soit venu Il a fallu qu’ils soient venus Il a fallu qu’elle soit venu(e) Il a fallu qu’elles soient venues {ir verbs such as venir (to come), so also all other verbs that have something to do with venir like advenir, provenir, devenir etc, are conjugated following this pattern.
3.2 CONJUGATION OF IMPERSONAL VERBS INTO SUBJONCTIF PASSE s. Pleuvoir – to rain Il a fallu qu’il ait plu t. Falloir – to be necessary Il a fallu qu’il ait fallu u. Advenir – to happen Il a fallu qu’il soit advenu v. Brûmer – to mist (hazy) Il a fallu qu’il ait brumé w. Venter – to blow wind Il a fallu qu’il ait venté 177 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II 3.3 CONJUGATION OF REFLEXIVE OR PRONOMINAL VERBS INTO SUBJONCTIF PASSE x.
Se laver – to take ones bath Il a fallu que je me sois lavé(e) Il a fallu que nous nous soyons lavé(e)s Il a fallu que tu te sois lavé(e) Il a fallu que vous vous soyez lavé(e)s Il a fallu qu’il se soit lavé Il a fallu qu’ils se soient lavés Il a fallu qu’elle se soit lavé(e) Il a fallu qu’elles se soient lavées y.
Se taire – to keep quiet Il a fallu que je me sois tu(e) Il a fallu que nous nous soyons tu(e)s Il a fallu que tu te sois tu(e) Il a fallu que vous vous soyez tu(e)s Il a fallu qu’il se soit tu Il a fallu qu’ils se soient tus Il a fallu qu’elle se soit tu(e) Il a fallu qu’elles se soient tues 3.4 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Conjugate the following verbs into subjonctif Passé a) Monter b) Etre c) Avoir (1) Verbe monter au subjonctif Passé.
Il a fallu que je sois monté(e) Il a fallu que tu sois monté(e) Il a fallu qu’il soit monté Il a fallu qu’elle soit montée Il a fallu que nous soyons monté(e)s Il a fallu que vous soyez monté(e)s Il a fallu qu’ils soient montés Il a fallu qu’elles soient montées (2) Verbe Etre au subjonctif Passé.
Il a fallu que j’aie été Il a fallu que tu aies été Il a fallu qu’il ait été 178 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II Il a fallu que nous ayons été Il a fallu que vous ayez été Il a fallu qu’ils aient été (3) Verbe Avoir au subjonctif Passé.
Il a fallu que j’aie eu Il a fallu que tu aies eu Il a fallu qu’il ait eu Il a fallu que nous ayons eu Il a fallu que vous ayez eu Il a fallu qu’ils aient eu 42.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught you the rules governing the conjugation of er, re, ir/oir as well as impersonal cum reflexive verbs into subjonctif passé.
You have also been told of some exceptionalities to these general riles.
We believe by now you can conjugate er, re, ir/oir as well as impersonal and reflexive verbs into subjonctif passé.
43.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the conjugations of verbs through the simplified presentation of conjugation of présent de l’indicatif that we have laid for you in Units two to five and the techniques of conjugation of future simple that we methodically handled in Unit six to eight as well as the method of conjugation of verbs into passé compose that we taught in Units nine to eleven, the conjugation of l’imparfait that we taught in Units thirteen to fifteen and the conjugation of imperative (positive and negative) that we taught in Unit sixteen, the conjugation of conditionnels présent and passé that we taught in Units seventeen and eighteen and then we decided to bring you further into the conjugation techniques by introducing you into the world of conjugation of subjonctifs présent and passé in French grammar as taught in Units nineteen and twenty.
With this unit twenty, we 179 FRE 122: FRENCH GRAMMAR II have now come to the end of our lectures of FRE 108 that centre on conjugation of verbs into various tenses of French grammar.
44.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 21.
Conjugate the following verbs into subjonctif passé: a. Rudoyer, b Voir., c. Prendre, d. S’appeler, e. Recommencer, f. Rendre, g. Pleuvoir, h. savoir, i.
Se laver, j. Brumer.
45.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES AKEUSOLA, OLU (1992): BASIC FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Reviewed in 2004.
AKEUSOLA, OLU (1995): FRENCH GRAMMAR FOR ANGLOPHONE STUDENTS, TOBAK PUBLISHERS, LAGOS.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes, Paris, Hâtier.
180
