NoneFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II COURSE GUIDE FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANAYLYSIS II Course Developer Dr Tunde Ayeleru Department of European Studies University of Ibadan Ibadan Oyo State Course Writers Dr Tunde Ayeleru Department of European Studies University of Ibadan Ibadan Oyo State Course Editor Professor V. Owhuotu University of Lagos.
Course Co-ordinator Lucy Jummai Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-495-1 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………….... 1 Course Aims…………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives ……………………………………… 1-2 Working through This Course ………………………… 2 Course Materials ……………………………………….
2 Study Units …………………………………………….. 2-3 References …………………………………………….. 3-4 Assignment File ...……………………………………… 4 Assessment …………………………………………….. 4 Tutor-marked Assignment (TMA).
…………………… 4 Final Examinations and Grading ……………………….. 5 Course Marking Scheme ……………………………….
5 Course Overview ……………………………………….
5-6 How to Get the Most from this Course ………………… 6-7 Summary ……………………………………………….
8 ivIntroduction to Textual Analysis This course is a foundation level one semester course to be taken towards the B.A.
(Hons.)
Degree in French and International Studies, and B.A Ed.
(Hons.)
in French.
It is a two (2) credit course of twenty study units.
It intends to introduce students to written comprehension and elementary composition in French.
The prerequisite for this course is FRE 109 Introduction to Textual Analysis I.
This course is essentially necessary for students because it enables them to put into practice French grammar that they will acquire in the course of the programme.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, and what you will require to do well in the course.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
There is also a detailed separate Assignment File.
Course Aims The overall aim of FRE 110: Introduction to Textual Analysis II is to introduce you to written comprehension, composition, and textual analysis in French.
This will be achieved through:  Introducing you to the basic techniques of written comprehension in French.
 Introducing you to the techniques of elementary composition in French.
 Explaining to you how to analyze grammatically texts and passages written in French.
 Introducing you to different language registers.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
Each unit also has its specific objectives.
The unit objectives are found at the beginning of each unit.
You need to read them before you start working on the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress in the course.
There is need for you to always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit to ensure that you have done what is required.FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Below are the objectives of the course.
You would have achieved the aims of the course if you are able to meet these objectives.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: 1.
Read and answer correctly questions related the passages; 2.
Identify some grammatical elements in the passage; 3.
Construct simple and correct sentences in French using your own expressions; 4.
Use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercises; 5.
Define the register of the texts; 6.
Analyse correctly different parts and structures of the texts; 7.
Write simple and correct composition in French; and 8.
Explain some vocabularies related to different registers.
Working through This Course To complete this course you are required to read the study units, and other materials related to the subject matter.
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises.
You will also have to submit your Tutor-Marked Assignments to your tutors.
The course will take you about 15 weeks to complete.
Find below the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: l. Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File Study Units There are twenty study units in this course.
They are: MODULE 1 Unit 1 Au village Unit 2 L'appartement de mon père Unit 3 A l'autogare iiFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Unit 4 Allons voir un match de football Unit 5 Le mariage MODULE 2 Unit 1 La soirée dansante Unit 2 Niamey: La capitale du Niger Unit 3 Sembène Ousmane: l'autodidacte Unit 4 La littérature Unit 5 Les noces chinoises MODULE 3 Unit 1 Les enfants insatisfaits Unit 2 La publicité: miroir de rêves Unit 3 La maison rurale et la résidence secondaire Unit 4 Au théâtre Unit 5 Rouler en toute sécurité MODULE 4 Unit 1 The passages are graded from simple to the most complex.
The first nine units are written in generally simple and straightforward language.
Module 2 units 4 to Module 4 have passages of present, past and future tenses.
You will meet sentences that are much more complex in these passages.
Each unit can be studied in one to two weeks.
Each unit has its specific objectives, reading materials, explanations and set of reading materials.
It also contains self-assessment exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments.
All this will assist you in achieving the learning objectives of the units and the whole course.
References You will need a good bilingual dictionary to consult for your studies.
Adebayo, Aduke (1994): A Functional French Course for Anglophone Students, Omoleye Publishing Co; Ibadan.
Adebayo, Aduke (1993): Text et Travaux de Langue Française Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd., Ibadan.
Ayeleru, Tunde (2000): A Concise Course in French for College and University Students, Kenny D Ventures.
Monnerie-Goarin, Annie et al (1999): Champion 1, Clé International, iiiFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Paris.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugation 12,000 Verbes, Hatier, Paris.
Berard Evelyne et al (1997): Tempo 2, Didier/ Hatier, Paris.
Girard, Jacky (1996): Panorama 1 Méthode de Française, Clé International Paris.
Assignment File There is an Assignment File where there are more than twenty assignments in the isle.
The assignments carry 50% of the total mark for the course.
The mark you obtain in the assignment will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Assessment The assessment of this course is divided into two main parts.
The first part is the tutor-marked assignments and the second part is a written examination.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated by the tutor.
Tutor Marked Assignment (TMAs) There are twenty tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit all assignments.
The four best of the twenty assignments will be selected of which the highest three marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% toward your total course mark.
When you have completed your assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for FRE 110 will be of two hours' duration and carry a total mark of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will reflect the types of self-testing, and tutor-marked assignments.
You need to revise before you sit for the examination.
You may also need to revise the self-assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The examination covers every aspect of the course.
ivFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Course Marking Scheme The table below shows the breakdown of the course marking.
Assessment Marks All assignments Four assignments, best three marks of the four count @ 10% each = 30% of course marks Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview There are twenty (20) units in this course.
Module/Unit Title Week/Activity Assignment 1 Course Guide Week 1 1 Au village Week 1 Assignment 1 2 L'appartement de mon Week 2 Assignment 2 père 3 A l'autogare Week 2 Assignment 3 4 Allons voir un match de Week 3 Assignment 4 football 5 Le mariage Week 3 Assignment 5 2 1 La soirée dansante Week 4 Assignment 1 2 Niamey: La capitale du Week 4 Assignment 2 Niger 3 Sembène Ousmane: Week 5 Assignment 3 l'autodidacte 4 La littérature Week 5 Assignment 4 5 Les noces chinoises Week 6 Assignment 5 3 1 Les enfants insatisfaits Week 7 Assignment 1 2 La publicité: miroir de Week 7 Assignment 2 rêves 3 La maison rurale et la Week 8 Assignment 3 résidence secondaire 4 Au théâtre Week 8 Assignment 4 5 Rouler en toute sécurité Week 10 Assignment 5 4 1 Cambriolage de la Week 11 Assignment 1 bijouterie DUTOC: Le coupable avoue 2 Le marchand et le voleur Week 12 Assignment 2 3 Promenande matinale Week 13 Assignment 3 4 Chercher une petite Week 14 Assignment 4 maison à louer vFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 5 Le voleur Week 15 Assignment 5 Revision Week 16 Final Examination Week 17 Total 17 weeks How to Get the Most from This Course You are aware that you will not be meeting face to face with your lecturer as in the conventional classroom situation.
The course units replace the lecturer.
You are expected to work through these course units at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
In the recorded texts it is the lecturer speaking to you.
The units tell you what to do: when to listen to a text, when to answer comprehension question, when to summarize or undertake any other assignment.
It is just in the same way as a lecturer would do in a normal classroom that the study units direct you in the exercise to undertake at appropriate points.
You have to follow this strictly.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit.
It gives you an idea of how the particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives which help you to know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make this your habit you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit is an aural comprehension passage with the accompanying comprehension questions.
Self tests are interspersed throughout the units and answers are given at the end of the units.
These tests are designed to help you achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each test as you come to it in the study unit.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, contact your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to ask your tutor to provide such help.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the “Course Overview” for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units, the dates of your tutorials, dates viFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II for submission of your tutor-marked assignments.
All this information should be gathered in one place.
For example, you could write it in your diary or wall calendar or an organizer.
In other words, you should write down your study schedule.
3.
Having established your study schedule ensure that you abide by it.
Do not, for any reason work behind this schedule.
If you get into any difficulty with your schedule, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the “Overview” at the beginning of each unit.
6.
It is important for you to do the assignments on their due dates.
Ensure that you consult the Assignment File to know the next assignment.
You will learn a lot by carefully doing the assignments.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are satisfied that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned to you, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are 12 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
viiFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following may be circumstances in which you would need help.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units.
• You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises.
• You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating actively in discussions.
Summary FRE 110: Introduction to Textual Analysis II intends to introduce the basic techniques of written comprehension in French to you.
On successful completion of this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of written comprehension in French, and techniques of writing simple composition.
You must also have acquired some vocabularies on different registers.
You will be able to • Answer questions related to written texts.
• Identify and explain some grammatical elements in French.
• Write simple and correct composition in French • Analyse structurally French texts of different registers etc.
I wish you success in this course and hope you find it interesting and useful.
viiiFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II MAIN COURSE Course Code FRE 110 Course Title Introduction to Textual Analysis II Course Developer Dr Tunde Ayeleru Department of European Studies University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Course Writer Dr Tunde Ayeleru Department of European Studies University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Course Editor Professor V. Owhuotu Course Co-ordinator Lucy Jummai Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ixFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-495-1 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria xFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………….. 1 Unit 1 Au village …………………………………… 1 – 8 Unit 2 L’appartement de mon père ………………… 9 – 14 Unit 3 A l’autogare ………………………………….
15 – 20 Unit 4 Allons voir un match de football …………….
21 – 27 Unit 5 Le Marriage ………………………………….
28 – 34 Module 2 ............................................................................... 35 Unit 1 La soirée dansante …………………………... 35 – 41 Unit 2 Niamey: La capitale du Niger ……………….
42 – 46 Unit 3 Sembène Ousmane: l’autodidacte …………… 47– 53 Unit 4 La littérature ………………………………….
54 – 59 Unit 5 Les nces chinoises …………………………... 60 – 67 Module 3 ............................................................................... 68 Unit 1 Les enfants insatisfaits ……………………….
68 – 73 Unit 2 La publicité: miroir de rêves ………………… 74 – 79 Unit 3 La maison rurale et la résidence secondaire ….
80 – 85 Unit 4 Au theater …………………………………….
86 – 90 Unit 5 Rouler en toute sécurité ……………………… 91 – 96 Module 4 ................................................................................ 97 Unit 1 Cambriolage de la bijouterie DUTOC: Le coupable avoue……………………………….. 97 – 102 Unit 2 Le marchand et le voleur …………………….. 103 – 108 Unit 3 Promenande matinale ………………………... 109 – 116 Unit 4 Chercher une petite maison à louer ………….. 117 – 123 Unit 5 Le voleur …………………………………….. 124 – 130 xiNoneFRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II MODULE 1 Unit 1 Au village Unit 2 L'appartement de mon père Unit 3 A l'autogare Unit 4 Allons voir un match de football Unit 5 Le mariage UNIT 1 AU VILLAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Au Village 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Verb I 3.3.2 Adjective 1 3.3.3 Simple Composition 4.0.
Conclusion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to this course.
You will read and analyse grammatically a simple and interesting passage.
The passage is about family life in a village.
You will learn some vocabularies related to village and family settings.
This unit will teach you the conjugation of some verbs of first group and some regular adjectives.
You will also learn some basic techniques of short composition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer correctly questions related to the passage; • Identify some grammatical elements in the passage; • Compose simple and correct sentences in your own words; and 1FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • Use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise You will now read the following interesting passage: 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Au Village Nous avons une grande maison dans notre village, Ijio, dans l'état d'Oyo.
Je veux d'abord parler de ce petit village, mais très intéressant.
Il se situe au pied d'une colline qui s'appelle Ilele.
C’est un village village frontalier parce qu'il se trouve près de la frontière Nigéria-République béninoise.
Dans ce village il n'y a pas d'usines, les indigènes sont généralement des cultivateurs.
Ils produisent l'igname, le manioc, le mais et la farine de manioc en grande quantité.
Voilà pourquoi Ijio est parmi les villages considérés comme le panier de nourriture de l'état d'Oyo.
Je dois mentionner avec un peu de regret qu'il n'y a pas de bonne auto- route qui mène vers mon village.
Parlant du village même, il y en a plus de cinq cents maisons.
Il y a une grande école secondaire et trois écoles primaires.
Ma maison se trouve au bord d'un fleuve, Pakiti.
Nous avons une grande cour parce qu'il s'agit d'une famille nombreuse.
Mes grandsparents sont morts mais il y a toujours mes parents et mes oncles et tantes qui vivent avec nous.
Nous préparons à manger et mangeons ensemble.
Nous menons une vie typiquement villageoise.
Dans la soirée, après le dîner, nous les enfants, nous nous asseyons autour du feu, en écoutant notre père qui raconte toujours des histoires intéressantes et moralisatrices.
En réalité, la vie chez-moi est intéressante.
(Ayeleru, 2004 :1) 3.2 Vocabulary The French passage you just read describes a village and the kind of life in the village.
It also talks of a particular family living a typical village life.
The words and expressions used are of village and family settings.
2FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II These expressions include: 1.
D'abord = at first, firstly 2. intéressant = interesting 3. le pied = foot 4. la colline = hill 5. généralement = generally 6. les indigènes = indigines, inhabitants 7. la nourriture = food 8. l'usine = industry 9. au tour de = around 10. la réalité = reality 11. la cour = compound You will now take your bilingual (French/ English) dictionary to look for the meanings of other words and expressions you may not understand.
Note that, when you're looking for the meaning of a noun, you need to confirm the gender of the noun.
A good dictionary will indicate the gender of every noun it gives.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis In this section of the unit, you will be exposed to the simple present tense conjugation of verbs in French.
You will also learn about adjectives in French.
3.3.1 Verb I French verbs are grouped into three.
Each group is identified by its ending.
Verbs of the first group have their infinitive endings in -ER, second group verbs have their infinitive endings in -IR while the infinitive endings of the third group verbs are -RE/OIR.
The infinitive form of a French verb has two parts.
These parts are: i. the stem ii.
the ending.
Example: parler the stem is parl- and the ending is -er.
In the French passage you just read in this unit, there are mainly verbs of the first group.
These verbs infinitives end in -ER.
I will mention some of them and conjugate a few ones as examples: a. parler = to speak, to talk b. se situer = to be situated 3FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II c. considére r = to consider d. s'appeler = to be called e. mener = to lead f. contribuer = to contribute g. manger = to eat h. commencer = to commence Let us conjugate parler, manger, commencer, mener as examples.
These verbs will be conjugated in the present tense (present de l'indicatif): Parler : to speak, to talk par/ er = parl - Add -e, -es, -e, -ons, -ez, -ent a. Je parle = I speak/I am speaking b. Tu parles = You speak/you are speaking c. Il/elle parle = He/she speaks/He she is speaking d. Nous parlons = We speak/we are speaking e. Vous parlez = You speak/you are speaking f. ils/elles parlent = They speak/they are speaking Manger: to eat Mang/er = mang- Add -e, -es -e -ons -ez -ent Je mange Tu manges Il/elle mange Nous mangeons Vous mangez Ils/elles mangent 4FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Note that in the first person plural form of the verb manger and -e is added before the ons.
This goes for all verbs of first group that end in -- ger.
That is, verbs like manger, partager, changer, corriger etc.
Commencer: to start, to commence Commenc/er = commenc Add the normal ending format: -e Je commence -es Tu commences -e Il/elle commence -ons Nous commençons -ez Vous commencez -ent Ils/elles commencent You will notice that in the first person plural form of the verb commencer, the “C” before ons.
This change applies to all verbs ending in -cer, verbs in this category include lancer, commencer, and prononcer.
Mener: to lead men/er = men Add: -e, -es, -e, -ons, -ez, -ent Je mène tu mènes I1/elle mène Nous menons Vous menez Ils/elles mènent Note that the first ‘e’ in the singular number and the third person plural number take an accent (accent grave) è.
It must be noted that accents are not for decorations in French.
They inform the pronunciation of French words, and grammar.
I hope that these examples (formats) will guide you in the conjugation of verbs of the first group in French.
5FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II There are verbs of second and third groups in the French passage you read in this unit.
They are conjugated differently.
You will learn about these verbs as this course progresses.
Some of the verbs are: i. avoir = to have ii.
être = to be iii.
vouloir = to desire, to wish, to want iv.
pouvoir = can, to be able v. produire = to produce vi.
vivre = to live vii.
s'asseoir = to sit (down) Take your conjugation manual and learn further about the conjugation of French verbs.
3.3.2 Adjective I There are adjectives in the French passage you read in this unit.
These adjectives include: a. grande b. petit c. intéressant d. frontalier e. bonne f. secondaire g. primaires As you might have known, an adjective is a qualifying word which tells us more about a noun.
In French, adjectives agree in number and gender with the noun they qualify.
There are different types of adjectives like qualifying, demonstrative, possessive adjectives etc.
Study the following examples: Masc sing Masc plural Fem.
sing Fem.
plural grand grands grande grandes petit petits petite petites intéressant intéressants intéressante intéressantes frontalier frontaliers frontalière frontalières bon bons bonne bonnes secondaire secondaires secondaire secondaire primaire primaries primaire primaires 6FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Identify other adjectives in the French text you read in this unit.
3.3.3 Simple Composition Let us compose simple sentences with the following words and expressions we have acquired in the French text provided in this unit: Au bord de, près de, intéressant, en réalité, village: a. Ma classe est au bord de la mer; b. Je m'assieds près de ma mère; c. Le film de James Bond est intéressant; d. En réalité, Ibadan est une grande ville; e. Mon village est bea; SELF ASSESSMENT EXERSISE Now with the aid of your dictionary and conjugation manual, construct a sentence each with the following expressions to show their meaning.
a. Il s'agit de b. au pied de c. Il y a d. en grande quantité e. Voilà f. parmi g. contribuer h. donner i. la cour j. dans 4.0.
CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about simple description of a place, town and family setting.
The French text you read has exposed you to the techniques of reading and grammatical analysis of a passage.
You have also learned about the use of these elements of grammar like verbs, adjectives etc.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the basic techniques of analysing and writing a text in French language.
You have learnt about conjugation of some French verbs and the use of adjectives in French.
You can identify some grammatical elements like vocabularies, verbs and adjectives.
You 7FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II can also compose simple and correct sentences using your own words and expressions.
There is no doubt that what you have learned in this unit will be useful for the rest of the units in this course.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Comment s'appelle le village?
2.
Quelle est l'occupation principale des gens de ce village 3.
Décrivez la famille de l'auteur 4.
Quel est le regret de l'auteur?
5.
Qu'est-ce que les enfants font après le diner?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1994): A Functional French Course for Anglophone Students, Omoleye Publishing Co; Ibadan.
Ayeleru, T. (2004): A Concise Course in French for College and Learning solutions, Ibadan.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 Verbes 1, Paris, Hatier.
Answers to Self Assessment 1.
It is about 2.
At the foot of 3.
There is 4.
In large quantity 5.
Here 6.
Amongst 7.
Contribute 8.
To give 9.
The compound 10.
In 8FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 2 L'APPARTEMENT DE MON PERE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 L'appartement de mon pere 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Verbs II 3.3.2 Adjectives II 3.3.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will continue to learn the techniques of analysis of simple written passage in French.
These techniques will teach you how to write a short story and the use of some words in your own composition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer questions related to the passage; • Define and analyse correctly different elements of grammar used in the text; • Define the register of the text; and • Compose simple and correct sentences in French.
You will now read the following interesting passage which is about an apartment in a big town 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 L'apartement De Mon Père Mon père a un appartement de quatre chambres.
Il y a un grand salon, une salle à manger, une salle de bain, une cuisine et un grenier.
Mon père a sa chambre à lui.
Ma mère aussi à la sienne.
Il existe une chambre 9FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II pour les enfants et la quatrième pour les visiteurs.
Dans le salon, il y a des fauteuils, un magnétophone, une télévision et un très grand frigidaire.
Une partie du salon est réservée aux livres pour mes parents.
Ainsi, on appelle cette partie la bibliothèque.
Les enfants ne doivent pas jouer dans cette partie et ils ne doivent pas jouer avec les livres.
C'est un ordre établi.
La chambre de ma mère est la plus grande parce qu'elle a beaucoup de choses à y garder.
Il y a un lit et une grande armoire où elle garde ses habits et des choses précieuses.
La chambre de mon père est grande mais elle n'est pas aussi grande que celle de ma mère.
Dans cette chambre, il y a un lit, une table et deux chaises.
Mon père lit toujours.
C'est pourquoi il met une table et des chaises dans sa chambre.
La chambre d’ami visiteur est toujours fermée à clé et reste toujours très propre en attendant n'importe quel visiteur.
Là, il y a un lit et une armoire comme dans les autres chambres.
Notre chambre contient deux lits.
II n'y a ni table ni chaise.
Notre armoire est toujours désordonnée.
C'est ma mère qui l'arrange, tous les samedi.
Il y a toujours du bruit dans notre chambre.
C'est pourquoi je n'aime pas y faire ma sièste.
Je préfère dormir dans la chambre de mon père l'après-midi.
Mon père me donne ce privilège parce que je suis l'aîné de la famille et j'aime garder sa chambre très propre.
La salle de bain est très propre avec un grand miroir accroché au mur.
Il y a toujours le savon, l'eau et les serviettes dans la salle de bain.
La toilette aussi reste toujours propre.
La cuisine n'est pas très grande mais le grenier est là pour garder la nourriture.
Je veux que tu passes voir notre appartement un jour et tu seras content.
3.2 Vocabulary You will notice that the passage you have just read describes an apartment hence the register is that of a house.
You will also see that some words are underlined.
You will now take your dictionary and check up the meanings of these words which will help increase your vocabularies.
les chambers un magnétophone une armoire 10FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II un salon un Frigidaire toujours une salle à manger une bibliothèque un miroir un grenier pourquoi la sièste.
Now, apart from the listed words, use your dictionary to check the meanings of words that you may not understand in the text.
This will surely enhance your understanding of the passage.
This will enrich and facilitate your discussion relating to issues of accommodation and housing.
Let me remind you that anytime you meet a new French word that is a noun, you need to immediately confirm its gender.
A good French - English dictionary will indicate the gender by putting (nf = in front of a feminine noun (nf = non féminin) and (nm) in front of a masculine noun (nm = nom masculin).
It is also important to reaffirm that a word may have different dictionary meanings, but you are to pick the most appropriate for the context of the passage.
Your dictionary will also indicate the part of speech to which a word belongs.
My advice to you therefore is that when you look for a word in the dictionary, always confirm the part of speech to which it belongs.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Verb II In the French passage you read in this unit, there is the use of verbs of the first, second and third group.
You will recall that we met verbs of the first group in unit 1, and a few verbs of the third unit.
The verbs of the second group end in -IR.
Example of these verbs includes: établir, finir.There are also some verbs of the third group.
Majority of verbs in this group are irregular verbs.
Like you have seen in the previous unit they end in " - RE or OIR".
Examples include: attendre, faire, mettre, lire, and voir.
You will now identify 5 verbs of the third group and with the aid of your conjugation manual, conjugate them into the simple present tense (present de l'indicatif) List at least 2 verbs of the second group that you can find in the text and conjugate them in the simple present tense.
3.3.2.
Adjective II In unit one, I told you that French adjective agrees in number and gender with the noun it qualifies.
You also met some adjectives which are qualificative in that unit.
In this unit therefore, there are qualificative, 11FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II demonstrative and possessive adjectives.
These adjectives include the followings: Qualificative Adjective Masc sing Masc.
pl Fem.
Sing Fem pl.
Grand grands grande grandes Proper propres propre propres Précieux précieux précieuse précieuses.
Demonstrative Adjectives Masc sing ce (this) Masc.
plural ces (these) Fem.
sing cette (this) Fem.
plural ces (these) Note that cet is used for both masculine and feminine singular nouns beginning with a vowel or an "h" Example: a. cet animal est grand = this animal is tall b. Cet amie est petite = this friend (female) is Small Identify 4 demonstrative adjectives from the French passage that is provided in this unit.
Use these identified adjectives in a simple sentence each to show their meanings.
3.3.3 Simple Composition Now that you have read the passage and worked on the vocabularies contained in the passage, you need to start constructing your own sentences in French.
Let's compose simple sentences using the following listed words from the passage: a. ne ... pas b. fermer à clé c. rester d. il existe e. mais i. Je ne suis pas étudiant.
ii.
Je ferme ma porte à clé.
iii.
La fille reste avec son père.
iv.
Dans ma classe, il existe un tableau-noir.
12FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II v. Le professeur n'est pas riche mais il est content.
Considering the above sentences, you will notice that simple sentences have been constructed using the five listed words above.
You can be doing this as regularly as possible to improve your writing skills.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Now, use the under listed words and expressions to compose simple and correct sentences.
Your sentence must have a subject and a finite verb.
1. un lit 2. jouer 3. une chaise 4. aussi 5. mon 6. un habit 7. une partie 8. un visiteur 9. une cuisine 10. pour 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learned some techniques of analysis of simple passages in French.
You have also learnt vocabulary of the apartment and household materials.
You have also learnt some elements of grammar like adjectives, verbs and nouns.
All these should help you develop your written expression in French.
.
5.0 SUMMARY What you have learned in this unit is to equip you with the basic skills needed to read and answer questions on a written French passage.
It has also equipped you to be able to define and analyse clearly grammatical elements used in the passage.
You have also been equipped with skills needed to compose simple and correct sentences in French.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Using your own words and expressions, summarise the French passage you read in this passage in six good sentences.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 13FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Ayeleru, T. (2004): A Concise Course in French for College and Learning solutions, Ibadan.
Adebayo, A.
(1994): A Functional French Course for Anglophone Students, Omoleye Publishing Co. Ltd. Ibadan.
Answers to Self Assessment Exersice 1.
Je dors sur le lit.
2.
Je joue au foot- ball.
3.
La chaise est cassee.
4.
Je reste a la maison pour me reposer.
5.
5)Mon cahier est perdu.
6.
Elle porte un ha bit proper 7. une partie de la cour est sale.
8.
Il a recu un visiteur.
9.
C’est une cuisine francaise 10.Je reste a la maison pour me Reposer.
14FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 3 A L'AUTOGARE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 A L'autogare 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Verb III 3.3.2 Adjective III 3.3.3 Adverb 3.3.4 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this uni, you will read another interesting text in French.
The register of the passage is that of transportation.
You will acquire more information on the techniques of reading and analysis of simple written passage in French.
These techniques will further equip you with the necessary skills for writing simple composition in French.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer questions based on the passage; • Define and analyse correctly different elements of grammar used in the text; • Define the register of the text; and • Compose simple and correct sentence in French.
Now, you will read another interesting passage which centres on transportation in a rural part of Nigeria.
15FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 A L'autogare Je suis arrivée à la gare en pleurant.
Ma mère essayait sans succès de me consoler.
"Ne pleures pas.
Tu reviendras dans deux mois", a-t-elle dit.
Je n'ai donne aucune réponse, je pleurais toujours.
Elle m'a acheté beaucoup de choses, à savoir: le sandwich, les bonbons, le chocolat, du pain et une bouteille de coca.
Je les ai bien sûr acceptés mais je n'ai pas cessé de sangloter.
Pourquoi ai-je pleuré?
Je pensais à ma mère, a qui je me suis très attaché.
J'ai pense à mes petits frères et soeurs et à mes amis.
J'ai pensé à un méchant professeur que j'allais rencontrer à l'école.
Après quelques minutes, la voiture était prête et nous avons quitté l'autogare.
Ma mère aussi a commencé à pleurer à son tour.
Après cinq minutes de voyage, j'ai cessé mon sanglot et j'ai commencé à penser aux préparatifs pour la rentrée et comment entamer la nouvelle année scolaire.
Arrivé à Okeho, le chauffeur a dit aux passagers de descendre et de chercher à manger parce que c'était déjà 15 heures.
Je n'ai pas pu manger parce que j'étais toujours triste et je pensais à ma mère au village.
Juste avant de quitter Okeho, j'ai rencontré un ami et camarade de classe, Jean.
Nous avons beaucoup causé et j'ai commencé à oublier ma tristesse.
A dix-sept heures, je suis arrivée à Iseyin où je fréquentais une école secondaire.
(Ayeleru, 2004 :12) 3.2 Vocabulary Now that you have read the passage, you will need to explain the underlined words in the passage in English.
Take your dictionary and look for the meanings of those words.
This exercise will definitely enhance your vocabulary building and ultimately improve your own writing competence.
Here are the underlined words: la gare le success consoler une réponse le bonbon une bouteille sangloter méchant la voiture le tour pleurer entamer les passagers la tristesse la rentrée -le chauffeur 16FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II bien sùr le voyage You need to also take your dictionary and look for other words that you may not understand in the passage.
Your understanding of the thrust of the passage depends largely on your ability to get the meanings of the key words in the text.
If you read and confirm the meaning of the words in the text you will definitely find it easy to discuss the themes of the text and answer any questions based on the passage.
Let me re-emphasize that where you have a word that is a noun; you need to confirm the gender of such a noun.
Your bilingual dictionary will assist you in doing this.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis You will be introduced to some grammatical elements used in the French passage that you have just read.
These elements will help you to discover some rudimentary aspects of grammar.
These elements will then help you to compose your own simple sentences and composition of French.
3.3.1 Verb III The French passage you have just read is written in the simple past tense (passé composé) and the imperfect tense (l'imparfait).
The simple past tense is used to describe an action that was accomplished.
To conjugate a verb in the simple past tense, the auxiliary avoir (to have) or être (to be), depending on the verb concerned is conjugated in the present form.
Then, the past participle of the main verb in question is added.
For example, if you want to conjugate the verb penser, you will first determined the past participle of the verb penser which is pensé (see your conjugation manual).
Then conjugate avoir (to have) in the present tense and add the past participle of pensé to it J'ai pensé nous avons pensé Tu as pensé vous avez pensé Il/elle a pensé Ils ont pensé.
Please, note that avoir is used to conjugate all verbs of action while the auxiliary étre is used to conjugate all verbs of state and movement and pronominal verbs.
Let's consider this example: Arriver - étre + arrivé 17FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II a. Je suis arrivé(e) b. Tu es arrivé(e) c. Il est arrivé d. Elle est arrivée e. Nous sommes arrivé(e)s f. Vous étres arrivé(e)s g. Ils sont arrivés h. Elles sont arrivées.
Let me also emphasize that whenever you conjugate any verb in the simple past with auxiliary étre, the past participle must agree in number and gender with the subject pronoun.
Take your conjugation manual and read about passé composé.
Make a list of 5 verbs of action and verbs of movement or state and conjugate them in the simple past (passé composé).
3.3.2 Adjective III Going through the passage you will notice that there are some adjectives used.
These adjectives are mainly possessive.
E.g.
ma, mon, mes (my).
Just like any other adjective, possessive adjective agrees in number and gender with the noun it qualifies.
Let me explain further by using the table below: Masc.
sing Mas.
Pl.
Fem sing Fem.
pl.
1st person mon mes ma mes = my 2nd ” ton tes ta tes = your 3rd ” son ses sa ses = his/her 1st “ notre nos notre nos = our 2nd “ votre vos votre vos= your 3rd “ leur leurs leur leurs = their Please, note that unlike in English language, it is the gender and number of the possessed object that determines the choice of the possessive adjective not the possessor.For example: a. Tunde's table = His table b.
La table de Tunde = sa table Now, construct five sentences using any five possessive adjectives 18FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.3.3 Adverb An adverb is a part of speech which modifies a verb.
It answers the questions "how, where, when?"
In the French passage you read in this unit, there were some adverbs like sans succès, beaucoup, toujours, bien-sûr, déjà.
The functions of these adjectives vary.
They are adverbial of time, place, manner and purpose.
Apart from this type of adverbs, there are some that are formed from the feminine form of French adjectives and they are considered to be regular forms of adverb.
Example: "heureux heureuse heureusement lent lente lentement You will meet more of these adverbs as you go on with your French courses.
There are also some other adverbs that are irregular and they will not obey the rule, I just mentioned.
You have to learn these ones as you come across them.
E.g.
• petit peu • mauvais mal You will now choose five of the listed adverbs from the passage and construct a sentence each with them.
You will ensure that your sentence has a subject pronoun, a finite verb and an adverb.
3.3.4 Simple Composition Now that you have gone through the French passage provided, you will attempt to compose some sentences with some identified expressions from the passage.
Let us look at the following exercises together.
à savoir bien-sûr juste avant de être prêt déjà.
l. Le Professeur a beaucoup de romans à savoir: L'Enfant noir, L'Étranger, la Peste.
2.
Juste avant de quitter Lokoja, le bus est arrivé.
3.
J'ai déjà mangé du riz avant de sortir 4.
Bien-sûr, Dieu est grand 5.
Le garçon est prêt à voyager.
19FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Now, construct simple sentences of your own by using the underlisted words and expressions.
i. descendre ii.
aussi iii.
le sanglot iv.
très v. le sandwich 4.0 CONCLUSION In this, unit, you have learnt some grammatical elements like possessive adjectives, adverbs and simple past tense.
You have further learnt the techniques of simple composition in French.
5.0 SUMMARY What you have learnt in this unit is the basic techniques and skills required in reading and analysing French passages.
You have also acquired the necessary skills for constructing simple and correct sentences in French.
6.0.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Pensez-vous que le narrateur a fait un voyage intéressant selon le texte?
2.
Faites un résumé du texte dans 4 phrases.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1994): A Functional French Course for Anglophone Students, Omoleye Publishing Co; Ibadan.
Ayeleru, T. (2000): A Concise Course in French for College and Lerarning solutions, Ibadan.
Answers to Self Assessment Exercise 1.
J’ai fais descendre les valises 2.
Elle aussi est malade 3.
L’enfant a cessé son sanglot 4.
Elle très fière de sa soeur 5.
L’enfant mange du sand wich 20FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 4 ALLONS VOIR UN MATCH DE FOOTBALL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Allons voir un match de football 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Verbs IV 3.3.1.1 Future Tense 3.3.1.2 Present Conditional Tense 3.3.2 Interrogative Sentence 3.3.3 Dialogue/ Conversational Style 3.4 Simple Written Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be introduced to another form of French text-- Dialogue.
You will therefore learn the techniques of analysing a dialogue written in French.
The dialogue you are about to read has a register of a Football match.
You will learn vocabulary of sport and especially, football match.
You will also acquire some expressions of wish, request acceptance and refusal in French language.
I am sure that you will enjoy this dialogue.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer questions based on the dialogue; • Identify and analyse the techniques of dialogue in French; • Construct your own simple and correct sentences; • Identify and analyse correctly the grammatical elements that make up the dialogue; • Distinguish the register of football from any other register.
Now read this dialogue which I find interesting and I am sure you will also enjoy it.
21FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Allons Voir Un Match De Football Chukwu: Que fais-tu ce weekend?
Kunle: Je ne sais pas encore.
Si je vais mieux, j'irai voir le nouveau film de James Bond en ville.
Chukwu: Moi je préférerais voir le match de football Kunle: Lequel?
Chukwu: Le grand match entre le Nigéria et le Togo.
Je n'aimerais pas manquer un bon match.
Kunle: C'est dommage!
Je ne pourrai pas venir avec toi.
Je serai trop bousculé.
Ce n'est pas bon pour ma santé.
Chukwu: J'irai demander à Ada si elle viendra avec moi.
Kunle: Elle ne viendra pas.
Elle n'aime pas le football.
Demande plutôt à Mariam.
Chukwu: D'accord!
A bientôt!
Chukwu: Mariam, viens-tu au stade avec moi?
Il y a un match de football entre le Nigeria et le Togo à 15 heures.
Mariam: Je voudrais bien.
Mais tu sais où se trouve le stade?
Chukwu: Non, pas exactement.
Mais on peut demander aux passants.
Mariam: D'accord!
On y va!
Il est déjà quatorze heures.
Nous n'avons qu'une heure.
Chukwu: Pardon Monsieur, je cherche le stade de la Liberté.
Agent de Police: Le stade?
Prenez la rue à gauche jusqu'aux feux.
Puis, tournez à droite.
Marchez jusqu'au grand pont.
C'est juste à l'autre bout du pont.
Mariam: C'est loin d'ici?
Agent de Police: Mais non!
Vous en avez pour cinq minutes.
Vous pouvez entendre le bruit des spectateurs déjà.
Chukwu/Mariam: Merci Monsieur!
Agent de Police: De rien (Adebayo, 1994 :75-76).
3.2 Vocabulary Like you have been informed, this unit talks about a type of sport, football match.
Words and expressions you will meet here are those of football.
Also, the relationship between the people involved in this dialogue also affects their style of expression and their level of language.
As we go along you will see more of this.
22FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Now, take your dictionary and explain the following French words in English.
Don't forget to identify the genders of nouns that you may find in the text.
Encore le stade exactement nouveau d'accord la rue bousculer la liberté plutôt manquer bientôt les feux dommage le pont le bout la ville les passants les spectateurs You will understand the text more if you check for the meanings of any other words or expressions that you may not know.
This will enhance your general understanding of the whole dialogue.
Your ability to answer questions based on the dialogue and ability to discuss the subject matter of the text depend largely on your general understanding of the text and its grammatical and lexical components.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis You will be introduced to elements of grammar used in the French dialogue that you have read in this unit.
This will further reinforce your competence of writing and comprehension of French.
3.3.1 Verb IV You have been learning about French verbs since the beginning of this course.
You will learn about verb in this unit again.
Your good mastery of French verbs is partly a pre-requisite to good expression, whether written or oral.
Here you will learn simple future tense and the present conditional tense.
3.3.1.1 Future Tense (Le Futur Simple) In the French dialogue you read, there are present, future and conditional tenses.
These tenses are peculiar to conversation.
They are everyday tenses that are usually found in conversation like this.
Since I have discussed the present tense in the preceding units, I will now take you through the future tense.
To get the future tense form in French you will add the followings to the infinitive form of the verb concerned.
For example, the verb demander (to ask, to demand).
You will add these to the infinitive form: -ai, -as, -a, -ons, -ez, - ont.
You will now have: Je demanderai - I will ask/demand Tu demanderas Il/elle demandera 23FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Nous demanderons Vous demanderez Ils/elle demanderont I should also tell you that there is an irregular conjugation of the future tense.
You have such examples in the dialogue: pouvoir, venir.
Look at how these verbs are conjugated: Pouvoir Venir Je pourrai Je viendrai Tu pourras Tu viendras Il/elle pourra Il/elle viendra Nous pourrons Nous viendrons Vous pourrezVous viendrez Ils/elle pourront Ils/elle viendront Let me advise that you take your conjugation manual and read about the future tense conjugation in French especially the irregular conjugation.
You will also have to do as many practices and exercises as possible.
Identify any 5 verbs in the French dialogue provided in this unit and use each of them in a sentence.
The tense of the verbs must be future.
(le futur simple).
3.3.1.2 Present Conditional (Le Conditionnel Présent) As I told you earlier, there is the use of present conditional tenses in the dialogue that you read in this unit.
The form of the present conditional tense is: Si + Présent + Futur (If + present + future).
Look at this example from the French dialogue provided: a. Si je vais mieux, j'irai voir le nouveau film de James Bond en ville.
Other examples of conditional tense are: a. Si to viens, nous sortirons b. Si ma mère arrive, nous mangerons c. Si elle vient, les élèves partiront.
You will notice the examples in different situations that are not certain.
In English language, some people refer to the first clause i.e.
si tu viens (If you come) as an "if clause nous sortirons (we shall go out) now stands as the main clause.
24FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Look for any dialogue written in French and find out, how much of present conditional tenses you can find in it.
I believe you will find it easy to identify because of the word si that is always present in it.
You will need to start using present conditional tenses in your daily oral and written expressions because this will help you to master its usage once and for all.
3.3.2.
Interrogative Sentence As mentioned earlier, the French text you are analysing in this unit is a dialogue.
It is the nature of this dialogue that makes the text to have so many interrogative sentences.
Interrogative is common in conversation and oral expression; this is because the response is obtained almost immediately.
Let us identify some interrogative sentences in the dialogue: i. Que fais-tu ce weekend?
ii.
Lequel?
iii.
Mariam, viens-tu au stade avec moi?
iv.
C'est loin d'ici?
In French language, there are three main forms of interrogation.
They are: 1.
Qu'est-ce que + declarative sentence For example: Qu'est-ce que tu fais?
(What are you doing?
or what do you do?).
2.
Inversion of the declarative sentence Example: Mariam, viens-tu au stade avec moi?
(Mariam, are you coming to the stadium with me).
3.
Rising intonation: This is when the sentence is in declarative form.
The interrogative nature is discovered by the intonation of the speaker and, in written form by the interrogative mark"?
Example: C'est loin d'ici?
Sometimes, interrogation forms may be realized by adding the inversion with the following words: Que, Où, and Qui.
Example: Que fais-tu ce week-end ?
25FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II You will notice that the way the interrogative sentences are used in the dialogue provided suggests familiarity that exists among the three characters in the dialogue (Chukwu, Kunle and Mariam).
3.4 Simple Written Expression Now that you have gone through the French dialogue provided in this unit, let us identify some words and construct simple and correct sentences with them.
a. encore b. d'accord c. le stade d. ne ... pas e. c'est dommage 1.
Il répète la phase encore.
Viens-tu en classe aujourd'hui?
Je ne sais pas encore.
2.
Le chef a parlé beaucoup et je suis d'accord avec lui.
3.
Il y a beaucoup de spectateurs au stade 4.
Je ne suis pas fatigué 5.
C'est dommage que les enfants soient en retard.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Now, use the words listed below to construct simple and correct sentences of your own.
Your sentence must have a subject and a finite verb.
a. avec b. entre c. où d. un film e. le passant 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned some vocabularies of football.
You have also learnt the techniques of conversation in French.
You have also acquired the techniques of analysing some grammatical elements like future and conditional tenses and the forms and use of interrogative sentences.
26FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 5.0 SUMMARY What you have learnt in this unit is the basic skills required in the analysis of a dialogue written in French.
You have also acquired further the necessary skills for construction of simple and correct sentences in French.
6.0.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Dans deux phrases, décrivez le programme d'activités de Chukwu pour le week-end dont on parle dans le texte.
2.
Aimez vous le sport?
Lequel?
Dans trois paragraphes, décrivezle.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1994): A Functional French Course for Anglophone Students, Omoleye Publishing Co. Ltd., Ibadan.
Ayeleru, T. (2004): A Concise Course in frech,Learning solutions,Ibadan.
for College and University Students, Kenny D. Ventures, Ibadan.
27FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 5 LE MARIAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Le Mariage 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Verb Imparfait Plusque parfait 3.3.2 Relative Pronoun (pronon relatif) 3.3.3 Adjective 3.4 Sentence Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read a narrative passage.
The register is that of marriage.
You will learn further the techniques of writing simple, compound and complex sentences.
This unit will also discuss further adjective.
You will also learn imperfect tense, pluperfect tense and the relative pronoun.
You will no doubt find this passage interesting.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer questions based on the passage; • define and explain some vocabularies in the passage; • Identify some words and tell the part of speech to which they belong; • Compose complex sentences using the relative pronoun; and • Define and analyse complex sentences.
You will now read the following passage: 28FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTNET 3.1 Le Mariage Monsieur Dada et Mademoiselle Catherine Ojo venaient de se marier.
Le mariage avait eu lieu à Ibadan.
Immédiatement après la cérémonie du mariage, le couple était parti pour la lune de miel.
La noce est pour un séjour de quatre semaines dans un grand hôtel à Paris.
Arrivé à l'hôtel de la Liberté dont 1e couple avait vu la photo, le marié avait pris la clé de leur appartement et il y était entré avec sa femme.
Ils s'étaient assis dans de grands fauteuils.
Mme Dada regardait tout autour de la pièce.
Il y avait de beaux tableaux et photos aux murs.
Aussi y avait-il de vieux mais de beaux meubles et de très épais tapis.
Le couple était au comble de la joie.
Quelques minutes plus tard, le cuisinier était arrivé avec des sandwichs.
En attendant le repas du riz-au-gras que la nouvelle famille avait commandé, ils mangeaient les sandwichs.
Ils avaient à peine fini les sandwichs quand un autre cuisinier était entré avec le repas espéré.
Le couple avait mangé à leur satisfaction.
Ayant fini le repas, M. Dada avait pris une bouteille de bière avant d'aller rejoindre sa femme à la piscine.
Ils avaient nagé pendant une trentaine de minutes.
"Nous devons avoir une piscine derrière notre maison", avait dit le mari.
(Ayeleru, 2004 :57) 3.2 Vocabulary Having read the French text provided in this unit, explain the underlined words used in the text in English.
Take your French-English dictionary and look for the meanings of those words and expressions.
This exercise will no doubt help you to build your vocabularies and it will also improve your writing competence.
Here are the underlined words: la cérémonie plus tard la piscine appartement nager le tapis le couple la noce le riz-au-gras la lune de miel le séjour le meuble Take your dictionary and look for the meanings of other words and expressions that you may not understand.
Your understanding of the 29FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II message and themes of the passage depends very much on your ability to grasp the meanings of the key words and expressions in the text.
You will recall that, a dictionary gives many meanings to a single word; it is now up to you to pick the most appropriate word for the context in which it is used.
Remember that where you have a word that is a noun, you need to confirm the gender of such a noun.
Your bilingual dictionary will be helpful for this exercise.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis I will take you through some grammatical elements that are used in the French passage you read.
The elements of grammar include Imparfect tense (I'imparfait) pluparfect (plusque parfait) relative pronouns, and adjectives.
3.3.1.1 Imperrect Tense (I'imparfait) The imperfect tense is used in French to describe an action that was continuous in the past.
It is also used to express habitual actions.
The regular imperfect tense is formed by adding the following endings to the stem of the conjugated form of first person plural of the concerned verb.
The endings are: -ais, -ais, -ait, -ions, -iez, -aient.
For example: parler - parlons - parl • Je parlais • tu parlais • Il/elle parlait • Nous parlions • Vous parliez • Ils/elle parlaient Regular imparfait tenses in the French passage you read in this unit include: venaient (venir), regardait (regarder) mangeaient (manger).
I should also tell you that there are irregular imperfect forms.
These will not follow the above regulation because the verbs concerned do not have a regular or fixed stem.
E.g.
avoir and étre will be conjugated this way: j'avais j'étais tu avais tu étais il/elle avait il/elle était Nous avions nous étions Vous aviez vous étiez Ils/elle avaient ils/elles étaient Take your conjugation manual and study imperfect tense conjugation.
30FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Now, go back to the French text you have read and identify 3 sentences where imperfect tenses are used and justify the reason(s) for the choice of imperfect tense in those contexts.
3.3.1.2 Pluperfect (Plusque Parfait) The pluperfect tense is widely used in the French passage that you read in this unit.
Look at some examples: avait eu, était parti, avait vu, avait pris, était entré.
The pluperfect is formed by adding the past participle of the verb being conjugated to the imperfect tense of the auxiliary étre or avoir as the case may be.
You will recall that étre is used to conjugate all verbs of movement state and pronominal verbs while avoir is used for verbs of action.
Let us look at two examples of pluperfect tense conjugation: partir nager J'étais parti(e) j'avais nagé tu étais parti(e) tu avais nagé Il était parti II/elle avait nagé Elle était parti(e) Nous avions nagé Nous étions parti(e)s Vous aviez nagé Ils étaient sortis Its/elles avaient nagé Elles étaient sorties Remember that the past participle of the verb conjugated with auxiliary étre agrees in number and gender with the subject or the subject pronoun as you can see in the example above.
Go through the French passage provided once given and identify two sentences each where the pluperfect is conjugated with étre and avoir respectively.
3.3.2 Relative Pronoun (Pronom Relatif) There is an ample use of relative pronoun in the French text you read in this unit.
For example: qui, que, où, dont are the simple forms of relative pronoun.
Now, what do you mean by relative pronoun?
Relative pronouns are used to join many sentences without repeating an already mentioned noun.
Relative pronouns lay more emphasis on the noun.
Like I have mentioned earlier on, there are different forms of the relative pronoun.
They are qui (who), que (which) où (where) and dont (whose).
They are simple relative pronouns.
31FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Qui- can function as a subject of a sentence.
For example : • Je vois une fille qui arrive.
Apart from the fact that "qui" in the sentence gives more information about "une fille", you can see that it also acts as the subject of the verb "arrive" (qui arrive).
S V Que- can function as an object of a verb in a sentence.
Example: • En attendant le repas du riz-au-gras que le nouvelle famille avait commandé ... (see the 3-rd paragraphe of the passage).
Que refers to riz-au-gras which is the antecedent and the object of the verb avait.
Où - can be complement of time or place.
For example: j'ai vu une femme au marché où elle vend des tomates.
Dont (whose, of whom, of which) performs many functions.
It can be complement of noun, adjective, indirect object and agent.
Let's consider these examples: • Arrivé à l'hôtel de la liberté dont le couple avait vu la photo.
(complement of noun, "l'hôtel") • Elle m'a parlé de la fille dont elle est satisfaite.
(complement of adjective).
Now, join the two simple sentences in each of the following numbers with the indicated relative pronoun.
1.
Je vois le professeur Il est arrive (Qui) 2.
Je mange la mangue elle est mûre (que) 3.
On parle de la femme Elle est méchante-(dont) 3.3.3 Adjective Apart from the types of adjective already discussed in the preceding units, there are verbal adjectives.
These are adjectives derived from the past participle of verbs.
These adjectives like other types of adjective 32FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II agree in gender and number with the nouns they qualify.
Verbal adjective in the French text provided in this unit includes, espéré.
Let us look at these examples:  Nous avons la langue parlée et la langue écrite  C'est une chose imprimée  C'est un programme organisé  Ce sont des réponses données The words underlined in the examples above are past participles of verbs and they act as adjectives in the sentences.
They are therefore called verbal adjectives.
Form three sentences by using these verbs in bracket as adjective in each of the sentence (accomplir, achever, mourir).
3.4 Sentence Formation and Composition Having gone through the French passage provided in this unit, you must have surely seen how complex sentences are formed by using simple relative clauses.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE You will now form five sentences using relative pronouns qui, que, où, dont for each sentence.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learned in this unit, the techniques of composing complex sentences by using simple relative clauses.
You have also learnt some elements of grammar like imperfect, pluperfect and adjectives that are vital to written and oral expressions in French.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the basic grammatical elements needed to compose complex sentences.
It has also equipped you with some tenses that you will need to narrate events and stories in the past.
It has therefore enhanced your competence of French written expression.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT i. Commentez "dont" dans cette phrase "Arrivée à l'hôtel de la liberté dont le couple avait vu la photo.
33FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II ii.
Commentez "que" dans cette phrase" En attendant le repas du riz-au- gras que la nouvelle famille avait commandé, ils mangeaient les sandwichs".
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993): Texts et travaux de langue Francaise Jator Publishing Company, Ibadan.
Ayeleru, T. (2004): A Concise Course in French for College and Learning solutions, Ibadan.
Answers to self assessment exercise 1.
Qui est dans la vioture?
2.
Que fait ton frere?
3.
Ou est le bureau du professeur?
4.
Voila la voiture dont je vous ai parler.
34FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II MODULE 2 Unit 1 La soirée dansante Unit 2 Niamey: La capitale du Niger Unit 3 Sembène Ousmane: l'autodidacte Unit 4 La littérature Unit 5 Les noces chinoises UNIT 1 LA SOIRÉE DANSANTE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 La soirée dansante 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Verb (pronominal) 3.3.2 Interrogation 3.3.3 Imperative Sentence 3.4 Simple Composition in French 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will be reading a dialogue written in French in this unit.
The dialogue exists in a school environment.
Three students are involved and their discussion takes place in a night party which allows the students to come across each other and know themselves.
What you will find interesting in this unit is the techniques of dialogue reading and writing, what we call in French la mise en scéne.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read the dialogue and explain issues related to the dialogue; • Define and analyse the grammatical elements employed in the passage; 35FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • Explain the vocabularies related to party and school life; and • Compose your dialogue in French language.
Now, you will read an interesting dialogue, where three students meet and discuss at a night party.
They exchange greetings and jokes.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 La Soiree Dansante Bola: Salut Chukwu!
Chukwu: Salut Bola!
viens!
Je vais te présenter à mon ami Ahmed.
Ahmed permets-moi de te présenter Bola.
Bola, je te présente Ahmed.
Bola: Enchanté.
Ahmed: Enchanté moi aussi.
Qui est avec toi?
Bola: C'est ma copine Mariam.
Nous partageons la même chambre.
Ahmed: Bonjour Mariam.
Je m'appelle Ahmed Jodah.
Je suis étudiant de Français.
Mariam: Bonjour Ahmed.
Je fais le Français aussi.
Mais je ne te vois jamais en classe.
Ahmed: Si!
si!
C'est que tu ne fais pas attention aux gars!
Mariam: Alors, tu t'amuses bien ce soir?
Ahmed: Ah oui!
Evidemment.
La musique est bonne, il y a des boissons.
Et les jeunes filles sont sympathiques.
Mariam: Tiens!
Où sont Bola et Chukwu?
Ahmed: Les voilà au fond de la salle.
Ils dansent.
Tu danses avec moi?
Mariam: Non, pardonne-moi, je n'aime pas danser.
(Adebayo, 1994 : 43-45).
3.2 Vocabulary The words and expressions that you will meet in this unit are those related with night party student life and get-together, you have words and expressions like: • la soirée dansante = night party • l'union des étudiants = students' union • une épreuve = examination • présenter quelqu'un = to introduce someone • enchantée) de rencontrer quelqu'un = to be pleased to meet someone.
• la musique = music 36FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • la boisson = drink • sympathique = kind • copine = friend (male) • les gars = guys Take your dictionary and check up the meanings of other words and expressions that you may not understand.
This will surely enhance your general understanding of the text.
The following words in the text may be expressed in another way.
For example: • copain/copine = ami(e), camarade • les gars: les jeune hommes • enchanté de vous connaître = j'ai le plaisir de vous connaître.
You willl also take note that the speakers in the French dialogue you read are friends hence their language is familiar and very informal.
That is why there is the use of tu (you) (second person singular number) instead of vous which is second person plural number.
Examples:  Bola, je te présente  Tu t'amuses bien ce soir?
 Tiens, où sont Bola et Chukwu?
The forms of greetings employed also suggest familiarity.
For example: - salut Chukwu - salut Bola This style gives the passage an oral tone.
Expressions like ah oui, si!
si!
also reinforce the oral nature of the text.
There is also an extensive use of interrogative sentences.
It is common in conversation.
Si means "yes" in the context of the above French dialogue.
When a question is posed negatively and the answer is positive, you say si, and not oui.
Example:  Tu ne mange pas  Si, je mange 37FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Pronominal Verb (Verb Pronominal) The French text you just read is a conversational text.
The verbs used are predominantly in the simple present tense and pronominal verbs.
The pronominal verbs include: Se présenter S'amuser S'appeler A pronominal verb can be reflexive or reciprocal.
In conjugating this for verb, the pronominal pronoun must also be conjugated.
Here is an example: • se présenter • Je me présente • Tu te présentes • II/elle se présente • Nous nous présentons • Vous vous présentez • Ils/ Elles se présentent Note that the singular numbers are reflective while the plural numbers may be reciprocal or reflexive.
Let us look at some examples in the French text provided in this unit:  Bonjour Mariam, je m'appelle Ahmed Jodah.
 Alors, tu t'amuses bien ce soir?
Self assessment exercise Now, make a list of five pronominal verbs and conjugate them in simple present tense.
(present de l'indicatif).
3.3.2 Interrogative Sentence Being a conversational text, there is the use of interrogative sentences in the passage.
I told you about interrogative sentences in one of the previous units (see unit 4).
Here are some of the interrogative sentences in the text.
 Qui est avec toi?
 Tu t'amuses bien ce soir?
38FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II  Où sont Bola et Chukwu?
 Tu danses avec moi?
You will notice that many of the interrogative sentences in the passage belong to the rising information (ascending intonation) form.
These are sentences that are in the affirmative form, you just indicate the interrogation by raising your tone and in the written form by putting the interrogative mark (?).
3.3.3 The Imperative Sentence The imperative is used while giving an order or a directive sometimes, the infinitive may be used to give information and directives.
Generally, to form the imperative in French, you make use of the present tense form of.
"tu", "nous" and "vous".
For example: venir Indicative Imperative Tu viens Viens!
Nous venons Venons!
Vous venez Venez!
Note that with -er verbs, the s that is normally at the end of the conjugated form of second person singular is dropped in the imperative form.
For example: manger, parler, aller.
Indicative Imperative Tu manges mange!
Tu parles français Parle français!
Tu vas Va!
But vas-y is used because of the pronunciation.
In the French text that you read, there are imperative sentences like:  Bola Viens!
- Tiens!
 Pardonne-moi!
 Ahmed permets-moi de te présenter Bola.
Use the following verbs in the imperative at any of the three levels (i.e tu, nous, vous).
39FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.4 Simple Composition in French Now that you have studied the French conversational text provided in the unit, you are to practice composition of simple and correct sentences in French.
There are some words that have been identified from the text.
These words will be used in sentences to guide you.
The words are:  tant pis  tant mieux - si  le gar  sympathique 1.
Tant pis pour Jean, il ne vient pas au bal ce soir 2.
Je voyage aujourd'hui tant mieux, il y a un petit congé.
3.
Tu ne viens pas au cinéma?
Si!
je viens avec toi.
4.
Le gar dans ma classe n'est pas sérieux 5.
Le professeur est très sympathique SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Construct a correct sentence each in French with the following words:  présenter  ne ... jamais  évidemment - fond  voilà.
Answers To Self Assessment Exercise a. Je vous presente ma petite soeur khadija.
b. Mon pere ne vientjamais nous voir.
c. Evidemment j’ai trouver mon crayon au fond de mon sac.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned a number of techniques of reading and analysing of a conversational text.
You have also learned some elements of grammar used in the composition of the text.
These elements are pronominal verb, interrogative sentence and imperative sentence.
You should have learned that in a conversation like the one you read in this unit, the language is devoid of formal expressions.
The expression is familiar because the people involved in the dialogue are friends who address each other as friends.
The style of the dialogue in this unit is peculiar to dialogue.
You must have discovered that the relationship between a speaker and his listener also determines the level of language (i.e.
formal, informal or familiar).
40FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 5.0 SUMMARY What you have learned in this unit concerns night party and student life on campus.
You have read in this unit, the discussion of three students who met at a party and introduced each other, exchanged jokes and enjoyed themselves.
You have therefore been equipped with techniques of reading and analysing a conversational text.
This unit has no doubt enhanced your competence of written expression.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT In three good sentences written in French.
Summaries, the French dialogue you read show clearly the main ideas of the dialogue.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(2000): A Functional French Course for Anglophone Students, Omoleye Publishing Co. Ltd. Ibadan, pp 43-45.
Monnerie-Goarin, Annie and Siréjols, Evelyna (1999): Champion 1, Clé International, Paris.
41FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 2 NIAMEY, LA CAPITALE DU NIGER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Niamey, La Capitale du Niger 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Verb 3.3.2 Adjective 3.4 Expression of Weather 3.5 Simple Written Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read the passage in French which describes the geographical and social situations of a Francophone capital in West- Africa, Republic of Niger.
This passage will introduce you to further grammatical elements and expressions needed in written and oral expression in French.
You will find this text interesting as it will give you a picture of the capital of the Saharan country which you may also want to visit personally.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer questions based on the text; • Use expressions relating to weather and government (administration) in your own writing; • Define and analyse the use of gerund; and • Compose sentences and paragraphs of your own using some expressions found in the text.
Now, let us go through the passage.
42FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Niamey, La Capitale Du Niger Niamey est la capitale de la République du Niger.
C'est une ville sahélienne avec une population de 2 millions d'habitants.
La vie est très vive et intéressante dans cette ville.
Il y a cependant de belles maisons et de hauts bâtiments qui font penser aux arbres dans la forêt.
Ces bâtiments bien arrangés contribuent énormément à la beauté de la ville.
A part des maisons résidentielles, il existe des bureaux et des ambassades des pays étrangers.
Le siège du gouvernement nigérien aussi se trouve à Niamey.
Les ministères et même la présidence sont tous là.
De plus, la seule université du pays est située à Niamey.
Ainsi, on l'appelle "Université de Niamey".
En dépit de la sécheresse du pays, il fait toujours beau temps au campus parce qu'il est situé très près du grand fleuve niger.
Heureusement le fleuve crée un centre de tourisme et de recréation pour les étudiants et les étrangers.
Le soir, on voit les étudiants dans les pirogues qui s'amusent sur le fleuve avec leurs amis.
Aussi y a-t-il un grand aéroport international a Niamey.
Il se trouve à la rentré de la ville.
Il existe une bonne sécurité dans cet aéroport.
Au grand marché, la plupart des vendeurs ne parlent pas français qui est la seule langue officielle.
En effet, il faut savoir parler haoussa ou jerma pour faciliter la communication commerciale.
En fait, la radio nigérienne, qui s'appelle "la voix du sahel" a beaucoup de ses programmes en haoussa et jerma qui sont les langues locales les plus populaires.
Alors, rendez-vous a Niamey!
(Ayeleru, 2004 :39) 3.2 Vocabulary In this passage, you will find vocabularies relating to different registers like administration, weather, geography and society.
For example, you find words like I'ambassade = embassy, le ministere _ ministry, la présidence, the presidency.
43FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Take your bilingual dictionary and look for the meanings of the underlisted words as they are used in the context of the passage provided.
This exercise will surely assist you to build your own vocabulary.
l'habitant la sécurité la recréation le bâtiment le pays 1e pirogue la beauté heureusement la sécheresse le siège le rendez-vous Look for the meanings of other words and expressions that you may not understand in the passage.
Your understanding of these words and expressions will help you to understand clearly the whole passage and you will find it easy to analyse.
Do not forget that your dictionary can also help you to identify the part of speech to which a word belongs.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Verb You will learn more about verbs here.
The French passage you just read is written in simple present tense.
This tense is commonly used to describe places, objects and situation.
You have learned simple present tense in the preceding units.
What I will teach you in this unit is the simple present tense of pronominal verbs.
A pronominal verb is the one which returns the action of the verb to the doer (subject of the verb).
A pronominal verb is always preceded by a pronominal pronoun.
Example: se trouver, s'amuser, se laver.
This pronoun se is always conjugated with the verb in all the tenses.
There are two types of pronominal pronoun, namely "reflexive" and "reciprocal".
The singular numbers je, tu, il, elle, on are reflexive while the plural numbers are reciprocal.
They are nous, vous, elles, ils.
Now, how is a pronominal verb conjugated?
Let us take some examples from the text: "s'amuser, s'appeller" S'amuser S'appeler Je m'amuse Je m'appelle Tu t'amuses Tu t'appelles Il/elle s'amuse Il/elle s'appelle Nous nous amusons Nous nous appelons Vous vous amusez Vous vous appelez Ils/ elles s'amusent Ils/ elles s'appellent 44FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Please, note that the reflexive pronouns are put between the subject pronoun and the verb when the verb is conjugated.
The reflexive pronouns are me, te, se, nous, vous, se.
Consult your conjugation manual for further information on the conjugation of pronominal verbs.
You need constant practice in this regard.
And, if you find them in French passages, study them very well.
3.3.2 Adjective You will see that, there is an ample use of French adjectives in the text you just read.
You have adjectives like interessante, belles, residentielles, seule.
There are regular and irregular adjectives.
Remember that adjectives in French agree in number and gender with the nouns they qualify.
Let us look at the irregular adjectives in the table below: Masc.
sing Masc.
plural Fem.
Sing Fem.
plural local locaux locale locales nouveau nouveaux nouvelle nouvelles nouvel (before nouveaux nouvelle nouvelles a vowel or h) beau beaux belle belles bel (before a beaux belle belles vowel or h) faux faux fausse fausses blanc blancs blanche blanches You will see more of these adjectives as you progress.
3.4 Expression of Weather As you have noticed in the French passage that you read in this unit, there is expression of weather condition.
The passage shows that the weather in Niamey, the capital of Republic of Niger is dry and hot.
Here are some expressions concerning weather in French.
• Il fait chaud = the weather is hot • Il fait beau temps = the weather is fine • I1 fait froid = the weather is cold • Il fait mauvais = the weather is bad • I1 peut = it is raining.
You can also use these expressions to describe the weather around you.
For example you can say: 45FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • Il fait froid â Jos = It is cold in Jos • Il fait chaud à Lokoja = It is hot in Lokoja.
3.4 Simple Written Expression Now that you have gone through a detailed analysis of the French passage provided in this unit, you can now use the various expressions you have learned to compose correct and clear sentences and paragraphs.
You will now compose five sentences of your own using a word each from the underlisted expressions.
a. heureusement b. il fait beau temps c. le siège d. il fait mauvais temps e. en pleut 4.0 CONCLUSION You have learned, in this unit, further techniques of written expression in French.
You have also learnt more grammatical elements ranging from verb to adjective.
You have no doubt acquired new expressions concerning the weather and administration.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with some vocabularies and expressions required to express the weather condition and to describe your country.
It has also enriched you with some techniques and skills for writing descriptive composition in French.
I believe you find the skills acquired here very useful as you progress in this course.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write a text of two paragraphs in French language to describe your village making particular references to important places and the weather condition in the village.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1994): A Functional French Course for Anglophone Students, Omoleye Publishing Co; Ibadan.
Ayeleru, T. (2000): A Concise Course in French for College and Learning solutions, Ibadan.
46FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 3 SEMBÈNE OUSMANE: L’AUTODIDACTE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sembène Ousmane: L'autodidacte 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Present Participle 3.3.3 The General (le gerundif) 3.4 Short Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References.Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will be taken you through another French passage which centres on a celebrated francophone African literature writer, the Senegalese Marxist, writer, Sembène Ousmane.
This unit will teach you the techniques of describing a person and talking about the person's qualities, characters and experiences.
This passage is very motivating and you will see how determination can help someone to attain a lofty height.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer questions related to the passage; • Discuss the life history and experience of the main character in the passage; • Identify some of the literary work of the main character of this passage; • Compose simple descriptive text of your own; and • Master the use of gerund and some prepositions in French language.
Now, let us go through the passage and analyse it: 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 47FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.1 Sembene Ousmane: L'autodidacte Sembène Ousmane est né en janvier 1923 d'une famille musulmane à Zinguichor dans la région de la Casamance, au sud du Sénégal.
Il a exercé plusieurs métiers dans sa jeunesse.N'ayant qu'une éducation primaire à peine a-t-il eu son Certificat dEtudes Primaires.
Il a été congédié de l'école pour avoir giflé un Blanc qui était son directeur.
Très jeune, il s'est dirigé vers Dakar où il a touché à tout.
Plus tard, il est parti en France en bateau.
Il a travaillé pendant dix ans comme docker au Port de Marseille, l'un des plus grands ports de la France.
Ayant compris qu'il n'a pas eu la chance de poursuivre ses études, il a appris à écrire lui-même.
Pendant la deuxième Guerre Mondiale, il a été recruté comme tirailleur.
Il a participé aux combats d’Italie et d'Allemagne.
Il était donc prisonnier de guerre et libéré plus tard.
Ouvrier militant, Sembène Ousmane a participé à beaucoup de grèves y compris la grève des cheminots de la ligne Dakar-Niger.
Il a écrit beaucoup de romans et nouvelles sur les périodes avant et après les indépendances.
Toutes les oeuvres littéraires de cet autodidacte ont rapport à sa propre vie et à la réalité socio-politique et économique de son temps.
Selon lui, l'écrivain doit mettre son oeuvre au service de la classe la plus démunie.
Parmi ses oeuvres nous pouvons retenir les suivantes: Le Docker Noir (1956), Ô Pays Mon Beau Peuple (1957), Les Bouts de Bois de Dieu (1960), L'Harmattan (1964), Le Mandat Précédé de Véhi-Ciosane (1973), Voltaïque (nouvelles 1972), Xala (1973) et le Dernier de l'Empire (a deux volumes, 1979-1982).
Il a réalisé également beaucoup de films.
Le premier est Barrom Sarret.
Le Mandat aussi a été projeté en film.
Sembène Ousmane explique l'importance du cinéma en disant que "le cinéma est pour les Africains la meilleure école du soir".
Tout ceci le démontre comme un écrivain populaire.
(Ayeleru, 2004 :49) 3.2 Vocabulary 48FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Do you know the person called autodidacte?
It is a person who without attending formal school or without taking instruction from anybody, learns how to read and write himself.
Sembène Ousmane, the writer referred to in this passage is a self taught man.
There are other vocabularies in the text.
They include: • L e métier = hand work, trade • la jeunesse = youth • congédier = to expel • le bateau = ship • le port = seaport • l'auto-cultivation = self training • l a grève = strike, riot You will now take your bilingual (French - English) dictionary and check the meaning of the following expressions: • le cheminot • la guerre mondiale/ populaire/ prisonnier • le docker • à peine • le directeur.
If you still find any other words that you may not understand, use your dictionary to find the meaning of such words and expressions.
Where you find a noun, don't forget to learn its gender with it.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Present Participle (Participle Présent) You will see that some verbs are used in the present participle form in the French passage you have read e.g.
ayant (avoir).
Present participles or regular verbs are formed by adding ant to the stem of the first person plural of the present tense of the verb concerned.
49FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Examples: • Parler parlons parl + ant = parlant • Finir finissons finiss + ant = finissant • Écrire écrivons écriv + ant = écrivant • Croire croyons croy + ant = croyant The two auxiliary verbs are irregular: etre and avoir: être" étant avoir ayant Now, make a list of 5 verbs used in the text and write out their present participles.
3.3.2 The Gerundive (Le Gerundif) The gerundive is used mostly to express two actions that are going on simultaneously.
In the French passage you read, the third paragraph starts with a gerund Ayant compris qu'il n'a pas eu la chance de poursuivre ses études, il a appris à écrire lui-même.
The gerund in the above context is to express the consequence of an action.
The consequence of the action expressed in the first sentence is exposed in the second sentence.
The gerund form that express simultaneous actions are:  En parlant, je mange du riz  En quittant la maison, je rencontre un ami  En mangeant, wumi parle à son ami.
You will note in the above examples that "en" is always followed by "present participle" to achieve the gerund i.e.
"en + participle présent".
3.3.3 Preposition (La Preposition) You must have seen that prepositions are used widely in the French passage provided in this unit.
Just like any other passage, preposition is a common feature in this one.
Prepositions that are commonly used are à (to) and de (of, from).
Preposition à can change in form according to the gender of the noun it precedes.
Let us look at its different forms: à before a name of a place or person.
Examples: Je parle à Daniel Je vais à Lokoja Please note that, à" + le will be au.
This is used before a masculine (abstract or common) singular noun.
It is a grammatical error to use à le 50FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II in your sentences and expressions.
For example, you should say Yakubu va au champ, Rachel va au cinéma.
Sometimes, the contextual meaning of au may be "in the" or "at the" for example you have the underlisted ones in the passage: • Sembène Ousmane est né en Javier 1923 d'une famille musulmane à Zinguichor dans la région de la Casamance, au sud du Sénégal" (1st sentence of the 1st paragraph).
When the preposition is used before a feminine with the article la, there is no contraction.
For example: • "à + la" = à la (used before abstract or common feminine singular noun).
• "Toutes les oeuvres littéraires de cet autodidacte ont rapport à sa propre vie et à la réalité socio-politique et économique de son temps".
(see paragraph 6 of the French passage).
• Je vais à la gare • Elle est à la maison As for the plural form, both masculine and feminine plural use the same form.
It is à + les = aux.
That is to say "aux" will be used before both masculine plural and feminine plural nouns.
Note that it is grammatically wrong to say à les instead of aux.
Let us consider the following examples:  Il a participé aux combats dItalie et d'Allemagne.
(see the 4th paragraph of the French passage).
 Je parle aux étudiants.
"De" - (of) is another preposition commonly used in the written French and oral expressions.
Like "à", it also changes in form depending on the noun it precedes.
It is therefore called partitive article.
Here are the different forms.
• "de + le" = du (it is used before a masculine singular noun).
Examples: • Je mange du pain (this expresses a part of a whole) 51FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • Sembène Ousmane est né en janvier 1923 ... à Zinguichor dans la région de la Casamance, au sud du Sénégal (see the first paragraph of the French text).
"De + la = de la" it is used before a feminine singular noun.
For example: • L'écrivain doit mettre son oeuvre au service de la classe la plus demunie (see the 6th paragraph of the French passage).
3.4 Short Composition Now that you have gone through the detailed analysis of the French language provided in this unit, you can now use the different expressions you have learned to compose correct and intelligible sentences and paragraphs.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE You will now compose 10 sentences of your own using a word each from the underlisted expressions.
a. à peine b. beaucoup de c. être démunie d. la jeunesse e. être congédié f. plus tard g. avoir la chance h. autodidacte i. plusieurs j. également 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt more techniques of written expressions in French.
You have also acquired some knowledge of elements of grammar like verb conjugation, gerund and preposition.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has no doubt equipped you with vocabulary relating to biography, literature and professions.
You have also learnt how to write simple and descriptive composition using both present and past tenses.
The skills you have acquired in this unit will surely be useful as you progress in this course.
52FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write a composition of four paragraphs in French language to describe a politician, leader or teacher that you know and admire or dislike.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ayeleru, T. (2000): A Concise Course in French for College and Learning solutions, Ibadan.
53FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 4 LA LITTERATURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 La Littérature 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Articles (definite and indefinite) 3.3.2 Pronouns 3.4 Sentence Construction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read a passage based on literature.
It gives different definitions of the discipline called literature.
It also focuses specifically on written African literature as an instrument of political liberation in the colonial era.
I am convinced that you will find this passage quite interesting and educative.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer correctly questions related to the themes of the text; • Define literature variously and discuss the different definitions; and • Contribute to discussions on African literature.
Please read the French passage below.
It is my hope that you find it interesting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 54FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.1 La Litterature La littérature a diverses définitions; plusieurs écrivains et critiques ont déjà tenté de donner des définitions appropriées à la littérature.
Ces différentes définitions lancent toujours des défis.
Certains la définissent comme une oeuvre d'imagination provoquée par une réalité.
Cette école de pensée voit la littérature comme une activité qui n'existe pas dans le vide, c'est-à-dire qu'il y a peut-étre des faits historiques ou fictifs qui se trouvent à la base de toute oeuvre littéraire.
La littérature sert à exprimer et à transmettre des messages.
Ceci explique que le but de la littérature dépasse "l'art pour l'art" pour assumer des fonctions didactiques et voire moralisatrices.
Il y a aussi ceux qui définissent la littérature comme toute chose imprimée.
Cette définition est plus vaste que les deux autres déjà mentionnées, car elle comprend la littérature d'autres sphères de connaissances à savoir la géographie, histoire, la biologie et ainsi de suite.
En Afrique, avant le colonialisme, la littérature était orale.
L'arrivée des colons qui ont donne l'éducation occidentale aux Africains a introduit la littérature écrite.
En effet, la littérature africaine écrite est centrée sur la prise de conscience et c'est cette prise de conscience qui aide les Africains à trouver leur vraie identité voire l'indépendance du continent africain.
(Ayeleru, 2004 :39) 3.2 Vocabulary The register of the above French passage is literature.
The words and expressions you see here are those activities.
You have words like: a. la critique = criticism b. le critique = critic c. l'œuvre = work of art d. l’histoire = history e. l'écrivain = writer f. didactique = didactic, meant to instruct g. colonialisme = colonialism Apart from words related to French literature, you also find other expressions like: 55FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II a. l'imagination = imagination b. moralisatrice = meant to teach moral c. le colon = colonial master Can you think of other words related to literature?
Make a list of five words that are related to literature.
"La prise de conscience" is used in the passage.
Do you know any other words that take the same model?
You will need to look for the meanings of other words and expressions that you may not understand as these will enhance your general understanding of the text.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Articles In the French language, nouns are used always with articles.
There are four types: definite, indefinite, partitive and contracted articles.
Definite articles are: Masc.
sing Feminine sing Plural (masc &, fem) Le la les Note that l apostrophe is used before a noun starting with vowels or "h".
example: l'animal,l’ homme.
Look at the following examples: le garçon, le livre, le cahier, la fille • la table la capitale • les garçons la définition • les cahiers le bâtiment • les filles la pensée l'université • les tables l'étudiant Indefinite Article Indefinite articles are: Masc sing Fem.
sing Plural (masc & fem) un une des Examples: 56FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • Singular Plural • C'est un bic Ce sont des bics • C'est un livre Ce sont des livres • C'est une chaise Ce sont des chaises • C'est une fille Ce sont des filles Please, note that definite articles are used for specific or particular nouns or objects while indefinite articles are used for any noun that is not specified 3.3.2 Pronouns A pronoun is used to replace a noun to avoid repetition of nouns in a passage or discussion.
There are different types of pronoun like: personal subject pronoun, object pronouns, indirect object pronouns, indefinite pronouns, relative pronoun and demonstrative pronoun.
We shall look at direct object pronouns in this section: The table below summarises the pronouns.
le Me en la Te les Nous Vous Examples: Je touchele chien • Je le touche • Je vois la fille • Je la vois • Je mange du pain • J’en mange Example of direct object pronoun in the French passage provided include (see the 2nd paragraph).
"certains la définissent comme une oeuvre d'imagination" The direct object pronoun in the sentence above is "la" which refers to "litterature" Indirect object pronoun is explained with the tables below: These pronouns are put before the verb.
57FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II me nous te vous Lui leur Il me parle toujours de son étude.
Je parle à Yemi, je lui parle bien.
Je parle aux étudiants.
Je leur parle Here is the rest of the indirect pronoun.
The table below summarises it.
These pronouns are put after the verb.
Moi Nous toi Vous lui elle eux Elles The above pronouns are put after the verb in the sentence.
They are in the "tonic form.
Yemi parle à moi Le professeur parle à nous Je donne le livre à elles.
3.4 Sentence Construction Self Assessment Exercise Having gone through the French text provided, you can now try and construct sentences of your own with the words and expression listed below: • l'un à l'autre • divers • peut-être • écrivain • critique • connaissance • imagination 4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt vocabulary related to literature.
You have also learnt some grammatical elements used in composing the text.
These elements 58FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II include "articles and pronouns".
These will no doubt enhance your writing skill.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with some grammatical elements and vocabulary required to discuss and analyse a text in French.
It has also added more to your vocabulary as you have been introduced to another language register, literature.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Pensez-vous que la littérature mérite d'être étudiée à l'école?
Donnez vos raisons dans 4 paragraphes.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ayeleru, T (2000): A Concise Course in French.
L earning solutions, lbadan.
Answers to Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Ils se tournent l’un à l’autre en riant.
2.
L’atelier s’agit de diverts métiers.
3.
La voiture qui arrive peut être celle du professeur.
4.
Chinua Achebe e st un écrivain célèbre.
5.
Gani Fawehmin est un critique.
6.
Zainab a fait la connaissance de Mohommed hier.
7.
Le poeme est une oeuvre d’imagination.
59FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 5 LES NOCES CHINOISES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les Noces Chinoises 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Pronominal Verb (verbe pronominal) 3.3.2 Impersonal phrase (location impersonnelle) 3.3.3 Adjective 3.3.4 Word Formation (formation des mots) 3.3.5 Short Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read a much longer text in French.
The passage centres on the Chinese traditional marriage.
You will meet more words and expressions relating to marriage and you will discover the culture of Chinese people as regards greetings and relationship with elders.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and discuss issues related to the passage; • Use in your own expression vocabularies you must have acquired from the passage; • Define and analyse some grammatical elements; and • Compare the Chinese marriage and culture with your own.
Now, we shall read the passage and see how interesting it is.
60FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Les Noces Chinoises Les noces se passent dans la maison du marié; il vient beaucoup d'invités.
Il peut y en avoir plus de cent: tous les parents, voisins et amis.
La coutume exige qu'il y ait huit plats ou tout au moins quatre.
Il faut de la viande, du vin, de l'eau-de-vie.
Au début de la cérémonie, tous les invités sont assises autour des mariés qui restent debout.
Le marié est à gauche et la mariée à droite.
Sur la table, il y a du vin, des sucreries, des grains de melon, des cigarettes et du miroir.
Sur le mur en face des mariés, il y a un portrait du président Mao.
La mariée prend de la farine et la pose dans un récipient en porcelaine, puis le marié et la mariée font une profonde révérence devant le portrait du président Mao.
Ils se retournent alors vers leurs parents et font une profonde révérence, une autre pour les plus àgés et une dernière pour les invités.
Alors les invités leur demandent de dire comment ils sont tombés amoureux l'un de l'autre.
Il faut qu'ils racontent l'histoire de leur amour".
Le marié et la mariée sont toujours très intimides.
Ils se tournent l'un vers l'autre et se disent l'un à l'autre de raconter.
Les gens tout autour crient: "Vite, vite!
Parfois les mariés disent simplement: "On s'est rencontré puis on s'est marié".
Les invités posent des tas de questions et ils leur disent des phrases de ce genre: "Nous vous avons vus.
Vous marchiez très près l'un de l'autre le long de la rivière".
Tout le monde plaisante et les mariés rougissent tout le temps.
Les invités essaient de les faire rougir le plus possible.
Le marié et la mariée ont tous deux de grandes fleurs rouges en papier; il faut qu'ils les échangent et qu'ils boivent du vin.
Puis les invités demandent à la mariée de chanter.
Les mariés goûtent un peu aux plats.
Ils s'asseyent enfin et tout le monde mange et boit.
(Adebayo, 1993 :1-3) 3.2 Vocabulary Let us go back to the passage to identify and explain some difficult words found in it.
For instance, les noces = marriage au début = at the beginning raconteur = to narrate 61FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II There are many verbs in the passage.
Let us identify their noun forms.
For example: a. Manger = le manger b. Boire = la boisson c. Marier = le mariage d. Chanter = la chanson e. Goûter = le goût f. Exiger = l'exigence g. Inviter = l'invitation h. Rencontrer = la rencontre You will now take your dictionary to find out the meaning of some other words and expressions that you may not understand in the text.
This will enable you to have a clear idea of what the whole passage is all about.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Past Tense of Pronominal Verb You have met the present pronominal verb in the preceding units.
In this unit, the pronominal verbs are used in the simple past tense (passé composé).
Examples of the verb in the French passage include: "on s'est recontré", "on s'est marié".
Like I told you earlier, the pronominal verb is conjugated in the simple past tense with the auxiliary verb "être".
The past participles therefore agree in number and gender with the subject pronouns of the verb being conjugated.
The auxiliary verb is put between the pronominal pronoun and the past participle.
For example: se rencontrer: a. Je me suis rencontré(e) b. tu t'es rencontré(e) c. Il s'est rencontré d. Elle s'est rencontrée e. Nous nous sommes rencontré(e)s f. Vous vous êtres rencontré(e)s g. Ils se sont rencontrés h. Elles se sont rencontrées The expression in the French passage you just read "on s'est rencontré puis on s'est marié" is a sort of familiar expression which means "nous nous sommes rencontrés puis nous nous sommes mariés".
In such expression, "On" (one) can also mean "nous" (we).
Let me remind you 62FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II that the singular numbers of the pronominal verbs are reflexive while the plural numbers are reciprocal.
Take your conjugation manual and study the pronominal verb conjugation in the simple past tense.
3.3.2 Impersonal Phrase (Locution Impersonnelle) Impersonal phrase in the passage includes: Il peut, Il faut.
They are called impersonal phrase because the subject pronoun "Il", does not refer to any person.
"Falloir, valoir, pouvoir" are sometimes conjugated in the third person singular number as impersonal phrase (locution impersonnelle).
Look at these examples: "Il faut de la viande" (1st paragraph) "I1 faut qu'ils racontent l'histoire de leur amour" (in the 2nd paragraph).
The first example is composed of "Il faut + noun" while the second example is "Il faut que + subjonctive verb".
Here are some other forms of impersonal pronoun that you may also find useful in your own expression.
i. Il est nécessaire ii.
Il est évident iii.
Il est obligatoire iv.
Il vaut mieux Now, look for other forms of the impersonal phrase in the French passage you read in this unit and identify the sentences in which they are used.
3.3.3 Adjective You will notice the use of two types of adjective in the passage you just read.
They are verbal adjectives and qualifying adjectives.
You will recall that verbal adjectives are formal mainly from the past participle of some verbs e.g.
"parlé, écrit, donné, intimidé".
Qualifying adjectives are for example: "profonde, grandes, rouges".
You will realise that most of the examples cited here are drawn from the French passage you read in this unit.
3.3.4 Word Formation (Formation Des Mots) You will see in this section how some words are formed in French language.
It has been argued that learners retain easily words that they know how they are formed.
There are different ways of forming words in French.
For example: derivation (prefix and suffix) and compound words.
63FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Derivation: is used mainly in the French language you read in this unit.
You may want to open that page and look for them.
Some of them are prefixes while you may also find some suffixes.
A prefix is the word that you add to the beginning of another word.
It sometimes denotes "negation".
The suffix is added to the end of a word.
In French it is common in "noun", and "adverb" formation.
Let us look at some examples of prefix: "in-, im-, il-, uni-, auto-, aéro-, bio-".
a.
"in-" inachevé, indispensable, b.
“im-“ impossible, imprévu c. “il-“ illégal, d. "aéro-" aéronautique e. "auto-" automatique, autodidacte Suffixation are common with French verbs, adverbs and noun for example: a. téléphone + er = téléphoner b. bavard + er = bavarder Adverb: you get the regular form of adverb by adding "-ment" to the feminine form of the adjective.
Example: a. grand grande grandement b. profond profonde profondément Noun: words like "age, -isme, -ment" may be added to some words to derive their noun forms.
For example: a. élév + age = élevage b. encourage + ment = encouragement c. journal + isme = journalisme There are many other forms of derivation that you will learn as you progress in this course.
64FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II There are also words that are formed by composition of more than one word.
Two or three different words may be brought together to form a word.
For example: i. l'eau-de-vie ii.
l'arc-en-ciel iii.
mi-temps iv.
timbre-poste 3.3.5 Short Composition The French text we are analysing in this unit is longer than what we have seen in the preceding units.
This passage is written in free simple present tense; a tense considered appropriate for description of actions and events.
You can also write a traditional marriage you know and how it is done.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Now, in four paragraphs, describe the chronological stages of the Chinese marriage that you read in the French passage provided in this unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt the techniques of reading and analysing a much more complex narrative passage in French.
You have also learnt some grammatical elements like past tense of pronominal verb, impersonal phrases and adjectives.
You also learnt how words are formed in French.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the necessary skills and techniques required to read and analyse a French text.
The grammatical elements you have acquired have surely enhanced your competence of written expression.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identifiez deux activités que vous trouvez très intéressantes dans les noces chinoises.
Présentez votre réponse en deux paragraphes.
65FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993): Texts et travaux de langue Française Jator Publishing Company, Ibadan.
pp.
1-3 Ayeleru, T. (2000): A Concise Course in French Learning solutions, Ibadan.
Answer To Self Assessment Exercise La coutume exige qu’il y ait huit plats au moins quatre.Il faut de la viande,du vin ,de l’eau de vie .Les mariés reste debout,et les invités sont assis au tour des mariés ,il ya du vin ,des sucreries ,grains de melon,des cigarettes,et de mirroir,sur le mur face des mariés ,il ya un portrait de Mao.
La mariee prend du farine et la pose sur un recipient en porcelaine ,puis le marié et la mariée font la reverence devant le président Mao ,et se tournent vers leurs parents et fond un profound reverence, une autre pour les plus agés et et une dernière ,pour les invites.
Les mariés sont toujours timides, les invités leurs posent des questions.
Tout le monde plaisante et les mariés rougissent tout le temps.Et les invités essaient de les faire rougir le plus possible.Et puis les invités demandent a la mariée de chanter.
66FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 67FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II MODULE 3 Unit 1 Les enfants insatisfaits Unit 2 La publicité: miroir de rêves Unit 3 La maison rurale et la résidence secondaire Unit 4 Au théâtre Unit 5 Rouler en toute sécurité UNIT 1 LES ENFANTS INSATISFAITS CONTENTS 1.0 Introductio 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les Enfants Insatisfaits 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Compound Relative Pronoun (pronom relatif compose) 3.3.2 Conditional Tense (le conditionnel) 3.4 Written Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read and analyse another long passage written in French language.
You will further learn about the techniques of textual analysis.
These techniques will enhance your competence of written expression.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and explain the themes of the passage; • Define and analyse correctly different grammatical elements used in the text; and • Compose story, using your own expression.
68FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Now, read the following passage which centres on some children of a parent.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Les Enfants Insatisfaits Il existe sans doute dans le monde des enfants qui choisissent avec sagesse leurs amis de telle sorte qu'ils rentrent chez eux heureux, pleinement conscients des efforts que font leurs parents pour leur assurer une vie décente et agréable.
Du moins, je veux le croire.
Mais il en existe d'autres, les miens par exemple, qui choisissent leurs camarades de telle façon qu'ils reviennent à la maison tristes, avec la sensation de manquer de tout et d'être frustrés.
C'est bizarre.
Mes enfants pourraient de temps en temps rencontrer des amis qui `ont moins'.
Or, les autres', dont ils me parlent incessamment, ont toujours `plus'.
Et plus je donne, plus ils en trouvent d'autres qui ont davantage.
Il suffit que j'achète une bicyclette à mon fils pour qu'il rencontre le lendemain un garçon qui deviendra son meilleur ami et qui a une motocyclette.
Et si je permets à ma fille d'aller au cinéma une fois par semaine, elle me donne aussitôt trois noms d'amies qui peuvent y aller quand elles veulent, c'est-à-dire, tout le temps.
J'y pensais tout à l'heure sur la plage.
L'été dernier, les enfants navaient guère cessé de me parler des avantages d'un canot pneumatique jaune que possédaient nos voisins et qui exerçait sur eux une attraction irrésistible.
`Oh papa!
Tu devrais acheter ça!
ça serait formidable!'
A les entendre, s'ils en avaient un, ils ne me demanderaient plus rien.
`Nous verrons ça l'an prochain', disais-je, `si vous êtes sages!'.
Je finissais par envier le père qui avait payé à ses enfants le canot jaune que tout le monde admirait.
Je me mettais à sa place, et je sentais que mes enfants seraient ravis.
Si j'en achetais un, j'aurais la paix.
Eh bien ça y est!
J'ai fais cette folie: j'ai acheté le canot jaune, le même modèle que celui qui faisait rêver mes enfants.
Pendant quelques temps j'ai eu la sensation d'être le père idéal qui sait répondre aux désires de ses enfants.
Nous étions sur la plage, avides de prendre le large.
Notre joie dura deux heures, pas plus.
Jusqu'à la minute où les jeunes Rochefort-Levy nous ont dépassés à toute vitesse dans leur canot à moteur aérodynamique.
(Adebayo, 1993 :1-3) 69FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2 Vocabulary There are some underlined words in the text you have just read.
Your knowledge of the meanings of these words will contribute to your general understanding of the passage.
The underlined words are: a. la sagesse = wisdom b. étre frustré = to be frustrated c. bizarre = strange, odd d. de temps en temps = from time to time, always e. la plage = beach f. les avantages = advantages g. formidable = formidable There are other expressions that you may not understand, take your dictionary look for their meanings.
You will need a comprehensive bilingual dictionary for this exercise.
There are expressions which explain the sequence of time in the text.
Let us find out other expressions of time.
• le lendemain (2nd paragraph) • aujourd'hui • demain • le lendemain • le surlendemain • hier • avant hier You will recall that we discussed word formation in the preceding unit.
We saw fixation that is "suffix" and "prefix".
In this passage again, there is a prefix "aéro-" which means "air".
You can therefore form air related words with this prefix.
For example i. aérodynamique ii.
aéroport iii.
aéronautique iv.
aérodrome Take your dictionary and look up for the English equivalents of the four words above i.e.
"aérodynamique, aéroport, aéronautique, aérodrome".
Can you think of other words with the prefix "aéro"?
70FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Relative Pronoun You will learn more about relative pronoun in this unit.
In unit 5, we discussed relative pronoun, you saw its form and function.
In this unit our approach will be analytical.
We shall analyse the relative pronouns as they are used in the passage.
Let us consider the following examples: "Mais il en existe d'autres, les miens par exemple, qui choisissent leurs camarades..."(first paragraph).
"Qui" is the relative pronoun in the above example.
It has "les miens" as antecedent.
"Qui" begins the subordinate clause "qui choisissent leurs camarades..." "qui" is therefore the subject of the verb "choisissent".
Another example of relative pronoun in the passage is in the second paragraph.
"Or, les autres' dont ils me parlent incessamment ont toujours plus".
"dont" is the relative pronoun and it functions as complement of noun, "les autres".
Let us look at "que" another relative pronoun that functions as "object" of a verb: "L'été dernier, les enfants n'avaient guère cessé de me parler des avantages d'un canot pneumatique jaune que possédaient nos voisins"... (3rd paragraph).
"Que" is the relative pronoun in the sentence and it functions as the direct object of the verb "possédaient".
The antecedent of "que" is "canot pneumatique jaune" which "que" actually represents in the subordinate the sentence above.
Now, look for other relative pronouns in the French text provided and analyse at least two of them to show their functions in the context in which they occur.
3.3.2 Conditional Tense We saw the present conditional tense in one of the preceding units (see unit 4).
Now, you will see the past conditional tense.
The past 71FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II conditional tense is used extensively in the French passage being analysed in this unit.
How is this conditional tense formed?
"si + imparfait + conditionnel présent Here are some examples for the text:  s'il en avaient un, ils ne me demanderaient plus rien (3rd paragraph).
 si j'en achetais un, j'aurai la paix.
You can also, by following the above example construct your own past conditional tenses.
3.4 Written Expression The text you read in this unit is an interesting one that narrates the frustration of a parent by his greedy children.
You will see that there is a mixture of standard and familiar language.
Words like La y est", "ça sera formidable" belong to the familiar level of language.
When you use these expressions, always remember that they belong to the informal or familiar level of language use.
You may not be right to use them in a formal situation.
Write a brief composition on your impression of the children mentioned in the French text that you read in this unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt the basic techniques of analysis of long passage in this unit.
You also learnt some grammatical elements like relative pronoun, conditional tense and some vocabularies.
All these are necessary for competence in written expression in French language.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with techniques of textual analysis in French.
It has also taught you the grammatical elements that are used in the composition of the French passage you read in this unit.
All this is geared towards your competence in written expression in French.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT In very clear and good French, summarise the French passage provided in this unit in five sentences.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 72FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Adebayo, A.
(1993): Texts et travaux de langue Française Jator Publishing Company, Ibadan.
pp.
1-3 UNIT 2 LA PUBLICITE: MIROIR DES REVES 73FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 La Publicité: Miroir de nos Rêves 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Negation in French (ne ... pas, ne ... plus etc) 3.3.2 Adverb (l'adverbe) 3.3.3 Adjective (l'adjectif) 3.4 Simple Written Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read and analyse a French passage which is centred on publicity and advertisement.
You will therefore learn vocabularies related to publicity and advertisement.
You will also learn some basic techniques of advertising.
This unit will teach you the use of humour, adjective and some other expressions peculiar to advertisement and announcement.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer correctly questions related to the passage; • Define and analyse some elements of grammar used in the passage; • Use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercises; and • Summarise the main thrusts of the text.
You will now read the French text provided below carefully: 74FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 La Publicite, Miroir De Nos Reves Pour faire vendre, la publicité a toujours utilisé trois moyens: informer, séduire et faire rêver.
Sur ces trois points, elle a changé Aujourd'hui, elle apporte des informations plus objectives et plus précises que dans le passé.
Elle nous séduit plus par l'humour et la beauté des images que par le sérieux.
Et enfin, elle ne nous fait pas rêver de la même manière parce que nos rêves ont changé.
Les publicités d'aujourd'hui ne parlent pas seulement du produit.
Elles ne disent pas seulement: cette voiture est la plus belle, la moins chère, la meilleure », mais aussi: « avec cette voiture, vous serez heureux, équilibré, intelligent, etc.
».
Les hommes et les femmes d'aujourd'hui ne rêvent plus de grands changements.
Ils ont envie de supprimer les différences entre l'homme et la femme.
Ils ont envie de réussir leur vie professionnelle comme leur vie privée.
C'est cette image de nos rêves que la publicité nous renvoie.
(Girardet et al.1996 : 147) 3.2 Vocabulary The French passage you just read is of commercial register.
The words and expressions used are of buying, selling and advertising.
These words and expressions include: a. la publicité = advertising/announcement, b. vendre = to sell c. informer = to inform d. séduire = to seduce e. l'humour = humour f. le changement = change g. sérieux = serious There are other expressions like "avoir envie" to desire for/to do something longing for something Example: Ils ont envie de supprimer la différence entre l’homme et la femme.
In French, the verb "faire" when followed with another verb, that verb must be in the infinitive form: 75FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II For example = "pour faire vendre, la publicité a toujours utilisé trois moyens: informer, séduire et faire rêver.
The underlined words are the verb "faire" followed by another verb in the infinitive form: "vendre" and "rêver".
There are other verbs that are always followed by the infinitive verbs.
Some of them are: aller, venir, vouloir, pouvoir savoir, devoir etc.
- Je vais manger au restaurant - Tu viens passer les vacances à Lagos - Je veux sortir ce soir - Elle peut nager - Elles savent conduire - Tu dois partir.
In advertisement register, there is the use of superlative to describe the products being advertised and their importance.
For instance, in the French text provided in this unit you have: • cette voiture est la plus belle, la moins chère, la meilleure".
You also find some comparison.
This is when one object or a person is compared with another.
In the French text you have the following examples: "Aujourd'hui, elle apporte des informations plus objectives et plus précieuses que dans le passé" "Elle nous séduit plus par l'humour et la beauté des images que par le sérieux".
Look for similar usage in the French text you just read and list them.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis In this section of the unit, you will be exposed to the use of negation in French and adverb as they are used in the French text being analysed.
3.3.1 Negation (La Négation) In French, negation is composed of two words: ne-pas (not).
Example: • Je ne suis pas étudiant • Yakubu ne comprend pas français 76FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II The verbe of the sentence is placed between "ne" and "pas" in the negative form.
You should note that "pas" can be replaced by rien, personne, jamais, plus, aucun etc.
- ne ... rien (nothing), ne ... personne (nobody), ne ... jamais (never), ne ... plus (no more), ne ...aucun(e) (none).
Examples of negative sentence in the French passage you just read are: "Les publicités d'aujourd'hui ne parlent pas seulement du produit.
Elles ne disent pas seulement..." (second paragraph) "Les hommes et les femmes d'aujourd'hui ne rêvent plus de grands changements" (third paragraph).
The underlined words in the above examples are words or negation.
Please, note that when the verb you intend to negate starts with a vowel or an "h", the first part of the negation "ne" becomes "n".
example: • Je n'aime pas cette fille • Elle n habite plus à Lagos When you change a positive sentence to a negative form with the following articles: un, une, du, dela, des, "pas" becomes "pas de (pas d) For example: Positive Sentence Negative Sentence Elle a des enfants Elle n'a pas d'enfants Il a une voiture Il n'a pas de voiture When you use verbs "aimer" and "avoir" the definite article remains invariable: Examples: Positive Sentence Negative Sentence J'aime le football Je n'aime pas le football Il a le temps Il n'a pas le temps Je connais le Portugal Je ne connais par le Portugal 77FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.3.2 Adverb (L'adverbe) You will recall that we have discussed the adverb form and usage severally earlier on in this course.
You will still find an extensive use of adverbe in the French text being analysed in this unit.
This adverb includes: toujours, aujourd'hui, enfin, seulement.
As you have been told an adverb modifies a verb.
If you go through the passage once again you will see that, adverbs used in the text are actually modifying the verb.
3.3.3 Adjective (L'adjectif) Adjectives are also prominent in this passage.
Being a text belonging to the advertising register, the use of adjective is necessary to show the good qualities of the products that are being advertised.
Examples of the adjectives in the passage are: "objectifs, précises, belle, chère, heureux, équilibré, intelligent, grands, professionnelle, privée".
These adjectives listed above are of varying types.
Some are qualifying adjectives; some are verbal adjectives regular and irregular adjectives.
Now, take five of the adjectives identified from the text and construct a sentence with each of them in French.
3.4 Simple Written Expression Having gone through the French text provided in this unit, I am sure you will be able to compose your own simple text on advertising using the experience you have acquired in the text.
You will have discovered the style of writing in advertisement.
It is always familiar, motivating and interesting.
The tense is mainly simple present tense.
Sometimes, you find the simple future tense.
All these are deliberate to enable as many people as possible have access to that information.
Sometimes, the title of the advertising passage is provocative and motivating to encourage readers to show interest in reading it.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the style and language of advertising.
The text you read has exposed you to some vocabularies of advertising and the use of grammatical elements like adjective and adverb in commerce and industry circle and register.
78FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the basic techniques of analysing and writing of texts relating to advertising.
You have also acquired some elements of grammar used in writing and analysing advertising text.
This unit has surely increased your vocabulary.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT You have a Peugeot 504 saloon car to sell, write a short text in French to advertise your car.
You must highlight the qualities of the car to be sold to show the potential buyers that your Peugeot 504 saloon car is a car to buy.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Girardet, Jacky et al (1996):Panorama l, Clé International Paris, p.147.
Monnerie-Goarin et al (1999): Champion 1, Clé International, Paris.
79FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 3 LA MAISON RURALE ET LA RESIDENCE SECONDAIRE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 La Maison Rurale et la Résidence Secondaire 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Y/EN 3.3.2 Indefinite Adjective (adjectif indéfini) 3.4 Written Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will read in this unit, a French passage that discusses two types of human residence, namely rural house and secondary residence.
You will be introduced to another language register which is that of building and accommodation.
This unit will surely add a lot of vocabulary to your word power and it will further enhance your writing techniques and competence.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and explain what rural house and secondary residence mean; • Explain the reasons for secondary residence; • Summarise the passage using your own words; • Define and analyse the grammatical elements in the passage; and • Compose your own passage with similar themes.
You will now read the French text provided below carefully.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 80FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.1 La Maison Rurale Et La Residence Secondaire Chaque Français garde probablement dans sa mémoire le souvenir d'une maison rurale lié aux souvenirs d'enfance.
C'était la maison familiale, où l'on passait ses vacances.
C'était le lieu où des "trésors" étaient entassés dans les greniers.
Ces trésors étaient généralement sans valeur, même si quelquefois on y retrouvait un meuble ancien, rare et précieux, ou un tableau oublié de grand peintre.
Finalement, ce qui avait le plus d'importance, c'étaient les vieux coffres remplis de livres à moitié uses par le temps, de jouets d'enfants démodés et cassés, de lettres anciennes, permettant de reconstituer l'histoire de la famille.
Pendant un certain temps, les Français, attirés par un nouveau mode de vie, se sont eloignés de leur origine paysanne pour aller vers la ville et la civilisation industrielle.
Aujourd'hui, on constate un retour à la campagne; les Français achètent, quand ils en ont les moyens, une résidence secondaire où ils vont passer leurs vacances et leurs week- ends.
C'est le refuge de ceux qui se sentent mal à l'aise dans les villes, qui fuient le bruit et la pollution; c'est aussi une sorte de retour au passé et à la nature.
Un ménage français sur cinq dispose d'une résidence secondaire.
La plupart des propriétaires de résidences secondaires appartiennent aux catégories sociales les plus riches et vivent dans les grandes villes.
Au plaisir de posséder une maison à la campagne s'ajoute l'idée que c'est un bon investissement.
{Adebayo, 1993 : 12-15} 3.2 Vocabulary You will be required to work more on the formation of verbs from nouns.
We shall find corresponding verbs to some nouns that are identified in the passage above: a. le ménage = ménager b. la mémoire = mémoriser c. l’éloignement = s’éloigner d. l’ eleignement = s’eloigner e. le souvenir = se souvenir f. un investissement = investir g. le refuge = réfugier h. la vie = vivre i. le jouer = jouer 81FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II j. la valeur = valoriser k. un constat = constater Like, I told you in the previous units, a word or an expression may have more than one dictionary meaning.
The choice of the most appropriate word depends largely on the context in which the word is used.
For example the word "ménage" means "le couple" (couple), it also has other meanings like "house keeper" etc.
You will also notice in the first sentence of the French passage provided the word "enfance" (childhood).
It is a period of human life.
Let us look at other periods of human life in French.
 l'enfance  l'adolescence  l'adulte  le vieillard There are other expressions in the passage, and you should look for their meanings by making use of your dictionary.
With the aid of your (French - French) dictionary, explain in French language the meanings of the underlined words and expressions in the French text provided in this unit.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis You will be taught more techniques of analysing the grammatical elements in a text.
You will also see a practical demonstration of analysis of grammar of the text you have just read.
3.3.1 Adverb (Y/En) There are so many types of adverb in French language.
They include adverb of place, time, action, manner, cause purpose and so on.
There are also adverbial pronouns like "y" and "en" that you have seen in the French text of this unit.
Look at the second paragraph of the passage; you will see an example of the adverbial pronoun "y”.
"Ces trésors étaient généralement sans valeur, même si quelquefois on y retrouvait un meuble ancien, rare et précieux, ou un tableau oublié de grande peintre".
The highlighted expression “y” is an adverb of pronoun that can stand for "a place" or sometimes "an idea" or "a person".
82FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II The second type of adverb pronoun is en.
It may refer to an object or "an idea".
Look at an example from the passage.
It is found in the third paragraph: "Aujourd'hui, on constate un retour à la campagne; les Français achètent, quand il en ont les moyens, une résidence secondaire, où ils vont passer leurs vacances et leurs week-ends".
The adverb pronoun in the above context refers to the ability to have the means of buying a second house to serve as a secondary residence.
Look and study the following examples of the use of adverb pronouns ("y" and "en).
• Les trésors sont entassés dans le grenier.
(Les trésors y sont entassés) • Ils passent leurs vacances à la campagne (Ils y passent leurs vacances) • Les Français se souviennent de leur enfance (Les Français s'en souviennent) • Un ménage sur cinq dispose d'une résidence secondaire (Un ménage sur cinq en dispose) You will observe that "y" is used to replace "place" or "object" when such place or object is preceded by preposition "à" (to), dans (in).
"En" is used when such nouns are preceded by the preposition"de".
Replace the underlined words with "y/en".
• Je pense à ma mère • Elle pense de la santé de sa mère • Nous allons à Lagos • Ils se sont éloignés de leur origine paysanne • Nous possédons une maison à Abuja 3.3.2 Adjective (Indefnite) You will see that there are different types of adjectives in the French text provided in this unit.
There are qualifying adjectives like "rurale, familiale, rare, précieux" etc.
There are also some verbal adjectives like "usés, démodés, oublié".
What you will learn in this section of the unit is the indefinite adjectives.
These adjectives include "certain, divers, chaque, plusieurs" etc.
Look at the following examples from the French text being analysed: 83FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II -"Pendant un certain temps, les Français sont attirés par un nouveau mode de vie...." The underlined word is an indefinite adjective qualifying the noun "temps" (time).
It is indefinite because it is vague and not precise or particular.
Construct grammatically correct sentences with each of the following indefinite adjectives: chaque, divers, plusieurs.
Please, note that French adjectives come mostly after the nouns they quality.
Some of them like "jeune, petit, grand" can come before the noun.
There are others that can come before or after the noun they qualify.
If they come before, they have meaning different from when they come after.
For example: • C'est un garcon grand (tall boy) • C'est un grand homme (great or bigman) • Un temps certain (a time you are sure of) • Un certain temps (a time you are not sure of) • Un immeuble ancien (an ancient building) • Mon ancien professeur (my former teacher).
3.4 Written Expression Having gone through the French text provided in this unit, you will be required to compose your own text by making use of some of the ideas and the grammatical elements that you have learnt in this unit.
You may want to tell me in two paragraphs written in good French why the French people went to town in the past and they return to the village today.
4.0 CONCLUSION What you have learnt in this unit is techniques of reading and analysing a French text.
You have also learnt some vocabularies relating to building and accommodations.
In this unit, you have also acquired some grammatical elements like adverbial pronouns, and adjectives.
All this will enhance your writing skill in French.
5.0 SUMMARY 84FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II This unit has equipped you with skills needed to read and analyse passages written in French.
The elements of grammar you have learnt in this unit will no doubt enhance your written expression skills.
You have acquired some skills that will facilitate your discussions and writings in French language.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Croyez-vous qu'une résidence secondaire soit une nécessité ou un luxe?
Present your answer in a page of A4 paper typed with 12 font.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993): Textes et Travaux de Langue Française, Jator Publishing, Company, lbadan, pp.
12-15.
85FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 4 AU THEATRE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Au Theatre 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Passê Composé (simple past tense) 3.3.2 Adjectif Verbal (verbal adjective) 3.4 Written Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will be reading a passage in French in this unit.
The passage is on theatre which means it has literature and entertainment as its language registers.
It is a text that will further teach you techniques of reading, analysis and writing of passages written in French.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer correctly questions on the passage • Define and analyse the elements of grammar in the text.
• Summarise the main ideas of the passage • Construct your own expressions and composition.
Now, read carefully the following French text.
I hope you will find it interesting and it will increase your techniques of textual analysis.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Au Theatre Antoine et Gabriel sont venus passer deux semaines à Dakar, chez leur oncle Nestor.
Cet après-midi, il les a amenés au théâtre pour leur permettre à voir une représentation des “Fourberies de Scapin".
A leur arrivée, un public jeune et nombreux s'impatientait devant les portes du 86FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II théâtre, encore fermées; en raison d'ennuis de dernière heure, on avait dû retarder le début de la séance.
Au bout de vingt minutes, le public a commencé à pénétrer lentement dans la salle.
Pour ne rien perdre du spectacle, les deux frères se sont assis dans les premières rangs et se sont mis aussitôt à regarder autour d'eux: L'étrangeté du lieu, son animation, la musique diffusée par les hautparleurs situés devant et derrière eux, tout cela les impressionnait fort.
Peu après, le rideau s'est levé.
Les acteurs les ont tout de suite fait rire aux éclats en gesticulant, en se poursuivant sur la scène, en criant à tue- tête et même en disparaissant parfois dans les coulisses.
Des applaudissements crépitaient par moments à différents endroits de la salle.
A l'entracte, de nombreux spectateurs sont allés se dégourdir les jambes dans le hall du théâtre.
Antoine et Gabriel ont préféré rester à leur place, trépignant d'impatience.
Pour avoir trop ri, ils étaient maintenant incapables de parler... {Adebayo 1993 :16-18} 3.2 Vocabulary As you have noticed, the register of the passage you just read is that of theatre.
Let us identify from the text, words and expressions of theatre.
a. une représentation = presentation b. la séance = session c. le spectacle = show, spectacle d. l'animation = theatre, cinema, liveliness e. la musique = music f. le rideau = window blind, curtain g. les acteurs = actors h. les actrices = actress i. la scène = scene j. gesticuler = to gesticulate k. les applaudissements = applause l. l'entracte = interlude, interval m. le spectateurs = spectators n. Le rideau s’est levé = the curtain is raised In one of the preceding units you saw briefly how some words are formed in French.
You will recall that I told you that word are formed through derivation, composition, borrowing from another language and so on.
In this unit we shall also look at some words that have been either formed by adding "prefix" or "suffix" to the already existing words to get the new words.
Here are some examples: 87FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II L'étrange + té = Fétrangeté (first paragraph of the passage) L'animer + tion = l'animation (1 st paragraph of the passage) L'entre + acte = l'entracte (2nd paragraph of the passage) L'après-midi (compound word) in + capable = incapable (the prefix is "in") it denotes negation.
im + patience = impatience (the prefix is "im") it also means negation.
le haut-parleurs = (compound word) Now, take your dictionary and look for other words and expressions that you may not understand in the passage.
It will help your understanding of the passage.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis of the Verb-Passé Composé You will see that there is simple use of the simple past in the French text provided.
The reason is because the activities being reported happened in the past.
There are simple past conjugated with both auxiliaries `étre' and `avoir'.
Let us look at some of these verbs as they occur in the passage.
In the first paragraph, there is the following example: "Cet après-midi, il les a amenés au théàtre pour les permettre à voir une représentation des" Fourberies de Scapin" The underlined expression is the sentence where the simple past in used.
The tense is "Il a amené (Antoine et Gabriel), but the writer uses the direct object pronoun "les" to represent or replace the two means "les" should be put before the auxiliary verbe in sentence.
(see Module 2 unit 3).
Note that the past participle must agree in number and gender with the direct object pronoun "les".
That is why you have amenés in plural.
Still in the first paragraph, there is another example of "passé composé".
This is a pronominal verb conjugated in the simple past tense (passé composé).
"Pour ne rien perdre du spectacle, les deux frères se sont assis dans les premières rangs et se sont mis aussitôt à regarder autour d'eux".
The underlined verbs are: "s'assoir" and "se mettre".
They are conjugated in the "passé compose" (simple past tense).
Remember that the past participle will agree in number gender with the subject pronouns.
You will need to read more of this in your conjugation manual.
Let's take another example.It is in the first paragraph of the passage.
88FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II "Au bout de vingt minutes, le public a commencé à pénétrer lentement dans la salle".
The underlined verb is in the simple past form.
The verb "commencer" is a verb of action conjugated with avoir.
It does not require any agreement between the past participle and the subject pronoun hence.
Le public a commencé (i.e.
il a commencé).
There are many other examples of the "passé compose" in the passage.
Read through the passage once more, and identify and study them.
3.3.2 Adjective (Adjectif Verbal) You will recall that past participles of some verbs also functions as adjectives.
They therefore have the same qualities as other types of adjective.
They also agree in number and gender with the nouns or pronouns they qualify.
We have discussed verbal adjectives in one or two of the preceding units.
In the French passage provided in this unit, you will also see some verbal adjectives.
They are: fermées, and diffusée.
Example: "A leur arrivée, un public jeune, et nombreux s'impatientait devant les portes du théâtre, encore fermées; en raison d'ennuis de derniére heure" (1 st paragraph).
The word underlined in the above example is a verbal adjective.
It qualifies "les portes", that is why it is also in the feminine plural form, to agree in number and gender with the noun; "les portes".
Another example of a verbal adjective in the text is: "L'étrangeté du lieu, son animation, la musique diffusée par les haut- parleurs situés devant et derrière eux, tout cela les impressionnait fort".
Diffusée is an adjective qualifying the musique in that example.
Can you explain the function of situés in the same example?
Let me also mention that you also have qualifying adjectives in the text.
They include jeune, nombreux, derniére, premiéres.
Do you notice the use of other part of speech in the text?
Identify at least another one, especially adverb and make a list of 5 adverbs from the passage.
3.4 Written Expression 89FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Now that you have gone through the French passage provided in this unit, you should be able to write short and correct composition narrating your own experience in a film or cinema house.
I will therefore encourage you to practice how to construct your own sentences or paragraphs with the words and expressions that you have acquired in this unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt about theatre, hall, stage and scene in this unit.
You have also acquired some vocabulary of theatre.
This passage you read has also shown you some elements of grammar like adjective, past simple tense and how they are used in a text.
This knowledge will surely improve your writing skills and competence.
5.0 SUMMARY What you have learned in this unit has equipped you with the techniques of analysing French written passage.
It has also equipped you with some elements of grammar needed in analysing and composing passages of your own.
You have doubtlessly acquired more y All this will further enhance your reading and writing competence in French.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT You have recently watched a film or a play that you found very exciting.
Narrate the actions that took place in the play and show me why you found it interesting in French.
Your answer should not be less than a page of A4 paper typed in double spacing with 12 point front.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993): Textes et Travaux de langue Française, Jator Publishing company, Ibadan, pp.
16-18.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 verbes, Hatier, Paris.
90FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 5 ROULER EN TOUTE SECURITE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Rouler en Toute Securité 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 L'adverbe 3.3.2 Le Subjonctif 3.4 Written Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read a passage about security on the road.
That is driving with absolute security.
You will learn new vocabularies of driving traffic code and road security.
You will also learn some practical advice concerning driving and what to do in case of accident.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and explain issues related to the passage; • Define and analyse the elements of grammar used in the text; • Explain the difficult words and expressions in the passage; and • Construct passage(s) using your own words and expressions.
Now, please read the French passages provided below carefully.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Rouler En Toute Securite 1.
Conseils De Conduite Tout d'abord, être en bonne condition pour partir: avec le ventre plein (mais pas trop) et sans avoir ingéré d'alcool ni de médicaments 91FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II provoquant un état de somnolence.
Sur la route, il est impératif de s'arrêter toutes les deux heures pour se détendre.
En cas de pluie (ou de brouillard), 3 réflexes: réduire sa vitesse, allumer les feux de croisement et augmenter la distance avec le véhicule qui vous précède.
De nuit: vérifier, avant le départ, l'état des feux et les nettoyer.
Surtout, évitez de partir vers 3 ou 4 heures du matin, heures auxquelles la capacité d'attention est la plus faible.
En suivant ces quelques conseils, votre trajet sera plus sûr et beaucoup plus agréable.
Alors, bonne route!
2.
Que Faire en Cas D'accident?
Prévenir les services de secours (en composant le 15, le 17 ou le 18) et baliser le lieu de l'accident afin d'éviter d'autres collisions.
Porter secours aux victimes, en les réconfortant, en leur parlant afin qu'elles gardent contact avec la réalité, et en les couvrant avec des couvertures.
Il faut éviter de leur donner à boire et de les déplacer si elles sont blessées, car cela peut aggraver les blessures.
Enfin, si elles ont un casque, il ne faut surtout pas le leur ôter.
3.
La Ceinture de Sécurité Un chiffre qui en dit long: il y a deux fois plus de morts dans les accidents où les passagers ne sont pas protégés par la ceinture.
En effet, la ceinture est pratiquement la seule sécurité qui permette de rester conscient et de s'extirper de son véhicule après le choc.
Après un tonneau, l'éjection d'un passager est mortelle dans neuf cas sur dix.
Sans oublier que la ceinture à l'arrière est obligatoire.
Or un Français sur deux ne l'attache jamais.
(Berard 1997 : 58) 92FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2 Vocabulary There are some underlined words in the French passage you have just read.
These words will be explained to enhance your general understanding of the passage.
The words and expressions are: • Tout d'abord = First of all • les medicaments = medecine, drugs • la pluie = rainfall • la vitesse = speed, gear • la distance = distance • le départ = departune • le trajet = journey • les collisions = collision • un chiffre = a figure (number) • la ceinture = belt • la ceinture de sécurité = security belt/seat belt.
• le passager = passenger There are some other expressions in the text.
Take your dictionary and look up for the meanings of other words and expressions you may not understand.
Note that you have to learn the gender of the nouns with them.
The expression below is specifically for driving: • prendre le Volant = to drive Here are other expressions with the verb "prendre" to take Prendre un congé = to be on holiday, to be on leave Prendre de conscience = to be conscious of Prendre des médicaments = to take medicine, take drug.
Can you find other expressions using the above model?
You will recall that we discussed the impersonal phrases in one of the preceding units, there are still some impersonal phrases (locution impersonnelles) in the French passage provided in this unit.
Here are some examples: • Il est impératif • Il faut éviter • Il ne faut pas • Il y a / il existe 93FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II You will also learn the expressions of good wishes to someone traveling or embarking on a journey.
 bonne route!
 bon voyage!
 bon séjours!
Find other expressions of greetings to a traveler that you know: 3.3 Grammatical Analysis You will learn further some elements of grammar used in the French passage you just read.
The elements to study include: adverb (l'adverbe) and subjunctive (le subjonctif) 3.3.1 L'adverbe (Adverb) As I have told you in one of the previous units, an adverb modifies a verb and also modifies an adjective.
There is the use of adverbs in the text being analysed in this unit.
These adverbs include:  Tout d'abord  Surtout  Enfin  Pratiquement.
Concerning the position of these adverbs in the sentence, some are placed at the beginning of the sentence while some are put at the end of the sentence.
Consider the following sentences from the passage:  Tout d'abord, être en bonne condition pour partir...  Alors, bonne route  Il ne faut surtout pas le leur ôter.
 En effet, la ceinture est pratiquement la seule sécurité qui permette de rester conscient".
The underlined words are adverbs.
You will see that some are at the beginning of the sentence while some are in the middle of the sentence.
It may also be put at the end of the sentence.
3.3.2 Le Subjonctif (The Subjunctive) 94FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Unlike in English language, subjunctive is commonly used in French.
It is a mood that expression "wish, possibility, uncertainty".
Sometimes, when superlative is used in a sentence, subjunctive is required: for example in the French that you have read you have the following examples: "Enfin, la ceinture est pratiquement la seule sécurité qui permette de rester conscient et de s'exprimer de son véhicule après le choc.
The verb permettre is in the subjunctive mood in the above sentence.
The verb is in subjunctive because of the superlative "la seule".
Expressions that take subjunctive mood include: • I1 faut que + subjonctif = I1 faut qu'il vienne • I1 semble que + subjonctif = I1 semble qu'il parte • Je veux que + subjonctif = Je veux que tu sois là.
Take your conjugation manual and read more on the subjunctive mood 3.4 Written Expression You should now be able to compose your own sentences and paragraphs using the vocabularies and grammatical techniques that you have learnt in the French passage studied and analysed in this unit.
Trouvez 5 conseils pour maintenir la sécurité de conduire sur la route.
Your answer should be in very good French and not more than half of a page of A4 paper.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned more words and expressions relating to driving and road security.
You have also learnt some techniques of reading and analysing of French passage.
The unit has further taught you how to put your own ideas in written form.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has no doubt increased your knowledge of analysis of a passage written French.
It has also equipped you with the basic skills for the analysis of grammatical elements that make up a text.
You have surely acquired more vocabularies that are helpful for your understanding of the passage and for your own written expression.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 95FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II In good and simple French, write a composition on how to maintain security on our roads.
Your answer should not be more than a page A4 and 12 point font.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berard Evelyne et al: (1997): Tempo 2 Didier/Ratier, Paris.
p. 58.
96FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II MODULE 4 Unit 1 Cambriolage de la bijouterie DUTOC: Le coupable avoue Unit 2 Le marchand et le voleur Unit 3 Promenande matinale Unit 4 Chercher une petite maison à louer Unit 5 Le voleur UNIT 1 CAMBRIOLAGE DE LA BIJOUTERIE DUTOC: LE COUPABLE AVOUE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Cambriolage de la Bijouterie Dutoc Le Coupable Avoue 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Le Passé Composé 3.3.2 L'adjectif 3.4 Written Expression (Expression écrite) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read an interesting passage about a robbery or burglary of jewelry's shop.
You will learn further the techniques of reading and analysing a passage written in French.
You will also learn some elements of grammar that made up the passage.
This unit will also teach you vocabulary related to robbery and police investigation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and answer questions related to the text • Define and analyse elements of grammar used in the text • Acquire and use correctly vocabularies of robbery and police investigation; and 97FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • Write a french passage of similar themes.
Now, read the French passage provided below: 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cambriolage De La Bijouterie Dutoc: Le Coupable Avoue Interrogé par la police, Pierre Faucheur a reconnu être l'auteur du vol de bijoux.
II a par contre nié avoir agi avec des complices.
Le malfaiteur a refusé d'expliquer comment il avait réussi à déjouer les systèmes d'alarme pourtant sophistiqués qui protégeaient la bijouterie.
Le commissaire Grosset, chargé de l'enquête, estime quant a lui que le voleur n'a pu agir sans complicité, le système d'alarme étant d'une conception tout à fait nouvelle, et encore à l'état expérimental.
Le propriétaire de la bijouterie, M. Dutoc, que nous avons cherché à joindre, aurait disparu de la circulation depuis plusieurs jours, selon une employée de la bijouterie, alors que sa femme affirme qu'il serait en voyage d'affaires en Afrique du sud, où il procéderait à des achats de pierres précieuses.
Deux témoins, le libraire voisin de la bijouterie et une vieille dame habitant l'immeuble d'en face, signalent la présence d'une voiture suspecte, le soir du cambriolage, une 605 Peugeot selon le libraire M. Lapage, un break Renault, selon la vieille dame.
Ils précisent que quelqu'un était à bord du véhicule et que celui-ci aurait stationne plusieurs heures à hauteur de la bijouterie, mais les témoignages divergent sur son signalement.
Etait-il brun avec une moustache comme le prétend le commerçant ou blond à lunettes comme l'affirme Mme Leguet, la voisine d'en face?
(Tempo p.188) 3.2 Vocabulary The main issues raised in the French text are robbery, arrest and police investigation.
Let us look at some of the words and expressions relating to robbery and police investigation: a. le cambriolage = burgalary, break-in b. le vol = stealing, theft c. les complices = accomplices d. un malfaiteur = an evildoer e. la bijouterie = jewelry shop f. le coupable = the accused 98FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II g. le propriétaire = the owner h. le témoignage = the witness i. le libraire = bookseller Note that some words have different meanings you are required to choose the most appropriate for the context for example: "le vol" can mean "flight" or "stealing".
In this French passage, it means stealing.
Let us look forward at the word "vol" • vol à main armée = armed robbery • le vol de nuit = night flight • le vol à l'arrachèe = bag snatching • le vol à la roulette = car snatching.
Look for similar expressions with the word "vol".
There are some verbs in the French text provided and you can realise directly from the words (verbs) their noun forms.
Look at the following examples: a. réussi = la réussite b. disparu = la disparition c. affirme = une affirmation d. expliquer = une explication e. cambrioler = le cambriolage f. voler = le vol g. achètes = un achat h. circuler = le circulation 3.3 Grammatical Analysis The grammatical elements to study and analyse in the French passage read in this unit are: the past simple tense (le passé composé) and the adjective (l'adjectif).
3.3.1 Le Passé Composé You will recall that "le passé composè" expresses action that took place and achieved in the past.
It is a tense of story telling.
You saw how the simple past tense is formed and conjugated in unit 3.
In this unit we shall identify the passé composé used in the passage and analyse its functions in the context.
The simple past used in the French passage includes 99FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II "Interrogé par la police, Pierre Faucheur a reconnu être l'auteur du vol de bijoux.
Il a par contre nié avoir agi avec des complices" (first paragraph).
The underlined words are the verbs used in the past simple tense.
The infinitive forms of the verbs are: "reconnaître, nier".
The two verbs are verbs of action hence they are conjugated in the simple past tense with the auxiliary verb "avoir".
You will notice that the action expressed took pace and was accomplished in the past unlike the imperfect (imparfait) where the action will be dragging in the past (continuous in the past).
Note that in the second sentence of the above example the auxiliary "avoir" is separated from the past participle of the verb (nié) conjugated by an adverb "par contre".
Therefore, you have "Il a par contre nié..." You can also see that most of the verbs in the simple past tense in the French passage you read are action verbs.
It is due to the fact that the ideas express in the text are those of "action".
These ideas are: burglary, break-in, interrogation, arrest etc".
This is also usage of pluperfect tense (plusque parfait) in the text.
You find this usage mostly in the reported speech.
For example: "Le malfaiteur a refusé d'expliquer comment il avait réussi à déjouer les systèmes d'alarme pourtant sophistiques qui protégeaient la bijouterie".
The underlined word in the above example is in the pluperfect tense (plusque parfait) and it is used in a reported speech.
3.3.2 L'adjecti F (Adjective) There is also the use of adjectives of different types in the French passage you just read.
There are qualifying adjectives, demonstrative adjectives and verbal adjectives.
The qualifying adjectives in the passage include:  sophistiquès (masc.
plural) qualifying "les systèmes d'alarme (1st paragraph)  prècieuses (fem.
plural) qualifying "les pierres" (2nd para.)
 expèrimental (masc.
plural) qualifying "l'ètat" (2nd para.)
 vieille (fem.
sing) qualifying "une dame" (3rd para.)
 suspecte (fem.
sing) qualifying "une voiture" (3rd para.)
 nouvelle (fem.
sing) qualifying "une conception (2nd para.)
100FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II There are also groups of words in the text that function like adjectives.
They are called adjectival phrases.
There are phrases like:  voyage d'affaires  système d'alarme The underlined words in the above examples act as adjectives to qualify the nouns: voyage, système.
You will now go through the passage and identify the adjectives and analyse them by telling me their types, their genders and numbers.
3.4 Written Expressions Having gone through the French passage provided in this unit you would now write using your own words.
You will recall that the language of the passage is purely formal because it involves crime and investigation.
The language level belongs to the standard form .There is a mixture of simple and complex sentences.
The sentences are in the reported speech form where there is a report on the burglary.
Now, write out the findings of the policemen concerning the burglary in the French text you have read in this unit.
Your answer should not be more than a page of A4 paper, 12point font.
Note that your tense should be "past" (le passé, composé, l'imparfait, le plusque-parfait) as appropriate.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned words and expressions related to burglary and police investigation.
You have also learned further techniques of reading and writing stories.
This unit has taught you more about adjective, and the past tense in French.
5.0 SUMMARY You have acquired more techniques of textual analysis in this unit.
You have also been equipped with the knowledge of some grammatical elements necessary for the analysis of texts and your writing competence has been greatly enhanced.
101FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Ecrivez une composition sur un cas de cambriolage que vous avez vu.
(Your response should be one page of A4 paper size).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berard, Evelyne (1997): Tempo 2, Didier/Hatier, Paris, p. 118.
102FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 2 LE MARCHAND ET LE VOLEUR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Le Marchand et le voleur 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 L'imparfait 3.3.2 L'adverbe 3.3.3 Groupe Nominal 3.4 La Phrase Complexe 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read a passage about a merchant and a thief.
You will further learn the techniques of reading and analysing of a French passage.
You will also learn more about written expression.
I am optimistic that this passage will also increase your word power as more vocabularies will be learnt.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer questions that are related to the passage.
• define and analyse the elements of grammar used in the passage.
• compose stories by using your own words and sentences.
• explain some French key words in the passage in English language.
Now, read carefully the French text, I hope you will find it interesting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Le Marchand Et Le Voleur Une fois, un marchand se rendait à Paris pour les affaires.
Comme la route traversait une grande forêt, il décida de passer la nuit dans un village non loin de la forêt.
103FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Pendant qu'il dînait dans une auberge, il dit à l'aubergiste: J'ai une assez grosse somme d'argent sur moi.
La plus sûre serait de ne pas voyager cette nuit.
Le marchand n'avait pas remarqué un homme de mauvaise mine qui l'écoutait dans un coin de la salle.
Le lendemain, le marchand repartit à cheval pour Paris.
Quand il était en pleine foret trios voleurs "surgirent subitement" des arbres et l'attaquèrent.
Les voleurs le ligotèrent en un tour de main et le tramèrent à une petite clairière à quelque distance de la "grand" route.
Quand ils l'eurent solidement attaché à un arbre, ils ouvrirent sa sacoche et en retirèrent l'argent.
Mais c'est une fortune!
cria le chef de la bande, l'homme de mauvaise mine de l'auberge.
Quelle chance!
Il faut fêter cela!
Georges, veux-tu aller à la ville chercher des provisions?
On va manger d'abord et en fera le partage ensuite.
N'oublie pas une bouteille de vin.
Georges partit pour la ville, et chemin faisant, il se disait: Si j'avais tout cet argent à moi seul, je pourrais vivre à l'aise pendant le restant de mes jours.
Une idée lui vint.
Après avoir acheté des provisions, il passa chez le pharmacien et acheta un petit paquet de poudre blanche.
Il déboucha la bouteille de vin et il y versa tout le contenu du paquet.
Pendant l'absence de Georges, un des autres dit: S'il n'y avait que nous deux, Guillaume, nous aurions chacun une belle somme d'argent.
Qu'en dis-tu?
Alors il lui glissa deux mots à l'oreille.
Quand Georges eût rejoint ses compagnons.
Il se pencha sur le sac pour sortir les provisions.
Guillaume le voyant le dos tourné, sauta sur lui et lui plongea un poignard dans le dos.
Georges tomba, blessé à mort.
Les deux autres traînement son cadavre jusqu'aux buissons, puis ils commencèrent à préparer le souper.
Ils mangèrent de bon appétit et naturellement ils burent tout le vin.
Peu de temps après, les deux voleurs se sentirent malades et au bout de quelques minutes, ils glissaient sur l'herbe bien morts, eux aussi.
104FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II (Textes et travaux de langue francaise, p. 23-26) 3.2 Vocabulary There are some underlined words in the passage; you will need to learn their meanings by making use of your bilingual (French-English) dictionary.
The underlined words are:  marchand  mauvaise mire  ligotèrent  féter  partage  le restant  les compagnons The word "aubergiste" means someone who takes care of "l'auberge" (inn).
Someone who takes care of: • garage = garagiste • un établissement = directeur (directs an establishment) The following words are "nouns".
We can get "verbs" from these nouns: • le marchand = marchander • une auberge = auberger • la féte = féter • le compagnon = accompagner The words below are verbs; let us see the nouns we can get from them: a. traverser = le travers b. remarquer = une remarque c. attaquer = une attaque d. attacher = un attaché e. ouvrir = une ouverture f. crier = un cri g. manger = le manger h. boire = la boisson i. acheter = un achat j. voir = une vue In the French text provided, there is an expression "en un tour de main".
105FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Let us find other expressions with the word "main"  une main d'oeuvre  la main vide Now, find five similar examples and explain them.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 L'imparfait There is the use of imperfect tense (imparfait) in the French passage you have just read.
Like I told you in one of the preceding units, the imperfect tense is used to express actions that were going on in the past.
It is also used to express habitual actions in the past.
Infact, today, some grammarians in France call imperfect tense (imparfait) "le présent dans le passé" (The present in the past).
Imparfait tense is the text includes: se rendait, traversait, dinait, avait".
Look for other examples in the passage.
3.3.2 L'adverbe You will recall that you were exposed to adverb and its formation in one of the previous units.
An adverb modifies a verb and sometimes, it modifies an adjective.
Majority of French adverbs are formed by adding "ment" to the feminine form of adjectives these are regular verbs.
The irregular one does not obey this rule.
Let us go through the French text again and identify some of the adverbs.
The adverbs in the text include:  une fois (adverb of time)  le lendemain (adverb of time)  subitement (adverb of manner)  solidement („ „ „)  naturellement (adverb of manner) Now, make a list of 5 other adverbs from the passage and indicate their types.
106FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.3.4 Groupe Nominal (Nominal Group) A nominal group is a group of words acting as a noun.
It may comprise the followings:  An article - (une, un le, la, les)  An adjective - (jeune, petite, grande, belle)  A noun - (homme, garçon, femme, maison) Examples:  une jeune fille  une petite maison  une belle maison  le grand homme.
A nominal group can function as a subject of a verb or as an object.
Here are some examples from the passage: • Les deux voleurs se sentirent malades (the last paragraph) The underlined words are nominal group functioning as subject of the verb "se sentirent".
Here is another example: • I1 glissaient sur l’herbe bien morts The underlined word is a nominal group, standing in the object position.
3.4 La Phrase Complexe (Complex Sentence) A complex sentence consists of a main clause and one or more subordinate clauses.
The subordinate clause is always introduced by a relative pronoun.
Let us look at the passage for some examples: • "Le marchand n'avait pas remarqué un homme de mauvaise mine qui l'écoutait dans un coin de la salle" The underlined sentence introduced by the relative pronoun qui is the subordinate clause while the main clause is "le marchand n'avait pas remarqué un homme de mauvaise mine".
Note that the main clause can stand alone; but the subordinate clause cannot stand alone and be meaningful.
107FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Another example is: • Quand ils l'eurent solidement attaché â un arbre, ils ouvrirent sa sacoche et en retirérent l'argent».
The underlined sentence is the main clause while the sentence that starts with "Quand" is the subordinate clause.
There are other examples in the passage.
Read through the passage once more and identify them.
Construct 2 good complex sentences.
Your sentences must have a main clause and at least a subordinate clause.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt new words and expressions relating to business, hotel and stealing in this unit.
You have also learnt some elements of grammar and sentence structures.
You have used the techniques of the grammatical elements to analyse the French passage provided in this unit.
These have no doubt, contributed to your understanding of the passage.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with some basic techniques of textual analysis.
You have learnt some grammatical elements that are relevant to textual analysis.
It has also taught you the structure of complex sentences in French.
Your vocabularies have also increased greatly.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Ecrivez sur le problème du vol à main armée au Nigéria.
Your answer should not be more than one page.
A4 paper with 12-font size and single line spacing.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993): Textes et Travaux de Langue Française, Jator Publishing Co., Ltd., Ibadan, pp.
23-26.
108FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 3 PROMENADE MATINALE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Promenade matinale 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Les temps verbaux 3.3.2 Le subjonctif 3.3.3 La proposition (Clause) principale et relative 3.4 Expression écrite (Written Expression) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read and analyse a French text written in a straightforward language.
The passage is centered on a "morning walk" as the title implies.
It is a stroll embarked upon by a man every morning to his office.
This passage will increase your vocabulary and tell you about some rivers in France.
You will learn further the techniques of reading and analysing text in French.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer questions related to the text • define and analyse the elements of grammar used in the text • explain some words and expressions used in the passage.
• write composition using your own expressions.
Now, you will read the French passage provided below and I hope you will enjoy it.
109FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Promenade Matinale Malgré le vent, malgré la brume, l'homme suit les quais, toujours les quais, pour aller à son bureau.
Elle n'est pas gaie, ce matin, la rivière.
Ce brouillard qui monte entre les vagues semble l'alourdir.
Les toits sombres des rives, tous ces tuyaux de cheminée inégaux en penchés qui se reflètent, se croissent et fument au milieu de l'eau font penser à je ne sais quelle lugubre usine qui, du fond de la Seine, enverrait à Paris toute sa fumée en brouillard.
Notre homme, lui, n'a pas l'air de trouver cela si triste.
L'humidité le pénètre de partout, ses vêtements n'ont pas un fil de sec; mais il s'en va tout de même en sifflotant avec un sourire heureux au coin des lèvres.
Il y a si longtemps qu'il est fait aux brumes de la Seine!
Puis il sait que là- bas en arrivant, il va trouver une bonne chancelière bien fourrée, son poêle qui ronfle en l'attendant, et la petite plaque chaude où il fait son déjeuner tous les matins... "Il ne faut pas que j'oublie d'acheter des pommes", se dit-il, de temps en temps, et il siffle et il se dépêche.
Vous n'avez jamais vu quelqu'un aller à son travail aussi gaiement.
Les quais, toujours les quais, puis un pont.
Maintenant, le voila derrière Notre-Dame.
A cette pointe de l'île, le brouillard est plus intense que jamais.Il vient de trios côtés à la fois, noie à moitié les hautes tours, s'amasse à l'angle du port, comme s'il voulait cacher quelque chose.
L'homme s'arrête: c'est là.
On distingue confusément des ombres sinistres, des gens accroupis sur le trottoir, qui ont l'air d'attendre, et des éventaires étalés avec des rangés de biscuits, d'oranges, de pommes, Oh!
les belles pommes si fraîches, si rouges sous la boue.
Il en remplit ses poches, en souriant à la marchande qui grelotte, les pieds sur la chaufferette.
Ensuite, il pousse une porte dans le brouillard... (Alphonse Daudet, Contes du Lundi.from Textes et travaux de langue francaise, p. 35-37) 3.2 Vocabulary The language of the text is full of geographical, sea and weather related expressions.
You have words like: • la rivière = river • le brouillard = fog, mist.
• sombres = dark • la rive = sea shore, river bank • lugubre = gloomy, dismal 110FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • l'humidité = humidity • la Seine = River Seine in France - Tile = Island • le port = seaport There are other expressions in the text that you may not understand, take your dictionary and look for their meanings.
These expressions are:  avoir, l'air = paraître  ses vêtements n'ont pas un fil de sec = ses vêtements sont mouillés - de temps en temps = toujours.
The text has an oral tone.
It is filled with many compound, short sentences, and verbless sentences.
Here are examples: "Malgré le vent, malgré le brume, l'homme suit le quais, toujours le quais, pour aller à son bureau".
The above sentence looks more like oral expression.
The following sentence has the same unit.
"Elle n'est pas gaie, ce matin, la rivière" The style of the text which favours oral expression explains why there are many punctuation marks especially comma, which is used in compound sentences.
Oral style of the text is also explained by the use of words and expressions like:  "Notre homme, lui, n'a pas l'air de trouver cela si triste"  "Les quais, toujours les quais, puis un pont".
This is a sentence without a verb what we call verbless sentence (la phrase averbale).
Another example of oral style in the text is: "Les toits-sombres des rives, tous ces tuyaux de cheminée inégaux et penchés qui se reflètent, se croissent et fument au milieu de l'eau font penser à je ne sais quelle lugubre usine..." The underlined word in the above example is an element of oral expression.
111FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Some edible objects mentioned in the French text we are analysing, they are `pommes, oranges et biscuit'.
Can you name some other fruits that you know in French?
Now explain the underlined words and expressions in the French passage you just read.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis Here, you will learn more about tense (temps verbaux) the subjunctive and clauses in French.
3.3.1 Les Temps Verbaux Generally, the tense of the French passage you read in this unit is simple present (présent de l'indicatif).
The description of the man's walk is done in a straightforward language and simple present tense.
From the beginning to the end of the passage, you will see the use of simple present tense, conjugated in the third person singular number.
Examples are: (the first paragraph)  L'homme suit les quais (suivre)  Elle n'est pas gaie, ce matin, la rivière (être)  Ce brouillard qui monte entre les vagues semble alourdir (montre, sembler) (In the second paragraph)  Notre homme-n'a pas l'air de trouver cela si triste (avoir)  L'humidité le pénètre (pénétrer)  Il s'en va de même... (s'en aller) (In the third paragraph)  ... le brouillard est plus intense que jamais (être)  Il vient de trios côtés à la fois... (venir) You will also notice that verbs of different groups are in the French text being analysed.
You have verbs of the first group (-ER), second group (- IR) and third group (-RE/OIR) in the passage.
Let us go through the text again and identify some of these verbs.
112FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 1st Group 2nd Group 3rd Group -ER -IR -RE/OIR aller remplir suivre montre accroupir etre sembler faire refleter savoir se croisser fumer avoir penser falloir envoyer venir penetrer Note that the verb "aller is an irregular verb.
Its conjugation form is different from other regular -ER verb conjugation.
Now, go through the text and make a list of other words in the passage by making use of the above table.
3.3.2 Le Subjonctif You will recall that I have discussed the subjunctive mood with you in one of the previous unit (see unit 15).
The subjunctive mood is used after verbs that express a wish, necessity, will, preference and fear.
How do we form the subjunctive?
For the subject pronouns like "je, tu, il, elle, ils or elles": you will use the conjugated form of the present tense with "ils" (third person plural number).
Examples: • Ils partent = que je parte • Ils comprennent = que je comprenne • Ils boivent = que je boive • Ils dorment = que je dorme You will notice that the verbs underlined in the above examples are in the present tense (présent de l'indicatif .
It is the last two letters ending the verbs that are dropped to form the subjunctive.
That is:  Ils dorment = que je dorme  Ils parlent= que je parle In the case of subject pronouns like: nouns and "vous", you will use the conjugated form of the imperfect tense (imparfait) for example:  nous partions = que nous partions.
113FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II  vous partiez = que vous parties  nous comprenions = que nous comprenions  vous compreniez = que vous compreniez  nous dormions = que nous dormions  vous dormiez = que vous dormiez Now, let us go back to the French passage and identify the subjunctive mood used in the text.
"Il ne faut pas que j'oublie d'acheter des pommes".
You will now take your conjugation manual and study more on the conjugation of the subjunctive mood in French.
3.3.3 La Proposition (Clause) You will recall that we learnt about the relative pronouns and complex sentences in units 5 and 11.
Here, we shall look more closely at the clauses (les propositions), identify and analyse their functions as they appear in the French text being examined.
Note once again that a complex sentence usually has a main clause (la proposition principale) and a subordinate clause (la proposition subordonnée).
The main clause can always stand on its own because it gives a complete thought but the relative clause or the subordinate clause cannot stand-alone.
Here are some examples of the clauses in the passage.
"Ce brouillard qui monte entre les vagues semble l'alourdir".
The underlined words constitute the main clause: "Ce brouillard semble l'alourdir" The subordinate (relative) clause is introduced by the relative pronoun "qui".
"qui monte entre les vagues".
You will observe that the relative clause alone does not give any meaningful information.
Its existence becomes meaningful when it is used with a main clause.
Simply put, a relative clause gives further information about the idea expressed in the main clause.
Let us take another example: "On distingue confusément des ombres sinistres, des gens accroupis sur le trottoir, qui ont l'air d'attendre..." the underlined sentence above is the 114FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II main clause while the rest part introduced by the relative pronoun "qui" constitute the relative clause.
You will also realise that the two relative pronouns in the two examples cited above is "qui" which normally functions as subject.
In the two relative clauses, "qui" functions as a subject.
In the first example: "Qui monte entre les vagues" S V In the second example; you have "Qui ont l'air d'attendre S V Look at the passage more closely and identify other clauses in it.
Analyse the clauses and show the functions of the subordinate clauses identified.
3.4 Expression Ëcrite (Written Expression) Having gone through the passage in this unit, you should also try and compose story of your own.
I believe that the style of the passage you read in this unit and the vocabulary you have acquired will enable you to write a composition in good French.
Now, in three paragraphs, write a story of a civil servant living in your neighborhood and working in the same office with you.
Tell me stage by stage how he leaves his house and gets to the office.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about techniques of simple and step-by-step narration of actions and events.
You have also learned some words and expressions relating to climate, geography and nature.
You have also learned about some elements of grammar used in the composition of the text.
These elements include: verbal tenses, the subjunctive mood and the clauses.
These techniques are therefore meant to enhance your competence of written expression.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the basic techniques of reading and analysis of a French text.
You have also been equipped with the grammatical elements and expressions of weather they are used in 115FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II composing the passage.
These elements acquired have, no doubt, enhanced your knowledge of writing and analysis of a French text.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Faites un résumé du texte que vous avez lu en racontant étape par étape le trajet de l'homme de sa maison jusqu'à son bureau.
Votre réponse doit être en 4 phrases.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993): Textes et Travaux de Langue Française, Jator Publishing Co., Ltd., lbadan, pp.
35-37.
Berard, E. et al (1997): Tempo 2 Méthode de Français, Didier/ Hatier, Paris.
116FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 4 CHERCHER UNE PETITE MAISON A LOUER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Chercher une petite maison à louer 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 Adjective (l'adjectif) 3.3.2 Verb (le verbe) 3.3.3 Adverb (l'adverbe) 3.4 Written Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read and analyse another text based on advertising and letting of a house.
There are two short passages that are responses to an initial advertisement (announcement).
A family of five, that is, a couple and 3 children want a small house to let for their holiday period in July.
They want a house near the sea and of which the rent will be affordable.
These passages will expose you once again to the commercial and advertising registers.
You will acquire the techniques of advertising and vocabularies related to advertising.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer correctly questions related to the text • identify and analyse the elements of grammar used in the text • explain the key words used in the passage • summarize the main ideas of the passage • construct sentences and stories of your own.
• identify the differences between the two short passages that make up the text.
Now, you will read the French passage provided.
117FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Chercher Une Petite Maison A Louer Couple, 3 enfants cherche petite maison à louer pour les vacances d'été (juillet) en bord de mer ou à proximité.
Tranquillité recherchée.
Loyer raisonnable.
Faire propositions à Monsieur et Madame Plançon, 22, rue des Jonquilles 63 000 Clermont-Ferrand.
1.
Suite à votre petite annonce parue dans le journal « La Montagne », j'ai le plaisir de vous proposer la location d'une maisonnette totalement indépendante, à la Grande-Motte.
Elle comporte cuisine, salle de bains, un grand séjour et 2 chambres.
Pour vos enfants nous pourrions installer un lit supplémentaire dans la plus grande des deux chambres.
En outre, elle dispose d'un jardinet équipé de jeux (balançoire, toboggan) ce qui serait idéal pour vos enfants.
Elle est située à 15 minutes de la plage et nous pouvons, si vous le désirez, mettre à votre disposition des bicyclettes.
Le loyer est de 6000 francs, charges comprises, ce qui n'est pas cher pour la région.
Nous vous conseillons de prendre une décision rapide, car les demandes sont nombreuses pour une offre de ce type.
Nous vous donnons la priorité car nous sommes, ma femme et moi, originaires de Clermont et nous serions heureux d'accueillir quelqu'un du pays.
Veuillez agréer l'expression de nos sentiments les meilleurs.
2.
En réponse à votre petite annonce du 12 mars, j'ai le plaisir de vous offrir la possibilité d'un séjour dans un cadre exceptionnel et à des tarifs défiant toute concurrence à La Grande-Motte.
Nous disposons en effet d'une dizaine d'appartements type F3 ou F4, avec accès direct à la plage, vue sur la mer, et tous les commerces à proximité (centre commercial au pied de l'immeuble).
Les loyers sont respectivement de 9000 et 11000 francs selon qu'il s'agit d'un F3 ou d'un F4.
Cuisine entièrement équipée.
Accès à une aire de jeux, court de tennis.
Si cette proposition vous convient, je vous conseille de réserver rapidement (versement de 3000 francs à la réservation).
En espérant que cette offre exceptionnelle retiendra votre attention, veuillez recevoir l'expression de nos sentiments respectueux.
(Berard 1997: 112) 3.2 Vocabulary 118FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Words and expressions used in the French text you just read are those of advertising, indeed a response to an announcement.
As a result of this, you find words like:  suite à votre announce = following your advertisment.
 en réponse à votre announce = in response to your advertisment  avoir le plaisir de = to have pleasure of  proposer à quelqu'un = to propose to someone  j'ai le plaisir de vous offrir = I am pleased to offer you You will observe that the examples cited above are written in a formal language style.
You have the use of "vous" which is a mark of politeness and formality.
Apart from this, you also find words and expressions that are meant to convince the family that the house being advertised is really good for them.
These words and expressions include: "Elle comporte : cuisine, salle de bains, un grand séjours et 2 chambres" "...un lit supplémentaire dans la plus grande des deux chambres" "Elle dispose d'un jardinet équipé de jeux (balançoire, toboggan) ce qui serait idéal pour vos enfants" "...cadre exceptionnel" "avec accès direct à la plage, vue sur la mer et tous les commerces à proximité.
If you look at the above examples, you will see that those expressions are saying positive and interesting things about the houses available.
In a text like this, the use of adjectives is rampant.
You will now take your dictionary and look up for the meaning of other expressions that you may not understand.
Your understanding of the key words and expressions in the passage will surely enhance your general understanding of the text.
Now, explain the underlined words in the French passage you just read in French.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis 119FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II The elements of grammar to consider in this unit are adjective and adverb.
This text is based on advertising and the use of qualifying adjectives to describe the objects for sale and the use of adverb to explain their efficiency become necessary.
3.3.1 Adjective (L'adjectif) You already know that an adjective qualifies a noun.
It describes more appropriately a noun or a pronoun.
In the French text you just read, there are different types of adjectives.
There are mainly qualifying and verbal adjectives.
Examples of qualifying adjectives are:  petite  idéal  indépendante  grande  rapide  nombreuses  heureux  exceptionnel/exceptionnelle  direct  commercial  respectueux - supplémentaire Here are some of the verbal adjectives in the passage:  parue  équipé/équipée  comprises Do you see other types of adjective in the passage?
Go through the passage again and identify them.
3.3.2 Verb (Le Verbe) Verbs that are used in the French passage you read are mostly in the simple present tense, conditional tense and simple future tense.
The table below will illustrate the three tenses used in the passage.
Present tense Future tense Conditional tense 120FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II (présent de l'indicactif) (le future) (le conditionnel) ai (avoir) retiendra (retenir) pourrions (pouvoir) comporte (comporter) serait (être) dispose (disposer) serions (être) désirez (désirer) est (être) Now, use the format below to complete the list of other verbs in the passage.
Present tense Future tense Conditional tense (présent de l'inactif) (le future) (le conditionnel) 3.3.4 Adverb (l'adverb) You will recall that I have discussed adverb with you in some of the previous units.
I also told you that there are regular adverbs (i.e.)
adverbs that are realised by adding "-ment" to the feminine form of an adjective.
Example: heureux = heureuse + ment = heureusement.
And, there are irregular adverbs.
This type does not follow a specific rule.
Example are: petit = peu mauvais = mal bon = bien Let us now look at the text and identify the adverbs that are used.
These adverbs include: Regular Adverb Totalement Respectivement Entièrement Rapidement You will notice that adverbs present in the text are regular ones and they are used to modify verbs or adjectives.
For example the following adverbs qualify adjectives:  Totalement independante  entièrement égiupée The other two adverbs: respectivement and rapidement modify verbs.
They are used in these contexts: 121FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II  les loyers sont respectivement de 9000 et 11,000 F.  je vous conseille de reserver rapidement The two underlined words are adverbs that modify verbs.
The verbs are "sont" and "reserver" respectively.
3.4 Written Expression You must have discovered that the writing style of advertising and public announcement is different from other types of writing.
The register is more of commerce and the writer's main objective is to convince the readers that the product being advertised is the best in the market.
This explains why the writer carefully chooses his words and expressions.
This language is always simple and direct to ease the understanding of the subject matter.
You have an apartment to let out, write a small advertisement to present this properly to the public.
Your answer should not exceed 4 paragraphs.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt more about the techniques of reading and analysing a text of advertising register.
You have also learned the choice and use of words to convince potential buyers of the products being advertised.
You have also learnt some grammatical elements like adjective, verb and adverb that are used in the text being analysed.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the basic skills required for the reading and analysis of a text based on advertising.
You have been equipped with some vocabularies relating to commerce and advertisement.
Your acquisition of elements of grammar like verb, adjective, adverb and others has no doubt contributed to your competence of written expression in French.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Parmi ces deux propositions, choisissez celle qui vous parait le mieux correspondre à la demande.
Justifiez vos choix dans 2 paragraphes.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 122FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Berard, E.et al (1997): Tempo 2, Méthode de français Didier/Hatier, Paris, p. 112.
Girard, Jacky (1996): Panorama 1, Méthode de Francais Clé International, Paris.
123FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 5 LE VOLEUR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Le voleur 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammatical Analysis 3.3.1 L'imparfait 3.3.2 Le Conditionnel 3.4 Written Expression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, which is the last unit of this course, you will read and analyse a relatively long passage French passage which its theme is based on a thief and his nefarious activities.
The thief in this passage you are about to read is not an armed robber but a thief that steals journals and magazine on a vendor's stand (shell).
This passage is interesting and you are going to learn a lot of new words and expressions relating to book selling and bookshop.
You will also learn some important grammatical elements that will enhance your writing skills.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Read and explain the themes of the passage; • Answer correctly questions based on the text; • Explain the vocabulary identified in the text; • Identify and analyse the elements of grammar used in the passage; and • Write correctly a story of your own in French.
You will now read the French passage.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 124FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.1 Le Voleur J'avais mis au point une combine formidable.
Je descendais chez Sentis, le libraire-marchand de journaux qui fait le coin de la GrandeRue en bas de la rue Sainte-Anne, et je prenais Pierrot, l'illustre permis aux enfants chrétiens, je le prenais sur sa pile.
J'avais mes six sous dans le creux de la main.
Au lieu de payer tout de suite à la caisse et de m'en aller, je feuilletais ça et là les magazines à l’étalage, je posais chaque fois mon journal sur une pile d'illustres pour feuilleter plus, à l'aise.
Quand je le reprenais, je fauchais en même temps un illustre sur la pile.
Je recommençais plus loin.
Je payais un illustré, j'en embarquais trois ou quatre à 1'œil.
Non seulement je volais, mais je volais des journaux qui faisaient pleurer le petit Jésus.
Vraiment la mauvaise pente.
J'avais d'ailleurs une trouille abominable: j'étais pas encore complètements pourri.
Je quittais la boutique les fesses serrées, je me forçais à ne pas courir, je remontais la rue Sainte-Anne, sans me retourner, surtout.
C'était trop facile, j'arrivais pas à croire que c'était si simple, une poignèe de fer allait se poser sur mon épaule, une voix terrible me traiter de voleur devant tout le monde.
Je crèverais sur place sûr.
En grimpant l'escalier, je commençais à oser y croire.
Mes mains, mes pieds se réchauffaient, je sentais le sang courir dans mes joues, j'étais sauvé, merde, j'avais gagné!
Je planquais les illustrés sous le matelas.
Je me les lirais au Fort, dans un coin de verdure secret, puis je les échangerais.
De toute façon, un truc volé, j'ai pas envie de le garder, ça me donne une impression de pas vrai, de pas exister tout à fait.
(Aebayo 1993 : 42-43) 3.2 Vocabulary In the French text you just read, you have words and expressions related to book sales and bookshop.
You have words like: a. la librairie = bookshop b. le libraire = book seller/ bookseller c. les journaux = news papers d. les étalages = shelves "Journal" means newspapers or dailies.
125FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II There are other titles like: a. les quotidiens = dailies b. le hebdomadaire = weekly magazine c. le mensuel = monthly magazine Do you know any papers that are published daily, weekly, monthly and annually?
In French "chez" is used to refer to someone's house, or the house of a family.
In the passage you have: - chez Sentis = Sentis' shop or place Here are some examples of the use of "chez" Chez +nom Chez +Sentis = Sentis' place Chez le secrétaire = The secretary's place/house Àla police = police place/station Chez les Ojo = At the Ojo’s Chez les Abubakar = The Abubakars' house "Chez" can also be used with pronouns (disjonctif).
Examples are: Chez - moi Chez - toi Chez - lui Chez - elle Chez - nous Chez - vous Chez - eux Chez - elles In one of the preceding units, we discussed formation of words; specifically, of "derivation" where we looked at "préfixation" and "suffixation" and "mots-composés".
Here, you will also see the use of a préfixe "re".
The préfixe "re" indicates repetition, do something again.
Examples of such expressions in the French text being analysed are: "Je recommençais plus loin".
(re + commençais) "Je remontais la rue Sainte-Anne, (re + montais) sans me retourner" (re + tourner).
"Mes mains, mes pieds se réchauffaient..." (re + chauffait).
List five examples of French words with prefix "re" from outside the passage you just read.
126FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II There are also some words (nouns) that are phrases.
For example, "une poignée de fer" (this is a grip (hand) made of iron).
Other words in this model include: le chemin de fer = railway le coup demain = the touch le coup d'état = military take-over of government un coup de fil = a telephone call un coup d'oeil = a quick call état d'âme = frame of mind, mood état d'alert = state of alert There are many expressions following the above structure.
Let us look at this expression in the French passage: "une voix terrible me traite de voleur devant tout le monde" In the model of the underlined expression "traite de voleur", we can have expressions like: Il me traite d'enfant Il me traite d'inconnu Il me traite de menteur.
The French passage belongs to a familiar level of language.
There is the use of words and expressions belonging to the familiar and common language which one cannot find in the formal language.
These familiar expressions in the passage are: "...j'étais pas encore complètement pourri" (second paragraph).
In the above sentence, there is a suppression of the first part of the negation "pas".
The standard and journal version of the sentence should be: "...je n'étais pas encore complètement pourri".
Another example of such usage is: C'était trop facile, j'arrivais pas à croire que c'était si simple".
The first part of the negation "ne" is also being suppressed in the above sentence.
The standard version of the sentence should be: C'était trop facile, je n'arrivais pas à croire que c'était si simple".
Another example of such usage is "j'ai pas envie de le garder".
Other expressions, which belong to the familiar language in the French text, are:  j'étais sauvé, j'avais gagné!
127FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II  J'ai pas envie de le garder, ça me donne impression de pas vrai, de pas exister tout à fait" In the examples above, you find abbreviated words like "ça" instead of "cela" and more of suppression of the first part of negation.
Now take your bilingual dictionary and explain in English the underlined words and expressions in the French passage you just read.
3.3 Grammatical Analysis In this unit, the elements of grammar that you will look at very closely are the imperfect and the conditional tenses.
Youll recall that you have seen these two tenses in some of the preceding units, you will now look more at their usage in the French text being analysed here.
3.3.1 Imperfect Tense (L'imparfait) The imperfect tense has been discussed in unit 5 and 17.
In the two units, you were taught the forms and functions of the imperfect tense.
In this unit therefore, you shall be exposed to imperfect tenses as they are used in the French passage being analysed.
The writer of the passage employed the imperfect (I'mparfait) and the pluperfect (plus que parfait) right from the beginning to the end of the text.
The imperfect tense is used to describe habitual actions or repeated actions in the part.
It is also used to describe a state in the past.
For example: "j'étais ravi - I was delighted.
Imperfect tense is also used to describe simultaneous action in the past.
Now, let us go through the passage and identify some of the imperfect tenses used in it.
"Je descendais chez Sentis, le librairie - marchand de journaux qui fait le coin de la Grande-Rue; ... et je prenais Pierrot, l'illustré permis aux enfants chrétien, je le prenais sur sa pile".
The underlined verbs in the above examples are imperfect tense.
Let us look at another example where the imperfect tense is used to describe simultaneous action in the past.
"Quand je prenais, je fauchais en même temps un illustre sur la pile".
"Non seulement je volais, je volais des journaux qui faisaient pleurer le petit Jésus".
128FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II The underlined verbs in the above examples are examples of the imperfect tenses which describe simultaneous actions in the past.
Now, identify other uses of imperfect tenses in the French passage you read in this unit.
3.3.2 The Conditional Tense (Le Conditionnel) We have learnt about the conditional tense in Module 1 units 4 and Module 3 unit 1 of this course.
The conditional tense is also employed in the French text being analysed in this unit.
The conditional tense in the text include: "Je les lirais au fort dans un coin de verdure secret, puis je les échangerais".
The two underlined verbs above are in the conditional tense.
Sometimes, the conditional tense is in the form of.
Si + imparfect + présent conditional.
Si j'avais de l'argent, j'achèterais une voiture.
This type is generally referred to as hypothetical system (système hypothétique).
The type of conditional employed in the French passage being analysed in this unit is present conditional.
It is not a hypothetical system.
Now, comment on the use of present conditional tense in the French text you just read in this unit.
3.4 Written Expression The French passage you read in this unit is an interesting one.
It narrates the activities of a thief who stole books and journals from a newspaper vendor's stand.
The passage is composed with a mixture of plusperfect and imperfect tenses.
You will also notice the use of present conditional tense.
The words and expressions used in the text belong to the familiar language.
You will notice the use of negation with the first part suppressed.
Let me emphasize that the familiar level of language should not be used in the formal context.
Write a short composition of 4 paragraphs on your feelings about the activities of the thief in the French text analysed in this unit.
129FRE 110 INTRODUCTION TO TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt the basic techniques of analysis of a long passage in this unit.
You have also learnt some elements of grammar like the imperfect tense, pluperfect tense and the conditional tense.
You have also acquired some vocabularies related to bookselling, bookshop and stealing.
All these have no doubt contributed to your competence in written expression in French.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the basic techniques of textual analysis in French.
The unit has also taught you the grammatical elements that made up the passage.
Your acquisition of these elements and techniques has surely enhanced your competence in textual analysis and written expression in French.
It is my belief that this course has really prepared you for the challenges of advanced course in textual analysis in French.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Summarize in five good French sentences, the French passage provided in this unit.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, Aduke (1993): Textes et Travaux de Langue Française, Jator Publishing Co. Ltd., Ibadan.
Adebayo, Aduke (1994): A Functional French Course for Anglophone Students, Omoleye Publishing Co., Ltd., Ibadan.
130
