 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: FRE 132 COURSE TITLE: TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II FRE 132 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Course Developer/Writers Dr. Tunde Ayeleru Dept.
of European Studies University of Ibadan Ibadan - Nigeria Alani Souleymane Dept.
of European Studies University of Ibadan Ibadan - Nigeria Programme Leader Dr. Christine Ofulue National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Ms Lucy Jubrin National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii FRE 132 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-930-9 All Rights Reserved iiiFRE 132 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ……………………………………………………… 1 What You Will Learn in this Course …………………………….
1 Course Aims ……………………………………………………….
1 Course Objectives ……………………………………………….. 1 Working through this Course …………………………………….
2 Course Materials ………………………………………………… 2 Study Units ……………………………………………………….
3 Textbooks and References ……….……………………………… 4 Assessment ……………………………………………………….
4 Tutor-Marked Assignment ……………………………………….. 5 Final Examination and Grading ………………………………….. 5 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………………….
5 Course Overview………………………………………………… 5 How to Get the Most from this Course ………………………….
6 Summary ………………………………………………………… 6 iv Introduction This course is a one semester course in the first year of the B.A.
(Hons) Degree in French Studies.
It is a two (2) credit course of twenty units.
It intends to introduce students to written comprehension and elementary composition in French.
This course is a pre-requisite to FRE 131: Textual Analysis 1.
It is essential to students because it enables them to put into practice the grammar of French they acquire in the course of this programme.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about and the course materials you will use.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
There is also a separate detailed Assignment File.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of FRE 132 Textual Analysis II is to introduce you to the basic techniques of Written Comprehension in French and analysis of French texts.
It also teaches you the basic techniques of elementary composition in French.
Course Aims This course aims at giving you an understanding of basic techniques of written comprehension and composition in French.
It also aims at teaching you how to grammatically analyse texts written in French.
This will be achieved by: • Introducing you to the basic techniques of French written comprehension • Introducing you to the techniques of elementary composition in French • Explaining to you how to grammatically analyse texts and passages written in French • Introducing you to different language registers.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
Each unit also has its specific objectives.
The unit objectives are found at the beginning of each unit.
You need to read them before you start working on the unit.
You may refer to them during your study of the FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II unit to check on your progress in the course.
There is need for you to always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit to ensure that you have done what is required.
Below are the objectives of the course.
You would have achieved the aims of the course if you are able to meet these objectives.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Read the passages and correctly answer questions related to them • Identify some grammatical elements in the passage • Construct simple and correct sentences in French • Use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercises • Identify the register of the texts • Correctly analyse different parts and structures of the texts • Write simple and correct composition in French • Explain the vocabulary related to different registers Working through this Course To complete this course you are required to read the study units and read the recommended books and other materials related to French written comprehension.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises.
You will also have to submit your Tutor-Marked Assignments to your tutors.
The course will take you between 20 and 25 weeks to complete.
See below the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
The Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
The Assignments File ii FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Study Units There are twenty study units in this course.
They are: Module 1 Unit 1 Une interview Unit 2 Ben Laden : L’homme de L’année ?
Unit 3 C’est le Mien Unit 4 La Fête des Mères Unit 5 Haschich à Rome Module 2 Unit 1 A la Recherche d’un Hôtel Unit 2 Jean-Jacques Goldman Unit 3 Kérékou II Unit 4 La Cuisine Française Unit 5 La Maison à Louer Module 3 Unit 1 La Pomme Unit 2 L’Amant Unit 3 Le Gagnant du Gros Lot Est Mort Unit 4 Le Manteau du Père Noël Unit 5 Le Mariage d’un Aveugle Module 4 Unit 1 Le Logement Unit 2 Rêves d’enfance Unit 3 Robert le Taxi Unit 4 Spéciale Santé Unit 5 Un Maître Prestigieux Unit 6 Une Exploratrice Française The passages are graded from simple to most complex.
The first nine units are written in generally simple and straightforward language.
Units 9-20 have passages of present, past and future tenses.
You will meet sentences that are much more complex in objectives, reading materials, explanations and the set of reading materials.
They also contain self- assessment exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments.
All these will assist you in achieving the learning objectives of the units and the whole course.
iiiFRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Textbooks and References Adebayo, A.
(1993).
Textes et Travaux de Langue Française.
Ibadan : Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd. Berard, E. et al (1997).
Tempo1.
Paris : Didier/Hatier.
Boya, T. et Carlos, J.
(1996).
PensezNneuf, Pensez Positif, Cahier No 1.
Cotonou :Les Editions Boya.
Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar (4th ed).
USA: Shaunm’s Outline Series, MacDraw-Hill.
DictionnaireFrançais-Anglais/French-English.(1994).
Paris/London :Le Robert/Harper Collins.
Dominique, P.
(1998.)
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1.
Méthode de Français.
Paris :Clé International.
Dominique, P. (1998).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 2.
Méthode de Français.
Paris: Clé International.
Girard, J.
(1996).
Panorama 1, Méthode de Langue Française.
Paris :Clé International.
Marianne, No 243 du 17 au 23Décembre 2001.
Ojo, Ade (2002).
A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar.
Ibadan: Signal Educational Services.
Oudot, S. (1986).
French Verbs and Essentials of Grammar USA: Passport Books.
Valette, J.P. and Valette, R.M.
(2000) Discovering French, Nouveau Bleu .
USA: Mcdougal Littell/Houghton Mifflin.
Assessment The assessment of this course is divided into two main parts.
The first contains the tutor-marked assignments and the second part is a written examination.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated by the tutor.
The work submitted to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
You will sit for a final examination for three iv FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II hours at the end of the course.
This examination will count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are twenty tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit only six of the twenty assignments of which the highest three will be counted.
Each assignment counts for 10% towards your total course mark.
When you have completed your assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for FRE 132 will be for three hours and will carry a total mark of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will reflect the self-tests, and tutor-marked assignments.
You need to revise before you sit for the examination.
You may also need to revise the self- assessment tests and tutor- marked assignments and the comments on them before the examination.
The examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course Marking Scheme The table below shows the breakdown of the course marking.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1-6 Six assignments, best three of the six count @ 10% each = 30% of course marks Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview There are twenty (20) units in this course.
You are to spend one week on each unit.
Assignment 1 will come at the end of Unit 3; Assignment 2 at the end of Unit 6, Assignment 3 after Unit 9; Assignment 4 at the end of Unit 12; Assignment 5 at the end of Unit 16 and Assignment 6 after completing unit 20. vFRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II How to Get the Best from this Course The advantage of distance learning is that you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place you find convenient.
The course material replaces the lecturer that stands before you in a face- to -face situation.
Each of the units has a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated into the other units and the course as a whole.
You also have a set of learning objectives of the units.
Those objectives tell you what you should have learnt on completion of the unit.
Having finished the unit, you need to go back to these objectives to find out whether you have achieved these objectives.
The main body starts with a passage written in French and explanations of grammatical elements and structures.
Self-assessment tests are spread all over the units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the units and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
Do each as you meet them in the unit.
Summary FRE 132: Introduction to Textual Analysis intends to introduce you to the basic techniques of written comprehension in French.
On successful completion of this course, you hopefully, will be equipped with the basic knowledge of written comprehension in French, and techniques of writing simple composition.
You would also have acquired some vocabulary on different registers.
You will be able to • Answer questions related to written texts • Identify and explain some grammatical elements in French • Write simple and correct composition in French • Analyse structurally, French texts of different registers etc.
vi FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Course Code FRE 132 Course Title Textual Analysis II Course Developer/Writers Dr. Tunde Ayeleru Dept.
of European Studies University of Ibadan Ibadan - Nigeria Alani Souleymane Dept.
of European Studies University of Ibadan Ibadan - Nigeria Programme Leader Dr. Christine Ofulue National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Ms Lucy Jubrin National Open University of Nigeria viiFRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-930-9 All Rights Reserved viii FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ……………………………………….……….…….
1 Unit 1 Une Interview………………............……………… 1 Unit 2 Ben Laden, L’homme De L’annee?
......................... 7 Unit 3 C’est Le Mien……………………............………… 13 Unit 4 La Fete Des Meres………………………............… 19 Unit 5 Haschich A Rome………………………............….
24 Module 2 …………………………………………………….
29 Unit 1 A La Recherche D’un Hotel……..........…………… 29 Unit 2 Jean Jacques Goldman…………...........…………… 35 Unit 3 Kerekou II………………………………….……….. 41 Unit 4 La Cuisine Française……………….............……….
46 Unit 5 La Maison A Louer…………………............……… 53 Module 3 …………………………………………….………... 58 Unit 1 La Pommme………………….............…………….. 58 Unit 2 L’amant……………………………………..……….
64 Unit 3 Le Gagnant Du Gros Lot Est Mort…..............……… 69 Unit 4 Le Manteau Du Pere Noel……………...............…… 74 Unit 5 Le Mariage D’un Aveugle…………...............……… 80 Module 4 ………………………….……………………….…… 86 Unit 1 Le Logement………………..........………………….
86 Unit 2 Reves D’enfance…………………..........………….. 92 Unit 3 Robert Le Taxi…………………………..........…….
97 Unit 4 Speciale Sante……………………………….
......... 102 Unit 5 Un Maitre Prestigieux……………………..........….
108 Unit 6 Une Exploratrice Française………………………... 113 ixFRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II MODULE 1 Unit 1 Une Interview Unit 2 Bien Laden, L’homme De L’annee ?
Unit 3 C’est Le Mien Unit 4 La Fete Des Meres Unit 5 Haschich A Rome UNIT 1 UNE INTERVIEW CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Total Interrogation 3.2.2 Partial Interrogation 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read and analyse a simple and interesting interview.
The passage centres on a conversation between two students.
You will learn less vocabulary since it is a simple conversation.
This unit will focus more on various ways of asking such questions as may appear in a conversation in general and an interview in particular.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer correctly questions related to the passage • ask any type of question • construct short interviews in your own words and expressions.
1 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now Read the Following Passage: Nicolas est un reporter pour La Gazette des Etudiants, le journal des étudiants.
Il a décide d’écrire un article sur les étudiants étrangers qui fréquentent l’établissement.
Aujourd’hui, il interviewe Fatou, une étudiante d’origine sénégalaise.
NICOLAS: Bonjour, Fatou.
Est-ce que je peux te poser quelques questions ?
FATOU : Oui, bien sûr.
NICOLAS : Tu es sénégalaise, n’est-ce pas ?
FATOU : Oui, je suis sénégalaise.
NICOLAS : Où est-ce que tu habites?
FATOU : Je suis de Dakar, mais maintenant j’habite à Paris avec ma famille.
NICOLAS : Pourquoi est-ce que vous habitez à Paris.
FATOU : Parce que ma mère travaille pour l’UNESCO.
NICOLAS : Est-ce que tu aimes Paris ?
FATOU : J’adore Paris.
NICOLAS : Qu’est-ce que tu fais le week-end?
FATOU : Ça dépend!
Je regarde la télé ou je joue au tennis avec mes copains.
NICOLAS : Merci beaucoup Fatou.
FATOU : C’est tout?
NICOLAS : Oui, c’est tout!
FATOU : Bon.
Alors maintenant c’est mon tour !
Est-ce que je peux te poser une question ?
NICOLAS : Bien sûr !
FATOU : Qu’est-ce que tu fais samedi ?
NICOLAS : Euh !
… Je ne sais pas.
FATOU : Alors, est-ce que tu veux aller à un concert de musique africaine ?
NICOLAS : Avec qui ?
FATOU : Avec moi, bien sûr !
NICOLAS : D’accord !
Où ?
Quand ?
A quelle heure?
3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read is a casual conversation between two students in an interview form.
It conveys words and expressions related to asking questions.
étranger: foreigner fréquenter : to attend poser une question : ask a question 2FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II bien sûr : of course n’est-ce pas : isn’t it ?
maintenant : now copain : friend, mate c’est tout : that is all mon tour : my turn tu veux : you want (from “vouloir” : to want ; wish to, like to) je peux : I can (from ‘pouvoir’ : to be able to) 3.2 Grammatical Analysis This section will teach you how to ask questions- whether complete or partial.
3.3.1 Total Questions Total questions are questions that require ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers.
There are three (3) different ways of asking such questions.
They refer to various registers: familiar language, oral standard and standard .
administrative language Note these various ways of asking the question: “are you married?” 1.
Tu es marié/mariée?
Vous êtes marié/mariée?
This is allowed on a low register.
It is a declarative sentence with an intonation in the form of a question.
2.
Est-ce que tu es marié(e) This type is allowed and is common in spoken French.
You simply add ‘est-ce que’ to the declarative statement: Est-ce que + tu es marié(e)?
Another example : est-ce qu’elle arrive aujourd’hui ?
(is she coming today ?)
Est-ce que + elle arrive aujourd’hui ?
3.
Es-tu marié(e) ?
Etes-vous marié(e) ?
This form presents an inversion between the verb and the subject.
However one needs to pay more attention to the third person singular when the verb does not end with –t.
Example: Finit-il son travail aujourd’hui?
Does he finish his work today?
A-t-elle un enfant?
* Does she have a child?
3 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Kola a-t-il mangé aujourd’hui?
** Has Kola eaten?
(The French puts it in the form: Kola has he eaten?)
NB: *A‘t’ is inserted for verbs which do not end with‘t’.
• A pronoun is inserted to make the inversion, rather than the noun.
It is very important to master the three ways of asking questions studied in this section as they will form the basis of the next section.
3.2.1 Partial Questions In this section, we shall deal with questions that require statements as answers but neither ‘yes’ nor ‘no’.
They require interrogative pronouns like: • Quel (which, what) agrees in gender and number with the noun it refers to.
It has four (4) forms: - with a masculine singular noun: quel - with a feminine singular noun: quelle - with a masculine plural noun: quels - with a feminine plural noun : quelles Examples: Quelle heure est-il ?
What time is it ?
Quels vêtements préférez-vous ?
Which clothes do you prefer?
• Que (what?).
It is used to refer to things.
Examples: Que désirez-vous?
/ Qu’est-ce que vous désirez?
• Pourquoi (why) Pourquoi est-ce que vous habitez à Paris ?
Pourquoi habitez-vous à Paris ?
Why do you live in Paris?
• Où : (where) Tu habites où ?
Où est-ce que tu habites ?
Où habites-tu (where do you live) • Others are: comment (how); combien (how many) ; quand (when), etc.
4FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.3 Simple Composition We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.
Now, with the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Il a décidé de travailler.
2.
Zidane est un joueur d’origine algérienne 3.
Je peux te demander une faveur ?
4.
Est-ce que vous connaissez le Village Français du Nigéria ?
5.
Qu’est-ce que tu manges ce soir ?
Words 1. un journal 2. étranger 3. un établissement 4. n’est-ce pas ?
5. alors 6. un concert 7. d’accord 8. quand 9. où 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has hopefully, equipped you with some basic tools for conducting a conversation in general and an interview in particular.
It has taught some verbs, nouns and interrogative pronouns that can help you ask any type of question in French.
With those grammatical elements, we hope you can construct sentences which you may need to ask questions and even respond to inquiries.
5.0 SUMMARY This lesson centered on an interview which allowed you to learn how to ask questions in French.
With this, you can identify any type of question.
By now you should be able to engage in conversations and enquire more about people rather than wait to react to questions.
5 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Answer these questions by saying true (vrai) or false (faux) and justify your answer.
Example: Fatou est française.
FAUX : elle est sénégalaise 1) Elle habite à Paris.
2) Le père de Fatou travaille pour l’UNESCO.
3) Le week-end, Fatou aime jouer au tennis.
4) Nicolas invite Fatou à un concert.
5) Fatou accepte l’invitation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dominique, P. et al (1998).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris :Clé International.
Valette, J.P. & Valette, R.M.
(2000).
Discovering French.
USA: Nouveau Bleu 1, Mcdougal Littell/Houghton Mifflin.
6FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 2 BIN LADEN, L’HOMME DE L’ANNEE ?
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Comparative 3.2.2 Superlative 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read and analyse a short and interesting passage on current events.
The passage criticises the reason why Bin Laden’s tentative election as Man of the Year was rejected in the USA.
The unit will show you the vocabulary related to satirical remarks by a journalist.
Also it will teach you how to compare, by making use of comparatives and superlatives.
It will also teach you some basic techniques of short composition using the grammatical elements taught in this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer correctly questions related to a critical analysis • identify some grammatical elements on comparative and superlative adjectives • compose simple and correct sentences with your own words and expressions • Use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now Read the Following Passage: L’hebdomadaire Times envisageait d’élire Bin Laden « homme de l’année ».
Ce choix, en vérité, s’impose puisque le lauréat peut être désigné « pour le meilleur et pour le pire ».
Personne, en 2001, n’est 7 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II arrivé en effet à jouer un rôle aussi considérable que le chef terroriste, au point que toutes les nations du monde ont été embriguées dans une « guerre » destinée à l’éliminer.
Or cette éventualité a provoqué, aux Etats-Unis, un véritable tollé.
Rappelons donc que Times désigna en 1938 Hitler, en 1939 et 1942 Staline, en 1979 Khomeiny, sans que cela provoque une levée de boucliers !
Régression ?
Marianne, No 243 du 17 au 23 décembre 2001 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read tells the problem arising from the tentative election of Bin Laden as Man of the Year 2001.
This short passage conveys words and expressions used in polemics and politics.
Despite its shortness, the passage contains a number of difficult words and expressions.
l’hebdomadaire: the daily newspaper ce choix s’impose : this choice is essential puisque: seeing that le lauréat : the winner le meilleur : the best le pire : the worst les nations du monde : nations of the world embriguées: involved un tollé : general outcry rappelons que : let’s remember une levée de boucliers : (a figurative expression for) general outcry 3.2 Grammatical Analysis Persons or things can be compared by using: the comparative form of the adjective (more … than, …er than, less … than, as … as) or the superlative form of the adjective (the most …, the …est, the least …) 3.2.1 The Comparative The comparative is formed the following way: Plus … (que) Plus grand Plus intéressant More … (than) greater more interesting Moins … (que) moins recent moins important Less … (than) less recent less important Aussi … (que) aussi bon aussi extraordinaire As … (as) as good as extraordinary 8FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Let’s examine some examples in the following sentences: UI est plus grande que NOUN (UI is bigger than NOUN) NOUN est moins grande que UI.
(NOUN is less big than UI) Gastlin court plus vite que Maurice green.
Gastlin runs faster than Maurice green.
Les soldats sont beaucoup moins patients que les civils.
(Soldiers are far less patient than civilians).
Le problème de la grippe aviaire est tout aussi grave.
(The problem of Avian Flu is just as serious.)
3.2.2 The Superlative The superlative is formed as follows: Le/la/les plus … the most …, the …est Le/la/les moins the least Le Nigéria est le pays le plus peuplé d’Afrique.
(Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa).
Bob Marley et Michael Jackson sont les plus grandes légendes de la chanson.
(Bob Marley and Michael Jackson are the greatest legends).
NB: Be careful, the comparative is not as simple as it looks.
There is need to pay attention to the word order.
The normal rules governing the word order of adjectives apply.
When a superlative adjective comes after the noun, the article is used twice, before the noun and before the adjective.
Example : Le politicien le plus populaire The most popular politician When a possessive adjective is used, there are two (2) possible constructions, depending on the position of the adjective: Example: Mon plus beau souvenir My most beautiful souvenir Or Son problème le plus urgent est de trouver à manger.
His most urgent problem is to find something to eat.
9 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Finally, we should take note of ‘in’ used in superlative and translated as ‘de’ in French.
La ville la plus propre de notre pays est Calabar.
The neatest town in our country is Calabar.
Let us end this grammar section with the irregular comparatives and superlatives.
Adjectives Comparative Superlative bon (masc) meilleur le meilleur bonne (fem) meilleure la meilleure good better the best mauvais pire le pire plus mauvais le plus mauvais mauvaise pire la pire plus mauvaise la plus mauvaise bad worse worst petit moindre le moindre plus petit le plus petit plus petite la plus petite small smaller, lesser the smallest, the least Other examples: Ma meilleure amie s’appelle Ngozi My best friend’s name is Ngozi L’harmattan est la plus mauvaise saison de l’année.
Harmattan is the worst season of the year.
NB.
• plus mauvais is used in the sense of worse in quality, taste, etc.
• moindre usually means ‘less in importance’ and • plus petit means less in size Le moindre de mes soucis The least of my worries Elle est plus petite que moi She is smaller than I (am) 3.2.3 Simple Composition We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.
Now, with the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
10FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Expressions 1.
Envisager de faire quelque chose 2.
Ce choix s’impose 3.
Jouer un rôle considérable 4.
Une action destinée à 5.
Sans que cela Words 1. l’hebdomadaire 2. le lauréat 3. considérable 4. puisque 5. un terroriste 6. éliminer 7. une éventualité 8. provoquer 9. désigner 10. une régression 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has made some remarks on why Bin Laden was rejected as the “Man of the Year”.
Most importantly, the text has exposed you to some journalistic satirical expressions using comparatives and superlatives.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with some basic tools for analyzing and writing a criticism in French on an alleged terrorist.
You should have learnt some verbs, nouns and adjectives that can help you make comparison in French.
With those grammatical elements, we hope you can construct sentences criticizing a political event by comparing some facts and figures on contemporary issues.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Answer these questions.
1.
Bin Laden est-il élu « homme de l’année » ?
2.
Selon l’hebdomadaire, Ben Laden mérite-t-il d’être « homme de l’année » 3.
Bin Laden est-il aimé dans le monde ?
4.
Pourquoi la proposition du Times a-t-elle provoqué « un considérable tollé » aux Etats-Unis ?
5.
Que pensez-vous de cette réaction américaine ?
11 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dominique, P. et al(1998).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris : Clé International.
Marianne, No 243 du 17 au 23 Décembre 2001.
12FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 3 C’EST LE MIEN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Possessive Adjectives 3.2.2 Possessive Pronouns 3.2.3 Expressing Possession with ‘à’ 3.2.4 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read and analyze a simple and interesting passage.
The passage is a dialogue which centres on a dispute between two children.
The unit will show the vocabulary related to a family atmosphere and dispute among youngsters.
Also, it will teach you how to form adjectives, pronouns and other phrases expressing possession.. We will also handle some basic techniques of short composition using the points taught in this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you should be able to : • read and answer questions related to the dialogue correctly • identify some grammatical elements on the possessive • compose simple and correct sentences in your own words and expressions on possession • make a general composition.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now read the following passage: C’est vendredi soir.
Les enfants sont tous deux dans la chambre d’Ariane.
Soudain, on entend des cris : ils se disputent.
Leur père va voir ce qui se passe.
13 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Ariane : Donne-moi ça !
C’est à moi !
Pierre : Non, c’est le mien !
Ariane : Mais non, tu as laissé le tien chez Maman et tu le sais bien !
Guillaume : Qu’est-ce que c’est que tout ce bruit ?
Qui a crié ?
Ariane : C’est Pierre, il a pris mon jeu et il dit que c’est le sien.
Pierre : Mais elle est complètement dingue.
Guillaume : Bon ça suffit.
Vous allez regarder la télé tranquillement.
Il y a un programme intéressant sur les animaux.
Ariane : J’aime pas les animaux !
Pierre : Menteuse !
Aïe !
Elle m’a donné un coup de pied dans la jambe.
Guillaume : Bon, c’est terminé pour ce soir.
Ni jeu, ni télé, mais au lit immédiatement !
3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read relates a dispute between a brother and a sister.
It also introduces you to the register of the family set up.
The words and expressions used are linked to the family situation and depict an atmosphere of argument.
tous deux : both ils se disputent : they have an argument ce qui se passe : what is happening.
c’est à moi : it belongs to me c’est le mien : it’s mine le tien : yours tout ce bruit : all this noise mon jeu : my game dingue : crazy un coup de pied : a quick ni jeu, ni télé : neither game nor tele menteuse : liar aïe !
ouch (interjection expressing a pain) You may wish to learn more words from the text.
You are advised not to waste time on checking other words that have not been explained.
This is a simple text and you should learn to get the message of a text without necessarily knowing all the words and expressions in it.
3.2 Grammatical Analysis This lesson is centred on expressing possession.
You will learn for instance how to say: ‘it is my book; it is mine; it belongs to me’ .
In other words, we shall present several possessive adjectives and pronouns and another way of expressing the possession.
14FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.1 Possessive Adjectives You will now see how possessive adjectives are used in French: (cid:1) Single Owner J’ai … Tu as … Il/elle a … (my) (your) (his/her)* masculin mon livre ton livre son livre S i n g u l i e r féminin ma femme ta femme sa femme devant mon ami ton ami son ami voyelles mon amie** ton amie son amie P l u r i e l mes livres tes livres ses livres mes amies tes amies ses amies NB: *The object possessed determines the gender (masculine/feminine).
Eg.
Son livre: His book / her book (livre is masculine) Sa voiture: his car / her car (voiture is feminine) ** In the singular form, any word starting with a vowel takes mon, ton or son, whether it is masculine or feminine.
(cid:1) Plural Owners Nous avons Vous avez ils/elles ont … (our) … (your) … (their) Singulier Masculin et notre livre votre livre leur livre feminine* notre amie votre amie leur amie Pluriel Masculin et nos livres vos livres leurs livres feminine nos amies** vos amies leurs amies NB: *There is no difference between the masculine and the feminine.
**There is no difference as to whether the word starts with a consonant or a vowel.
3.2.2 Possessive Pronouns Here, it is important to understand that the possessive pronoun replaces both the possessive adjective and the noun.
(cid:1) Single Owner mine yours his/hers mon livre: le mien ton livre : le tien son livre: le sien ma femme: la mienne ta femme: la tienne sa femme: la sienne mon ami: le mien ton ami: le tien son ami: le sien 15 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II mon amie**: la mienne ton amie: la tienne son amie: la sienne mes livres: les miens tes livres: les tiens ses livres: les siens mes amies les tes amies: les ses amies: les miennes tiennes siennes (cid:1) Plural Owners notre livre: le nôtre* votre livre: le vôtre leur livre: le leur notre amie: la nôtre votre amie: la vôtre leur amie: la leur nos livres: les nôtres vos livres: les vôtres leurs livres: les leurs nos amies**: les nôtres vos amies: les vôtres leurs amies: les leurs NB : * There is no difference between the masculine and the feminine except the articles ‘le’ or ‘la’.
** There is no difference between the masculine and the feminine.
Examples : Sa voiture est blanche ; la vôtre est rouge His/her car is white; yours is red.
Mon stylo n’écrit pas, donne-moi le tien.
My biro is not writing, give me yours.
La robe de son amie est bleue.
La sienne est brune His/her friend’s gown is blue.
Hers/his is brown.
Mes enfants sont têtus.
Les vôtres sont obéissants.
My children are stubborn.
Yours are very obedient.
3.2.3 Another Expression of Possession We intend to show how to use the expression ‘to belong to’ just with such simple words as ‘être’ (to be), ‘à’ and personal pronouns like ‘moi’ without using the verb ‘appartenir’ (to belong to).
First we need to know those pronouns: moi, toi, lui, elle, nous, vous, eux, elles.
Then we will build expressions like the following: C’est mon livre Ce livre est à moi It’s my book This books belongs to me C’est ma voiture Cette voiture est à moi It’s my car This car belongs to me Ce sont mes enfants Ces enfants sont à moi These are my children These children belong to me C’est ton chemise Cette chemise est à toi It’s your shirt This shirt belongs to you 16FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II C’est son véhicule Ce véhicule est à lui/elle It is his/her vehicle This vehicle belongs to him/her Ce sont nos chaussures Ces chaussures sont à nous These are our shoes These shoes belong to us Ce ne sont pas leurs affaires Ces affaires ne sont pas à eux These are not their belongings These belongings are not theirs Ce sont les stylos de Biola et de Jennifer Ces stylos sont à elles These are Biola and Jennifer’s biros These biros do not belong to B. and J.
3.2.4 Simple Composition We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.Now, with the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Les enfants sont tous deux devant la télévision.
2.
Ils se disputent 3.
C’est à moi 4.
Il a pris mon sac 5. donner un coup de pied Words 1. soudain 2. le mien 3. le bruit 4. le jeu 5. dingue 6. tranquillement 7. la jambe 8. immédiatement 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has presented a family conversation, more precisely an argument.
The text has exposed you to some basic expressions in possessive adjectives, pronouns and expressions.
17 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has used a family argument to equip you with the some basic tools in analysing and writing a text in French.
You should have learnt some verbs, nouns and adjectives that can help you make phrases in French to express possession.
With those grammatical elements, we hope you can construct basic sentences in an argument 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
A quel moment de la journée se passe l’action ?
2.
Pourquoi le père décide-t-il d’aller voir ce qui se passe ?
3.
Quelle est la cause de la dispute ?
4.
Ariane est-elle pacifique ?
5.
Quelles sont les solutions proposées par le père ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abry, D. & Charlton, M.L.
(2000).
La grammaire des Premiers Temps, Vol.1.
Grenoble : Presses Universitaires de Grenoble.
Philippe Dominique et al (1998).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1.
Méthode de Français.
Paris : Clé International.
18FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 4 LA FETE DES MERES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Deriving Adjectives from Nouns 3.2.2 The Partitive Article for Possession 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read and give a grammatical analysis of a simple and interesting passage.
The passage centers on a public holiday: Mothers’ Day.
You will learn the vocabulary related to festivities and French history.
This unit will teach you how to make adjectives from nouns and expressions of possession using the ‘of’ style.
It will also teach you some basic techniques of short composition 2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and provide correcct answers to questions related to dialogues • identify some grammatical elements in the passage • compose simple and correct sentences in your own words and expressions • use some techniques of writing in your own writing exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now read the following passage: C’est Napoléon 1er qui, en 1806, a l’idée de cette fête.
La fête des mères devient officielle en 1929 et populaire après la deuxième mondiale.
En 1950, une loi institue le Fête des Mères.
19 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Elle a lieu le dernier dimanche du mois de mai.
Pour cette occasion, dans les écoles, les enfants fabriquent ce qui offrent à leurs mamans : fleurs en papier, dessins, bibelots, etc.
.
Mais la fête des mères est d’abord une fête familiale : Le père et les enfants achètent ensemble un cadeau à la mère de famille.
La fête des Mères est aussi une grande opération commerciale.
Dès le début du mois de mai, des inscriptions « Fêtes des Mères » apparaissent sur les vitrines des magasins pour rappeler à chacun qu’il doit acheter son cadeau.
Berard, E. et al (1997) Tempo1.
Didier/Hatier, Paris, p127 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read tells the origin of Mothers’ Day and its institutionalisation.
It also talks of what is expected on that celebration day.
The words and expressions used are linked to the French culture and depict an atmosphere of celebration.
la fête : a festival, a celebration La fête des Mères : Mothers’ Day devient: becomes (present tense of the verb ‘devenir’) La Guerre Mondiale : the World War une loi: a law offrent: offer (from the verb ‘ offrir’) bibelot: bibelot, curio fleurs en papier: flowers made of paper ensemble: together un cadeau : a gift apparaissent: appear (from the verb ‘ apparaître’») vitrines: (shop) window doit: must (from the verb ‘devoir’) You may wish to learn more words from the text.
Do not hesitate to consult a bilingual dictionary (French/ English);but avoid the temptation of checking all the words.
3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have noticed that the formation of English adjectives is in two parts: either a pure adjective (a friendly match) or a noun (a day job or a day’s job).
It is also the case in French but for a little difference in the second part.
For the case of ‘a day’s job’, the French puts it as ‘the job of a day’ and that of ‘a day job’ is ‘the job of the day time’.
20FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.1 Derivation of Adjectives from Nouns You will now see how some adjectives are coined from nouns: Nouns Adjectives Fem(s) La famille familial familiale Le commerce commercial commerciale Le génie (Genius) génial géniale Le matin matinal matinale Les parents parental parentale Le fils (son), la fille (daughter) filial filiale La rivière riverain riveraine La mère (mother) maternel maternelle Le père (father) paternel paternelle L’université universitaire universitaire La communauté communautaire communautaire Note that some adjectives are totally or partly different from the noun they originated from: Nouns Adjectives L’air aérien aérienne Le jour (day) quotidien quotidienne La semaine hebdomadaire hebdomadaire Le mois (month) mensuel mensuelle Sometimes you may wish to make a phrase by just using the noun as an adjective like ‘a day meeting’ instead of ‘a daily meeting’.
Then the next point will be of great use.
3.2.2 Phrases with ‘of’ In French the word ‘of’ is usually translated as ‘de’ as in the example: ‘a family friend’ should be put as ‘a friend of the family’: un ami de la famille.
You are now going to learn the various ways of using ‘de’.
L’ami de Garba (the friend of Garba / Garba‘s friend) L’ami d’Ada (the friend of Ada / Ada‘s friend) de + Ada =d’Ada L’ami de l’étudiant; l’ami de l’étudiante: no change whether masculine or feminine noun when the noun starts with a vowel.
L’ami du professeur : de + le =du The teacher’s friend L’ami des enfants : de + les =des The children’s friend 21 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.3 Simple Composition We shall try to construct some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.
Now with the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
La fête du travail a lieu le 1er mai 2.
La guerre civile du Nigéria a affecté les Igbo.
3.
Une petite fille offre une fleur au président de la république 4.
Mon père et ma mère habitent ensemble 5.
Air France opère à partir de Lagos pour des raisons commerciales Words 1. la fête 2. populaire 3. avoir lieu 4. l’école 5. fabriquer 6. un dessin 7. dès le début 8. un magasin 9. chacun 10. un cadeau 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has explained how a public holiday is celebrated in France.
The text has exposed you to some basic ways of using adjectives.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with some basic tools for analyzing and writing a text in French.
You should have learnt some verbs, nouns and adjectives with which you can make phrases and sentences in French.
We hope you can now construct sentences about public holidays and some traditional celebrations in your country.
22FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Qui a eu l’idée de la fête des mères ?
2.
Qui achète un cadeau à la mère de famille ?
3.
En quelle année la Fête des Mères est instituée ?
4.
La fête des mères connaît-elle une grande publicité ?
5.
Que font les enfants dans les écoles ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bérard, E. et al (1997).
Tempo 1, Méthode de Français.
Didier / Hatier, Paris p127.
23 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 5 HASCHICH A ROME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The Passive Voice 3.2.2 Avoidance of the Passive Voice 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read and analyse a text dealing with a controversial issue in Rome: the use of drugs like hashish by individuals.
The passage will show you the vocabulary of demonstration, arrest and arguments for or against the use of drugs.
It will also teach you how to use the passive voice in French and how to make alternative and simpler constructions thus avoiding the passive voice in French.
You should then be able to use the vocabulary and grammar to compose your own sentences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer correctly questions related to the passage • identify some grammatical elements in the passage • compose simple and correct sentences in your own words and expressions • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
24FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now read the following passage: Un mouvement politique italien a distribué du haschisch hier dans le centre historique du Rome au cours d’une manifestation en faveur de la législation de la vente et de l’usage des drogues douces.
Une dirigeante du Club Pannella, organisateur de la manifestation, Rita Bernardini, et le secrétaire du Parti Radical (droite) de Marco Pannella, le Belge Olivier Dupuis ont été arrêtés par la police, alors qu’il distribuaient un demi gramme de cannabis aux cinq personnes venues défiler.
Marco Pannella a été condamné à quatre mois de prison le 19 septembre dernier pour distribution publique de haschisch et de marijuana.
Par ailleurs, 80% des Britanniques souhaitent une modification de la législation sur la consommation de cannabis.
Selon, un sondage publié hier par l’Independent on Sunday, 45% estiment que le haschisch, à des fins médicales, doit être légalisé et 35% qu’il devrait être autorisé pour la consommation personnelle dite « récréative ».
Seules 17% des personnes interrogées se disent favorables au statu quo actuel qui interdit totalement la consommation de la drogue.
(Source anonyme) 3.1 Vocabulary The passage you just read depicts the arrest of some activists who were protesting the unilateral ban of hard drugs.
The words and expressions are linked to polemics and depict the views of various people on government’s stand on the issue of hard drugs.
au cours de : during la vente : the sale douces : soft une dirigeante : a leader personnes venues défiler: people who came to match par ailleurs : furthermore souhaiter : to wish un sondage : opinion poll fin: end se disent : declare interdire: to forbid, outlaw You may wish to learn more words from the text.
Do not hesitate to consult a bilingual dictionary (French / English) ;but make sure you use a very good one and search for the words within their context.
25 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.2 The Passive Voice The passage you have read contains sentences in the passive voice, besides the ones in the active voice.
The following sentence extracted from the text is an instance of the passive voice: ‘Marco Pannella a été condamné à quatre mois de prison’.
In the active voice, the subject performs an action whereas in the passive voice, it is the subject that receives the action or is acted upon.
Example: J’ai été invité I was invited The passive voice is formed with: être (to be) + participe passé (past participle) You will do well to note that the past participle always agrees in number and gender with the subject: Elle a été recrutée She has been recruited Ils sont déçus They are disappointed Elles seront vues They will be seen We are now going to learn how to conjugate the verb ‘aimer’ (to love) in the passive voice: Active voice Passive voice infinitif aimer être aimé (e) to love to be loved présent j’aime je suis aimé (e) I love I am loved imparfait j’aimais j’étais aimé (e) I was loving I was being loved futur j’aimerai je serai aimé (e) I will love I will be loved conditionnel j’aimerais je serais aimé (e) I would love I would be loved 3.2.3 Avoidance of the Passive Voice You need to note that the passive voice is less common in French than it is in English.
You should be careful when you try to transpose sentences in the passive voice in English to the passive voice in French.
Sometimes it is impossible.
For instance, an indirect object cannot become the subject of a sentence in French: He was given a book (i.e.
a book was given to him).
26FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Generally, the French try to avoid the passive voice whenever and wherever possible: • Using the pronoun ‘on’ On m’a volé mon sac My bag was stolen En Allemagne, on boit beaucoup de bière A lot of beer is drunk in Germany • When the agent becomes the subject of the verb: if the agent, i.e.
the real subject, is mentioned in English, it can become the subject of the French verb: Mon mariage va les surprendre.
They will be surprised by my marriage/my marriage will surprise them.
• The use of a reflexive verb; particularly in the third person: Elle s’appelle Marianne.
She is called Marianne.
Ce plat se mange froid.
This dish is eaten cold.
• The use of ‘se faire + infinitive (when the subject is a person) Il s’est fait insulter He was insulted 3.2.4 Simple Composition In this section, you are going to compose some sentences with the words and expressions you have acquired in this unit.
Now, with the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Un mouvement a distribué du haschisch au cours d’une manifestation 2.
C’est une manifestation en faveur de la libération des prisonniers 3.
Ils ont été arrêtés par la police 4.
Les personnes sont venues défiler 5.
Selon un sondage 27 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Words 1. un mouvement politique 2. la vente 3. la drogue 4. un organisateur 5. un parti politique 6. défiler 7. hier 8. autoriser 9. favorable 10. status quo 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has presented a political issue, more precisely the resolution of a political conflict.
You must have learnt some political terms.
Finally, the text has exposed you to some basic ways of using the active and passive voice.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with some basic tools for analyzing and writing a text in French about a political rally.
You should have learnt some verbs, nouns and adjectives with which you can make sentences in French, swinging between the active and the passive voice.
With these grammatical elements, we hope you can build sentences of your own to talk of a political rally, conflict or situations in general.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Qui a distribué du haschich ?
Quand et où ?
2.
Pourquoi le mouvement politique a-t-il organisé une manifestation ?
3.
Qui ont été arrêtés ?
Pour quelle raison ?
4.
Que désire la majorité des Britannique ?
5.
Que dit la loi britannique au sujet du haschisch ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Oudot, S.(1986).
French Verbs and Essentials of Grammar.
USA: Passport Books.
Adebayo, A.G. (1993).Textes et Travaux de Langue Française.
Ibadan: Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd. 28FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II MODULE 2 Unit 1 A La Recherche D’un Hotel Unit 2 Jean Jacques Goldman Unit 3 Kerekou II Unit 4 La Cuisine Française Unit 5 La Maison A Louer UNIT 1 A LA RECHERCHE D’UN HOTEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The Recent Past 3.2.2 The Near Future 3.2.3 The Present Continuous 3.2.4 Simple Composition 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read and give a simple grammatical analysis of a simple and interesting conversation.
The passage centers on hotel reservation.
The unit will show you the vocabulary related to booking and reservation and it will teach you ways of using the past and future tenses.
It will also teach you some basic techniques of short composition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer correctly questions related to the dialogue • identify some grammatical elements in the passage as far as expressing the past, the future and the present continuous tenses are concerned 29 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • compose simple and correct sentences in your own words and expressions • use some techniques of writing which you must have acquired in your own writing exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now read the following passage: A l’office du tourisme, une touriste accompagnée de son mari se renseigne sur les hôtels à Paris.
Touriste : Bonjour Madame, je viens d’arriver à Paris et je cherche une chambre.
Vous avez une liste d’hôtel, s’il vous plaît ?
Hôtesse : Oui Madame, voilà.
Touriste : Pouvez-vous me réserver une chambre, s’il vous plaît ?
Hôtesse : Oui, bien sûr.
Vous choisissez quel hôtel ?
Touriste : Un hôtel à deux étoiles, l’hôtel Victor Hugo.
Hôtesse : C’est pour combien de personnes ?
Touriste : Euh, pour mon mari et moi… Hôtesse : Et pour combien de nuits ?
Touriste : Pour deux nuits.
Hôtesse : Bien.
Une chambre à deux ou un grand lit?
Touriste : Un grand lit.
Nous voulons une douche également.
Hôtesse : Bon, alors une chambre pour deux nuits, pour deux personnes avec un grand lit et douche.
Très bien, je vais téléphoner et je vous réserve ça tout de suite.
Touriste : J’espère que l’hôtel n’est pas complet !
Hôtesse : Je crois qu’en cette saison, il y aura de la place.
(Source anonyme) 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read reveals a conversation on hotel booking and reservation.
The words and expressions used depict a hotel environment.
son mari : her husband se renseigner : to find out je viens d’arriver : I have just arrived voilà : here it is une étoile: a star une nuit : a night une douche : a shower tout de suite : straightaway 30FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II j’espère : I hope il y aura : there will be We hope you can understand the text without much reference to a bilingual (French/English) dictionary.
3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have learnt or heard about how to use the past and the future tenses in French.
However, as beginners of French or non native speakers, we sometimes forget the past or future tense forms of the verb while communicating.
Here is an escape route, or rather a simpler way of expressing them.
3.2.1 Le Passe Recent (The Recent Past) ‘Je viens d’arriver à Paris’.
This sentence means ‘I’ve just arrived in Paris’.
The structure of the recent past is in two (2) parts: venire de + infinitive.
The first requirement is to master the verb ‘venir’ (to come) in its present tense form: je viens, tu viens, il/elle vient, nous venons, vous venez, ils/elles viennent.
The second phase is to combine ‘de’ and the infinitive.
Be careful: when ‘de’ is followed by a verb starting with a vowel, it becomes‘d’ Aller + infinitif je viens tu viens manger (to eat) il/elle vient de danser (to dance) nous venons arriver (to arrive) vous venez d’ acheter une voiture ils/elles viennent.
(buy a car) Example: Tu viens de finir You have just finished Je viens d’arriver I’ve just arrived Le film vient de finir The film has just ended 31 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.2 Le Futur Proche (The Near Future) In this part, we shall learn to make sentences in the pattern ‘I’m going to …’ in lieu of ‘I will…’ The structure is: aller + infinitive Aller + infinitif je vais tout de suite (right now) tu vas tout à l’heure (pretty soon) il/elle/on va à 8 heures (at 8 o’clock) nous allons partir* ce soir (tonight) vous allez demain (tomorrow) ils/elles vont *partir: only the verb ‘aller’ will not fit in here since it is the one used in the present form.
One should avoid saying: “je vais aller” (I am going to go).
3.2.3 Le Present Continu (The Present Continuous) The structure is [être + en train + infinitive] We need to handle the verb ‘être’ (to be) être en train de + infinitif je suis lire tu es (read) il/elle/on est travailler nous sommes en train de (work) vous êtes regarder la télévision (watch TV) ils/elles sont Example: 1.
Let us take the instance of somebody who is crying after failing her exams.
Here you will combine the three (3) points: - Elle vient d’échouer à ses examens She has just failed her exams - Elle est en train de pleurer She is crying now - Elle va étudier davantage She is going to study more 32FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 2.
Imagine two people shaking hands after a tennis match: - Ils viennent de faire un match de tennis They have just played a tennis match - Maintenant, ils sont en train de se saluer They are now greeting each other - Bientôt, ils vont prendre une douche Soon, they are going to take a shower 3.2.4 Simple Composition We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.
Now with the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Vous venez d’arriver 2.
Chercher un logement 3.
Réserver une place 4.
Un hôtel 5 étoiles 5.
Il n’y a pas de place Words 1. se renseigner 2. l’office du tourisme 3. voilà 4. l’école 5. une liste 6. réserver 7. combien 8. une nuit 9. complet 10. une place 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has handled the reservation of a hotel accommodation.
The text has exposed you to alternative usage of the past tense (the recent past), the present continuous tense and the near future tense.
We hope you can use these skills to make any form of booking henceforth.
33 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has aimed to equip you with some basic tools in understanding and writing a text in French about hotel reservation.
You should have learnt some words used in the hotel industry and some tenses that will broaden your knowledge of the usage of the past, the present and the future tenses.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Pourquoi la touriste cherche-t-elle sur les hôtels à Paris ?
2.
La touriste est-elle une parisienne ?
3.
La touriste est-elle riche ?
4.
La touriste et son mari vont-ils rester longtemps à Paris ?
5.
L’hôtel Victor Hugo est-il complet ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Philippe, D. et al(1998).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris : Clé International, 1998.
34FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 2 JEAN JACQUES GOLDMAN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Adverbs 3.2.2 Compound Nouns 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read and analyse an interesting passage.
The passage is a biography of a very famous French singer: his origins and his lifestyle.
This unit will further illustrate the formation of adverbs and compound nouns.
Also, some techniques of short composition will be introduced to you.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer correctly questions related to the passage • identify and make use of some grammatical elements like adverbs and compound nouns • compose simple and correct sentences in your own words and expressions • use some techniques of writing .
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Read the following passage: A 38 ans, il règne en maître incontesté sur la génération des 13-18 ans.
Le moindre de ces couplets se transforme en tube.
De là à imaginer qu’il mène la vie somptueuse des stars, il n’y a évidemment qu’un pas.
Eh bien non !
Même s’il est effectivement milliardaire, Jean-Jacques Goldman continue à vivre comme avant, lorsqu’il vendait des chaussures dans le magasin de sport de ses parents.
« À cette époque, se 35 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II souvient-il, lorsque je demandais : « voulez-vous du 30 ou du 39 » à une cliente, elle ne me disait pas : « Mon Dieu, comme vous avez une belle voix !
» C’est depuis que je suis célèbre qu’on me trouve soudainement beau, grand, intelligent… » Cette distance qu’il sait s’imposer par rapport à son succès a permis à Jean-Jacques Goldman de ne rien bouleverser dans sa vie : une vielle voiture pour se déplacer, toujours le même pavillon à Montrouge, quinze jours de ski en hiver avec femme et enfants, une villa « sympa » louée dans l’arrière-pays niçois en été, ces sont là ses seuls luxes.
Il est resté vraiment modeste et refuse de croire que son succès de chanteur l’autorise à parler de tout en spécialiste : « e Ce n’est pas parce qu’on chante Quand la musique est bonne, bonne… qu’on a le droit de dire aux gens pour qui ils doivent voter », aime-t-il à remarquer en souriant.
D’ailleurs, si d’aventure il attrapait la grosse tête, ses trois enfants la lui dégonfleraient bien vite : eux, leur rêve, c’était d’avoir un papa pompier … pour l’uniforme !
L’Almanach 1989 de TFI; TF1 Editions 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you have just read is about a French star.
The words and expressions used are linked to his origins and his simple lifestyle.
le moindre de ses couplets : the least of his verses/song un tube : a hit milliardaire : billionaire se souvient-il : he remembers (from ‘se souvenir’) du 38 ou du 39: size 38 or 39. célèbre: famous a permis : has allowed (from ‘permettre’: to allow) sa vie : his life une villa : a villa (detached house) l’arrière-pays : the hinterland Niçois: from Nice (a French town) ils doivent : they must (from ‘devoir’ : must) s’il attrappait la grosse tête : was he to feel high, to swell up (his ego) dégonfler: to deflate un pompier : a fire fighter You may wish to learn more words from the text.
Do not hesitate to use a bilingual dictionary (French/English).
Remember to avoid the temptation of checking all the words.
36FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have noticed the presence of adverbs like ‘soudainement’ and ‘vraiment’ and some compound nouns like ‘arrière-pays’.
These will constitute our points of grammatical analysis.
3.2.1 Adverbs Most adverbs are formed by adding ‘-ment’ to the feminine form of the adjective: • Regular Forms Adjectives Adverbs Masculine Feminine French English parfait parfaite parfaitement perfectly long longue longuement at length rapide rapide rapidement rapidly • From Adjectives Ending in a Vowel Masculine Adjectives Adverbs English vrai vraiment truly absolu absolument absolutely • -ément Adjectives Adverbs Masculine Feminine French English énorme énorme énormémen enormously précis précise précisément precisely • Adjectives ending with –ant and –ent change to –amment and – emment respectively Masculine Adjectives Adverbs English constant constamment constantly brillant brillamment brilliantly patient patiemment patiently prudent prudemment prudently Exceptions lent lentement slowly présent présentement presently 37 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • Irregular Adverbs Adjectives Adverbs Masculine Feminine French English bref brève brièvement briefly gentil gentille gentiment gently bon bonne bien well mauvais mauvaise mal badly meilleur meilleure mieux better petit petite peu little moindre moindre moins less 3.2.2 Compound Nouns • With two nouns in apposition, with a noun and an adjective or with two adjectives Singular Plural English le chou-fleur les choux-fleurs cauliflower la grand-mère les grands-mères grandmother • Nouns and Their Complements Singular Plural English le chef-d’œuvre les chefs-d’œuvre masterpiece le timbre-poste les timbres-poste stamp • Invariable Word Plus a Noun Singular Plural English l’arrière-pays les arrière-pays the hinterland l’avant-coureur les avant-coureurs the forerunner • A Verb and its Complement Singular Plural English le gratte-ciel les gratte-ciel skyscraper le passe-partout les passe-partout passkey le réveil-matin les réveil-matin alarm clock le porte-parole les porte-parole spokesperson le laissez-passer les laissez-passer pass, permit Exceptions : le cure-dent le cure-dents tooth-pick le tire-bouchon les tire-bouchons corkscrew le couvre-lit les couvre-lits bedspread 38FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • Same in the Singular and Plural Singular Plural English l’après-midi les après-midi afternoon le tête-à-tête les tête-à-tête private talk 3.2.3 Simple Composition We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.
Now with the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
You may use the past and the future tenses.
Expressions 1.
Il règne en maître incontesté 2.
Comme vous avez une belle voix 3.
Une vieille voiture pour se déplacer 4.
C’est depuis que je suis célèbre qu’on me trouve beau 5.
Leur rêve, c’était d’avoir un papa pompier Words 1. incontesté 2. un tube 3. une star 4. le magasin 5. milliardaire 6. le succès 7. la vie 8. une villa 9. sympa 10. le luxe 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have read about the life style of a French singer.
The text has exposed you to some basic adverbs and compound nouns.
You are expected to use the vocabulary and others which you know to enable you to do the biography of other stars of your choice.
39 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with some basic tools for writing about a superstar.
You should have learnt some adverbs and nouns that can help you construct phrases and sentences in French.
We hope you can now talk and write about your favourite stars.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Jean-Jacques Goldman est-il l’idole incontestée des adultes ?
2.
Quel est son style de vie ?
3.
Est-il vraiment beau, grand, intelligent ?
4.
Pensez-vous qu’il peut être politicien ?
5.
Ses enfants aiment-ils son style de vie et quel était leur rêve ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ojo, A.
A.
(2002).
Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar.
Ibadan: Signal Education Services.
Oudot, S. (1986).
French Verbs and Essentials of Grammar.
USA: Passport Books.
Philippe, D. et al (1998).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 2, Méthode de Français.
Paris :Clé International.
40FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 3 KEREKOU II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Indefinite Adjective/Pronoun ‘TOUT’ 3.2.2 Negation : ‘ne … que’ 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read and give a grammatical analysis of an interesting passage.
The text talks about the way forward after the election of Kerekou as the President of the Republic of Benin.
This will be his second term as president of that country.
You will learn the vocabulary related to African politics.
This unit will teach you how to use words to express the totality or entirety (the whole, all) of an item and also how to express a restriction.
You will equally learn some basic techniques of short composition, using the elements introduced to you in this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you should be able to : • read and provide correct answers to questions related to this passage and any text on African politics • identify some grammatical elements in the passage on indefinite adjectives/pronouns and express their totality • compose simple and correct sentences in your own words and expressions to talk of politics in your area and country • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
41 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now read the following passage: « Ensemble est un mot de toute beauté.
Se mettre ensemble, c’est le commencement.
Rester ensemble, c’est le progrès.
Réfléchir ensemble, c’est l’unité.
Travailler ensemble, c’est le succès.
» Gagner ensemble une élection n’est qu’un préliminaire.
Les partis politiques béninois, s’ils veulent penser neuf, penser positif et agir autrement pour changer le Bénin, doivent comprendre que la défense durable de leurs intérêts passe d’abord par leur unité.
Et le Président Kérékou ne peut accomplir avec succès la mission que le peuple lui a confiée qu’en maintenant et qu’en confortant cette unité de toutes les forces politiques de notre pays autour de son action.
L’élection présidentielle est terminée.
Une page est tournée.
Le verdict des urnes s’impose désormais à chacun et à tous.
Adversaires ou « frères ennemis », l’espace d’une campagne, les Béninois, toutes conditions, toutes appartenance, toutes confessions confondues retrouvent l’ordinaire de la messe républicaine : un Etat pour tous, piloté au nom de tous par celui qui désormais bénéficie de la légitimité populaire.
Pensez neuf, pensez positif,T.
Boya et Jérôme Carlos 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just went through is on politics in the Republic of Benin.
Therefore, the words and expressions used are politically inclined.
ensemble: together gagner: to win agir: to act confiée: entrusted notre pays : our country autour de : around les urnes : the ballot à chacun et à tous : to each and everyone toutes confessions confondues : from all denominations You may wish to know the meaning of more words from the text.
Do not hesitate to use a bilingual dictionary (French/English).
However ensure you understand the text globally and also that you check the words within their context.
42FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The Indefinite Adjective/Pronoun: ‘Tout’ The passage you just read contains a reoccurrence of the indefinite adjectives/pronouns like: à tous, toutes conditions, etc.
These are all the usable forms: tout (masc.
sing.
), tous (masc.
plur.
), toute (fem.
sing.
), toutes (fem.
plur.)
a. Adjectives • In singular, tout means each or every when used without an article.
Toute femme est destinée à un home Every woman is destined to a man Tout individu doit le savoir.
Every individual must know that When followed by a determiner (an article or a possessive adjective), it means ‘the whole, the entire’: Toute la ville attend le gouverneur.
The whole town is awaiting the governor.
Je serai honnête toute ma vie.
I’ll be honest my whole life.
NB : Tout le monde means everybody.
• In the plural, tout means all or every Tous les enfants aiment le chocolat.
All the children love chocolate.
Il prie tous les jours.
He prays every day.
Toutes les filles sont jolies.
All the girls are pretty.
b. Pronouns Il mange tout.
He eats everything.
Ils partent tous.
They are all going.
Elles sont toutes jolies.
All of them are pretty.
43 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.2 Negation In this section, you will learn some aspects of negation.
Whether you have studied the following types of negation or not, you might need them.
Examples: Je n’ai pas fini.
I have not finished.
Many negative expressions function like ne … pas ne … pas du tout not at all ne … point not (emphatic) ne … plus no longer, no more ne … jamais never ne … guère hardly ne … aucun not any aucun(e) … ne none ne … rien nothing ne … personne nobody nul (nulle) ne … no one ne … que only Examples: Il n’a que deux chambres.
He has only two rooms.
Il n’a lu que des journaux.
He has read only newspapers.
3.2.3 Simple Composition We shall try to build some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.
With the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Don’t forget to use as many tenses as possible (present, past, future, etc.).
Expressions 1.
Travailler ensemble 2.
Gagner une élection n’est qu’un préliminaire 3.
La défense de leurs intérêts passe d’abord par leur unité 4.
Un Etat pour tous 5.
Toutes confessions confondues 44FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Words 1. ensemble 2. la beauté 3. le progrès 4. le succès 5. béninois 6. agir 7. la défense 8. l’unité 9. adversaires 10. la légitimité 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have read a talk on the political situation in the Republic of Benin in the mid 90s.
You were equally exposed to words and the techniques of reading analyzing a passage on politics and expressions of totality and negation.
5.0 SUMMARY Having gone through this unit, you should be equipped with some basic tools for analyzing and writing a text in French language about politics in the sub region.
You should have learnt some adjectives, pronouns and expressions of negation that can help you make sentences in French to express a political opinion.
With those grammatical elements, we hope you can build sentences of your own when discussing politics.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Comment l’auteur définit-il le succès ?
2.
Gagner une élection, est-ce la fin de l’activité politique ?
3.
Comment les partis politiques béninois peuvent-ils défendre leur unité ?
4.
L’auteur accepte-il le verdict de l’élection présidentielle ?
5.
Que doit faire le peuple vis-à-vis de M. Kérékou ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Boya, T. et Carlos, J.
(1996).
Pensez Neuf, Pensez Positif, Cahier No 1.
Les Editions Boya, Cotonou.
Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar.
(4th ed).
USA: Shaum’s Outline Series, McGraw-Hill.
Philippe, D. et al (1998).
Le Nouveau Sans Frontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris : Clé International.
45 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 4 LA CUISINE FRANÇAISE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The Partitive (de, du, de l’, de la, des + uncountable nouns) 3.2.2 The Conjunctions ‘comme’ and ‘tel’ 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read a simple passage and analyze it grammatically.
The text gives us an insight into the eating habits in France and their origin.
This unit will teach you how to use the partitive for food items (de, de l’, de la, du, des) and the words ‘tel’, ‘quel’ to enumerate some items.
Some basic techniques of short composition using the points acquired in this course will be added to your study.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read the passage on French gastronomy and correctly answer the questions related to it • identify and make use of some grammatical elements in the passage such as the partitive and words like ‘tel’ and ‘quel’ • compose simple and correct sentences in your own words and expressions when you talk of food items • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
46FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Read the following passage: La découverte d’un aliment nouveau fait plus pour le bonheur du genre humain que la découverte d’une étoile.
Le plaisir de la table est de tous les âges, de toutes les conditions, de tous les pays et de tous les jours.
Convier quelqu’un, c’est se charger de son bonheur pendant tout le temps qu’il est sous notre toit.
C’est vers 1770 que se sont créés en France les premiers restaurants qui, depuis, se sont répandus dans toute l’Europe.
Tout homme qui s’assied à la table d’un restaurant de première classe est aussi bien et même mieux traité que s’il était à la table d’un prince.
Un repas tel qu’on peut l’avoir à Paris, en 1825, est tout cosmopolite où chaque partie du monde est représentée par ses productions.
Les parties principales viennent de France, telles que la viande de boucherie, la volaille, les fruits : d’autres sont d’imitation anglaise, telles que le bifteck, d’autres viennent d’Allemagne comme le bœuf de Hambourg, d’autres d’Espagne comme les raisins secs de Malaga, d’autres d’Italie comme les glaces, d’autres de Russie comme les viandes séchées, le caviar, d’autres d’Asie comme le riz et le café, d’autres d’Afrique, d’autres enfin d’Amérique comme les pommes de terre, le chocolat, le sucre etc.
Vers le milieu de XVIIè siècle, les Hollandais apportèrent le café en Europe ; alors aussi le sucre commença à s’employer.
C’est encore au XVIIè siècle vers le commencement du règne de Louis XIV que l’usage de l’eau-de-vie commença à se répandre, mais ce n’est que sous Louis XV que cette boisson est devenue vraiment populaire.
C’est encore vers la même époque qu’on commença à user du tabac, de sorte que le sucre, le café, l’eau-de-vie et le tabac, ces quatre produits si importants pour le commerce, ont à peine deux siècles de date.
La physiologie du goût, Brillat-Savarin, 1825, pp 82-84 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read tells the origins of the French people’s eating habits.
The words and expressions used are linked to French culture and gastronomy.
un aliment: food le plaisir de la table : the pleasure of good cooking convier quelqu’un: to invite somebody to 47 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II sous notre toit: in our house, under our roof répandus: spread qui s’assied: who sits down (from the verb ‘s’asseoir’) la viande de boucherie: meat from butchery la volaille : poultry les raisins secs : dry grapes les viandes séchées : dried meat apportèrent : from ‘apporter’ : to bring l’eau-de-vie : brandy ont à peine deux siècles de date : are barely two centuries old You may wish to understand or know more words from the text.
Do not hesitate to use a bilingual dictionary (French/English), but avoid the temptation of checking all the words.
3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have noticed that the passage is about French cuisine and the influence it received from other countries.
Thus you will learn how to name food items and how to compare them.
3.2.1 The Partitive Structure Food items like coffee, milk and tea cannot be counted.
In French, the partitive is used for these nouns.
It is expressed by de + definite article.
These are all the usable forms: tout (masc.
sing.
), tous (masc.
plur.
), toute (fem.
sing.
), toutes (fem.
plur.)
Singular Plural Masculine du des Feminine de la des Masculine or feminine before a vowel de l’ des Je bois de l’eau.
I am drinking some water Elle prend des oranges She takes some oranges Contrastive Uses The definite article is used for nouns in general.
The partitive is used when referring to an undetermined quantity of a noncountable item.
48FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Il aime le café (all coffee) He likes coffee Elle boit du café (some coffee) She drinks (some) coffee Some food items can be counted: banana, orange.
Je prends un poulet.
I’m taking one chicken Achète des tomates au marché.
Buy some tomatoes at the market In fact, some food items can be either countable or uncountable nouns depending on the way they are used.
Examples: Voici le gâteau !
Here is a cake (the cake you are looking for) Voici un gâteau !
Here is a cake (a whole cake) Voici du gâteau !
Here is some cake (part/a piece of the cake) Miscellaneous - In a negative sentence: - Tu prends du pain?
Non, je ne veux pas de pain.
You take some bread?
No, I don’t want any bread - With an adjective preceding a plural noun Elle a préparé des haricots délicieux She cooked some delicious beans Ouais, ce sont de bons haricots Yeah, they are sweet beans Expressions of Quantity and with ‘de’ - The partitive becomes de after the following: Assez enough une boîte a box beaucoup a lot une bouteille a bottle peu a little un verre a glass trop too much une tasse a cup tant so many, as many un kilo a kilo autant so much, as much un litre a litter moins less une livre a pound une douzaine a dozen un morceau a piece une tranche a slice • Je voudrais de la bière I would like some beer • Beaucoup de bière ?
A lot of beer ?
• Non, un peu de bière No, a little beer • Car je n’aime pas la bière Because I don’t like beer 49 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Check out for expressions using ‘de’ Je bois de l’eau I’m drinking some water J’ai besoin d’eau I need water 3.2.2 Phrases with ‘of’ You might have noticed the repetition of the conjunction comme : “d’autres viennent d’Allemagne comme le bœuf de Hambourg, d’autres d’Espagne comme les raisins secs de Malaga, d’autres d’Italie comme les glaces, d’autres de Russie comme les viandes séchées, le caviar, d’autres d’Asie comme le riz et le café, d’autres d’Afrique, d’autres enfin d’Amérique comme les pommes de terre, le chocolat, le sucre » In French, it is used for enumeration and means ‘as, like’.
A synonym is ‘tel’.
Other examples are: • Les fleurs comme/telles que la rose et l’oeillet sont fragiles.
• Flowers like roses and carnations are fragile • Il parle comme/tel son père : tel père, tel fils • He speaks like his father: like father, like son NB.
Unlike ‘comme’ which is invariable, tel agrees in number and gender with the noun: • tel père (such father) • telle mère (such a mother) • de tels enfants sont récalcitrants (such children are stubborn) • de telles filles sont vicieuses (such girls are vicious) 3.2.3 Simple Composition Now with the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
La cuisine française 2.
Convier quelqu’un, c’est se charger de son bonheur ; saluer quelqu’un, c’est reconnaître sa présence 3.
Un repas tel qu’on peut l’avoir à Paris ; la femme telle qu’on laconnaît est un être délicat 4.
De la viande comme le poulet, le mouton 5.
Mais ce n’est que sous Abubacar que les salaires ont commencé à augmenter 50FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Words 1. cosmopolite 2. le plaisir 3. à table 4. le bonheur 5. le restaurant 6. un repas 7. les fruits 8. les produits 9. le commerce 10. cette date 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you must have read a bit more about French culinary attitudes.
The text has exposed you to some basic expressions using the correct article meant for food items.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with some basic tools for analysing and writing a text in French about food varieties and eating attitudes.
You should have learnt some verbs, nouns and conjunctions that can help you make phrases in French.
We hope you can now construct sentences which describe the food varieties in any locality and the attitudes of the people towards food and feeding.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Pourquoi la découverte d’un aliment est-elle importante ?
2.
D’où viennent le riz, les pommes de terre et le café ?
3.
Nommez cinq produits alimentaires ?
4.
Comparez le repas français au repas traditionnel !
5.
Quel est votre plat favori ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993).
Textes et Travaux de la Langue Française.
Ibadan: Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd. Brillat-Savarin, (1964).
La Physiologie du Goût, 1825.
Brillat-Savarin, cité par André Alvernhe et al.
« En France », Didier.
Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar (4th ed).Shaum’s Outline Series.
USA: McGraw-Hill.
51 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Dictionnaire Français-Anglais/English-French(1994).Paris/London : Le Robert/Harper Collins.
Philippe, D. et al (1998).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris :Clé International.
52FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 5 LA MAISON A LOUER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Prepositions Used for Positioning 3.2.2 Practical Use of the Preposition: with (out) Complement 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read an interesting passage and give it a grammatical analysis.
This unit will teach you some basic techniques of short composition using the points acquired in this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read the passage and provide correct answers to questions related to it • identify some grammatical elements in the passage • compose simple and correct sentences with your own words and expressions • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Read the following passage: Madame, Voici les renseignements que vous m’avez demandés à propos de la maison que nous louons à Arcachon pour les vacances d’été.
Il y a 5 pièces : trois au rez-de-chaussée et 2 chambres à l’étage.
En plus, bien entendu, vous avez une cuisine équipée (frigo, cuisinière, 53 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II lave-linge et lave-vaisselle) ainsi qu’une salle de bains équipée d’une douche et d’une baignoire.
Parmi les 3 pièces du rez-de-chaussée, à gauche vous avez une salle à manger, à droite un salon et derrière le salon une pièce qui peut également servir de chambre ou de bureau.
La cuisine se trouve à droite, en entrant.
L’accès à la salle de bains se fait par la cuisine.
Derrière la maison vous avez un petit jardin très ensoleillé.
Les 2 chambres à l’étage donnent sur la mer et la cuisine et le salon sont du côté jardin.
Il y a un garage au fond du jardin.
Le quartier est très calme, même en été.
La maison est libre à partir du 1er juillet.
Le loyer est de 6 000 francs par mois, et de 11 000 francs* si vous louez pour les deux mois.
* Note that the French now use the Euro as the common European currency of the European Union.
3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read talks about a house for rent.
It also gives some details about the types of rooms available in the house.
The words and expressions used are linked to the vocabulary of housing and accommodation.
renseignements: inquiries louons: from ‘louer’ : to rent.
It also means to rent out or to lease (depending) on the the person using the verb, whether the tenant or the landlord.
pièces: rooms rez-de-chaussée: ground-floor à l’étage: upstairs frigo: frigde lave-linge: washing-machine salle de bains: bathroom salon: living room ensoleillé: sunny quartier: area You will find a bilingual dictionary (French/English) useful; but you must search the words within their context.
54FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have seen that the author is trying to describe a house.
Along the line, he tries to position some objects or rooms.
3.2.1 Prepositions Used for Positioning You will now learn how to position objects in your environment and the correct way to use those prepositions.
Prepositions Meaning in English à droite (to the right) à gauche (to the left) sur (on) sous (under) au fond du (down, at the far end of) au dessus (over), au dessous (underneath) entre (between) derrière (behind) devant (in front) en face (de): opposite, in front of (somebody) = face to face au bord (de) (along, at the edge of a road, beach, river, etc) à côté (de): beside; du côté de : from the side of près (de) : near loin (de): far au loin : in the distance ici: here là-bas: over there Now we are going to see how to use these prepositions in sentences.
It is important to note that they fall into two categories: those that take ‘de’ when they are followed by an object and those that don’t.
Example: • le professeur est devant les étudiants (the teacher is in front of the students) Prepositions in this group are: à droite, à gauche, derrière, devant, sur, sous, entre • La table est à côté de la chaise (the table is beside the chair) Prepositions in this category are: au fond (de), au dessus (de), au bord (de), à côté (de), du côté de, près (de), loin (de), en face (de) 55 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.2 Practical Use of the Prepositions Here we are going to study the various uses of the prepositions .
(cid:1) J’habite à côté du restaurant.
Regardez ce restaurant !
J’habite à côté.
(cid:1) La maison est à gauche du jardin.
Regardez ce jardin !
La maison est à gauche.
(cid:1) Bayo habite en face de l’hôtel.
Regardez cet hôtel !
Bayo habite en face.
(cid:1) Le jardin est derrière la maison.
Regardez cette maison !
Le jardin est derrière.
(cid:1) L’université est* entre Sango et Orogun.
Regardez Sango et Orogun !
L’université est au milieu**.
NB : • You may also use ‘se trouve’, ‘se situe entre Sango et Orogun (si found, is situated) • ‘Au milieu’ means ‘in the middle’ 3.2.3 Simple Composition With the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Nous louons un appartement à Ojo.
2.
Le loyer est 52000 naira par an.
3.
La mosquée de UI est à côté de l’église.
4.
Il y a des boutiques le long de Allen Avenue à Ikeja.
5.
Eko Hotel est au bord de la plage Kuramo Words 1. les renseignements 2.
Il y a 5 pièces 3. le rez-de-chaussée 4. une cuisine équipée 5. une cuisinière, 6.
Parmi les 3 pièces 7.
La cuisine se trouve 8.
L’accès à la salle de bains se fait par la cuisine.
9. ensoleillé 10.
Le quartier est très calme.
56FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has taught the prepositions that should help you locate things or people wherever you may be.
The text has exposed you to some basic verbs and prepositions.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit should have equipped you with some basic tools for writing a text in French about objects in a house.
It has taught some verbs, nouns and prepositions that can help you make phrases in French.
We hope you can now construct sentences about positioning items in a location.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Quel type de texte est-ce ?
2.
Pourquoi l’auteur écrit-il cette lettre ?
3.
Combien de pièce y a-t-il dans l’appartement et comment sont- elles réparties.
4.
Quels sont les équipements de la cuisine et de la salle de bains ?
5.
Comment entre-t-on dans la salle de bains ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dominique, P. et al (1998).
Le Nouveau SansFfrontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris :Clé International.
Graham, G. (March 2003).
Teach Yourself French, Teach Yourself; 4rev.
ed.
edition.
57 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II MODULE 3 Unit 1 La Pommme Unit 2 L’amant Unit 3 Le Gagnant Du Gros Lot Est Mort Unit 4 Le Manteau Du Pere Noel Unit 5 Le Mariage D’un Aveugle UNIT 1 LA POMMME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The Agreement in ‘Passé Composé’ 3.2.2 Usages of ‘Imparfait’ versus ‘Passé Composé’ 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read a simple passage and analyze it grammatically.
The passage is an historical text which tells the origin of the consumption of potato in France.
This unit will take you beyond the rules of the imperfect and the present perfect tenses and actually show you how to use the tenses.
Also it will show you how to write a short composition with your newly acquired knowledge.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer correctly, questions related to the passage on French history • identify and make use of some grammatical elements in the passage • compose simple and correct sentences with your own words and expressions to relate to a past event • use some techniques of writing which you have acquired in your own writing exercise.
58FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Please read the following passage: Antoine Parmentier était un agronome qui vivait au XVIIIè siècle.
C’était une époque où il y avait souvent des famines.
Parmentier voulait combattre ces famines en développant la culture de la pomme de terre.
Mais la pomme de terre était une plante mystérieuse dont les gens avaient peur.
On disait qu’elle causait des maladies et que seuls, les porcs pourraient en manger.
Alors, Parmentier a décidé de faire une des premières opérations publicitaires de l’Histoire.
Tout près de Paris, il a semé un grand champ de pommes de terre et l’a fait garder par des soldats en disant qu’il cultivait un légume très rare réservé à la table du roi.
Les soldats avaient reçu l’ordre d’être peu vigilants.
Intrigués, les gens sont venus voler les mystérieux légumes.
Ils les ont mangé et les ont trouvés très bons.
Philippe Dominique, Le Nouveau sans frontières 1, Méthode de français, 1998.
3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read tells the origin of the consumption of potato.
You are expected to find words relating the mystery surrounding the acceptance of potato as food.
Do not waste time with a bilingual dictionary (French/English).
The text is easy.
agronome : agronomist, agricultural purpose la pomme de terre : potato les gens avaient peur : people were scared, afraid la maladie : sickness seuls : only pourraient : could tout près de Paris : not far from Paris il a semé : he sowed très rare : very scarce les gens sont venus voler : people came to steal 3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have noticed that the formation of English adjectives is in two parts: either pure adjectives (a friendly match) or nouns (a day job).
It is also the case in French but for a little difference in the second part.
For the case of ‘a day job’, the French puts it as ‘the job of a day’.
59 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.1 Rules of Agreement in the Present Perfect Tense You will learn how to form the present perfect called passé composé in French and subsequent perfect tenses.
Note that the rules of agreement guiding the present perfect or passé composé are the same for the remaining perfect tenses.
• Agreement with ‘avoir’ Usually there is no agreement: Elle a mangé She ate / has eaten However, there is agreement whenever the direct object occurs before the verb.
Voilà l’homme que j’ai appelé that is the man I called Je l’ai rencontré à Bamako I met him in Bamako Voilà la dame que nous avons choisie that is the lady we chose comme président as president Je l’ai choisie aussi I chose her too Voilà les chansons qu’il a enregistrées those are the songs he recorded Tu les as écoutées you listened to them Tu connais les candidats que j’ai invités?
you know the candidates I called Je l’ai ai vus.
I saw them NB.
• When the object is indirect, there is no agreement Tu vois la dame à qui on a donné un cadeau, je lui ai parlé il y a quelques minutes.
You see the lady to whom a gift was given; I talked to her a few minutes ago.
• Watch out for verbs accompanied by unit of price, weight, distance, length, time Les trois années que j’ai perdu avec elle.
The three years I lost with her Les bonbons que le gosse a perdus.
The sweet the kid lost • Agreement with ‘être’ That is the most common: Elle est partie she has left Elle s’est lavée she took her bath 60FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II NB.
Elle s’est lavé la main (she washed her hands): Although the verb is pronominal, the object is ‘la main’, not ‘elle’.
However, in that case, there will be agreement when it is replaced by a pronoun (which of course comes before the verb) Example: Ses mains?
Elle se les a lavées (She washed them) 3.2.2 Usages of ‘Imparfait’ versus ‘Passe Compose’ • The uses of imparfait The imperfect tense is used to express the following types of action in the past.
- a state in the past Quand j’étais enfant when I was a child Quand j’avais trois ans when I was three Tu étais très jeune you were very young - a habit in the past Tu allais à l’école à pied.
You used to go to school on foot Je me lavais 3 fois par jour à l’internat.
I used to bathe 3 times a day in the boarding house - the continuous past Je mangeais quand tu es arrivé.
I was eating when you came in.
• the ‘passé composé’ versus the ‘imparfait’ - a specific action against a continuing or habitual action Elle m’a insulté ce matin.
Pourtant, elle me respectait.
She insulted me this morning.
However she used to respect me.
Je mangeais quand tu es arrivé I was eating when you came in.
- with different meanings J’avais soif I was thirsty J’ai eu soif I became hungry je savais la réponse I knew the answer j’ai su la réponse I found out the answer 61 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.3 Simple Composition We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.
With the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Un agronome qui vivait en Afrique 2.
Une époque où les gens mouraient de famines 3.
Il l’a fait écouter des chansons.
4.
Les soldats avaient reçu l’ordre de tirer sur les intrus.
5.
Ils l’ont mangés : elles les ont appréciés Words 1. un agronome 2. combattre 3. mystérieuse 4. l’Histoire 5. un champ 6. un légume 7. vigilant 8. l’ordre 9. voler 10. trouver 4.0 CONCLUSION The passage in this unit tells us about the mysterious and intelligent introduction of potato to the French table.
The text has exposed you to some basic expressions which contain verbs in passé composé and imparfait.
5.0 SUMMARY After going through this unit, you should be equipped with some basic tools for writing and analyzing a text in French language about potato in the culinary habits of the French people.
You should have learnt some nouns, adjectives and verbs especially in the past/present perfect and the imperfect tenses.
We hope you can construct sentences which tell how some people acquired some new habits.
62FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. lle est la profession d’Antoine Parmentier ?
2. rquoi a-il voulu introduire la pomme de terre ?
3. gens ont-ils accepté la pomme ?
4. plante est-elle vraiment réservée au roi ?
5.
Pourquoi les gens volent-ils les pommes de terre ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar (4th ed).
USA: Shaum’s Outline Series, McGraw-Hill.
Dominique, P. et al (1998).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris : Clé International.. 63 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 2 L’AMANT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Direct/Reported Speech 3.2.2 The Personal Pronoun Indirect Object 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read a long but interesting passage and give it a grammatical analysis.
The passage is a literary text which relates the meeting between a lady and a young Chinese in Vietnam.
This unit will take you through the techniques of reported speech and the use of the personal pronoun and indirect object.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and provide correct answers to questions related to the passage on French history • identify and make use of some grammatical elements in the passage • compose simple and correct sentences with your own words and expressions which relate to report speech and refer to people through pronouns • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Please read the following passage: L’Amant est un récit autobiographique qui se passe au Vietnam dans les années 30.
Marguerite Duras raconte sa rencontre avec un jeune Chinois très riche que vient l’attendre à la sortie des cours.
64FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II L’homme élégant est descendu de la limousine, il fume une cigarette anglaise.
Il regarde la jeune fille au feutre d’homme et aux chaussures d’or.
Il vient vers elle lentement.
C’est visible, il est intimidé.
Il ne sourit pas tout d’abord.
Tout d’abord il lui offre une cigarette.
Sa main tremble… Elle lui dit qu’elle ne fume pas, non merci.
Elle ne dit rien d’autre, elle ne lui dit pas laissez-moi tranquille.
Alors il a moins peur.
Alors il lui dit qu’il croit rêver.
Elle ne répond pas.
Ce n’est pas la peine qu’elle réponde, que répondrait-elle.
Elle attend.
Alors il le lui demande : mais d’où venez-vous ?
Elle dit qu’elle est la fille de l’institutrice de l’école des filles de Sadec.
Il réfléchit et puis il dit qu’il a entendu parler de cette dame,sa mère,de son manque de chance avec cette concession qu’elle aurait achetée au Cambodge, c’est bien ça n’est-ce pas ?
Oui c’est ça.
Il répond que c’est tout à fait extraordinaire de la voir sur ce bac… Il lui dit que le chapeau lui va bien, très bien même, que c’est … original… un chapeau d’homme, pourquoi pas ?
Elle est si jolie, elle peut tout se permettre.
Elle le regarde.
Elle lui demande qui il est.
Il dit qu’il revient de Paris où il a fait ses études, qu’il habite Sadec lui aussi, justement sur le fleuve, la grande maison avec les grandes terrasses aux balustrades de céramique bleue.
Elle lui demande ce qu’il est.
Il dit qu’il est Chinois, que sa famille vient de la Chine du Nord, de Fou-Chouen.
Voulez-vous me permettre de vous ramener chez vous à Saigon ?
Elle est d’accord.
Il dit au chauffeur de prendre les bagages de la jeune fille dans le car et de les mettre dans l’auto noire.
L’Amant, Marguerite Duras, 1984.
3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read relates an encounter between a young lady and a Chinese gentleman.
The words and expressions used are linked to the tension related to a first encounter.
Limousine : grande voiture de luxe feutre: felt hat rien d’autre : nothing else laissez-moi tranquille : leave me alone il a moins peur : he is less afraid ce n’est pas la peine qu’elle reponde : she needs not answer bac : ferryboat le chapeau lui va bien : the hat fits her très rare : very scarce les gens sont venus voler : people came to steal 65 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Do not hesitate to use a bilingual dictionary (French/English) but avoid the temptation of looking up all the words.
Even though the text is long, you may find it simple after all.
3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have noticed that the narrator was trying to convey a dialogue either by quoting or reporting and that there was a frequent use of the pronouns lui.
3.2.1 Reported Speech Direct Speech Reported Speech Structure “je ne fume pas” Elle dit qu’elle ne fume pas Dire I don’t smoke She says that she doesn’t smoke que/qu’ “Prends les bagages il dit au chauffeur de prendre Dire de… de la jeune fille!” les bagages de la jeune fille.
Take the lady’s He tells the driver to take the luggage lady’s luggage Demande de « Ne dormez pas en Elle dit/demande de ne pas … classe !
» dormir en classe.
do not sleep in class She says/asks not to sleep in class « Fumez-vous ?
» Il lui demande si elle fume Demander Do you smoke?
He wants to know if she smokes si “Qui êtes-vous?” Elle lui demande qui il est Who are you?
She asks him who he is qui “Que voulez-vous?” Elle lui demande ce qu’il veut What do you want?
She asks him what he wants ce que “D’où venez-vous?” Il lui demande d’où elle vient Where are you He asks her where she is où coming from?
coming from “Comment allez- Il lui demande comment elle comment vous?” va. How are you?
He asks her how she is 3.2.2 Personal Pronoun, Indirect Object You might have noticed the use of lui in your study of the reported speech.
It is the personal pronoun introduced by a verb followed by à: Donner à, offrir à, écrire à, demander à, envoyer à To give to to offer to to write to to ask to to send to 66FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II These are the corresponding pronouns.
Il me donne un sac He gives a bag to me Il te donne to you Il lui donne to him/her Il nous donne to us Il vous donne to you Il leur donne to them N.B.
Est-ce qu’ils ont écrit à leurs amis ?
Did they write to their friends?
Oui, ils leur ont écrit.
Yes, they wrote to them 3.2.3 Simple Composition We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.
With the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Le lion de Joseph Kessel est un récit que se passe en Afrique 2.
C’est visible, il est intimidé 3.
Elle lui dit qu’elle ne fume pas 4.
Ce n’est pas la peine qu’il nous attende 5.
Le chapeau lui va bien Words 1. la limousine 2. la cigarette 3. peur 4. la peine 5. la chance 6. les études 7. un chapeau 8. d’accord 9. les bagages 10. le chauffeur 4.0 CONCLUSION The French text you just studied teaches reported speech, using references to people through pronouns.
67 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 5.0 SUMMARY You must have learnt how to write a conversation in French about an encounter.
You should have learnt some phrases and pronouns that can help you make sentences in French.
With those grammatical elements, we hope you can construct dialogues or report what people say.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Qu’est-ce qui montre que le Chinois est très riche ?
2.
Le Chinois maîtrise-t-il ses émotions ?
3.
Qui entame la conversation et pourquoi ?
4.
Le jeune homme connaît-il la mère de la fille ?
Comment ?
5.
Comment se termine la rencontre ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993).
Textes et Travaux de Langue Française.
Ibadan: Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd. Berard, E.et al.(1998).
Tempo 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris: Clé International.
Dominique, P. et al (1997).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris : Didier/Hatier.
Duras, M.( 1984).
L’Amant, Paris : Editions de Minuit.
68FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 3 LE GAGNANT DU GROS LOT EST MORT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis: « when two verbs follow each other… » 3.2.1 Preposition ‘à’ before a Verb 3.2.2 Preposition ‘de’ before a Verb 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read and analyse a simple and interesting passage.
The passage is a story about someone who wins a jackpot, but cannot live to enjoy it.
You will learn some vocabulary on health.
This unit will also teach you how to handle consecutive verbs in French.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you should be able to : • read the passage and provide correct answers to questions related to it • identify and make use of some grammatical elements in the passage concerning the infinitive • independently describe actions in French 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Read the following passage Il y a seize jours, Monsieur Martin a gagné le gros lot de cinq cent mille francs à la loterie national.
Hier soir, il est mort à la suite d’une crise cardiaque.
Il avait 62 ans.
Quand on lui avait présenté son chèque, il avait déclaré en souriant amèrement : « je suis déjà trop vieux.
Si seulement j’avais possédé une telle fortune pendant ma jeunesse.
Mais c’est comme cela que le sort agit, n’est-ce pas ?
Rien ne changera dans ma vie.
Je continuerai à suivre mon régime malheureusement.
Salade, 69 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II biscottes, eau chaude, pas de champagne et surtout pas d’émotion, parce qu’on m’a dit que c’est l’émotion qui tue.
Quand j’ai appris la nouvelle, j’ai failli m’effondrer.
J’ai dû faire venir le docteur.
Il m’a conseillé de faire une cure de repos.
Ce sera la première fois depuis notre mariage.
» Il paraît que le choc a été fatal et c’est sa fille et son gendre qui profiteront le plus puisque sa femme est aussi malade : elle souffre d’une bronchite chronique.
« Mon mari a toujours travaillé comme quatre, » nous a-t-elle expliqué.
« et il n’a jamais eu de chance.
C’est un mutilé de guerre, vous savez.
Pendant la première guerre, il s’est battu contre les Boches, et il a été blessé trois fois, une fois dans une attaque de gaz empoisonneur.
C’est là le commencement de ses troubles cardiaques, je crois.
En 1935, il était chômeur.
Nous avons essayé de tenir ensemble une petite boutique, mais elle n’a pas grandement réussi.
A quoi bon une telle fortune à la fin de sa vie ?
» (Source anonyme) 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read tells the story of a man who wins a jackpot at a time he cannot enjoy it.
The words and expressions used here depict ill-luck and tragedy.
le gros lot: the jackpot le sort : fate mon régime : my diet biscottes: rusk j’ai failli m’effondrer : I nearly collapsed j’ai dû faire venir le docteur : I had to call for the doctor une cure de repos : a rest theurapy son gendre : his son-in-law travailler comme quatre : work like a slave il s’est battu contre : he fought against Do not hesitate to look up the meaning of new words in a bilingual dictionary.
You must however overcome the temptation of checking all the words.
Remain within the context.
3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have heard the saying that when two verbs follow each other, the second takes the infinitive form: je fait venir le docteur.
Of course, the perfect tenses are in another category: j’ai fait.
Here ‘j’ai fait’ is a combination of an auxiliary (to have = ai) and a past participle (done = fait).
But we shall focus on the presence of prepositions between two consecutive verbs.
70FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.1 The Use of ‘a’ Before an Infinitive Here is a list of verbs followed by the preposition ‘à’ s’amuser à: to playfully do apprendre à : learn to arriver à : be able to s’attendre à: expect avoir à: have to chercher à : try to commencer à: start consenter à: consent to destiner à: destine to engager à: engage oneself in enseigner à: teach to s’habituer à: get used to hésiter à: be reluctant to penser à: think about se plaire à: like, to enjoy se préparer à: get ready for renoncer à: give up réussir à: succeed in servir à : serve as 3.2.2 Use of ‘de’ before an Infinitive This is the list of verbs followed by ‘de’ accepter de : agree to s’agir de: be about s’arrêter de: stop cesser de: stop se contenter de: be contented with défendre de : forbid essayer de: try to éviter de : avoid finir de: finish interdire : forbid, to prevent from négliger de : neglect ordonner de : order to oublier de : forget to promettre de : promise to proposer de : propose refuser de : refuse to regretter de : regret risquer de : nearly do sth 71 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II se souvenir de : remember tenter de : try to venir de : to have just + perfect Examples : S’arrêter de manger: to stop eating Je t’ordonne de sortir: I command you to go out Il risque de mourir: he may die Je viens de manger: I have just eaten.
3.2.3 Simple Composition We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this lesson.
Use your dictionary for this exercise.
Ensure you construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions, to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Katung a gagné le gros lot de Big Brother Nigeria 2.
Il est mort à la suite d’une crise cardiaque 3.
Si seulement j’avais possédé une telle fortune pendant ma jeunesse 4.
Il m’a conseillé de faire une cure 5.
A quoi bon une belle fortune à la fin de sa vie ?
Words 1. la loterie nationale 2. le chèque 3. amèrement 4. une fortune 5. la jeunesse 6. l’émotion 7. n’est-ce pas 8. chômeur 9. réussi 10. souffrir 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit presents a description of a miserable and tragic life.
It teaches the use of verbs in a sequence.
72FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 5.0 SUMMARY This unit must have equipped you with some basic tools for writing and analyzing a conversation in French about the life of a person.
You must have learnt some French verbs, nouns and adjectives that can help you make phrases in French.
We hope you can now construct sentences in French, which give vivid descriptions of actions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Quand M. Martin a-t-il gagné le gros lot ?
2.
Qu’est-ce qui lui est arrivé lorsqu’il a entendu la ‘bonne’ nouvelle ?
3.
Pourquoi souriait-il amèrement quand on lui a présenté son chèque ?
4.
En quoi consiste le régime de M. Martin ?
5.
De quoi M. Martin est-il mort ?
Mentionnez des crises médicales dont on peut souffrir !
6.
Donnez le contraire de : la jeunesse, un chômeur, un gendre, fatal, gros !
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo,A.(1993).
Textes et Travaux de Langue Française.
Ibadan: Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd. Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar (4th ed).
USA: Shaunm’s Outline Series, McGraw-Hill.
73 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 4 LE MANTEAU DU PERE NOEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The conditional tense 3.2.2 Difference between ‘adjectif verbal’ and ‘participe présent’ 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will read and analyse a simple but interesting passage.
The passage is on the Father Christmas phenomenon and the expectations of children to receive some gifts from Father Christmas.
The unit will take you through the expression of uncertainty with the conditional tense.
Some other points on the present participle and some basic techniques for writing short composition will be introduced to you.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read the passage and correctly answer the questions related to it.
• identify and make use of some grammatical elements in the passage; such as the conditional tense and the present participle used as adjectives • compose simple and correct sentences of your own, which relate to uncertainty, using the present perfect tense • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
74FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Read the following passage On ne fêtera pas Noël cette année, mon trésor.
C’est la troisième fois que Maman dit cela.
Martin ne comprend pas vraiment la raison pour laquelle on le priverait de Noël.
Il n’a pas été moins sage que les autres années.
Il n’a pas été plus mauvais à l’école, il ne s’est bagarré qu’à deux ou trois reprises, pas plus.
Alors pourquoi le Père Noël le punirait- il ?
Maman est en train de faire la vaisselle.
Martin, le nez penché au- dessus de son bol de céréales, espère qu’elle va en dire plus.
Au bout d’une longue minute de silence, il demande : « Qu’est-ce que j’ai fait ?
» Maman se retourne, une assiette entre les mains.
Elle a le visage fermé.
De profondes rides donnent à son front l’aspect d’un morceau de tissu chiffonné.
Elle n’avait pas l’air aussi inquiète, avant.
« Rien, mon chéri, rien.
Ce n’est pas de ta faute.
C’est que, comment dire, il arrive, parfois que le Père Noël ne puisse pas passer dans une famille.
Ce n’est pas très grave, tu sais, et ce n’est pas du tout pour te punir… » « Pourquoi il nous oublierait ?
» Maman soupire.
On la dirait très fatiguée.
« Pour une raison que les enfants ne peuvent pas comprendre.
Allez, finis ton bol et va à l’école !
» Elle pivote et plonge les mains dans l’évier.
Martin a bien cru que ce matin, il aurait enfin droit à des explications.
Mais au lieu de cela, Maman a réglé le problème comme à chaque fois, en le laissant hors du coup.
Le garçon achève son petit déjeuner en silence.
Rien ne va plus depuis quelque temps.
Quand Papa rentre du travail, il passe à côté de Martin et ne lui adresse même pas la parole, on dirait qu’il ne le voit pas.
Maman est tout le temps tracassée, elle ne rit plus jamais.
Plusieurs fois, Martin a entendu ses parents se disputer, et tout ça le trouble beaucoup.
On dirait que ses parents lui en veulent de quelque chose, mais quoi ?
Et si ce n’est pas la bonne raison, alors pourquoi lui font-ils payer leurs problèmes en ne fêtant pas Noël ?
Ce matin-là, au lieu de s’engager dans la petite rue qui mène à l’école Martin emprunte un chemin de terre et s’enfonce dans la campagne.
Il a décidé de manquer la classe.
Il est certain que le Père Noël ne l’a pas oublié, mais qu’en réalité on veut le punir.
Pour quelle raison ?
Olivier Ka.
Le Manteau du Père Noël.
Ed.
Grasset et Fasquelle, 2000.
75 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read tells the plight of a child who is denied Father Christmas’ gift without reasonable explanation.
The words and expressions used take us through the chid’s search for an explanation and what he noticed as unusual at home.
Faire la vaisselle: to do the dishes Le visage fermé : expressionless face Chiffonné : rumpled Elle n’avait pas l’air: to look worried (from ‘avoir l’air: to look) Il arrive que : it happens that puisse: from the verb ‘pouvoir’ (the subjuntive mood) : to be able elle pivote : she turns round Martin a cru que: Martin really thought; (from ‘croire’: to believe) Le garcon achève son petit déjeuner: the boy eats up his breakfast il ne lui adresse même pas la parole : he does not even talk to her on dirait que : it seems like ses parents lui en veulent de quelque chose : his parents have a grudge against him emprunter un chemin : to take, follow a path s’enfonce dans la campagne: disappear into the countryside Look up the meaning of new words in your bilingual (French/English dictionary); but make sure you remain within the context of the passage and avoid spending too much time on vocabulary.
3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The Value of the Conditional Tense • Formation The verbs in the conditional tense share the same stem with the future tense.
The changes only take place at the end.
Parler Finir Prendre Je parlerais finirais prendrais tu parlerais finir ais prendrais il/elle parlerait finirait prendrait nous parlerions finirions prendrions vous parleriez finiriez prendriez ils/elles parleraient finiraient prendraient The verbs with irregular endings are the following : employer ; acheter ; appeler; cueillir; s’asseoir; aller; avoir; être; faire; savoir; falloir; valoir; 76FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II vouloir; apercevoir; décevoir; devoir; pleuvoir; courir; secourir; mourir; voir; envoyer; tenir (and its derivatives); venire (and its derivatives) • Uses • it means ‘would’ À votre place, je travaillerais If I were you, I would work NB: Be careful Je devrais manger I should sleep Je mangerais I would eat • after certain conjunctions Il ferait le travail dès qu’il reviendrait He would do the work as soon as he returned • a soft request, command or desire Je voudrais un stylo Pourriez-vous attendre dehors, s’il vous plaît • Possibility or unsure action Il serait malade.
He is rumoured to be sick.
• Reported speech Elle m’a dit qu’elle m’épouserait.
She told me that she would marry me.
3.2.2 The Present Participle and Verbal Adjective You might have noticed the repetition of the conjunction comme: “d’autres viennent d’Allemagne comme le bœuf de Hambourg, d’autres d’Espagne comme les raisins secs de Malaga, d’autres d’Italie comme les glaces, d’autres de Russie comme les viandes séchées, le caviar, d’autres d’Asie comme le riz et le café, d’autres d’Afrique, d’autres enfin d’Amérique comme les pommes de terre, le chocolat, le sucre » In this column, we will study some differences between the present participle and the verbal adjective.
Infinitives participes présents adjectifs verbaux adhérer adhérant adhérent communiquer communiquant communicant convaincre convainquant convaincant différer différant différent équivaloir équivalant équivalent 77 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II exceller excellant excellent fatiguer fatiguant fatigant intriguer intriguant intrigant négliger négligeant négligent 3.2.3 Simple Compositions We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this unit.
With the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Il ne comprend pas vraiment la raison pour laquelle on lui demanderait de démissionner.
2.
Sa maison a été cambriolée à deux ou trois reprises.
3.
C’est Maïmouna qui fait la vaisselle.
4.
Maman a l’air inquiète.
5.
Martin a droit à des explications.
Words 1. le Père Noël 2. se bagarrer 3. punir 4. faire la vaisselle 5. une assiette 6. des rides 7. mon chéri 8. punir 9. achever 10. soupirer 4.0 CONCLUSION You must have read about the reaction of the child who was denied the opportunity of meeting Father Christmas.
You must have learnt how to use the present participle and the conditional tense.
5.0 SUMMARY You must have learnt some nouns, verbs, and adjectives that can help you express your opinion in French.
We hope you have been equipped to such an extent that you express your feelings about an issue.
78FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
La famille ne fêterait-elle pas Noël ?
2.
Martin comprend-il ce qui se passe ?
3.
Dérivez le rapport entre la mère et le père de Martin !
4.
La mère de Martin est-elle une femme heureuse ?
5.
Pensez-vous que Martin verra le Père Noël ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993).
Textes et Travaux de Langue Française.
Ibadan: Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd. Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar.
(4th ed).
USA: Shaunm’s Outline Series, McGraw-Hill.
Ojo, Ade (2002).
A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar.
Ibadan: Signal Educational Services.
79 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 5 LE MARIAGE D’UN AVEUGLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The Feminine of Adjectives 3.2.2 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read a simple but touching passage.
The text talks about the marriage of a physically challenged individual with neither arms nor eyes.
The description is vivid due to the preponderance of adjectives referring to the couple.
You will be introduced to some basic techniques of short composition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read the passage and correctly answer questions related to it.
• identify and make use of some grammatical elements on the gender of adjectives in the passage • compose simple and correct sentences of your own • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Please read this interesting passage: Montigny, le 5 juin, samedi dernier, dans la petite église de Montigny, non loin de Maubeuge, une heureuse cérémonie s’est déroulée.
M. Alfred Nicolas, 28 ans, septième enfant d’une famille de mineurs d’origine étrangère qui s’est installée en France à la fin de la première guerre mondiale, a épousé une femme qui était autrefois infirmière venant d’Arras.
80FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Mais ce qui rend si émouvant ce mariage, c’est que le mari est aveugle et sans mains.
C’était pendant la deuxième guerre mondiale qu’Alfred a été victime d’une explosion qui devait le mutiler si tragiquement.
Il était mineur.
Un jour, retournant de bonne heure de son travail à la mine, il bêchait dans le jardin d’un parent âgé, quand la bêche a frappé un objet métallique.
Au lieu de se sauver le plus vite possible, il s’est incliné pour le ramasser.
C’était une grenade Mills.
Elle a éclaté.
Les deux bras étaient arrachés par la force de l’explosion.
Puis le jeune homme, déjà privé de ses bras, a vu pour comble de malheur, qu’il perdait peu à peu ses yeux.
En quelques mois, la cécité était totale.
Navré, il a quitté l’hôpital pour se rendre chez lui, où sa famille a fait de son mieux pour le distraire.
C’était lors de son voyage aux Lourdes où, lui, bon catholique, s’est rendu il y a deux ans, espérant qu’il regagnerait la vue, qu’il a fait la connaissance d’une jeune fille blonde, Mlle Hanot, la responsable d’un groupe d’aveugles qu’elle avait amené aux Lourdes.
Et, en fin de compte, il y a eu une sorte de miracle quand l’amitié des jeunes gens s’est peu à peu approfondie en amour.
(Source anonyme) 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read relates the wedding of a blind man.
The words and expressions used describe his plight and how he found a wife.
samedi dernier: last Saturday Une cérémonie s’est déroulée: a ceremony took place s’est installée: settled down la guerre mondiale: the world war infirmière venant de : a nurse from ce qui rend si émouvant ce mariage: what makes this marriage so touching aveugle et sans mains: blind and without arms de bonne heure: early in the morning il bêchait : he was digging Au lieu de se sauver: instead of taking to his heels il s’est incliné : he bent down arrachés: torn off, severed privé de ses bras: deprived of his arms pour comble de malheur: to crown it all la cécité : blindness se rendre chez lui : to get to his house en fin de : finally amour : love Do not hesitate to use your bilingual (French/English) dictionary.
81 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The Feminine Gender of Adjectives You might have noticed the presence of adjectives describing the seeming tragic life of a handicapped person which ended up in joy: his wedding.
In this analysis, we shall keep up the idea of coupling by bringing adjectives together in masculine/feminine pairs.
• Regular forms: + e Masculine Feminine English Français* Française French parfait parfaite perfect fatigué fatiguée tired sourd sourde deaf NB.
Note that the final consonant is silent • Adjectives that double their final consonants before taking e Masculine Feminine English cruel cruelle cruel bon bonne good gros grosse big, fat • From -et to -ète Masculine Feminine English complet complète complete secret secrete secret • From -er to -ère Masculine Feminine English premier première first dernier dernière last étranger étrangère foreign • From -x to –se Masculine Feminine English amoureux amoureuse in love jaloux jalouse jealous Except: doux douce sweet roux rousse reddish brown faux fausse false 82FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • From -eur to –euse (when derived from a verb) Masculine Feminine English flatteur flatteuse flattering trompeur trompeuse deceitful Except: antérieur antérieure anterior inférieur inférieure inferior majeur majeure major postérieur postérieure posterior extérieur extérieure exterior meilleur meilleure best mineur mineure minor supérieur supérieure superior • From -eur to –rice Masculine Feminine English acteur actrice acting créateur créatrice creative directeur directrice directing • From -f to –ve Masculine Feminine English actif active active bref brève brief • From -c to –che Masculine Feminine English blanc blanche white franc franche frank sec sèche dry Except: grec grecque greek public publique public • Irregular Adjectives Masculine Feminine English aigu aiguë sharp long longue long favori favorite favorite malin maligne sly bénin bénigne benign frais fraîche fresh 83 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.2.3 Simple Composition You are expected to construct some sentences with the words and expressions you have acquired in this lesson.
Please do so with the aid of your dictionary Expressions • Une cérémonie émouvant s’est déroulée.
• Ce qui rend si émouvant ce mariage • C’était pendant la deuxième guerre mondiale que … • Il a quitté l’hôpital pour se rendre chez lui • En fin de compte, il y a eu une sorte de miracle Words • l’église • étrangère • la guerre • épouser • émouvant • une grenade • le malheur • la cécité • l’amitié • l’amour .4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has exposed you to some ways of using masculine and feminine adjectives.
Hopefully, you can easily and confidently handle adjectives whatever their gender.
You should be able to construct more descriptive sentences by now.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit should have equipped you with some more basic tools with which you can express your opinion in French.
We hope you can construct sentences which describe people, objects and events.
84FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Qu’est-ce qui s’est passé à l’église de Montigny le 5 juin dernier ?
2.
Qu’est-ce qui rend le mariage si émouvant ?
3.
Comment Alfred est-il devenu handicapé ?
4.
L’hôpital a-t-il guéri Alfred ?
5.
Que pensez-vous de ce genre de mariage ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993).
Textes et Travaux de Langue Française.
Ibadan: Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd. Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar (4th ed).
USA: Shaunm’s Outline Series, McGraw-Hill.
85 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II MODULE 4 Unit 1 Le Logement Unit 2 Reves D’enfance Unit 3 Robert Le Taxi Unit 4 Speciale Sante Unit 5 Un Maitre Prestigieux Unit 6 Une Exploratrice Française UNIT 1 LE LOGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Verbs Related to Accommodation 3.2.2 The Personal Pronoun (Direct Object) 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read and analyse a simple but interesting passage.
The passage centres on accommodation through a telephone conversation.
You will learn the vocabulary related to the handling of accommodation and rent.
This unit will teach you how to use the verbs involved in dealing with housing issues and how to address someone without mentioning their name.
You will also learn some basic techniques of short composition using the points you will acquire in this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and the passage provide correct answers to the questions relating to it • identify some grammatical elements in the passage such as the personal pronoun as a direct object 86FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • construct simple and correct sentences about housing and accommodation • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Please read the following passage: Corinne : Allô Maman, c’est Corinne.
Je téléphone pour te dire que je n’ai pas obtenu de chambre à la cité universitaire.
Je crois que je vais chercher un studio à louer ou bien un appartement avec une ou deux copines.
Maman : Un studio !
Mais c’est beaucoup trop cher !
Et puis, il faudrait le meubler.
Corinne : Bien sûr, mais je vais travailler pendant les vacances pour acheter des meubles.
J’ai besoin d’une table, deux chaises et un lit ou un sofa, c’est tout !
Maman : Non, il n’en est pas question !
Alors tu m’écoutes ; il serait beaucoup plus simple de prendre une chambre meublée chez des particuliers, dans une famille.
Cherche dans les petites annonces dans le journal de demain.
Tempo 1 p152 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read talks about a house for rent.
It also gives some details about the types of rooms available in the house.
The words and expressions used are linked to the vocabulary of housing and accommodation.
pour te dire : to tell you chambre: bedroom cité universitaire: halls of residence on campus appartement: flat le meubler: furnish it les meubles: the pieces of furniture J’ai besoin de: I need (I have need of) une chaise: chair lit: bed c’est tout: that’s all il n’en est pas question !
: no way !
tu m’écoutes : you listen to me 87 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II You will find your bilingual dictionary useful.
But search for the meaning of the words within their context.
Here is a useful index: Agent immobilier: estate agent agence immobilière: estate agency le locataire : tenant le propriétaire : the owner, landlord le loyer : the rent (fees ) 3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have noticed that there are some verbs related to housing.
Secondly there are also some personal pronouns used as direct objects.
3.2.1 Verbs Used in the Housing Sector During communication involving the housing sector, we are likely to come across verbs like ‘louer’ (to rent/lease), acheter (to buy), vendre (to sell), meubler (to furnish), appartenir à (to belong to), chercher, etc.
Some, as seen in previous lessons, are easy to handle-- meubler and chercher -----as they end in ‘er’.
In this same group of ‘er’ verbs, some need a little attention.
achet/er: (j’achète, tu achète, il/elle achète, nous achetons, vous achetez, ils/elles achètent).
Indeed, we should take note of the changes in pronunciation as the original ‘e’ in the infinitive (acheter) and in ‘nous achetons’ and ‘vous achetez’ become ‘è’ for ‘je, tu, il/elle, ils/elles’ in achèt----.
Care should therefore be taken when handling other verbs in that ‘E+Consonant+ER’ pattern: jeter, appeler, peeler, répéter, accéder, etc.
Lou/er.
the stem ‘lou---’ ends with a vowel.
It becomes ‘je lou-e, tu lou- es, il/elle lou-e, nous lou-ons, vous lou-ez, ils/elles lou-ent’.
Some learners do, mistakenly, bring in some consonants and end up giving such wrong conjugations as ‘je louere’, ‘vous lousez’, etc.
This also applies to other verbs such as continuer, diminuer, étudier.
Eg étudier correct wrong j’ étudie étude tu étudies études il/elle étudie étude nous étudions étudons vous étudiez étudez ils/elles étudient étudent 88FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II On the other hand, the other verbs are irregular • Appartenir is handled like tenir or venir (to come).
venir appartenir je viens j’appartiens tu viens appartiens il/elle vient appartient nous venons appartenons vous venez appartenez ils/elles viennent appartiennent 3.2.2 The Personal Pronoun (Direct Object) What we mean by direct object is that there is no preposition between the verb and the object: The Direct Object The Indirect Object In English Uche knows Bola Uche is talking to Bola.
In French Uche connaît Bola Uche parle à Bola If you replace the nouns Uche and Bola with some pronouns, they will become ‘he’ and ‘her’ respectively.
‘He’ is a personal pronoun subject while ‘her’ is a personal pronoun object.
We will now have: The Direct Object The Indirect Object In English He knows her He is talking to her.
In French Il la connaît Il lui parle.
We will restrict our study to the personal pronoun direct object as seen in the passage: • Je téléphone pour te dire : I phone or I am phoning/calling to tell you • il faudrait le meubler.
You must furnish it • tu m’écoutes : you listen to me* (Note that the verb listen in English transits to an indirect object while in French ‘écouter’ transits to a direct object.)
Here is an exhaustive list of all the personal pronouns direct object Elle me connaît She knows me Elle te connaît you Elle le connaît him 89 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Elle la connaît her Elle nous connaît us Elle vous connaît you Elle les connaît them 3.2.3 Simple Composition We shall try to compose some sentences with the words and expressions we have acquired in this unit.
Use your dictionary to construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Je téléphone pour te dire que je suis marié 2.
Mon appartement a trois chambres.
3.
Je vais travailler pour acheter ma propre maison.
4.
Tu m’attends à la maison, j’arrive bientôt.
5.
Cherche dans la chambre de Paul et apporte son sac.
Words (1) la table (2) la salle à manger (3) le lit (4) la cuisine (5) louer un appartement (6) Il n’en est pas question !
(7) J’ai besoin de (8) Il serait plus simple de (9) chercher (10) les petites annonces 4.0 CONCLUSION The passage presented in this unit is about renting an accommodation by telephone.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit must have equipped you with some basic tools for writing about accommodation in French.
It has shown the use of some verbs and pronouns.
We hope you can construct sentences in French to give hints about any house or flat.
90FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. lle est la profession d’Antoine Parmentier ?
2. rquoi a-il voulu introduire la pomme de terre ?
3. gens ont-ils accepté la pomme ?
4. plante est-elle vraiment réservée au roi ?
5.
Pourquoi les gens volent-ils les pommes de terre ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar 4th (ed).
USA: Shaum’s Outline Series, McGraw-Hill.
Dominique, P. (1998) et al, Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris :Clé International.
91 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 2 REVES D’ENFANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Adjectives from the Pressent Participle 3.2.2 Adjectives from the Past Participle 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read and analyse a simple but interesting passage.
The passage centres on childhood dreams of a pupil in a class situation.
You will learn how to derive adjectives from the participle of verbs, both present and past.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read and answer correctly questions related to the passage and classroom situations • identify some grammatical elements in the passage such as the present and past participle and their usage as adjectives • construct simple and correct sentences about classrooms and daydreaming • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Please read the following passage: Il y a 40 ans… Une classe de 5e dans un collège parisien.
Le professeur de français donne des explications.
“ Je vais vous expliquer une règle de grammaire difficile et je vous serais reconnaissant d’écouter attentivement.
Le participe passé employé avec “avoir” s’accorde en genre et en nombre avec le complément d’objet direct du verbe.
Je 92FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II précise qu’il s’accorde seulement quand le complément est placé avant le verbe… Autrement dit, si le complément est après le verbe, il n’y a pas d’accord.
Vous me suivez?
C’est clair?
Pour être plus précis, je vais donner des exemples…” Le professeur continue son monologue.
Tous les élèves semblent écouter.
Mais au fond de la classe, caché derrière un grand, le jeune Jean Dugommier baisse les yeux sur son livre d’histoire ouvert sur ses genoux.
Indifférent aux aventures du participe passé, il lui est égal que la leçon soit ennuyeuse… En effet, l’héroïne qui le passionne est maintenant prisonnière des Anglais.
3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read tells of a grammar lesson in a class.
It conveys words and expressions related to a classroom and a lesson.
It also makes reference to a historical event in France.
Il y a 40 ans : 40 years ago 5e JSS 2 : un collège : Junior Secondary School reconnaissant : grateful s’accorde : agrees (grammatically) en genre : in gender (masculine / feminine) en nombre : in number (singular / plural) vous me suivez : you follow me semblent écouter : seem to listen (from the verb ‘sembler’) caché : hidden baisse : lower ouvert : open (as adjective) il lui est égal : he is not bothered 3.2 Grammatical Analysis In this section, you will learn how to form adjectives from verbs on two levels: the present participle and the past participle.
3.2.1 Derivation of Adjectives from the Present Participle To start, we need to understand how to form the present participle.
Like the ‘imparfait’ tense, the present participle is formed by using the stem of the first person plural of the present tense (replacing the –ons endings of the verb with the ending –ant) 93 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Examples: Infinitive Nous + Verb Present Participle aimer nous aimons aimant finir nous finissons finissant prendre nous prenons prenant Exceptions: Infinitive Present Participle English avoir ayant to have / having être étant to be / being savoir sachant to know / knowing The next stage is to see how to use them as adjectives.
You should note that the present participle agrees in number and in gender with its noun or pronoun.
Example: Le travail de journalisme est très fatigant.
Journalism work is very tiring.
Nous allons à une soirée dansante ce samedi.
We are going to a dancing party.
Ils sont très exigeants.
They are very demanding Le dimanche, NTA présente des nouvelles surprenantes.
On Sundays, NTA presents surprising news.
3.2.2 Derivation of Adjectives from Past Participles There is need to master the formation of the past participle.
You have two groups: the regular and the irregular.
• The Regular Past Participle -er (verbs) -ir (verbs) -re (verbs) aim(er) + é fin(ir) + i vend(re) + u aimé fini vendu • The Irregular Past Participle prendre (to take) – pris comprendre (understand) – compris apprendre (learn) – appris 94FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II voir (see) – vu ; avoir (have) – eu ; savoir (know) – su ; devoir (to have to) – du ; vouloir (want) – voulu ; pouvoir (be able) - pu être (to be) – été ; faire (do) – fait ; mettre (put) – mis ; lire (read) – lu ; venir (come) – venu ; ouvrir (open) – ouvert Check a conjugation booklet for other verbs.
When it is used as an adjective, the past participle always agrees with the noun or pronoun it refers to: - un pneu crevé (a burst tyre) - une pomme pourrie (a rotten apple) - il avait les yeux ouverts (open eyes : his eyes were open) - toutes les places sont occupées (all the places were occupied) You should note that in French, the past participle is used as an adjective to describe postures of the body where the English uses the present participle.
accoudé leaning on one’s elbows accroupi squatting agenouillé kneeling alongé lying (down) appuyé (contre) leaning (against) couché lying (down) penché leaning over (sus)pendu hanging 3.2.3 Simple Composition Now with the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning: Expressions 1.
Une explication 2.
Donner des explications 3.
Etre reconnaissant 4.
Autrement dit.
5.
Tous les étudiants semblent l’écouter 95 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Words 1. la table 2. difficile 3. seulement 4. monologue 5. caché 6. indifférent 7. ennuyeuse 8. une prisonnière 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit relates the events a classroom.
The text has exposed you to some basic expressions using verbal adjectives i.e.
adjectives derived from the participles of verbs.
We hope you have acquired enough skills to help you talk about your childhood dreams (rêves d’enfance) and to help you give a lesson in French.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit should have equipped you with some basic tools for writing a text in French about a French lesson in a classroom.
You should have learnt some verbs, nouns and adjectives that can help you make phrases in French.
We hope you can construct sentences in which you may need to describe and qualify nouns and pronouns with verbal adjectives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Quand se déroule l’action ?
2.
Où se déroule l’action ?
3.
Que fait le professeur de français ?
4.
Le participe passé avec le verbe ‘avoir’ s’accorde.
Vrai ou faux ?
expliquez !
5.
Que fait Jean Dugommier ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dominique, P. et al (1998).
, Le Nouveau sans Frontières 1, Méthode de Français.
Paris : Clé International.
Oudot, S. (1986).
French Verbs and Essentials of Grammar.
USA : Passport Books.
96FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 3 ROBERT LE TAXI CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 The Infinitive 3.2.2 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will read and analyse a simple and interesting passage.
The passage is about an unusual taxi-driver.
It will teach you some vocabulary related to office materials in the cab and it will also take you round the world of the infinitive mood.
You will finally acquire some basic tools for composing unusual and odd stories.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you should be able to : • read the passage on a strange taxi-driver and provide correct answers to questions relating to it • identify the infinitive mood • construct simple and correct sentences which tell an interesting story of something queer.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Please read the following passage: Le Zorro du voyageur Tout va mal, certains jours : migraines, boutons, décousus, pli à poster en urgence et manque de timbre… Pour couronner le tout, vous allez être en retard à votre rendez-vous à l’autre bout de Paris !
Le bonheur c’est, ce jour-là, de rencontrer le taxi de Robert Izoird.
Ancien photographe, organiste et saxophoniste, Robert vous conduira à destination.
Jusque là, rien d’extraordinaire pour un taxi.
La première 97 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II chose qui étonne dans sa voiture, c’est le dos des sièges-avant placardés des coupures de presse.
Des photocopies des articles sont même à la disposition des clients.
Puis s’habituant à la surprise, le regard saute du Pariscope de la semaine à des jeux de patience destinés au prochain embouteillage.
En cas de besoin, Robert Izoird dévoile sa boîte secrète : « sa mallette des petits services rendus ».
Parmi les trésors, l’agrafeuse, l’aiguille, l’essence de térébenthine ou l’aspirine salvatrice.
Tous les petits objets dont l’absence est cause des mille tracas quotidiens, sont disponibles sur simple sourire.
On irait jusqu’à soupçonner Robert de détenir aussi du papier cadeau dans son coffre.
Pour le savoir, rendez- vous dans son taxi… aux prochaines fêtes.
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 2, Philippe Dominique et al, 1998.
3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read tells the story of a strange fellow and his multipurpose cab.
The words and expressions will serve to discover the content and usefulness of such a cab.
Zorro: a horse-riding film character with a mask round his eyes, a whip and a flowing gown known as saviour of the needy and the downtrodden.
tout va mal: everything is wrong décousus: disjointed items à l’autre bout de paris: at the other end of Paris sièges-avant: front seats placardés: covered with en cas de besoin : if need be on ira jusqu’à soupçonner robert : one would even suspect Robert papier cadeau : wrapping paper 3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have noticed the various uses of the verbs in the infinitive form.
This discourse shall reveal more about their different uses in French.
3.2.1 The Infinitive Form of a Verb • It can be used as a noun: Vouloir c’est pouvoir Where there is a will there a way.
98FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • As an imperative Laisser cuire pendant dix minutes !
Cook for ten minutes !
• Deliberation Que faire?
What shall I/we do?
Comment travailler dans un tel environnement?
How can one work in such an environment?
• Exclamation Oh!
Partir à l’école encore ce matin!
Oh, are we going to school again this morning?
• After prepositions Priez avant de manger: Pray before eating.
Il parle sans rire.
He talks without laughing.
Il est parti après avoir mangé.
He left after he had eaten.
• After a verb - with no linking preposition: vouloir (to want), souhaiter (to wish), désirer (to wish, to want), espérer (to hope), aller (to go), venir (to come), laisser (to let, allow) and expressions like laisser tomber (to drop), aller chercher (to fetch), vouloir dire (to mean), etc: J’aimerais vous voir après la classe.
I would like to see you after the class.
Je n’ose pas lui parler de polygamie.
I dare not discuss polygamy with her - with preposition à (the list has been given in other lessons) Il nous invite à diner.
He invites us to a dinner.
Elle passe son temps à bavarder.
She spends her time talking.
Cela sert à ouvrir la porte.
99 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II This is used to open the door.
- with preposition de il a envie d’uriner.
He feels like urinating.
Il s’est arrêté de pleuvoir.
It stopped raining.
Je vous prie de m’aider.
Please, help me.
- After a noun, a pronoun, an adverb or an adjective: Nous avons plusieurs personnes à inviter pour le marriage.
We have many people to invite for the marriage.
Je suis enchanté de faire votre connaissance.
Glad to meet you!
Je n’ai pas le courage de l’affronter.
I don’t have the courage to confront him.
C’est facile à faire.
It is easily done.
- Expressions avec faire Il fait chanter ses étudiants.
He made his students sing.
Tu m’as fait perdre beaucoup d’argent.
You made me lose plenty of money.
We also have expressions like: faire entrer (to show in); faire venire (to send for) 3.2.2 Simple Composition With the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning.
Expressions 1.
Tout va mal 2.
Pour couronner le tout 3.
La première chose qui étonne dans sa voiture, c’est 4.
En cas d’urgence, téléphonez le 129 5.
Pour le savoir, lisez le journal du samedi 100FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Words 1. la migraine 2. en retard 3. rendez-vous 4. le taxi 5. conduire 6. les clients 7. la mallette 8. l’aspirine 9. disponible 10. soupçonner 4.0 CONCLUSION The passage in this unit describes a strange man and his multipurpose taxi.
The text you have read has exposed you to most uses of the infinitive form of the French verb.
5.0 SUMMARY Having gone through this unit, you should be able to write about a weird situation in French.
You must have learnt some adjectives, nouns and verbs (in the infinitive form) that can help you make phrases in French.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Que veut dire l’expression ‘le Zorro du voyageur’ ?
2.
Le taxi de Robert est-il un taxi porte bonheur ?
3.
Quels sont les types de service qu’il peut tendre ?
4.
Robert se fait-il payer des services disponibles dans son taxi ?
5.
Connaissez-vous un taxi comme celui de Robert ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar 4th (ed).
USA: Shaunm’s Outline Series, McGraw-Hill.
Dominique, P. et al (1998).
Le Nouveau sans Frontières 2, Méthode de Français.
Paris : Clé International.
101 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 4 SPECIALE SANTE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis: Adverbial Pronouns 3.2.1 Pronoun ‘y’ 3.2.2 Pronoun ‘en’ 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read and analyse a long but interesting passage.
The passage talks about how inadequate and inexperienced the young French medical doctors are.
You will acquire some basic techniques of short composition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read the passage and provide correct answers to the questions related to it • identify and make use of some grammatical elements in the passage: the personal pronouns ‘y’ an ‘en’ • construct simple and correct sentences to criticise the university system • use some techniques of writing acquired in your own writing exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Please read the following passage: « LES JEUNES MEDECINS N’ONT COMME FORMATION QUE CE QU’ILS FONT HORS DE LA FACULTE », s’indigne un professeur.
A en croire les programmes, il a sûrement raison.
102FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Pierre est un sujet brillant… Il rencontre tous les jours dans le service hospitalier où il exerce, des cas dramatiques et il sait y faire face.
Mais le souvenir de son premier remplacement, tout simple, chez un confrère médecin de campagne lui procure un frisson rétrospectif.
Le médecin lui avait passé les consignes juste avant de partir.
« Pas d’accouchement en perspective ?
» avait demandé Pierre.
Je n’en ai jamais fait.
‘Rien à craindre’, lui répond le médecin en montant dans sa voiture.
‘Les vacances, c’est sacré, pas une minute à perdre.’ Trois jours plus tard, on vient appeler Pierre.
Une femme enceinte dans une ferme.
Elle a l’impression que c’est pour bientôt.
Le jeune homme passe rapidement en revue les notions théoriques apprises en fac, se retrouve devant la future mère, palpe pour la première fois de sa vie un ventre de femme enceinte, ne remarque rien de spécial et annonce, un peu gêné : « Je crois que ça peut attendre.
» Une demie heure après, raconte-t-il, les gens de la ferme reviennent me voir en me disant : ‘Venez docteur, je crois bien que c’est commencé.’ J’ai juste eu le temps de prendre ma voiture et de transporter la femme à l’hôpital avant qu’elle accouche ».
Ce qui a le plus stupéfié Pierre dans cette histoire, c’est la reconnaissance que lui a manifestée les fermiers alors que, d’évidence, il s’était gravement trompé.
Une histoire pas très originale… Si l’on en croit un sondage récent, un médecin sur quatre s’installe sans avoir jamais vu une rougeole.
Et les trois quarts des médecins interrogés estiment qu’ils ont été lâchés dans la nature sans avoir une pratique suffisante des différentes catégories de médicaments qu’ils doivent pourtant prescrire quotidiennement.
Il n’y a là rien de mystérieux : les futurs médecins sont formés à l’hôpital, c’est-à-dire un endroit où l’on traite les cas graves.
Conséquence logique : les étudiants en médecine qui n’ont pas le goût du risque se ruent sur les spécialités.
Là au moins, on peut faire ses premières armes à l’hôpital.
A l’heure actuelle, sur trois médecins qui s’installent, deux sont des spécialistes.
Extrait de l’article de Gérard Petitjean, ‘Spéciale Santé’, No 2, Le Nouvel Observateur, 30.1.77 103 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read describes the mistake made by a young medical practitioner due to his inexperience.
Please use your bilingual dictionary if you wish to do so but you must overcome the temptation of checking all the words.
La santé : health Le service hospitalier : hospital Il sait y faire face: he knows how to handle it Un confrère: a colleague accouchement: a childbirth, delivery une femme enceinte : a pregnant woman apprises en fac : learnt in the faculty palpe un ventre: to palpate, to feel a belly il s’était gravement trompé: he made a grievous mistake une rougeole : measles 3.2 Grammatical Analysis: Adverbial Pronouns You might have noticed that the formation of English adjectives is in two parts: either a pure adjective (a friendly match) or a noun (a day’s job).
It is also the case in French but for a little difference in the second part.
For the case of a day’s job, the French puts it as ‘the job of a day’.
3.2.1 Pronoun ‘Y’ Expressions like: ‘il sait y faire face” and “il n’y a là rien” necessitate the understanding of the pronoun ‘y’.
• Replaces the preposition à or other positional prepositions such as devant, sur, dans + an inanimate concrete noun (things, places) or abstract noun.
Ex: Tu penses à ton succès, j’y suis intéressé également.
You are thinking about your success.
I’m interested in it also.
• There Étiez vuos dans la chamber quand il est arrivé?
Oui, j’y étais.
Were you in the room when he came?
Yes, I was there.
J’y allais à pied.
I was going (there) on foot.
Vas-y; allez-y!
Go ahead.
104FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II • Some idioms Il y a there is Ça y est OK.
There it is.
Je n’y suis pour rien I am not involved Je n’y peux rien It has gone beyond me 3.2.2 Pronoun ‘ EN’ The word ‘en’ has been used a great number of times.
But we will only talk about its usage as a pronoun like it is the case in the following extracts from the passage: ‘à en croire les programmes, il a sûrement raison.’, ‘je n’en ai jamais fait’, ‘Si l’on en croit un sondage récent’.
• ‘En’ replaces de + noun Tu viens au resto?
– non merci, j’en viens.
Are you coming to the restaurant?
No thanks, I’m coming from there.
Des médicaments?
Oui, j’en ai besoin énormément (avoir besoin de …) Drugs?
Yes, I need them badly.
Tu veux des bonbons?
Oui, j’en veux.
You want some sweets?
Yes, I would like some.
Il a reçu un coup de fusil et en est mort.
He received a gun shot and died of it.
L’Imam n’a pas épousé plus d’une femme, et pourtant, il en est capable.
The Imam did not marry more than a wife, and yet he is capable of it.
Il ne circule pas en Jeep, et pourtant il en est capable.
He does not move about in a Jeep, yet he is capable of it.
• Idiomatic expressions S’en aller to leave, to go away En avoir assez to be fed up En finir to get over with En vouloir à to have a grudge against Il en est ainsi that is how it is Il s’en est fallu de peu it was close Il y en a qui some people are … 3.2.3 Simple Compositions With the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning: 105 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Expressions 1.
A en croire les programmes, il a sûrement raison 2.
Il sait y faire face 3.
Pas d’accouchement en perspective 4.
Rien à craindre 5.
Il ne remarque rien de spécial Words 1. hospitalier 2. confrère 3. les consignes 4. enceinte 5. accoucher 6. gravement 7. une rougeole 8. la mallette 9. médicaments 10. prescrire 11. un spécialiste 4.0 CONCLUSION The passage in this unit is about the inexperience of young medical doctors who graduate from the university.
The text has exposed you to some basic expressions used in the medical profession.
It has also shown you how to use more pronouns.
Now you should be able to make more sentences instead of repeating the same ones.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit should have equipped you better to write in French, especially about the medical profession.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Pourquoi le confrère de Pierre part-il ?
2.
Quel est le cas qui se présente à Pierre trois jours après le départ de son confrère ?
3.
Pierre a peur.
pourquoi ?
4.
« je crois que c’est bien commencé.
» De quoi parle-t-on ?
5.
Selon le narrateur, les jeunes médecins n’ont pas de bonne formation.
Quels sont les problèmes de formation soulevés dans le texte ?
106FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993).
Textes et Travaux de Langue Française.
Ibadan: Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd. Ojo, Ade (2002).
A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar.
Ibadan: Signal Educational Services.
107 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 5 UN MAITRE PRESTIGIEUX CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis: Pluralization 3.2.1 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Here you will read and analyse a simple and interesting passage.
The passage is an extract from an African novel on the pre-independence era of an Islamic traditional master.
The unit will teach you how to handle the plural case in French.
You will also be introduced to some basic techniques of short composition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read the passage correctly and answer the questions relating to it • identify and make use of the plural case as seen in the passage • construct sentences to describe people and events.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Please read the following passage: L’homme était vieux, maigre et émacié, tout desséché par ses macérations.
Il ne riait jamais.
Les seuls moments d’enthousiasme qu’on pouvait lui voir étaient ceux pendant lesquels, plongé dans ses méditations mystiques, ou écoutant réciter la Parole de Dieu, il se dressait tout tendu et semblait s’exhausser du sol, comme soulevé par une force intime.
Les moments étaient nombreux par contre où, poussé dans une colère frénétique par la paresse ou les bévues d’un disciple, il se laissait aller à des violences d’une brutalité inouïe.
Mais ces violences, on l’avait remarqué, étaient fonction de l’intérêt qu’il portait au disciple en faute.
Plus il le tenait en estime, plus folles étaient ses colères.
Alors, verges, bûches enflammées, tout ce qui lui tombait sous la main servait au châtiment.
Samba Diallo se souvenait qu’un jour, pris 108FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II d’une colère démente, le maître l’avait piétiné à terre et l’avait furieusement piétiné, comme font certains fauves sur leur proie.
Le maître était un homme redoutable à beaucoup d’égards.
Deux occupations remplissaient sa vie : les travaux de l’esprit et les travaux des champs.
Il consacrait aux travaux des champs, le strict minimum de son temps et ne demandait pas à la terre plus qu’il ne faut pour sa nourriture, extrêmement frugale, et celle de sa famille, sans les disciples.
Le reste de son temps, il le consacrait à l’étude, à la méditation, à la prière et à la formation des jeunes gens confiés à ses soins.
Il s’acquittait de cette tâche avec une passion réputée dans tout le pays des Diallobé.
Des maîtres venant des contrées les plus lointaines le visitaient périodiquement et repartaient édifiés.
Les plus grandes familles du pays se disputaient l’honneur de lui envoyer leurs garçons.
Généralement, le maître ne s’engageait qu’après avoir vu l’enfant.
Jamais aucune pression n’avait pu modifier sa décision, lorsqu’il avait refusé.
Mais il arrivait qu’à la vue d’un enfant, il sollicitât de l’éduquer.
Il en avait été ainsi pour Samba Diallo.
Extrait de : L’Aventure Ambiguë, Cheikh Hamidou Kane, Ed.
Julliard, Paris, 1961.
3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just read describes a traditional Islamic scholar.
It gives details of his knowledge, his violent nature and his reputation as a renowned teacher.
The words and expressions used depict the African Islamic school.
desséché: dried out, emaciated riait: from the verb ‘rire’: was laughing plongé: deep in il se dressait: he would stand tendu: tensed s’exhausser du sol: to lift oneself up une colère frénétique : a wild anger il le tenait en estime : he held him in high esteem verges, bûches enflammées : burning canes, logs une colère démente : a crazy, insane anger piétiné: trampled à beaucoup d’égards: to a great consideration les travaux des champs : farm work (travaux is the plural of ‘le travail’) il arrivait que : it would happen that il en avait été ainsi pour: that had been the case of 109 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II At this stage, you may require constant use of your dictionary.
Please feel free to consult it as often as you think you should.
3.2 Grammatical Analysis You might have learnt that we usually get the plural form of a noun or adjective by adding‘s’ at the end.
But the presence of the word ‘travaux’, which is the plural of ‘travail’ shows there are cases of irregular plural.
This will constitute our focus in this section.
• Nouns ending in –s, -x or –z do not change in the plural Singular Plural English le bras les bras arm le bois les bois wood le prix les prix price le nez les nez nose • Nouns ending in –au, -eau, -eu, -oeu and x Singular Plural English le bateau les bras boat le feu les feux fire le jeu les jeux game Exceptions : le landau les landaus carriage le pneu les pneus tyre • Nouns ending in –ou generally add ‘s’ to the plural except the following which add -x Singular Plural English le bijou les bijoux jewel le caillou les cailloux stone le chou les choux cabbage le hibou les hiboux owl le joujou les joujoux toy le pou les poux flea, louse • Nouns ending in –al change to –aux in the plural Singular Plural English L’animal les animaux animal le cheval les chevaux horse 110FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II l’hôpital les hôpitaux hospital le journal les journaux newspaper Exceptions : le bal les bals ball dance le carnival les carnivals carnival le festival les festivals festival • Nouns ending –ail add ‘s’ to the plural except: Singular Plural English le bail les baux lease le travail les travaux work le vitrail les vitraux stained glass window • The most irregular plurals Singular Plural English L’aïeul les aïeuls ancestor le bonhomme les bonshommes old fellow le ciel les cieux sky le gentilhomme les gentilshommes gentleman l’œil les yeux eye le monsieur les messieurs gentleman madame Mrs. mesdames mademoiselle Miss mesdemoiselles Finally you should note that family names do not take –s in the plural: Les Osondus ; les Ibrahims ; les Adelekes.
3.2.1 Simple Composition With the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning: Expressions 1.
Les seuls moments d’enthousiasme 2.
Les moments où il se laissait aller 3.
Ces violences étaient fonction de l’intérêt Pas d’accouchement en perspective 4.
Plus il le tenait en estime, plus folles étaient ses colères 5.
Le maître était un homme redoutable à beaucoup d’égards 6.
Il arrivait qu’il sollicitât de l’éduquer 7.
Il en avait été ainsi pour Samba Diallo 111 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II Words 1. macérations 2. enthousiasme 3. la Parole de Dieu 4. une colère 5. la paresse 6. les bévues 7. le châtiment 8. se souvenir 9. les travaux 10. sa nourriture 4.0 CONCLUSION The passage in this unit is about the life of an African Islamic teacher.
The text shows you how to use singular and plural nouns in French.
5.0 SUMMARY We believe you are now able to correctly construct French sentences that involve singular and plural nouns and you can describe different kinds of people.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Qu’est-ce que l’aspect physique du maître nous apprend de son caractère ?
2.
Quels sont les traits dominants du caractère du maître?
3.
Pourquoi le maître châtie-t-il ses disciples ?
Pourquoi est-il violent ?
4.
Comment s’explique le prestige du maître dans toute la région ?
5.
Pourquoi le maître s’intéresse-t-il à Samba Diallo ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1993).
Textes et Travaux de Langue Française.
Ibadan: Omolayo Publishing Co. Ltd. Crocker, M.E.C.
(1999).
French Grammar (4th ed).
USA: Shaunm’s Outline Series, McGraw-Hill.
Kane, C.H.
(1961).
L’Aventure Ambiguë, Ed.
Paris : Julliard.
112FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II UNIT 6 UNE EXPLORATRICE FRANÇAISE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammatical Analysis : Time Indicators 3.2.1 Adverbs of Time 3.2.2 Expression of Time and Duration 3.2.3 Simple Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will read and analyse a simple passage.
The passage centers on a female explorer named Alexandra David-Neel.
The unit will teach you the vocabulary related to exploration and women, how to use words to express time and some basic techniques of short composition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • read the passage and provide correct answers to questions relating to it • identify some grammatical elements in the passage concerning indication of time • construct simple and correct sentences to express time • relate an adventure you had.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Please read the following passage: Née en 1868, près de Paris, Alexandra David-Neel est une des premières exploratrices françaises libérées.
A l’âge de quinze ans, elle quitte la maison familiale et part seule pour l’Angleterre.
Puis elle visite l’Europe et l’Afrique de Nord.
Mais la vraie aventure d’Alexandra commence en 1911.
Elle quitte son mari et part à la découverte de l’Asie.
Pendant 113 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II quatorze ans, elle découvre l’Inde.
C’est la première européenne à visiter le Tibet.
Elle rencontre le dalaï-lama, passe deux ans seule dans les montagnes à 4000 m et vit des aventures extraordinaires.
Elle revient en France en 1925.
Depuis son départ, tout a changé.
Les femmes ont les cheveux courts.
Elles montrent leurs bras et leurs jambes.
Elles fument !
On fait du sport.
On va au cinéma.
Alexandra découvre alors une autre France.
Girard, J.
(1996) Panorama 1, Méthode de langue française, Clé International, Paris.
3.1 Vocabulary The French passage you just went through talks about the explorations a French lady.
Words and expressions used are linked to exploration and women’s liberation in France as part of cultural changes in the French society.
Née : born seule : alone l’Angleterre : England vraie : true la découverte : discovery découvre : from ‘découvrir’ : to discover vit : from ‘vivre’ : to live Depuis son départ : since she left les cheveux courts : short hair montrer : to show leurs bras et leurs jambes : their arms and legs Elles fument : they smoke 3.2 Grammatical Analysis 3.2.1 Adverbs of Time The passage you have read contains a number of words expressing time.
In this part, we shall first have a look at the adverbs of time.
The most common of them are: alors then après afterwards aujourd’hui today aussitôt at once bientôt soon d’abord first 114FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II déjà eady demain tomorrow encore still; again pas encore not yet enfin at last ; finally hier yesterday parfois sometimes rarement seldom souvent often tard late tôt early toujours always tout de suite immediately Examples: Il n’a pas encore téléphoné.
He has not yet phoned Les délégués sont déjà arrivés.
The delegates have already arrived.
3.2.2 Expressing the Time of an Action You now need to use the adverbs of time you just read and other words to express the time or the moment an action took place.
(cid:1) The Time Il est né à Ibadan le 7 janvier à 8 heures He was born on the 7th of January at 8 o’clock Obasanjo va rester au pouvoir jusqu’en 2007.
Obasanjo will stay in power till year 2007.
You can ask questions like: - Quand êtes-vous né(e)?
When were you born?
- Jusqu’à quand va-t-il rester?
Till when is he going to stay?
- A quelle heure commence le match ?
At what time does the match start?
- Quel jour voyageons- nous ?
Which day are we travelling?
115 FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II (cid:1) The Duration Il est resté à Abuja de 1999 à 2007.
He stayed in Abuja from 1999 to 2007.
Il est resté à Abuja pendant 8 ans.
He stayed in Abuja for 8 years Je travaille à Badagry depuis dix mois I have been working in Badagry for ten months Je travaille à Badagry depuis avril I have been working in Badagry since April.
Je suis arrivé il y a deux jours.
I arrived 2 days ago You can ask questions like: Depuis combien de temps est-il resté à Abuja?
For how long has he stayed in Abuja?
Depuis combien de temps travaillez-vous à Badagry ?
For how long have you been working in Badagry?
Depuis quand travaillez-vous à Badagry ?
Since when have you been working in Badagry?
3.2.4 Simple Composition With the aid of your dictionary, construct a sentence each with the following words and expressions to show their meaning: Expressions 1.
Une des premières exploratrices 2.
Elle part à la découverte de l’Asie.
3.
Pendant quatorze ans, 4.
Depuis son départ, tout a changé 5.
Les femmes ont les cheveux courts.
Words 1. née 2. exploratrices 3. libérées 4. ans 5. seule 6. aventure 7. la découverte 8. rencontrer 9. extraordinaire 10. les cheveux 116FRE 132 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS II 4.0 CONCLUSION The passage in this unit is about the adventures of a female French explorer and the changes in the French society and culture.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has aimed to equip you with some basic tools for writing a text in French about adventure.
It has taught you some parts of speech that can help you make sentences in French to express the time or the duration of an action.
We hope you can build sentences of your own to talk about an adventure.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
En quelle année Alexandra est-elle née ?
2.
Combien d’année a-t-elle passé en Inde ?
3.
Aime-t-elle la vie familiale ?
4.
Quels changements découvre-t-elles chez les Françaises quand elle revient en France 5.
Quels sont les autres changements culturels qui ont opéré en France à son arrivée ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Girard, J.
(1996).
Panorama 1, Méthode de Langue Française.
Paris: Clé International.
Simone Oudot, (1986).French Verbs and Essentials of Grammar.
USA: Passport Books.
117
