 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: MTH 311 COURSE TITLE: CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES 1 MTH 311 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES COURSE MATERIAL NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2 Course Code MMMMTTTTHHHH 333311111111 Course Title CCAALLCCUULLUUSS OOFF SSEEVVEERRAALL VVAARRIIAABBLLEESS Course Writers Mr. Toyin Olorunnishola And Dr. Ajibola Oluwatoyin School of Science and Technology National Open University of Nigeria Course Editing Team NNAATTIIOONNAALL OOPPEENN UUNNIIVVEERRSSIITTYY OOFF NNIIGGEERRIIAA CCOOUURRSSEE TTIITTLLEE:: CCAALLCCUULLUUSS OOFF SSEEVVEERRAALL VVAARRIIAABBLLEESS 3 COURSE CODE: M T H 311 TABLE OF CONTENT MODULE 1 Limit and Continuity of Functions of Several Variables • Unit 1: Real Functions • Unit 2: Limit of Function of Several Variables.
• Unit 3: Continuity of Function of Several Variables.
MODULE 2 PARTIAL DERIVATIVES OF FUNCTION OF SEVERAL VARIABLES • Unit 1: Derivative • Unit 2: Partial derivative.
• Unit 3: Application of Partial derivative.
MODULE 3 TOTAL DERIVATIVE OF A FUNCTION.
• Unit 1: Derivation of a function.
• Unit 2: Total derivative of a function.
• Unit 3: Application of total derivative of a function.
MODULE 4 PARTIAL DIFFERENTIABILITY AND TOTAL DIFFERENTIABILITY OF FUNCTION OF SEVERAL VARIABLE • Unit 1: Partial differentials of function of several variables.
• Unit 2: Total differentials of function of several variables.
• Unit 3:Application of partial and total differentials of function of several variables.
MODULE 5 COMPOSITE DIFFERENTIATION, FULLER’S THEOREM, IMPLICIT DIFFERENTIATION.
• Unit 1: Composite differentiation • Unit 2: Fuller’s Theorem • Unit 3: Implicit differentiation.
MODULE 6 TAYLOR’S SERIES EXPANSION • Unit 1: Function of two variables • Unit 2: Taylor’s series expansion for functions of two variables.
• Unit 3: Application of Taylor’s series.
4 MODULE 7 MAXIMISATION AND MINIMISATION OF FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES • Unit 1Maximisation and Minimisation Of Functions Of Several Variables.
• Unit 2: Lagrange’s Multipliers.
• Unit 3: Application of Lagrange’s Multipliers.
MODULE 8 THE JACOBIANS • Unit 1: Jacobians • Unit 2: Jacobian determinants • Unit 3: Applications of Jacobian 5  MODULE 1 Limit and Continuity of Functions of Several Variables Unit 1: Real Functions Unit 2: Limit of Function of Several Variables.
Unit 3: Continuity of Function of Several Variables.
UNIT 1 REAL FUNCTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 domain 3.2 real function 3.3 value of functions 3.4 types of graph 3.5 types of function 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings INTRODUCTION A real-valued function, f, of x, y, z, ... is a rule for manufacturing a new number, written f(x, y, z, ...), from the values of a sequence of independent variables (x, y, z, ...).
The function f is called a real-valued function of two variables if there are two independent variables, a real-valued function of three variables if there are three independent variables, and so on.
As with functions of one variable, functions of several variables can be represented numerically (using a table of values), algebraically (using a formula), and sometimes graphically (using a graph).
Examples Function of two variables 1. f(x, y) = x  y Substitute 1 for x and 2 for y f(1, 2) = 1  2 = 1 6 Substitute 2 for x and 1 for y f(2, 1) = 2  (1) = 3 Substitute y for x and x for y f(y, x) = y  x Function of three variables 2. h(x, y, z) = x + y + xz Substitute 2 for x, 2 for y, and 2 for z. h(2, 2, 2) = 2 + 2 + 2(2) = OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to know: • domain • real function • value of functions • types of graph • types of function MAIN CONTENT f is a function from set A to a set B if each element x in A can be associated with a unique element in B.
The unique element B which f associates with x in A denoted by f (x).
Domain In the above definition of the function, set A is called domain.
Co-domain 7 In the above definition of the function, set B is called co-domain.
Real Functions A real valued function f : A to B or simply a real function 'f ' is a rule which associates to each possible real number x A, a unique real number f(x) B, when A and B are subsets of R, the set of real numbers.
In other words, functions whose domain and co-domain are subsets of R, the set of real numbers, are called real valued functions.
Value of a Function If 'f ' is a function and x is an element in the domain of f, then image f(x) of x under f is called the value of 'f ' at x.
Types of Functions and their Graphs Constant Function A function f : A ® B Such that A, B Ì R, is said to be a constant function if there exist K Î B such that f(x) = k. Domain = A Range = {k} The graph of this function is a line or line segment parallel to x-axis.
Note that, if k>0, the graph B is above X-axis.
If k<0, the graph is below the x-axis.
If k = 0, the graph is x-axis itself.
8  Identity Function A function f : R® R is said to be an identity function if for all x Î R, f(x) = x. Domain = R Range = R Polynomial Function A function f : R® R is said to be a polynomial function if for each x Î R, f(x) is a polynomial in x.
9 f(x) = x3 + x2 + x Modulus Function f : R ® R such that f(x) = |x|, is called the modulus function or absolute value function.
Domain = R Square Root Function Since square root of a negative number is not real, we define a function f : R+ ® R such that 10  Greatest Integer Function or Step Function (floor Function) f (x) = [x] = greatest integer less than or equal to x [x] = n, where n is an integer such that Smallest Integer Function (ceiling Function) For a real number x, we denote by [x], the smallest integer greater than or equal to x.
For example, [5 .
2] = 6, [-5 .
2] = -5, etc.
The function f:R R defined by f(x) = [x], x R is called the smallest integer function or the ceiling function.
Domain: R Range : Z 11  Exponential Function The exponential function is defined as f(x) = ex.
Its graph is Logarithmic Function Logarithmic function is f (x) = log x.
Its graph is 12  Trigonometric Functions Trigonometric functions are sinx, cosx, tanx, etc.
The graph of these functions have been done in class XI.
Inverse Functions Inverse functions are sin-1x, cos-1x, tan-1x etc.
The graph of these functions have been done in class XI.
Signum Functions 13  Odd Function A function f : A B is said to be an odd function if f(x) = - f(-x) for all x A The domain and range of f depends on the definition of the function.
Examples of odd function are y = sinx, y = x3, y = tanx Even Function A function f : A B is said to be an even function if f(x) = f(-x) for all x A.
The domain and range of f depends on the definition of the function.
Examples of even function are y = cosx, y = x2, y = secx 14 A polynomial with only even powers of x is an even function.
Reciprocal Function CONCLUSION In this unit, you have defined domain and types of domain.
You have known real functions and have also learnt value of functions.
You have also known types of graph and type of function.
SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied : • domain • real function • value of functions • types of graph • types of function TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Function f is defined by f(x) = - 2 x 2 + 6 x - 3 .
find f(- 2).
2.
Function h is defined by h(x) = 3 x 2 - 7 x - 5 .
find h(x - 2).
3.
Functions f and g are defined by f(x) = - 7 x - 5 and g(x) = 10 x - 12 .
find (f + g)(x) 15 4.
Functions f and g are defined by f(x) = 1/x + 3x and g(x) = -1/x + 6x - 4 .
find (f + g)(x) and its domain 5.Functions f and g are defined by f(x) = x 2 -2 x + 1 and g(x) = (x - 1)(x + 3) .
find (f / g)(x) and its domain.
REFERENCES Boas, Ralph P., Jr.: "A primer of real functions", The Carus Mathematical Monographs, No.
13; Published by The Mathematical Association of America, and distributed by John Wiley and Sons, Inc.; New York 1960 189 pp.
MR22#9550 Smith, Kennan T.: "Primer of modern analysis", Second edition.
Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, New York-Berlin, 1983.
446 pp.
ISBN 0-387-90797-1 MR84m:26002 Krantz, Steven G.; Parks, Harold R.: "A primer of real analytic functions", Basler Lehrbücher [Basel Textbooks], 4; Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 1992.
184 pp.
ISBN 3-7643-2768-5 MR93j:26013 UNIT 2: Limit of Function of Several Variables CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Definition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Let f be a function of two variables defined on a disk with center (a,b), except possibly at (a,b).
Then we say that the limit of f(x,y) as (x,y) approaches (a,b) is L and we write lim (x,y) ﬁ (a,b)f(x,y) = L If for every number e > 0 there is a corresponding number d > 0 such that ‰ f(x,y) - L‰ < e whenever 0 < (x- a)2 +(y- b)2 < d Other notations for the limit are 16 lim f(x,y) = L and f(x,y) ﬁ L as (x,y) ﬁ (a,b) xﬁ a yﬁ b Since ‰ f(x,y) - L‰ iiisss ttthhheee dddiiissstttaaannnccceee bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrrsss fff(((xxx,,,yyy))) aaannnddd LLL,,, aaannnddd (x- a)2 +(y- b)2 iiisss ttthhheee dddiiissstttaaannnccceee bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt (((xxx,,,yyy))) aaannnddd ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt (((aaa,,,bbb))),,, DDDeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn 111222...555 sssaaayyysss ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee dddiiissstttaaannnccceee bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn fff(((xxx,,,yyy))) aaannnddd LLL cccaaannn bbbeee mmmaaadddeee aaarrrbbbiiitttrrraaarrriiilllyyy sssmmmaaallllll bbbyyy mmmaaakkkiiinnnggg ttthhheee dddiiissstttaaannnccceee fffrrrooommm (((xxx,,,yyy))) tttooo (((aaa,,,bbb))) sssuuuffffffiiiccciiieeennntttlllyyy sssmmmaaallllll (((bbbuuuttt nnnooottt 000)))... FFFiiiggguuurrreee 111222...111555 iiilllllluuussstttrrraaattteeesss DDDeeefffinition 1122..55 bbyy mmeeaannss ooff aann aarrrrooww ddiiaaggrraamm.. IIff aannyy ssmmaallll iinntteerrvvaall ((LL - e , L +e )) iiss ggiivveenn aarroouunndd LL,, then we can find a disk Dd wwiitthh cceenntteerr ((aa,,bb)) aanndd rraaddiiuuss d >> 00 ssuucchh tthhaatt ff mmaappss aallll tthhee ppooiinnttss iinn Dd [[eexxcceepptt ppoossssiibbllyy ((aa,,bb))]] iinnttoo tthhee iinntteerrvvaall ((LL - e , L + e ).
2.0: OBJECTIVES AAtt tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo kknnooww tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff tteerrmmss.. 3.0: MAIN CONTENTS CCoonnssiiddeerr tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn ff((xx,,yy)) == 9- x2 - y2 wwhhoossee ddoommaaiinn iiss tthhee cclloosseedd ddiisskk DD == {{((xx,,yy))‰ x2 + y2 £ 999}}} ssshhhooowwwnnn iiinnn FFFiiiggguuurrreee 111222...111444(((aaa))) aaannnddd wwwhhhooossseee gggrrraaappphhh iiisss ttthhheee hhheeemmmiiisssppphhheeerrreee ssshhhooowwwnnn iiinnn FFFiiiggguuurrreee 12.14(b) IIIfff ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt (((xxx,,,yyy))) iiisss ccclllooossseee tttooo ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnn,,, ttthhheeennn xxx aaannnddd yyy aaarrreee bbbooottthhh ccclllooossseee tttooo 000,,, aaannnddd sssooo fff(((xxx,,,yyy))) iiisss ccclllooossseee ttoo 33.. IInn ffaacctt,, iiff ((xx,,yy)) lliieess iinn aa ssmmaallll ooppeenn ddiisskk xx2 + y2 < d 2, then f(x,y) = 9- (x2 + y2) > 99- d 2 Figure 12.14 TTThhhuuusss wwweee cccaaannn mmmaaakkkeee ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueeesss ooofff fff(((xxx,,,yyy))) aaasss ccclllooossseee tttooo 333 aaasss wwweee llliiikkkeee bbbyyy tttaaakkkiiinnnggg (((xxx,,,yyy))) iiinnn aaa sssmmmaaallllll eeennnooouuuggghhh dddiiissskkk wwwiiittthhh ccceeennntttrrreee (((000,,,000)))... WWWeee dddeeessscccrrriiibbbeee ttthhhiiisss sssiiitttuuuaaatttiiiooonnn bbbyyy uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee nnnoootttaaatttiiiooonnn lim (x,y) ﬁ (a,b) 9- (x2 + y2)) = 3 In general, the notation 17 lim (x,y) ﬁ (a,b)f(x,y) = L Means that the values of f(x,y) can be made as close as we wish to the number L by taking the point (x,y) close enough to the point (a,b).
A more precise definition follows.
12.5 Definition Let f be a function of two variables defined on a disk with centre (a,b), except possibly at (a,b).
Then we say that the limit of f(x,y) as (x,y) approaches (a,b) is L and we write lim (x,y) ﬁ (a,b)f(x,y) = L If for every number e > 0 there is a corresponding number d > 0 such that ‰ f(x,y) - L‰ < e whenever 0 < (x- a)2 +(y- b)2 < d Other notations for the limit are lim f(x,y) = L and f(x,y) ﬁ L as (x,y) ﬁ (a,b) xﬁ a yﬁ b Since ‰ f(x,y) - L‰ is the distance between the numbers f(x,y) and L, and (x- a)2 +(y- b)2 is the distance between the point (x,y) and the point (a,b), Definition 12.5 says that the distance between f(x,y) and L can be made arbitrarily small by making the distance from (x,y) to (a,b) sufficiently small (but not 0).
Figure 12.15 illustrates Definition 12.5 by means of an arrow diagram.
If any small interval (L - e , L +e ) is given around L, then we can find a disk Dd with center (a,b) and radius d > 0 such that f maps all the points in Dd [except possibly (a,b)] into the interval (L - e , L + e ).
Another illustration of Definition 12.5 is given in Figure 12.16 where the surface S is the graph of f. If e > 0 is given, we can find d > 0 such that if (x,y) is restricted to lie in the disk Dd and (x,y) „ (a,b), then the corresponding part of S lies between the horizontal planes z = L - e and z = L + e .
For functions of a single variable, when we let x approach a, there are only two possible directions of approach, from the left or right.
Recall from Chapter 2 that if limxﬁ a – f(x) „ limxﬁ a + f(x), then limxﬁ a f(x) does not exist.
For functions of two variables the situation is not as simple because we can let (x,y) approach (a,b) from an infinite number of directions in any manner whatsoever (see Figure 12.7).
Definition 12.5 refers only to the distance between (x,y) and (a,b).
It does not refer to the direction of approach.
Therefore if the limit exists, then f(x,y) must approach the same limit 18 nnnooo mmmaaatttttteeerrr hhhooowww (((xxx,,,yyy))) aaapppppprrroooaaaccchhheeesss (((aaa,,,bbb)))... TTThhhuuusss iiifff wwweee cccaaannn fffiiinnnddd tttwwwooo dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt pppaaattthhhsss ooofff aaapppppprrroooaaaccchhh aalloonngg wwhhiicchh ff((xx,,yy)) hhaass ddiiffffeerreenntt lliimmiittss,, tthheenn iitt ffoolllloowwss tthhaatt lliimm(x,y)ﬁ (a,b) ff((xx,,yy)) ddooeess nnoott eexxiisstt..
Figure 12.15 L-˛ L L + ˛ Figure 12.16 19  Figure 12.17 If f(x,y) ﬁ L as (x,y) ﬁ ((aa,,bb)) aalloonngg aa ppaatthh CC , and f(x,y) ﬁ L as (x,y) ﬁﬁ (a,b) along a path 1 1 2 C2, where L1 „ L2, then lim((xx,,yy))ﬁ (a,b) f(x,y) Example 1 x2 - y2 Find lim iiff iitt eexxiissttss.. (x,y)ﬁ (0,0) x2 + y2 Solution Let f(x,y) = (x2 – y2)/(x2 + y2)).. FFiirrsstt lleett uuss aapppprrooaacchh ((00,,00)) aalloonngg tthhee xx-aaxxiiss.. TThheenn yy == 00 ggiivveess f(x,0) = x2/x2 = 1 for all x „ 00,, ssoo f(x,y) ﬁ 1 as (x,y) ﬁ ((00,,00)) aalloonngg tthhee xx-axis WWee nnooww aapppprrooaacchh aalloonngg tthhee yy-axis by putting x = 0.
Then f(0,y) = -y2/y2 == -1 for all y „ 0, so f(x,y) ﬁ 1 as (x,y) ﬁ ((00,,00)) aalloonngg tthhee yy-aaxxiiss ((sseeee FFiigguurree 1122..1188..)) SSiinnccee ff hhaass ttwwoo ddiiffffeerreenntt lliimmiittss aalloonngg ttwwoo ddiiffffeerreenntt lliinneess,, tthhee ggiivveenn lliimmiitt ddooeess nnoott eexxiisstt..
Figure 12.18 20  Figure 12.19 Example 2 If f(x,y) = xy/(x2 + y2)),, ddooeess lliimm(x,y)ﬁ (0,0) f(x,y) exist?
21 Solution If y = 0, then f(x,0) = 0/x2 = 0.
Therefore f(x,y) ﬁ 0 as (x,y) ﬁ (0,0) along the x-axis If x = 0, then f(0,y) = 0/y2 = 0, so f(x,y) ﬁ 0 as (x,y) ﬁ (0,0) along the y-axis Although we have obtained identical limits along the axes, that does not show that the given limit is 0.
Let us now approach (0,0) along another line, say y = x.
For all x „ 0. x2 1 f(x,y) = = x2 + x2 2 1 Therefore f(x,y) ﬁ as (x,y) ﬁ (0,0) along y = x 2 (See Figure 12.19.)
Since we obtained different limits along different paths, the given limit does not exist.
Example 3 xy2 If f(x,y) = , does lim f(x,y) exist?
x2 + y4 (x,y)ﬁ (0,0) Solution With the solution of Example 2 in mind, let us try to save time by letting (x,y) ﬁ (0,0) along any line through the origin.
Then y = mx, where m is the slope, and if m „ 0, x(mx)2 m2x3 m2x f(x,y) = f(x,mx) = = = x2 +(mx)4 x2 +m4x4 1+m4x2 So f(x,y) ﬁ 0 as (x,y) ﬁ (0,0) along y = mx Thus f has the same limiting value along every line through the origin.
But that does not show that the given limit is 0, for if we now let (x,y) ﬁ (0,0) along the parabola x = y2 we have y2.y2 y4 1 f(x,y) = f(y2,y) = = = (y2)2 + y4 2y4 2 1 so f(x,y) ﬁ as (x,y) ﬁ (0,0) along x = y2 2 Since different paths lead to different limiting values, the given limit does not exist.
Example 4 22 3x2y Find lim iiff iitt eexxiissttss.. (x,y)ﬁ (0,0) x2 + y2 Solution AAAsss iiinnn EEExxxaaammmpppllleee 333,,, ooonnneee cccaaannn ssshhhooowww ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee llliiimmmiiittt aaalllooonnnggg aaannnyyy llliiinnneee ttthhhrrrooouuuggghhh ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnn iiisss 000... TTThhhiiisss dddoooeeesss nnnooottt ppprrrooovvveee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee gggiiivvveeennn llliiimmmiiittt iiisss 000,,, bbbuuuttt ttthhheee llliiimmmiiitttsss aaalllooonnnggg ttthhheee pppaaarrraaabbbooolllaaasss yyy === xxx2 and x = y2 aallssoo ttuurrnn oouutt ttoo bbee 00,, ssoo wwee bbeeggiinn ttoo ssuussppeecctt tthhaatt tthhee lliimmiitt ddooeess eexxiisstt.. Let e > 0.
We want to find d >> 00 ssuucchh tthhaatt 3x2y - 0 < e wwhheenneevveerr 00 << x2 + y2 < d x2 + y2 3x2 y That is, < e wwhheenneevveerr 00 << x2 + y2 < d x2 + y2 But x2 £ x2 + y2 since y2 ‡ 00,, ssoo 3x2 y £ 3 y = 3 y2 £ 3 x2 + y2 x2 + y2 Thus if we choose d = e //33 aanndd lleett 00 << x2 + y2 < d , then 3x2y e  - 0 £ 3 x2 + y2 << 33d = 3  = e x2 + y2 3 Hence, by Definition 12.5.
3x2y lim = 0 (x,y)ﬁ (0,0) x2 + y2 4.0: CONCLUSION IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee kkknnnooowwwnnn ssseeevvveeerrraaalll dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnnsss aaannnddd hhhaaavvveee wwwooorrrkkkeeeddd vvvaaarrriiiooouuusss eeexxxaaammmpppllleeesss... 5.0: SUMMARY In this uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd ttthhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn ooofff ttteeerrrmmmsss aaannnddd hhhaaavvveee sssooolllvvveeeddd vvvaaarrriiiooouuusss eeexxxaaammmpppllleeesss ... 6.0: TUTOR-MARKED-AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 1.
Find the limit 23 2.
Find the limit 3.
Calculate the limit 4.Calculate the limit 5.
Find the limit 6.Find the limit 7.Find the limit 7.0: RREEFFEERREENNCCEESS // FFUURRTTHHEERR RREEAADDIINNGG 11.. GG.. BB.. TThhoommaass,, JJrr.. aanndd RR.. LL.. FFiinnnneeyy,, Calculus and Analytic Geometry,, 99tthh eedd..,, AAddddiissoonn- Wesley, 1996.
2.
S. Wolfram, TThhee MMaatthheemmaattiiccaa BBooook, 3rd ed., Wolfram Media, 1996 3.Bartle, R. GG.. aanndd SShheerrbbeerrtt,, DD.. Introduction to Real Analysis.
NNeeww YYoorrkk:: WWiilleeyy,, pp.. 141, 1991.
24 4.Kaplan, W. "Limits and Continuity."
§2.4 in Advanced Calculus, 4th ed.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, pp.
82-86, 1992.
25 Unit 3: Continuity of Function of Several Variables.
CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions and examples 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Just as for functions of one variable, the calculation of limits can be greatly simplified by the use of properties of limits and by the use of continuity.
The properties of limits listed in Tables 2.14 and 2.15 can be extended to functions of two variables.
The limit of a sum is the sum of the limits, and so on.
Recall that evaluating limits of continuous functions of a single variable is easy.
It can be accomplished by direct substitution because the defining property of a continuous function is limxﬁ a – f(x) = f(a).
Continuous functions of two variables are also defined by the direct substitution property.
Definition Let f be a function of two variables defined on a disk with center (a,b).
Then f is called continuous at (a,b) if lim f(x,y) = f(a,b) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) 2.0: OBJECTIVE At this unit, you should be able to know the definition of terms 3.0 : MAIN CONTENTS Let f be a function of two variables defined on a disk with center (a,b).
Then f is called continuous at (a,b) if lim f(x,y) = f(a,b) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) If the domain of f is a set D (cid:204) R2, then Definition 12.6 defines the continuity of f at an interior point (a,b) of D, that is, a point that is contained in a disk Dd (cid:204) D [seek Figure 12.20(a)].
But D may also contain a boundary point, that is, a point (a,b) such that every disk with center (a,b) contains points in D and also points not in D [see Figure 12.20(b)].
If (a,b) is a boundary of D, then Definition 12.5 is modified so that the last line reads f(x,y)- L < e whenever (x,y) ˛ D and 0 < (x- a)2 +(y- b)2 < d With this convention, Definition 12.6 also applies when f is defined at a boundary point (a,b) of D. 26 Finally, we say f is ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss oonn DD iiff ff iiss ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss aatt eevveerryy ppooiinntt ((aa,,bb)) iinn DD.. TThhee iinnttuuiittiivvee mmeeaanniinngg ooff ccoonnttiinnuuiittyy iiss tthhaatt iiff tthhee ppooiinntt ((xx,,yy)) cchhaannggeess bbyy aa ssmmaallll aammoouunntt,, tthheenn ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff fff(((xxx,,,yyy))) ccchhhaaannngggeeesss bbbyyy aaa sssmmmaaallllll aaammmooouuunnnttt... TTThhhiiisss mmmeeeaaannnsss ttthhhaaattt aaa sssuuurrrfffaaaccceee ttthhhaaattt iiisss ttthhheee gggrrraaappphhh ooofff aa ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss ffuunnccttiioonn hhaass nnoo hhoolleess oorr bbrreeaakkss.. UUssiinngg tthhee pprrooppeerrttiieess ooff lliimmiittss,, yyoouu ccaann sseeee tthhaatt ssuummss,, ddiiffffeerreenncceess,, pprroodduuccttss,, aanndd -quotients of cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuooouuusss fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss aaarrreee cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuooouuusss ooonnn ttthhheeeiiirrr dddooommmaaaiiinnnsss... LLLeeettt uuusss uuussseee ttthhhiiisss fffaaacccttt tttooo gggiiivvveee eeexxxaaammmpppllleeesss of continuous functions.
AA ppoollyynnoommiiaall ffuunnccttiioonn ooff ttwwoo vvaarriiaabblleess ((oorr ppoollyynnoommiiaall,, ffoorr sshhoorrtt)) iiss aa ssuumm ooff tteerrmmss ooff tthhee form cxmyn,, wwhheerree cc iiss aa ccoonnssttaanntt aanndd mm aanndd nn aarree nnoonn-nneeggaattiivvee iinntteeggeerrss.. AA rational function iiss aa rraattiioo ooff ppoollyynnoommiiaallss.. FFoorr iinnssttaannccee,, f(x,y) = x4 + 5x3y2 + 6xy4 – 77yy ++ 66 is a polynomial, whereas 2xy+1 g(x,y) = x2 + y2 is a rational function.
Figure 12.20 27  From Definition it can be shown that lim x = a lim y = b lim c = c (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) These limits show that the functions f(x,y) = x, g(x,y) = y, and h(x,y) = c are continuous.
Since any polynomial can be built up out of the simple functions f, g and h by multiplication and addition, it follows that all polynomials are continuous on R2.
Likewise, any rational function is continuous on its domain since it is a quotient of continuous functions.
Example 5 Evaluate lim (x2y3 – x3y2 + 3x + 2y).
(x,y)ﬁ (1,2) Solution Since f(x,y) = x2y3 – x3y2 + 3x + 2y is a polynomial, it is continuous everywhere, so the limit can be found by direct substitution: lim (x2y3 – x3y2 + 3x + 2y) = 12.23 – 13.22 + 3.1 + 2.2 = 11 (x,y)ﬁ (1,2) Example 6 Where is the function x2 + y2 f(x,y) = Continuous?
x2 + y2 Solution The function f is discontinuous at (0,0) because it is not defined there.
Since f is a rational function it is continuous on its domain D = {(x,y)‰ (x,y) „ (0,0}.
Example 7 Let 28   If(x,y) „ (0,0) x2 - y2 g(x,y) =  x2 + y2 0 Here g is defined at (0,0) but g is still discontinuous at 0 because Lim(x,y)ﬁ (0,0) g(x,y) does not exist (see Example 1).
Example 8 Let   If(x,y) „ (0,0)  3x2y f(x,y) =  x2 + y2  0 We know f is continuous for (x,y) „ (0,0) since it is equal to a rational function there.
Also, from Example 4, we have 3x2y lim f(x,y) = lim = 0 = f(0,0) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) x2 + y2 Therefore f is continuous at (0,0), and so it is continuous on R2.
Example 9 Let    3x2y If(x,y) „ (0,0) h(x,y) =  x2 + y2  17 Again from Example 4, we have 3x2y lim g(x,y) = lim = 0 „ 17 = g(0,0) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) x2 + y2 And so g is discontinuous at (0,0).
But g is continuous on the set S = {(x,y)‰ (x,y) „ (0,0} since it is equal to a rational function on S. Composition is another way of combining two continuous functions to get at third.
The proof of the following theorem is similar to that of Theorem 2.27.
29 Theorem If f is continuous at (a,b) and g is a function of a single variable that is continuous at f(a,), o then the composite function h = g f defined by h(x,y) = g(f(x,y)) is continuous at (a,b).
Example 10 On what set is the function h(x,y) = ln(x2 + y2 – 1) continuous?
Solution Let f(x,y) = x2 + y2 – 1 and g(t) = ln t. Then g(f(x,y)) = ln(x2 + y2 – 1) = h(x,y) o So h = g f. Now f is continuous everywhere since it is a polynomial and g is continuous on its domain {t‰ t > 0}.
Thus, by Theorem 12.7, h is continuous on its domain D = {(x,y)‰ x2 + y2 – 1 > 0} = {(x,y)‰ x2 + y2 > 1} Which consists of all points outside the circle x2 + y2 = 1.
Everything in this section can be extended to functions of three or more variables.
The distance between two points (x,y,z) and (a,b,c) in R3 is (x- a)2 +(y- b)2 +(z- c)2 , so the definitions of limit and continuity of a function of three variables are as follows.
Definition Let f: D (cid:204) R3 ﬁ R. (a) lim f(x,y,z) = L (x,y,z)ﬁ (a,b,c) Means that for every number e > 0 there is a corresponding number d > 0 such that ‰ f(x,y,z) - L‰ < e whenever (x,y,z) ˛ D and 0 < (x- a)2 +(y- b)2 +(z- c)2 < d (b) f is continuous at (a,b,c) if 30 lim f(x,y,z) = f(a,b,c) (x,y,z)ﬁ (a,b,c) If we use the vector notation introduced at the end of Section 12.1, then the definitions of a limit for functions of two or three variables can be written in a single compact form as follows.
If f: D (cid:204) Rn ﬁ R, then lim xﬁ a f(x) = L means that for every number e > 0 there is a corresponding number d > 0 such that ‰ f(x) - L‰ < e whenever 0 < ‰ x – a < d Notice that if n = 1, then x = x and a = a, and (12.9) is just the definition of a limit for functions of a single variable.
If n = 2, then x = (x,y), a = (a,b), and ‰ x – a‰ = (x- a)2 +(y- b)2 , so (12.9) becomes Definition 12.5.
If n = 3, then x = (x,y,z), a = (a,b,c), and (12.9) becomes part (a) of Definition 12.8.
In each case the definition of continuity can be written as limf(x) = f(a) xﬁ a 4.0: CONCLUSION In this unit, you have known several definitions and have worked various examples.
5.0: SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied the definition of terms and have solved various examples .
The following limits lim x = a, lim y = b and lim c = c (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) (x,y)ﬁ (a,b) Show that the functions f(x,y) = x, g(x,y) = y, and h(x,y) = c are continuous.
Obviously any polynomial can be built up out of the simple functions f, g and h by multiplication and addition, it follows that all polynomials are continuous on R2.
Likewise, any rational function is continuous on its domain since it is a quotient of continuous functions.
6.0: TMA In Exercises 1 – 3 determine the largest set on which the given function is continuous x2 + y2 +1 1.
F(x,y) = x2 + y2 - 1 31 x6 + x3y3 + y6 2.
F(x,y) = x3 + y3 3.
G(x,y) = x+ y - x- y 4.
For what values of the number r is the function   (x+ y+ z)r If(x,y,z) „ (0,0,0) f(x,y,z) =  x2 + y2 + z2  0 continuous on R3?
5.
If c ˛ V , show that the function f: Rn ﬁ R given by f(x) = c.x is continuous on Rn.
n 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.Show that function f defined below is not continuous at x = - 2. f(x) = 1 / (x + 2) 2.
Show that function f is continuous for all values of x in R. f(x) = 1 / ( x 4 + 6) 3.
Show that function f is continuous for all values of x in R. f(x) = | x - 5 | 4.
Find the values of x at which function f is discontinuous.
f(x) = (x - 2) / [ (2 x 2 + 2x - 4)(x 4 + 5) ] 5.
Evaluate the limit lim sin (2x + 5) xx→ a 6.Show that any function of the form e ax + b is continous everywhere, a and b real numbers.
7.0: REFERENCES / FURTHER READING 1.Bartle, R. G. and Sherbert, D. Introduction to Real Analysis.
New York: Wiley, p. 141, 1991.
2.Kaplan, W. "Limits and Continuity."
§2.4 in Advanced Calculus, 4th ed.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, pp.
82-86, 1992 3.
Richard Gill.
Associate Professor of Mathematics.
Tidewater Community 32  MODULE 2 PARTIAL DERIVATIVES OF FUNCTION OF SEVERAL VARIABLES -Unit 1: Derivative -Unit 2: Partial derivative.
-Unit 3: Application of Partial derivative.
UNIT 1: DERIVATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The derivative of a function 3.2 Higher derivative 3.3 Computing derivative 3.4 Derivative of higher dimension 3.0 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In calculus, a derivative is a measure of how the function changes as the input changes.
Loosely speaking, a derivative can be thought of how much one quantity is changing in response to changes in some other quantity.
For example, the derivative of the position of a moving object with respect to time, is the object instantaneous velocity.
33 TTThhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaattt aaa gggiiivvveeennn ccchhhooossseeennn iiinnnpppuuuttt vvvaaallluuueee dddeeessscccrrriiibbbeee ttthhheee bbbeeesssttt llliiinnneeeaaarrr aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn nneeaarr tthhaatt iinnppuutt vvaalluuee.. FFoorr aa rreeaall vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn ooff aa ssiinnggllee rreeaall vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee... TTThhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee aaattt aaa pppoooiiinnnttt eeeqqquuuaaalllsss ttthhheee ssslllooopppeee ooofff ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt llliiinnneee tttooo ttthhheee gggrrraaappphhh ooofff ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaattt ttthhhaaattt pppoooiiinnnttt... IIInnn hhhiiiggghhheeerrr dddiiimmmeeennnsssiiiooonnn,,, ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaattt aaa pppoooiiinnnttt iiisss llliiinnneeeaaarrr tttrrraaannnsssfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn cccaaalllllleeeddd ttthhheee llliiinnneeeaaarrriiizzzaaatttiiiooonnn... AAA ccclllooossseeelllyyy rrreeelllaaattteeeddd nnnoootttiiiooonnn iiisss ttthhheee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalll ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn... TTThhheee ppprrroooccceeessssss ooofff fffiiinnndddiiinnnggg aaa dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn... TTThhheee rrreeevvveeerrrssseee iiisss IIInnnttteeegggrrraaatttiiiooonnn...
The derivative of a function rreepprreesseennttss aann iinnffiinniitteessiimmaall cchhaannggee iinn tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo one of its variables, TThhee ""ssiimmppllee"" ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn with respect to a variable iiss ddeennootteedd eeiitthheerr or df/dx 2.0 OBJECTIVE IInn tthhiiss UUnniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo:: • KKnnooww tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn • Identify hhiigghheerr ddeerriivvaattiivvee • ssoollvvee pprroobblleemmss bbyy CCoommppuuttiinngg ddeerriivvaattiivvee • iiddeennttiiffyy ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff hhiigghheerr ddiimmeennssiioonn 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 33..11 TThhee DDeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa FFuunnccttiioonn Let ƒ bbee aa ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt hhaass aa ddeerriivvaattiivvee aatt eevveerryy ppooiinntt a iinn tthhee ddoommaaiinn ooff ƒ.
Because every point a hhaass aa ddeerriivvaattiivvee,, tthheerree iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt sseennddss tthhee ppooiinntt a ttoo tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ƒ at a.
This function is written f′(x) aanndd iiss ccaalllleedd tthhee derivative function or the ddeerriivvaattiivvee of ƒ.
The derivative of ƒ ccoolllleeccttss aallll tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess of ƒ aatt aallll tthhee ppooiinnttss iinn tthhee ddoommaaiinn ooff ƒ.
Sometimes ƒ hhhaaasss aaa dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee aaattt mmmooosssttt,,, bbbuuuttt nnnooottt aaallllll,,, pppoooiiinnntttsss ooofff iiitttsss dddooommmaaaiiinnn... TTThhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn wwwhhhooossseee value at a equals f′(a) wwhheenneevveerr f′(a) iiss ddeeffiinneedd aanndd eellsseewwhheerree iiss uunnddeeffiinneedd iiss aallssoo ccaalllleedd tthhee derivative of ƒ.
It is stiiillllll aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn,,, bbbuuuttt iiitttsss dddooommmaaaiiinnn iiisss ssstttrrriiiccctttlllyyy sssmmmaaalllllleeerrr ttthhhaaannn ttthhheee dddooommmaaaiiinnn ooofff ƒ. UUUsssiiinnnggg ttthhhiiisss iiidddeeeaaa,,, dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn bbbeeecccooommmeeesss aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss::: TTThhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss aaannn ooopppeeerrraaatttooorrr wwwhhhooossseee dddooommmaaaiiinnn iiisss ttthhheee ssseeettt ooofff aaallllll fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ttthhhaaattt hhhaaavvveee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss aaattt eeevvveeerrryyy pppoooiiinnnttt ooofff ttthhheeeiiirrr domain aanndd wwhhoossee rraannggee iiss aa sseett ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss.. IIff wwee ddeennoottee tthhiiss ooppeerraattoorr bbyy DD, then D(ƒ) is the function f′(x).
Since D(ƒ)) iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn,, iitt ccaann bbee eevvaalluuaatteedd aatt aa ppooiinntt a.. BByy tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff the derivative function, D(ƒ)(aa) = f′(a).
For comparison, considdeerr tthhee ddoouubblliinngg ffuunnccttiioonn ƒ(x) =2x; ƒ is a real-vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn ooff aa rreeaall nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr,,, mmmeeeaaannniiinnnggg ttthhhaaattt iiittt tttaaakkkeeesss nnnuuummmbbbeeerrrsss aaasss iiinnnpppuuutttsss aaannnddd hhhaaasss nnnuuummmbbbeeerrrsss aaasss ooouuutttpppuuutttsss::: 34  The operator D,,, hhhooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, iiisss nnnooottt dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd ooonnn iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll nnnuuummmbbbeeerrrsss... IIIttt iiisss ooonnnlllyyy dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd ooonnn functions: BBeeccaauussee tthhee oouuttppuutt ooff D is a function, the output of D ccaann bbee eevvaalluuaatteedd aatt aa ppooiinntt.. FFoorr instance, when D iiss aapppplliieedd ttoo tthhee ssqquuaarriinngg ffuunnccttiioonn,, D oouuttppuuttss tthhee ddoouubblliinngg ffuunnccttiioonn,, which we named ƒ(x)))... TTThhhiiisss ooouuutttpppuuuttt fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn cccaaannn ttthhheeennn bbbeee eeevvvaaallluuuaaattteeeddd tttooo gggeeettt ƒ(1) = 2, ƒ(2) = 4, and so on.
3.2 Higher derivative Let ƒ bbee aa ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonn,, aanndd lleett f′(x) bbee iittss ddeerriivvaattiivvee.. TThhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f′(x) (if it has one) is written f′′(x) aanndd iiss ccaalllleedd tthhee sseeccoonndd ddeerriivvaattiivvee of f.. SSiimmiillaarrllyy,, tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa second ddeerriivvaattiivvee,, iiff iitt eexxiissttss,, iiss wwrriitttteenn f′′′(x) and is called the tthhiirrdd ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ƒ.
These rreeppeeaatteedd ddeerriivvaattiivveess aarree ccaalllleedd higher-order derivatives.
If x(t)) rreepprreesseennttss tthhee ppoossiittiioonn ooff aann oobbjjeecctt aatt ttiimmee t, then the higher-oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff x have pphhyyssiiccaall iinntteerrpprreettaattiioonnss.. TThhee sseeccoonndd ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff x is the derivative of x′(tt), the velocity, and bbyy ddeeffiinniittiioonn tthhiiss iiss tthhee oobbjjeecctt''ss aacccceelleerraattiioonn.. TThhee tthhiirrdd ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff x iiss ddeeffiinneedd ttoo bbee tthhee jjeerrkk,, aanndd tthhee ffoouurrtthh ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss ddeeffiinneedd ttoo bbee tthhee jjoounce.
A function ƒ nnneeeeeeddd nnnooottt hhhaaavvveee aaa dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,, fffooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, iiifff iiittt iiisss nnnooottt cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuooouuusss... SSSiiimmmiiilllaaarrrlllyyy,,, eeevvveeennn iiifff ƒ dddoooeeesss hhhaaavvveee aaa dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,, iiittt mmmaaayyy nnnooottt hhhaaavvveee aaa ssseeecccooonnnddd dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, llleeettt Calculation shows that ƒ iiss aa ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonn wwhhoossee ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss 35 f′(x) iiisss tttwwwiiiccceee ttthhheee aaabbbsssooollluuuttteee vvvaaallluuueee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn,,, aaannnddd iiittt dddoooeeesss nnnooottt hhhaaavvveee aaa dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee aaattt zzzeeerrrooo... SSSiiimmmiiilllaaarrr eexxaammpplleess sshhooww tthhaatt aa ffuunnccttiioonn ccaann hhaavvee k derivatives for any non-nneeggaattiivvee iinntteeggeerr k but no (k + 1)-oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivvee.. AA ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt hhaass k successive derivaattiivveess iiss ccaalllleedd k times differentiable.. IIff iinn aaddddiittiioonn tthhee ktthh ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss,, tthheenn tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn iiss ssaaiidd ttoo bbee ooff differentiability class Ck.. ((TThhiiss iiss aa ssttrroonnggeerr ccoonnddiittiioonn tthhaann hhaavviinngg k ddeerriivvaattiivveess..)) AA ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt hhaass iinnffiinniitteellyy mmaannyy ddeerriivvaattiivves is called infinitely differentiable.
OOOnnn ttthhheee rrreeeaaalll llliiinnneee,,, eeevvveeerrryyy pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalll fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiisss iiinnnfffiiinnniiittteeelllyyy dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee... BBByyy ssstttaaannndddaaarrrddd ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn rruulleess,, iiff aa ppoollyynnoommiiaall ooff ddeeggrreeee n is differentiated n ttiimmeess,, tthheenn iitt bbeeccoommeess aa ccoonnssttaanntt ffuunnccttiioonn.. AAllll ooff iittss ssuubbsseeqquueenntt ddeerriivvaattiivveess aarree iiddeennttiiccaallllyy zzeerroo.. IInn ppaarrttiiccuullaarr,, tthheeyy eexxiisstt,, ssoo ppoollyynnoommiiaallss aarree ssmmooootthh ffuunnccttiioonnss.. TThhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn ƒ at a point x pprroovviiddee ppoollyynnoommiiaall aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonnss ttoo tthhaatt function near x.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, iiff ƒ is twice differentiable, then in the sense that If ƒ iiisss iiinnnfffiiinnniiittteeelllyyy dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee,,, ttthhheeennn ttthhhiiisss iiisss ttthhheee bbbeeegggiiinnnnnniiinnnggg ooofff ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss fffooorrr ƒ. Inflection Point AAA pppoooiiinnnttt wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ccchhhaaannngggeeesss sssiiigggnnn iiisss cccaaalllllleeeddd aaannn inflection point...AAAttt aaannn iiinnnfffllleeeccctttiiiooonnn pppoooiiinnnttt,,, ttthhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee mmmaaayyy bbbeee zzzeeerrrooo,,, aaasss iiinnn ttthhheee cccaaassseee ooofff ttthhheee inflection point x==00 ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn y=x3,, oorr iitt mmaayy ffaaiill ttoo eexxiisstt,, aass iinn tthhee ccaassee ooff tthhee iinnfflleeccttiioonn point x=0 of the function y==x1/3.. AAtt aann iinnfflleeccttiioonn ppooiinntt,, aa ffuunnccttiioonn sswwiittches from being a ccoonnvveexx ffuunnccttiioonn ttoo bbeeiinngg aa ccoonnccaavvee ffuunnccttiioonn oorr vviiccee vveerrssaa.. 33..33 CCoommppuuttiinngg tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee TTThhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn cccaaannn,,, iiinnn ppprrriiinnnccciiipppllleee,,, bbbeee cccooommmpppuuuttteeeddd fffrrrooommm ttthhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn bbbyyy cccooonnnsssiiidddeeerrriiinnnggg tthhee ddiiffffeerreennccee qquuoottiieenntt,, aanndd ccoommppuuttiinngg iittss lliimmiitt.. IInn pprraaccttiiccee,, oonnccee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff aa ffeeww sssiiimmmpppllleee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss aaarrreee kkknnnooowwwnnn,,, ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff ooottthhheeerrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss aaarrreee mmmooorrreee eeeaaasssiiilllyyy cccooommmpppuuuttteeeddd using rules fffooorrr ooobbbtttaaaiiinnniiinnnggg dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff mmmooorrreee cccooommmpppllliiicccaaattteeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss fffrrrooommm sssiiimmmpppllleeerrr ooonnneeesss... DDeerriivvaattiivvee ooff EElleemmeennttaarryy FFuunnccttiioonn Most deriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee cccooommmpppuuutttaaatttiiiooonnnsss eeevvveeennntttuuuaaallllllyyy rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreee tttaaakkkiiinnnggg ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff sssooommmeee cccooommmmmmooonnn fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... TTThhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg iiinnncccooommmpppllleeettteee llliiisssttt gggiiivvveeesss sssooommmeee ooofff ttthhheee mmmooosssttt fffrrreeeqqquuueeennntttlllyyy uuussseeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff aa ssiinnggllee rreeaall vvaarriiaabbllee aanndd tthheeiirr ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. • Derivative power: if 36  where r is any reeaall nnuummbbeerr,, tthheenn wwhheerreevveerr tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn iiss ddeeffiinneedd.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, iiff f(x) = x1 / 4, then aanndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ffuunnccttiioonn iiss ddeeffiinneedd oonnllyy ffoorr ppoossiittiivvee x, not for x = 0.. WWhheenn r = 0, this rule implies that f′(x) is zero for x ≠≠ 0, which is almost the constant rruullee ((ssttaatteedd bbeellooww)).. Exponential and logarithm ffuunnccttiioonnss: TTrriiggoonnoommeettrriicc FFuunnccttiioonnss :: IInnvveerrssee TTrriiggoonnoommeettrriicc FFuunnccttiioonn :: RRuulleess ffoorr ffiinnddiinngg tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee 37 IInn mmaannyy ccaasseess,, ccoommpplliiccaatteedd lliimmiitt ccaallccuullaattiioonnss bbyy ddiirreecctt aapppplliiccaattiioonn ooff NNeewwttoonn''ss ddiiffffeerreennccee qqquuuoootttiiieeennnttt cccaaannn bbbeee aaavvvoooiiidddeeeddd uuusssiiinnnggg dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn rrruuullleeesss... SSSooommmeee ooofff ttthhheee mmmooosssttt bbbaaasssiiiccc rrruuullleeesss aaarrreee ttthhheee following.
Constant rule: if ƒ(x)) iiss ccoonnssttaanntt,, tthheenn Sine rule : for all functions ƒ and g aanndd aallll rreeaall nnuummbbeerrss a and b.
Product rule : for all functions ƒ and g. Quotient rule : for all functions ƒ and g where g ≠ 0.
Chain rule : If f(x) = h(g(x)),, tthheenn Example computation The derivative of is HHHeeerrreee ttthhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd ttteeerrrmmm wwwaaasss cccooommmpppuuuttteeeddd uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee aaannnddd ttthhhiiirrrddd uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt rrruuullleee... TTThhheee kknnoowwnn ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff tthhee eelleemmeennttaarryy ffuunnccttiioonnss x2, x4, sin(x), ln(x)) aanndd eexxpp((x) = ex, as well as tthhee ccoonnssttaanntt 77,, wweerree aallssoo uusseedd.. 33..44 DDeerriivvaattiivveess iinn hhiigghheerr ddiimmeennssiioons DDeerriivvaattiivvee ooff vveeccttoorr vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn A vector valued function y(t))) ooofff aaa rrreeeaaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee ssseeennndddsss rrreeeaaalll nnnuuummmbbbeeerrrsss tttooo vvveeeccctttooorrrsss iiinnn sssooommmeee vvveeeccctttooorrr space Rn.
A vector-vvvaaallluuueeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn cccaaannn bbbeee ssspppllliiittt uuuppp iiinnntttooo iiitttsss cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss y (t), y (t), …, 1 2 y (t), meaning that y(t) = (y (tt), ..., y (t)))).. TThhiiss iinncclluuddeess,, ffoorr eexxaammppllee,, ppaarraammeettrriicc ccuurrvvee iinn R2 n 1 n 38 or R3... TTThhheee cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss aaarrreee rrreeeaaalll vvvaaallluuueeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss,,, sssooo ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn ooofff ddeerriivvaattiivvee aapppplliieess ttoo tthheemm.. TThhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff y(t)) iiss ddeeffiinneedd ttoo bbee tthhee vveeccttoorr,, ccaalllleedd tthhee ttaangent vvveeeccctttooorrr,,, wwwhhhooossseee cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss aaarrreee ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff ttthhheee cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... TTThhhaaattt iiisss,,, Equivalently, iiifff ttthhheee llliiimmmiiittt eeexxxiiissstttsss... TTThhheee sssuuubbbtttrrraaaccctttiiiooonnn iiinnn ttthhheee nnnuuummmeeerrraaatttooorrr iiisss sssuuubbbtttrrraaaccctttiiiooonnn ooofff vvveeeccctttooorrrsss,,, nnnooottt ssscccaaalllaaarrrsss... IIIfff ttthhheee derivative of y eexxiissttss ffoorr eevveerryy vvaalluuee ooff t, then y′ iiss aannootthheerr vveeccttoorr vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn..
If e , …, e iiss tthhee ssttaannddaarrdd bbaassiiss ffoorr Rn, then y(t) can also be written as y (t)e + … + y (t)e .
1 n 11 1 n n IIff wwee aassssuummee tthhaatt tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa vveeccttoorr-vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn rreettaaiinnss tthhee lliinneeaarriittyy pprrooppeerrttyy,, then the derivative of y(t)) mmuusstt bbee bbeeccaauussee eeaacchh ooff tthhee bbaassiiss vveeccttoorrss iiss aa ccoonnssttaanntt.. TThhiiss ggeenneerraalliizzaattiioonn iiss uusseeffuull,, ffoorr eexxaammppllee,, iiff y(t) is the position vector ooff aa ppaarrttiiccllee aatt ttiimmee t; then the derivative y′(t)) iiss tthhee vveelloocciittyy vveeccttoorr ooff tthhee ppaarrttiiccllee aatt ttiimmee t. Partial derivative Suppose that ƒ iiisss aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ttthhhaaattt dddeeepppeeennndddsss ooonnn mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee... FFFooorrr iiinnnssstttaaannnccceee,,, ƒ cccaaannn bbbeee rrreeeiiinnnttteeerrrppprrreeettteeeddd aaasss aaa fffaaammmiiilllyyy ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnndddeeexxxeeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee ooottthhheeerrr vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss::: IInn ootthheerr wwoorrddss,, eevveerryy vvaalluuee ooff x chooses a function, denoted f ,, wwhhiicchh iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff oonnee rreeaall x number.
That is, Once a value of x iiss cchhoosseenn,, ssaayy a, then f(x,y) determines a function f tthhaatt sseennddss y to a² + ay a + y²: 39 In this expression, a is a ccoonnssttaanntt, not a variable, so f iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff oonnllyy oonnee rreeaall vvaarriiaabbllee.. a CCCooonnnssseeeqqquuueeennntttlllyyy ttthhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee fffooorrr aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee aaappppppllliiieeesss::: The aabboovvee pprroocceedduurree ccaann bbee ppeerrffoorrmmeedd ffoorr aannyy cchhooiiccee ooff a.. AAsssseemmbblliinngg tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess ttooggeetthheerr iinnttoo aa ffuunnccttiioonn ggiivveess aa ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt ddeessccrriibbeess tthhee vvaarriiaattiioonn ooff ƒ iinn tthhee y direction: TThhiiss iiss tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ƒ with respect to y.
Here ∂ is a rounded dd called the partial derivative symbol.. TToo ddiissttiinngguuiisshh iitt ffrroomm tthhee lleetttteerr d, ∂ iiss ssoommeettiimmeess pprroonnoouunncceedd ""ddeerr"",, ""ddeell"",, oorr ""ppaarrttiiaall"" iinnsstteeaadd ooff ""ddeeee""..
In general, the ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee of a function ƒ(x , …, x )) iinn tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonn x at the point (a 1 n i 1 …, a ) is defined to be: n IInn tthhee aabboovvee ddiiffffeerreennccee qquuoottiieenntt,, aallll tthhee vvaarriiaabblleess eexxcceepptt x aarree hheelldd ffiixxeedd.. TThhaatt cchhooiiccee ooff i ffiixxeedd vvaalluueess ddeetteerrmmiinneess aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff oonnee vvaarriiaabbllee and, by definition, In other worddss,, tthhee ddiiffffeerreenntt cchhooiicceess ooff a index a family of one-vvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonnss jjuusstt aass iinn ttthhheee eeexxxaaammmpppllleee aaabbbooovvveee... TTThhhiiisss eeexxxppprrreeessssssiiiooonnn aaalllsssooo ssshhhooowwwsss ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee cccooommmpppuuutttaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss rreedduucceess ttoo tthhee ccoommppuuttaattiioonn ooff oonnee-variable derivatives.
An important example of a fuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss iiisss ttthhheee cccaaassseee ooofff aaa ssscccaaalllaaarrr vvvaaallluuueeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ƒ(x ,...x )) oonn aa ddoommaaiinn iinn EEuucclliiddeeaann ssppaaccee Rn (e.g., on R² or R³³)).. IInn tthhiiss ccaassee ƒ has a partial 1 n derivative ∂ƒ/∂x wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo eeaacchh vvaarriiaabbllee x.
At the point a,, tthheessee ppaarrttiiaall derivatives j j define the vector TThhiiss vveeccttoorr iiss ccaalllleedd tthhee ggrraaddiieenntt ooff ƒ at a.
If ƒ iiss ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee aatt eevveerryy ppooiinntt iinn ssoommee ddoommaaiinn,, tthheenn tthhee ggrraaddiieenntt iiss aa vveeccttoorr-valued function ∇ƒ tthhaatt ttaakkeess tthhee ppooiinntt a to the vector ∇f(a).. CCoonnsseeqquueennttllyy tthhee ggrraaddiieenntt determines a vector field.
40 Generalizations The concept of a derivative can be extended to many other settings.
The common thread is that the derivative of a function at a point serves as a linear approximation of the function at that point.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have known the derivative of a function .Through the derivative of functions, you have identified higher derivative, and you have solved problems by computing derivative through the use of this functions.
You have also identified derivative of higher dimension.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied the following: o the derivative of a function o identify higher derivative o solve problems by Computing derivative o identify derivative of higher dimension 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Find the derivative of F(x,y) = 3sin(3xy) Find the derivative of F(x,y)= (x3+ln6)( y) Evaluate the derivative F(x,y) = x2+3xy- 2tan(y) ysin x Find the derivative of F(x,y) = ecosx REFERENCES Anton, Howard; Bivens, Irl; Davis, Stephen (February 2, 2005), Calculus: Early Transcendentals Single and Multivariable (8th ed.
), New York: Wiley, ISBN 978-0-471- 47244-5 Apostol, Tom M. (June 1967), Calculus, Vol.
1: One-Variable Calculus with an Introduction to Linear Algebra, 1 (2nd ed.
), Wiley, ISBN 978-0-471-00005-1 • Apostol, Tom M. (June 1969), Calculus, Vol.
2: Multi-Variable Calculus and Linear Algebra with Applications, 1 (2nd ed.
), Wiley, ISBN 978-0-471-00007-5 • Courant, Richard; John, Fritz (December 22, 1998), Introduction to Calculus and Analysis, Vol.
1, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-65058-4 • Eves, Howard (January 2, 1990), An Introduction to the History of Mathematics (6th ed.
), Brooks Cole, ISBN 978-0-03-029558-4 41 • LLLaaarrrsssooonnn,,, RRRooonnn;;; HHHooosssttteeetttllleeerrr,,, RRRooobbbeeerrrttt PPP...;;; EEEdddwwwaaarrrdddsss,,, BBBrrruuuccceee HHH... (((FFFeeebbbrrruuuaaarrryyy 222888,,, 222000000666))),,, Calculus: EEaarrllyy TTrraannsscceennddeennttaall FFuunnccttiioonnss ((44tthh eedd..)),, HHoouugghhttoonn MMiifffflliinn CCoommppaannyy,, ISBN 978-0-618- 60624-5 • Spivak, Michael ((SSeepptteemmbbeerr 11999944)),, Calculus ((33rrdd eedd..)),, PPuubblliisshh oorr PPeerriisshh,, ISBN 978-0- 914098-89-8 • SStteewwaarrtt,, JJaammeess ((DDeecceemmbbeerr 2244,, 22000022)),, Calculus (5thh eedd..)),, BBrrooookkss CCoollee,, ISBN 978-0-534- 39339-7 • TThhoommppssoonn,, SSiillvvaannuuss PP.. ((SSeepptteemmbbeerr 88,, 11999988)),, Calculus Made Easy ((RReevviisseedd,, UUppddaatteedd,, EExxppaannddeedd eedd..)),, NNeeww YYoorrkk:: SStt.. MMaarrttiinn''ss PPrreessss,, ISBN 978-0-312-18548--0 • CCrroowweellll,, BBeennjjaammiinn ((22000033)),, Calculus, hhttttpp::////wwwwww..lliigghhttaannddmmaatttteerr..ccoomm//ccaallcc// • Garrett, Paul (2004), NNootteess oonn FFiirrsstt-Year Calculus, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff MMiinnnneessoottaa, hhttttpp::////wwwwww..mmaatthh..uummnn..eedduu//~~ggaarrrreetttt//ccaallccuulluuss// • Hussain, Faraz (2006), UUnnddeerrssttaannddiinngg CCaallccuulluus, hhttttpp::////wwwwww..uunnddeerrssttaannddiinnggccaallccuulluuss..ccoomm// • KKeeiisslleerr,, HH.. JJeerroommee ((22000000)),, EElleemmeennttaarryy CCaallccuulluuss:: AAnn AApppprrooaacchh UUssiinngg IInnffiinniitteessiimmaallss, hhttttpp::////wwwwww..mmaatthh..wwiisscc..eedduu//~~kkeeiisslleerr//ccaallcc..hhttmmll • MMaauucchh,, SSeeaann ((22000044)),, UUnnaabbrriiddggeedd VVeerrssiioonn ooff SSeeaann''ss AApppplliieedd MMaatthh BBooookk, hhttttpp::////wwwwww..iittss..ccaalltteecchh..eedduu//~~sseeaann//bbooookk//uunnaabbrriiddggeedd..hhttmmll • SSlloouugghhtteerr,, DDaann ((22000000)),, DDiiffffeerreennccee EEqquuaattiioonnss ttoo DDiiffffeerreennttiiaall EEqquuaattiioonnss, hhttttpp::////ssyynneecchhiissmm..oorrgg//ddrruuppaall//ddee22ddee// • SSttrraanngg,, GGiillbbeerrtt ((11999911)),, Calculus, http://ocw.mit.edu/ans7887700//rreessoouurrcceess//SSttrraanngg//ssttrraannggtteexxtt..hhttmm • Stroyan,, KKeeiitthh DD.. ((11999977)),, AA BBrriieeff IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn ttoo IInnffiinniitteessiimmaall Calculus, hhttttpp::////wwwwww..mmaatthh..uuiioowwaa..eedduu//~~ssttrrooyyaann//IInnffssmmllCCaallccuulluuss//IInnffssmmllCCaallcc..hhttmm Unit 2 : Partial derivatives CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 DDeeffiinnee PPaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee 3.2 KKnnooww tthhee ggeeoommeettrriicc iinntteerrpprreettaattiioonn 3.3 IIddeennttiiffyy aannttii ddeerriivvaattiivvee aannaalloogguuee 3.4 SSSooolllvvveee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss ooonnn pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee fffooorrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss 3.5 IIddeennttiiffyy hhiigghheerr oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-MMaarrkkeedd AAssssiiggnnmmeenntt 77..00 RReeffeerreenncceess//FFuurrtthheerr RReeaaddiinnggss 1.0 INTRODUCTION Suppose that ƒ iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff mmoorree tthhaann oonnee vvaarriiaabbllee.. FFoorr iinnssttaannccee,, 42  A graph of z = x2 + xy + y2... FFFooorrr ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee aaattt (((111,,, 111,,, 333))) ttthhhaaattt llleeeaaavvveeesss y constant, the corresponding tangent lliinnee iiss ppaarraalllleell ttoo tthhee xz-plane.
A slice of the graph above at yy= 1 The graph ooff tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn ddeeffiinneess aa surface in Euclidean space.. TToo eevveerryy ppooiinntt oonn tthhiiss ssuurrffaaccee,, tthheerree aarree aann iinnffiinniittee nnuummbbeerr ooff tangent lines.. PPaarrttiiaall ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn iiss tthhee aacctt ooff cchhoooossiinngg oonnee ooff tthheessee lliinneess aanndd ffiinnddiinngg iittss slope.. UUssuuaallllyy,, tthhee lliinneess ooff mmoosstt iinntteerreesstt aarree tthhoossee that are parallel to the xz-ppllaannee,, aanndd tthhoossee tthhaatt aarree ppaarraalllleell ttoo tthhee yz-plane.
TTTooo fffiiinnnddd ttthhheee ssslllooopppeee ooofff ttthhheee llliiinnneee tttaaannngggeeennnttt tttooo ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaattt (((111,,, 111,,, 333))) ttthhhaaattt iiisss pppaaarrraaalllllleeelll tttooo ttthhheee xz-plane, the y vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiisss tttrrreeeaaattteeeddd aaasss cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt... TTThhheee gggrrraaappphhh aaannnddd ttthhhiiisss ppplllaaannneee aaarrreee ssshhhooowwwnnn ooonnn ttthhheee rrriiiggghhhttt... OOOnnn ttthhheee ggrraapphh bbeellooww iitt,, wwee sseeee tthhee wwaayy tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn llooookkss oonn tthhee ppllaane y == 11.. BByy ffiinnddiinngg tthhee derivative ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn wwhhiillee aassssuummiinngg tthhaatt y iiss aa ccoonnssttaanntt,, tthhee ssllooppee ooff ƒ at the point (x, y, z) is found to be: SSoo aatt ((11,, 11,, 33)),, bbyy ssuubbssttiittuuttiioonn,, tthhee sslloope is 3.
Therefore aatt tthhee ppooiinntt.. ((11,, 11,, 33)).. TThhaatt iiss,, tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff z with respect to x aatt ((11,, 11,, 33)) iiss 33 2.0: OBJECTIVES AAfftteerr ssttuuddyyiinngg tthhiiss,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo :: • ddeeffiinnee PPaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee 43 • know the geometric interpretation • identify anti derivative analogue • solve problems on partial derivative for function of several variables • identify higher order derivatives 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Let us consider a function 1) u = f(x, y, z, p, q, ... ) of several variables.
Such a function can be studied by holding all variables except one constant and observing its variation with respect to one single selected variable.
If we consider all the variables except x to be constant, then represents the partial derivative of f(x, y, z, p, q, ... ) with respect to x (the hats indicating variables held fixed).
The variables held fixed are viewed as parameters.
Definition of Partial derivative.
The partial derivative of a function of two or more variables with respect to one of its variables is the ordinary derivative of the function with respect to that variable, considering the other variables as constants.
Example 1.
The partial derivative of 3x2y + 2y2 with respect to x is 6xy.
Its partial derivative with respect to y is 3x2 + 4y.
The partial derivative of a function z = f(x, y, ...) with respect to the variable x is commonly written in any of the following ways: Its derivative with respect to any other variable is written in a similar fashion.
44  Geometric interpretation.
TTThhheee gggeeeooommmeeetttrrriiiccc iiinnnttteeerrrppprrreeetttaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff aaa pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss ttthhheee sssaaammmeee aaasss ttthhhaaattt fffooorrr aaannn ooorrrdddiiinnnaaarrryyy dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee... IIIttt rrreeeppprrreeessseeennntttsss ttthhheee ssslllooopppeee ooofff ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt tttooo ttthhhaaattt cccuuurrrvvveee rrreeeppprrreeessseeennnttteeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaattt aaa pppaaarrrtttiiicccuuulllaaarrr pppoooiiinnnttt PPP... IIInnn ttthhheee cccaaassseee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff tttwwwooo vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss z = f(x, y) FFiigg.. 11 sshhoowwss tthhee iinntteerrpprreettaattiioonn ooff and .
ccoorrrreessppoonnddss ttoo tthhee ssllooppee ooff ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt tttooo ttthhheee cccuuurrrvvveee AAAPPPBBB aaattt pppoooiiinnnttt PPP (((wwwhhheeerrreee cccuuurrrvvveee AAAPPPBBB iiisss ttthhheee iiinnnttteeerrrssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee sssuuurrrfffaaaccceee wwiitthh aa ppllaannee tthhrroouugghh PP ppeerrppeennddiiccuullaarr ttoo tthhee yy aaxxiiss)).. SSiimmiillaarrllyy,, corresponds to the ssslllooopppeee ooofff ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt tttooo ttthhheee cccuuurrrvvveee CCCPPPDDD aaattt pppoooiiinnnttt PPP (((wwwhhheeerrreee cccuuurrrvvveee CCCPPPDDD iiisss ttthhheee iiinnnttteeerrrssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee ssuurrffaaccee wwiitthh aa ppllaannee tthhrroouugghh PP ppeerrppeennddiiccuullaarr ttoo tthhee xx aaxxiiss))..
Examples 2 TThhee vvoolluummee ooff aa ccoonnee ddeeppeennddss oonn hheeiigghhtt aanndd rraaddiiuuss The volume V of a cone ddeeppeennddss oonn tthhee ccoonnee''ss height h and its radius r according to the formula The partial derivative of VV with respect to r is 45 wwwhhhiiiccchhh rrreeeppprrreeessseeennntttsss ttthhheee rrraaattteee wwwiiittthhh wwwhhhiiiccchhh aaa cccooonnneee'''sss vvvooollluuummmeee ccchhhaaannngggeeesss iiifff iiitttsss rrraaadddiiiuuusss iiisss vvvaaarrriiieeeddd aaannnddd iiitttsss hhheeeiiiggghhhttt iiisss kkkeeepppttt cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt... TTThhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo h is wwwhhhiiiccchhh rrreeeppprrreeessseeennntttsss ttthhheee rrraaattteee wwwiiittthhh wwwhhhiiiccchhh ttthhheee vvvooollluuummmeee ccchhhaaannngggeeesss iiifff iiitttsss hhheeeiiiggghhhttt iiisss vvvaaarrriiieeeddd aaannnddd iiitttsss rrraaadddiiius is kept constant.
By contrast, the total ddeerriivvaattiivvee of V with respect to r and h aarree rreessppeeccttiivveellyy and TThhee ddiiffffeerreennccee bbeettwweeeenn tthhee ttoottaall aanndd ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss tthhee eelliimmiinnaattiioonn ooff iinnddiirreecctt ddeeppeennddeenncciieess bbeettwweeeenn vvaarriiaabblleess iinn ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. IIIfff (((fffooorrr sssooommmeee aaarrrbbbiiitttrrraaarrryyy rrreeeaaasssooonnn))) ttthhheee cccooonnneee'''sss ppprrrooopppooorrrtttiiiooonnnsss hhhaaavvveee tttooo ssstttaaayyy ttthhheee sssaaammmeee,,, aaannnddd ttthhheee hhheeeiiiggghhhttt aaannnddd radius are in a fixed ratio k, TThhiiss ggiivveess tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo r: EEEqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnnsss iiinnnvvvooolllvvviiinnnggg aaannn uuunnnkkknnnooowwwnnn fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn'''sss pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss aaarrreee cccaaalllllleeeddd partial differential equations aanndd aarree ccoommmmoonn iinn physics, engineering, and other sscciieenncceess and applied disciplines.
Notation Forr tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg eexxaammpplleess,, lleett f be a function in x, y and z. First-oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess:: 46  Second-oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess:: Second-order mmiixxeedd ddeerriivvaattiivveess: Higher-oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall aanndd mmiixxeedd ddeerriivvaattiivveess:: WWWhhheeennn dddeeeaaallliiinnnggg wwwiiittthhh fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff mmmuuullltttiiipppllleee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss,,, sssooommmeee ooofff ttthhheeessseee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss mmmaaayyy bbbeee rrreeelllaaattteeeddd tttooo eeeaaaccchhh ooottthhheeerrr,,, aaannnddd iiittt mmmaaayyy bbbeee nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrryyy tttooo ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy eeexxxpppllliiiccciiitttlllyyy wwwhhhiiiccchhh vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss aaarrreee bbbeeeiiinnnggg hhheeelllddd constant.
In fields such as ssttaattiissttiiccaall mmeecchhaanniiccss,, tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ff with respect to x, holding y and z ccoonnssttaanntt,, iiss oofftteenn eexxpprreesssseedd aass Anti derivative analogue There is a concept ffoorr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess tthhaatt iiss aannaallooggoouuss ttoo aannttii ddeerriivvaattiivveess for regular dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss... GGGiiivvveeennn aaa pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,, iiittt aaallllllooowwwsss fffooorrr ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll rrreeecccooovvveeerrryyy ooofff ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnnaaalll function.
Consider the example of .. TThhee ""ppaarrttiiaall"" iinntteeggrraall ccaann bbee ttaakkeenn wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x (treating y aass ccoonnssttaanntt,, iinn aa ssiimmiillaarr mmaannnneerr ttoo ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiioonn)):: Here, the ""ccoonnssttaanntt"" ooff iinntteeggrraattiioonn iiss nnoo lloonnggeerr aa ccoonnssttaanntt,, bbuutt iinnsstteeaadd aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff aallll tthhee vvaarriiaabblleess ooff tthhee oorriiggiinnaall ffuunnccttiioonn eexxcceepptt x.. TThhee rreeaassoonn ffoorr tthhiiss iiss tthhaatt aallll tthhee ootthheerr vvaarriiaabblleess aaarrreee tttrrreeeaaattteeeddd aaasss cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt wwwhhheeennn tttaaakkkiiinnnggg ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,, sssooo aaannnyyy fffuuunnnccctttiiiooon which does not involve x wwwiiillllll dddiiisssaaappppppeeeaaarrr wwwhhheeennn tttaaakkkiiinnnggg ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,, aaannnddd wwweee hhhaaavvveee tttooo aaaccccccooouuunnnttt fffooorrr ttthhhiiisss wwwhhheeennn wwweee tttaaakkkeee ttthhheee aaannntttiiidddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee... TTThhheee mmmooosssttt gggeeennneeerrraaalll wwwaaayyy tttooo rrreeeppprrreeessseeennnttt ttthhhiiisss iiisss tttooo hhhaaavvveee ttthhheee """cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt""" rrreeeppprrreeessseeennnttt aaannn uuunnnkkknnnooowwwnnn fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff aaallllll ttthhheee ooottthhheeerrr vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss... TTThhhuuusss ttthhheee ssseeettt ooofff functions 47 x2 + xy + g(y), where g iiss aannyy oonnee-aarrgguummeenntt ffuunnccttiioonn,, rreepprreesseennttss tthhee eennttiirree sseett ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss iinn variables x,y tthhaatt ccoouulldd hhaavvee pprroodduucceedd tthhee x-partial derivative 2x+y.
IIIfff aaallllll ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaarrreee kkknnnooowwwnnn (((fffooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee gradient), then the aaannntttiiidddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss cccaaannn bbbeee mmmaaatttccchhheeeddd vvviiiaaa ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee ppprrroooccceeessssss tttooo rrreeecccooonnnssstttrrruuucccttt ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnnaaalll fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn uuuppp tttooo a constant Example 3 For the function ffiinndd tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff ff wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo xx aanndd yy aanndd ccoommppuuttee tthhee rraatteess ooff cchhaannggee ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn iinn tthhee xx aanndd yy ddiirreeccttiioonnss aatt tthhee ppooiinntt ((-1,2).
IIInnniiitttiiiaaallllllyyy wwweee wwwiiillllll nnnooottt ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueeesss ooofff xxx aaannnddd yyy wwwhhheeennn wwweee tttaaakkkeee ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss;;; wwweee wwwiiillllll jjjuuusssttt rreemmeemmbbeerr wwhhiicchh oonnee wwee aarree ggooiinngg ttoo hhoolldd ccoonnssttaanntt wwhhiillee ttaakkiinngg tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee.. FFiirrsstt,, hhoolldd yy ffiixxeedd aanndd ffiinndd tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ff wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo xx:: SSeeccoonndd,, hhoolldd xx ffiixxeedd aanndd ffiinndd tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ff wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo yy:: Now, plug in the values x=-11 aanndd yy==22 iinnttoo tthhee eeqquuaattiioonnss.. WWee oobbttaaiinn ff__xx((-1,2)=10 and f_y(- 1,2)=28.
PPaarrttiiaall DDeerriivvaattiivveess ffoorr FFuunnccttiioonnss ooff SSeevveerraall VVaarriiaabblleess WWWeee cccaaannn ooofff cccooouuurrrssseee tttaaakkkeee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn tttwwwooo vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss... IIIfff fff iiisss aaa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff nn vvaarriiaabblleess xx__11,, xx__22,, ......,, xx__nn,, tthheenn ttoo ttaakkee tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ff wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo xx__ii wwee hhoolldd aallll vvaarriiaabblleess bbeessiiddeess xx__ii ccoonnssttaanntt aanndd ttaakkee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee..
Example 4 TToo ffiinndd tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ff wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo tt ffoorr tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn wwweee hhhooolllddd xxx,,, yyy,,, aaannnddd zzz cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt aaannnddd tttaaakkkeee ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo ttthhheee rrreeemmmaaaiiinnniiinnnggg vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee ttt...
The result is 48 Interpretation ∂f IIss tthhee rraattee aatt wwhhiicchh ff cchhaannggeess aass xx cchhaannggeess,, ffoorr aa ffiixxeedd ((ccoonnssttaanntt)) yy.. ∂x ∂f IIss tthhee rraattee aatt wwhhiicchh ff cchhaannggeess aass yy changes, for a fixed (constant) x.
∂y HHiigghheerr OOrrddeerr PPaarrttiiaall DDeerriivvaattiivveess IIff ff iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff xx,, yy,, aanndd ppoossssiibbllyy ootthheerr vvaarriiaabblleess,, tthheenn ∂2f ∂ ∂f is defined to be ∂x2 ∂x ∂x Similarly, ∂2f ∂ ∂f iiss ddeeffiinneedd ttoo bbee ∂y2 ∂y ∂y ∂2f ∂ ∂f iiss ddeeffiinneedd ttoo bbee ∂y∂x ∂y ∂x ∂2f ∂ ∂f iiss ddeeffiinneedd ttoo bbee ∂x∂y ∂x ∂y TTThhheee aaabbbooovvveee ssseeecccooonnnddd ooorrrdddeeerrr pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss cccaaannn aaalllsssooo bbbeee dddeeennnooottteeeddd bbbyyy fff , f , f , and f xx yy xy yx respectively.
The last two are called mmiixxeedd ddeerriivvaattiivveess aanndd wwiillll aallwwaayyss bbee eeqquuaall ttoo eeaacchh ootthheerr wwhheenn aallll tthhee ffiirrsstt oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aarree ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss.. SSSooommmeee eeexxxaaammmpppllleeesss ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss aaarrreee ssshhhooowwwnnn bbbeeelllooowww,,, vvaarriiaabbllee aass wwee ddiidd iinn CCaallccuulluuss II.. 49 Example 1 FFiinndd aallll ooff tthhee ffiirrsstt oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ffoorr tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg ffuunnccttiioonnss.. (a) (b) (c) (d) Solution (a) LLeett’’ss ffiirrsstt ttaakkee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x aanndd rreemmeemmbbeerr tthhaatt aass wwee ddoo ssoo aallll tthhee y’s will be treated as constants.
TThhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x is, NNNoootttiiiccceee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd aaannnddd ttthhheee ttthhhiiirrrddd ttteeerrrmmm dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee tttooo zzzeeerrrooo iiinnn ttthhhiiisss cccaaassseee...
It should be clear wwhhyy tthhee tthhiirrdd tteerrmm ddiiffffeerreennttiiaatteedd ttoo zzeerroo.. IItt’’ss aa ccoonnssttaanntt aanndd wwee kknnooww tthhaatt constants always differentiate to zero.
TTThhhiiisss iiisss aaalllsssooo ttthhheee rrreeeaaasssooonnn ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd ttteeerrrmmm dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteeeddd tttooo zzzeeerrrooo... RReemmeemmbbeerr tthhaatt ssiinnccee wwee aarree ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiinngg wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x hheerree wwee aarree ggooiinngg ttoo ttrreeaatt aallll y’s as constants.
TThhaatt mmeeaannss tthhaatt tteerrmmss tthhaatt oonnllyy iinvolve y’’ss wwiillll bbee ttrreeaatteedd aass ccoonnssttaannttss aanndd hheennccee wwiillll ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee ttoo zzeerroo.. NNooww,, lleett’’ss ttaakkee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo y.
In this case we treat all xx’s as constants and ssoo tthhee ffiirrsstt tteerrmm iinnvvoollvveess oonnllyy x’s and so will differentiate to zero, just as tthhee tthhiirrdd tteerrmm wwiillll.. HHeerree iiss tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo y.
(b) WWiitthh tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn wwee’’vvee ggoott tthhrreeee ffiirrsstt oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess ttoo ccoommppuuttee.. LLeett’’ss ddoo tthhee ppaarrttiiaall 50 derivative with respect to x ffiirrsstt.. SSiinnccee wwee aarree ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiinngg wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x we will treat all y’s and all z’’ss aass ccoonnssttaannttss.. TThhiiss mmeeaannss tthhaatt tthhee sseeccoonndd aanndd ffoouurrtthh tteerrmmss wwiillll ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee ttoo zzeerroo ssiinnccee tthheeyy oonnllyy iinnvvoollvvee y’s and z’s.
TThhiiss ffiirrsstt tteerrmm ccoonnttaaiinnss bbootthh x’s and y’s aanndd ssoo wwhheenn wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x the y wwwiiillllll bbbeee ttthhhooouuuggghhhttt ooofff aaasss aaa mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiicccaaatttiiivvveee cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt aaannnddd sssooo ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt ttteeerrrmmm wwwiiillllll bbbeee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteeeddd jjjuuusssttt aass tthhee tthhiirrdd tteerrmm wwiillll bbee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaatteedd.. HHeerree iiss tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x. Let’’ss nnooww ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo y.
In this case all x’s and z’’ss wwiillll bbee ttrreeaatteedd aass constants.
TTThhhiiisss mmmeeeaaannnsss ttthhheee ttthhhiiirrrddd ttteeerrrmmm wwwiiillllll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee tttooo zzzeeerrrooo sssiiinnnccceee iiittt cccooonnntttaaaiiinnnsss ooonnnlllyyy x’s while the x’’ss iinn tthhee ffiirrsstt tteerrmm aanndd tthhee z’’ss iinn tthhee sseeccoonndd tteerrmm wwiillll bbee ttrreeaatteedd aass mmuullttiipplliiccaattiivvee constants.
HHeerree iiss tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo y. FFiinnaallllyy,, lleett’’ss ggeett tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo z. SSiinnccee oonnllyy oonnee ooff tthhee tteerrmmss iinnvvoollvvee z’s this will be the only non-zzeerroo tteerrmm iinn tthhe derivative.
Also, the y’’ss iinn tthhaatt tteerrmm wwiillll bbee ttrreeaatteedd aass multiplicative constants.
HHeerree iiss tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo z.
(c) WWiitthh tthhiiss oonnee wwee’’llll nnoott ppuutt iinn tthhee ddeettaaiill ooff tthhee ffiirrsstt ttwwoo.. Before taking the derivative let’s rreewwrriittee tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn aa lliittttllee ttoo hheellpp uuss wwiitthh tthhee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn pprroocceessss.. NNooww,, tthhee ffaacctt tthhaatt wwee’’rree uussiinngg s and t here instead of the “standard” x aanndd y shouldn’t be a problem.
IItt wwiillll wwoorrkk tthhee ssaammee wwaayy..
Here are the two deriivvaattiivveess ffoorr tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn.. 51  RReemmeemmbbeerr hhooww ttoo ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee nnaattuurraall llooggaarriitthhmmss.. (d) NNooww,, wwee ccaann’’tt ffoorrggeett tthhee pprroodduucctt rruullee wwiitthh ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. TThhee pprroodduucctt rruullee wwiillll wwoorrkk tthhee ssaammee wwaayy hheerree aass iitt ddooeess wwiitthh ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff one variable.
WWee wwiillll jjuusstt nneeeedd ttoo bbee ccaarreeffuull ttoo rreemmeemmbbeerr wwhhiicchh vvaarriiaabbllee wwee aarree ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiinngg wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo.. LLeett’’ss ssttaarrtt oouutt bbyy ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiinngg wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x. IInn tthhiiss ccaassee bbootthh tthhee ccoossiinnee aanndd tthhee exponential contain x’’’sss aaannnddd sssooo wwweee’’’vvveee rrreeeaaallllllyyy gggooottt aaa ppprrroooddduuucccttt ooofff tttwwwooo fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss iiinnnvvvooolllvvviiinnnggg x’s and ssoo wwee’’llll nneeeedd ttoo pprroodduucctt rruullee tthhiiss uupp.. HHeerree iiss tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x.
52  Do not forget the chain rule ffoorr ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff oonnee vvaarriiaabbllee.. WWee wwiillll bbee llooookkiinngg aatt tthhee cchhaaiinn rrruuullleee fffooorrr sssooommmeee mmmooorrreee cccooommmpppllliiicccaaattteeeddd eeexxxppprrreeessssssiiiooonnnsss fffooorrr mmmuuullltttiiivvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss iiinnn aaa lllaaatttttteeerrr ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn... HHoowweevveerr,, aatt tthhiiss ppooiinntt wwee’’rree ttrreeaattiinngg aallll tthhee y’s as constants and soo tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee wwiillll ccoonnttiinnuuee ttoo wwoorrkk aass iitt ddiidd bbaacckk iinn CCaallccuulluuss II.. AAllssoo,, ddoonn’’tt ffoorrggeett hhooww ttoo ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee eexxppoonneennttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonnss,, NNooww,, lleett’’ss ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo y. IInn tthhiiss ccaassee wwee ddoonn’’tt hhaavvee aa pprroodduucctt rruullee ttoo wwoorrrryy about sinccee tthhee oonnllyy ppllaaccee tthhaatt tthhee y shows up is in the exponential.
TThheerreeffoorree,, ssiinnccee x’s are cccooonnnsssiiidddeeerrreeeddd tttooo bbbeee cccooonnnssstttaaannntttsss fffooorrr ttthhhiiisss dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,, ttthhheee cccooosssiiinnneee iiinnn ttthhheee fffrrrooonnnttt wwwiiillllll aaalllsssooo bbbeee ttthhhooouuuggghhhttt ooofff aaasss a multiplicative constant.
HHeerree iiss tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo y.
Example 2 FFFiiinnnddd aaallllll ooofff ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt ooorrrdddeeerrr pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss fffooorrr ttthhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... (a) (b) (c) 53 Solution (a) WWee aallssoo ccaann’’tt ffoorrggeett aabboouutt tthhee qquuoottiieenntt rruullee.. SSiinnccee tthheerree iissnn’’tt ttoooo mmuucchh ttoo tthhiiss oonnee,, wwee wwiillll simply give the derivatives.
IInn tthhee ccaassee ooff tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo v recall that u’’ss aarree ccoonnssttaanntt aanndd ssoo wwhheenn wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee tthhee nnuummeerraattoorr wwee wwiillll ggeett zzeerroo!!
(b) NNNooowww,,, wwweee dddooo nnneeeeeeddd tttooo bbbeee cccaaarrreeefffuuulll hhhooowwweeevvveeerrr tttooo nnnooottt uuussseee ttthhheee qqquuuoootttiiieeennnttt rrruuullleee wwwhhheeennn iiittt dddoooeeesssnnn’’’ttt nnneeeeeeddd tttooo be used.
IInn tthhiiss ccaassee wwee ddoo hhaavvee aa qquuoottiieenntt,, hhoowweevveerr,, ssiinnccee tthhee x’s and y’’ss oonnllyy aappppeeaarr iinn tthhee numerator and the z’’ss oonnllyy aappppeeaarr iinn tthhee ddeennoommiinnaattoorr tthhiiss rreeaallllyy iissnn’’tt aa qquuoottiieenntt rruullee pprroobblleemm.. LLeett’’ss ddoo tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x and y first.
IInn bbootthh tthheessee ccaasseess tthhee z’s are constants aaannnddd sssooo ttthhheee dddeeennnooommmiiinnnaaatttooorrr iiinnn ttthhhiiisss iiisss aaa cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt aaannnddd sssooo wwweee dddooonnn’’’ttt rrreeeaaallllllyyy nnneeeeeeddd tttooo wwwooorrrrrryyy tttoooooo mmmuuuccchhh about it.
HHeerree aarree tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess ffor these two cases.
54  NNooww,, iinn tthhee ccaassee ooff ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo z wwee ccaann aavvooiidd tthhee qquuoottiieenntt rruullee wwiitthh aa quick rewrite of the function.
HHeerree iiss tthhee rreewwrriittee aass wweellll aass tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo z. WWWeee wwweeennnttt aaahhheeeaaaddd aaannnddd pppuuuttt ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee bbbaaaccckkk iiinnntttooo ttthhheee “““ooorrriiigggiiinnnaaalll””” fffooorrrmmm jjjuuusssttt sssooo wwweee cccooouuulllddd sssaaayyy ttthhhaaattt we did.
IInn pprraaccttiiccee yyoouu pprroobbaabbllyy ddoonn’’tt rreeaallllyy nneeeedd ttoo ddoo tthhaatt.. (c) IIInnn ttthhhiiisss lllaaasssttt pppaaarrrttt wwweee aaarrreee jjjuuusssttt gggoooiiinnnggg tttooo dddooo aaa sssooommmeeewwwhhhaaattt mmmeeessssssyyy ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm...
However, if yyoouu hhaadd aa ggoooodd bbaacckkggrroouunndd iinn Calculus I chain rule tthhiiss sshhoouullddnn’’tt bbee aallll tthhaatt ddiiffffiiccuulltt ooff a problem.
HHeerree aarree tthhee ttwwoo ddeerriivvaattiivveess,, 55  SSoo,, tthheerree aarree ssoommee eexxaammpplleess ooff ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. HHooppeeffuullllyy yyoouu wwiillll aaggrreeee tthhaatt aass lloonngg aass wwee ccaann rreemmeemmbbeerr ttoo ttrreeaatt tthhee ootthheerr vvaarriiaabblleess aass ccoonnssttaannttss tthheessee wwoorrkk iinn eexxaaccttllyy tthhee ssaammee mmaannnneerr tthhaatt ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff oonnee vvaarriiaabbllee ddoo.. SSoo,, iiff yyoouu ccaann ddoo CCaallccuulluuss II dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee yyyooouuu ssshhhooouuullldddnnn’’’ttt hhhaaavvveee tttoooooo mmmuuuccchhh dddiiiffffffiiicccuuullltttyyy iiinnn dddoooiiinnnggg bbbaaasssiiiccc pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss... TThheerree iiss oonnee ffiinnaall ttooppiicc tthhaatt wwee nneeeedd ttoo ttaakkee aa qquuiicckk llooookk aatt iinn tthhiiss sseeccttiioonn,, iimmpplliicciitt differentiation.
BBBeeefffooorrreee gggeeettttttiiinnnggg iiinnntttooo iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn fffooorrr mmmuuullltttiiipppllleee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss llleeettt’’’sss fffiiirrrsssttt rrreeemmmeeemmmbbbeeerrr hhhooowww iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn wwwooorrrkkksss fffooorrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee...
Example 3 Find for .
Solution RReemmeemmbbeerr tthhaatt tthhee kkeeyy ttoo tthhiiss iiss ttoo aallwwaayyss tthhiinnkk ooff y as a function of x,, oorr and so wwhheenneevveerr wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee aa tteerrmm iinnvvoollvviinngg y’s with respect to x wwee wwiillll rreeaallllyy nneeeedd ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee wwhhiicchh wwiillll mmeeaann tthhaatt wwee wwiillll aadddd oonn aa to that term.
TThhee ffiirrsstt sstteepp iiss ttoo ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x.
56  The final step is to solve for NNNooowww,,, wwweee dddiiiddd ttthhhiiisss ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm bbbeeecccaaauuussseee iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn wwwooorrrkkksss iiinnn eeexxxaaaccctttlllyyy ttthhheee sssaaammmeee mmmaaannnnnneeerrr wwiitthh ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff mmuullttiippllee vvaarriiaabblleess.. IIff wwee hhaavvee aa ffuunnccttiioonn iinn tteerrmmss ooff tthhrreeee vvaarriiaabblleess x, y, and z we will assume that z iiss iinn ffaacctt aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff x and y.
In otheerr wwoorrddss,, .
Then whenever we differentiate z’’ss wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x wwee wwiillll uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee aanndd aadddd oonn aa .
LLiikkeewwiissee,, wwhheenneevveerr wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee z’s with respect to y wwee wwiillll aadddd oonn aa .
LLeett’’ss ttaakkee aa qquuiicckk llooookk aatt aa ccoouuppllee ooff iimmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn problems.
Example 4 Find and for each of the following functions.
(a) (b) Solution (a) Let’s start with finding WWee ffiirrsstt wwiillll ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x and remember to add on a wwhheenneevveerr wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee aa z. RReemmeemmbbeerr tthhaatt ssiinnccee wwee aarree aassssuummiinngg then any product of x’s and z’’’sss wwwiiillllll bbbeee aaa ppprrroooddduuucccttt aaannnddd sssooo wwwiiillllll nnneeeeeeddd ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt rrruuullleee!!!
Now, solve for 57 .
NNooww wwee’’llll ddoo tthhee ssaammee tthhiinngg ffoorr eexxcceepptt tthhiiss ttiimmee wwee’’llll nneeeedd ttoo rreemmeemmbbeerr ttoo aadddd oonn aa wwhheenneevveerr wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee aa z.
(b) WWee’’llll ddoo tthhee ssaammee tthhiinngg ffoorr tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn aass wwee ddiidd iinn tthhee pprreevviioouuss ppaarrtt.. FFiirrsstt lleett’’ss ffiinndd .
Don’t fffooorrrgggeeettt tttooo dddooo ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee ooonnn eeeaaaccchhh ooofff ttthhheee tttrrriiiggg fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss aaannnddd wwwhhheeennn wwweee aaarrreee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiinnnggg ttthhheee iiinnnsssiiidddeee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooonnn ttthhheee cccooosssiiinnneee wwweee wwwiiillllll nnneeeeeeddd tttooo aaalllsssooo uuussseee ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt rrruuullleee... Now let’s solve for 58  Now let’s take care of .
TThhiiss oonnee wwiillll bbee sslliigghhttllyy eeaassiieerr tthhaann tthhee ffiirrsstt oonnee.. 4.0 CONCLUSION IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd aaa PPPaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee uuussseeeddd ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee tttooo kkknnnooowww ttthhheee gggeeeooommmeeetttrrriiiccc iiinnnttteeerrrppprrreeetttaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaannnddd aaannntttiii dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee aaannnaaallloooggguuueee hhhaaasss bbbeeeeeennn iiidddeeennntttiiifffied.
You have SSSooolllvvveeeddd ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss ooonnn pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee fffooorrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss aaannnddd iiidddeeennntttiiifffiiieeeddd hhhiiiggghhheeerrr order derivatives.
5.0 SUMMARY IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg:: tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff PPaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabbllee ttthhheee gggeeeooommmeeetttrrriiiccc iiinnnttteeerrrppprrreeetttaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss 59 the identification of antiderivative analogue of partial derivative of functions of several variable Solve problems on partial derivative for function of several variables The identification of higher order derivatives of functions of several variables TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.Find the partial derivatives f and f if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = x2 y + 2x + y 2: Find f and f if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = sin(x y) + cos x 3.Find f and f if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = x ex y 4.Find f and f if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = ln ( x2 + 2 y) 5.Find f (2 , 3) and f (2 , 3) if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = y x2 + 2 y 6.Find partial derivatives f and f of the following functions x y A. f(x , y) = x ex + y B. f(x , y) = ln ( 2 x + y x) C. f(x , y) = x sin(x - y) 7.0 REFERENCE Jeff Miller (2009-06-14).
"Earliest Uses of Symbols of Calculus".
Earliest Uses of Various Mathematical Symbols.
http://jeff560.tripod.com/calculus.html.
Retrieved 2010-02-20.
Abramowitz, M. and Stegun, I.
A.
(Eds.).
Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables, 9th printing.
New York: Dover, pp.
883-885, 1972.
60 Fischer, G.
(Ed.).
Plate 121 in Mathematische Modelle aus den Sammlungen von Universitäten und Museen, Bildband.
Braunschweig, Germany: Vieweg, p. 118, 1986.
Thomas, G. B. and Finney, R. L. §16.8 in Calculus and Analytic Geometry, 9th ed.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1996.
Wagon, S. Mathematica in Action.
New York: W. H. Freeman, pp.
83-85, 1991.
Unit 3 APPLICATION OF PARTIAL DERIVATIVE CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Apply partial derivative of functions of several variable in Chain rule.
3.2 Apply partial derivative of functions of several variable in Curl (Mathematics) 3.3 Apply partial derivative of functions of several variable in Derivatives 3.4 Apply partial derivative of functions of several variable in D’ Alamber operator 3.5 Apply partial derivative of functions of several variable in Double integral 3.6 Apply partial derivative of functions of several variable in Exterior derivative 3.7 Apply partial derivative of function of several variable in Jacobian matrix and determinant 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION The partial derivative of f with respect to x is the derivative of f with respect to x, treating all other variables as constant.
Similarly, the partial derivative of f with respect to y is the derivative of f with respect to y, treating all other variables as constant, and so on for other variables.
The partial derivatives 61 are written as ∂f/∂x, ∂∂f/∂∂yy,, aanndd ssoo oonn.. TThhee ssyymmbbooll ""∂"" iiss uusseedd ((iinnsstteeaadd ooff ""d") to remind us ttthhhaaattt ttthhheeerrreee iiisss mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee,,, aaannnddd ttthhhaaattt wwweee aaarrreee hhhooollldddiiinnnggg ttthhheee ooottthhheeerrr vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss fffiiixxxeeeddd...
OBJECTIVES IInn tthhiiss UUnniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo:: AAppppllyy ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabbllee iinn CChhaaiinn rruullee.. AAApppppplllyyy pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn CCCuuurrrlll (((MMMaaattthhheeemmmaaatttiiicccsss))) AAppppllyy ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabbllee iinn DDeerriivvaattiivveess AAApppppplllyyy pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn DDD’’’ AAAlllaaammmbbbeeerrr ooopppeeerrraaatttooorrr Apply partttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn DDDooouuubbbllleee iiinnnttteeegggrrraaalll AAApppppplllyyy pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn EEExxxttteeerrriiiooorrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee AAApppppplllyyy pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx aaannnddd dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnnaaannnttt MAIN CONTENT AAAPPPPPPLLLIIICCCAAATTTIIIOOONNNSSS OOOFFF PPPAAARRRTTTIIIAAALLL DDDEEERRRIIIVVVAAATTTIIIVVVEEE OOOFFF FFFUUUNNNCCCTTTIIIOOONNNSSS IIINNN SSSEEEVVVEEERRRAAALLL VARIABLE.
Chain rule CCoommppoossiitteess ooff mmoorree tthhaann ttwwoo ffuunnccttiioonnss TTThhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee cccaaannn bbbeee aaappppppllliiieeeddd tttooo cccooommmpppooosssiiittteeesss ooofff mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn tttwwwooo fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... TTTooo tttaaakkkeee ttthhheee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ccoommppoossiittee ooff mmoorree tthhaann ttwwoo ffuunnccttiioonnss,, nnoottiiccee tthhaatt tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ooff f, g, and h ((iinn tthhaatt oorrddeerr)) iiss tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ooff f with g ∘ h.. TThhee cchhaaiinn rruullee ssaayyss tthhaatt ttoo ccoommppuuttee tthhee derivative of f ∘ g ∘ h,, iitt iiss ssuuffffiicciieenntt ttoo ccoommppuuttee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f aanndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff g ∘ h. The derivative of f ccaann bbee ccaallccuullaatteedd ddiirreeccttllyy,, aanndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff g ∘ h ccaann bbee ccaallccuullaatteedd bbyy applying the chain rule again.
FFoorr ccoonnccrreetteenneessss,, ccoonnssiiddeerr tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn TThhiiss ccaann bbee ddeeccoommppoosseedd aass tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ooff tthhrreeee ffuunnccttiioonnss:: Their derivatives are: 62  TThhee cchhaaiinn rruullee ssaayyss tthhaatt tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff tthheeiirr ccoommppoossiittee aatt tthhee ppooiinntt x = a is: In Leibniz notation, this is: or for short, TThhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ffuunnccttiioonn iiss tthheerreeffoorree:: AAAnnnooottthhheeerrr wwwaaayyy ooofff cccooommmpppuuutttiiinnnggg ttthhhiiisss dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss tttooo vvviiieeewww ttthhheee cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn f ∘ g ∘ h as the composite of f ∘ g and h.. AAppppllyyiinngg tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee ttoo tthhiiss ssiittuuaattiioonn ggiivveess:: TTThhhiiisss iiisss ttthhheee sssaaammmeee aaasss wwwhhhaaattt wwwaaasss cccooommmpppuuuttteeeddd aaabbbooovvveee... TTThhhiiisss ssshhhooouuulllddd bbbeee eeexxxpppeeecccttteeeddd bbbeeecccaaauuussseee (((f ∘ g) ∘ h = f ∘ (g ∘ h).
The quotient rule TThhee cchhaaiinn rruullee ccaann bbee uusseedd ttoo ddeerriivvee ssoommee wweellll-kknnoowwnn ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn rruulleess.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, tthhee qqquuuoootttiiieeennnttt rrruuullleee iiisss aaa cccooonnnssseeeqqquuueeennnccceee ooofff ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee aaannnddd ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt rrruuullleee... TTTooo ssseeeeee ttthhhiiisss,,, wwwrrriiittteee ttthhheee function f(x)/g(x)) aass tthhee pprroodduucctt f(x) · 1/g(x).
First apply the product rule: 63 TToo ccoommppuuttee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff 11//g(x), notice that it is the composite of g with the reciprocal ffuunnccttiioonn,, tthhaatt iiss,, tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt sseennddss x to 1/x.. TThhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff tthhee rreecciipprrooccaall ffuunnccttiioonn iiss −1/x2.. BByy aappppllyyiinngg tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee,, tthhee llaasstt expression becomes: wwhhiicchh iiss tthhee uussuuaall ffoorrmmuullaa ffoorr tthhee qquuoottiieenntt rruullee.. DDeerriivvaattiivveess ooff iinnvveerrssee ffuunnccttiioonnss inverse functions and difffeerreennttiiaattiioonn Suppose that y = g(x) has an inverse function.
Call its inverse function f ssoo tthhaatt wwee hhaavvee x = f(y)).. TThheerree iiss aa ffoorrmmuullaa ffoorr tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f in terms of the deerriivvaattiivvee ooff g. To see this, note that f and g ssaattiissffyy tthhee ffoorrmmuullaa f(g(x)) = x.
Because the functions f(g(x)))) aanndd x aarree eeqquuaall,, tthheeiirr ddeerriivvaattiivveess mmuusstt bbee eeqquuaall.. TThhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee of x iiss tthhee ccoonnssttaanntt ffuunnccttiioonn wwiitthh vvaalluuee 11,, aanndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f(g(x)))) iiss determined by the cchhaaiinn rruullee.. TThheerreeffoorree wwee hhaavvee:: f'(g(x))g'(x) = 1.
To express f′ aass aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff aann iinnddeeppeennddeenntt vvaarriiaabbllee y, we substitute f(yy) for x wherever it aappppeeaarrss.. TThheenn wwee ccaann ssoollvvee ffoorr f′.
FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ccoonnssiiddeerr tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn g(x) = ex.
It has an iinnvveerrssee wwhhiicchh iiss ddeennootteedd f(y) = ln y.
Because g′(x) = ex,, tthhee aabboovvee ffoorrmmuullaa ssaayyss tthhaatt TThhiiss ffoorrmmuullaa iiss ttrruuee wwhheenneevveerr g is differentiable and its inverse f iiss aallssoo ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee.. TThhiiss fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa cccaaannn fffaaaiiilll wwwhhheeennn ooonnneee ooofff ttthhheeessseee cccooonnndddiiitttiiiooonnnsss iiisss nnnooottt tttrrruuueee... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, cccooonnnsssiiidddeeerrr g(x) = x3.
Its inverse is f(y) = y1/3,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss nnnooottt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee aaattt zzzeeerrrooo... IIIfff wwweee aaatttttteeemmmpppttt tttooo uuussseee ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee ffoorrmmuullaa ttoo ccoommppuuttee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f at zero, then we must evaluate 1/gg′(f(0)).
f(0) = 0 and g′(((000))) === 000,,, sssooo wwweee mmmuuusssttt eeevvvaaallluuuaaattteee 111///000,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss uuunnndddeeefffiiinnneeeddd... TTThhheeerrreeefffooorrreee ttthhheee fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa fffaaaiiilllsss iiinnn ttthhhiiisss ccaassee.. TThhiiss iiss nnoott ssuurrpprriissiinngg bbeeccaauussee f is not differentiable at zero.
64  Higher derivatives Faà di Bruno's formula gggeeennneeerrraaallliiizzzeeesss ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee tttooo hhhiiiggghhheeerrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss... TTThhheee fffiiirrrsssttt fffeeewww derivatives are Example Given wwhheerree and ,, ddeetteerrmmiinnee tthhee vvaalluuee ooff and using the chain rule.
and Curl (mathematics) In vector calculus, the curl ((oorr rotor) is a vector operator tthhaatt ddeessccrriibbeess tthhee infinitesimal rotation of a 3-dimensional vveeccttoorr ffiieelldd.. AAtt eevveerryy ppooiinntt iinn tthhee ffiieelldd,, tthhee ccuurrll iiss rreepprreesseenntteedd bbyy a vector.
The attributes of ttthhhiiisss vvveeeccctttooorrr (((llleeennngggttthhh aaannnddd dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn))) ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrriiizzzeee ttthhheee rrroootttaaatttiiiooonnn aaattt ttthhhaaattt point.
The curl of a vector field F,, ddeennootteedd ccuurrll F or ∇×F,, aatt aa ppooiinntt iiss ddeeffiinneedd iinn tteerrmmss ooff iittss pprroojjeeccttiioonn oonnttoo vvaarriioouuss lliinneess tthhrroouugghh tthhee ppooiinntt.. IIff iiss aannyy uunniitt vveeccttoorr,, tthhee pprroojjeeccttiioonn ooff tthhee curl of F onto iiss ddeeffiinneedd ttoo bbee tthhee lliimmiittiinngg vvaalluuee ooff aa cclloosseedd lliinnee iinntteeggrraall in a plane orthogonal to aass tthhee ppaatthh uusseedd iinn tthhee iinntteeggrraall bbeeccoommeess iinnffiinniitteessiimmaallllyy cclloossee ttoo tthhee ppooiinntt,, divided by the area enclosed.
65 AAss ssuucchh,, tthhee ccuurrll ooppeerraattoorr mmaappss C1 functions from R3 to R3 to C0 ffuunnccttiioonnss ffrroomm R3 to R3.
CCoonnvveennttiioonn ffoorr vveeccttoorr oorriieennttaattiioonn ooff tthhee lliinnee iinntteeggrraall Implicitly, curl is defined by:[[22]] TThhee aabboovvee ffoorrmmuullaa mmeeaannss tthhaatt tthhee ccuurrll ooff aa vveeccttoorr ffiieelldd iiss ddeeffiinneedd aass tthhee iinnffiinniitteessiimmaall area density of the circulation ooofff ttthhhaaattt fffiiieeelllddd... TTTooo ttthhhiiisss dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn fffiiittt nnnaaatttuuurrraaallllllyyy (((iii))) ttthhheee Kelvin-Stokes theorem,,, aaasss aaa ggglllooobbbaaalll fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa cccooorrrrrreeessspppooonnndddiiinnnggg tttooo ttthhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn,,, aaannnddd (((iiiiii))) ttthhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg """eeeaaasssyyy tttooo mmeemmoorriizzee"" ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff tthhee ccuurrll iinn oorrtthhooggoonnaall ccuurrvviilliinneeaarr ccoooorrddiinnaatteess,, ee..gg.. iinn ccaarrtteessiiaann cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss,,, sssppphhheeerrriiicccaaalll,,, ooorrr cccyyyllliiinnndddrrriiicccaaalll,,, ooorrr eeevvveeennn eeelllllliiippptttiiicccaaalll ooorrr pppaaarrraaabbbooollliiicccaaalll cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss::: If (x ,x ,x ) are the Cartesian coordinates and (u ,u ,u )) aarree tthhee ccuurrvviilliinneeaarr ccoooorrddiinnaatteess,, tthheenn 1 2 3 1 2 3 iiisss ttthhheee llleeennngggttthhh ooofff ttthhheee cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteee vvveeeccctttooorrr cccooorrrrrreeessspppooonnndddiiinnnggg tttooo .
The remaining ttwwoo ccoommppoonneennttss ooff ccuurrll rreessuulltt ffrroomm ccyycclliicc iinnddeexx-permutation: 3,1,2 →→ 11,,22,,33 →→ 2,3,1.
Usage IIInnn ppprrraaaccctttiiiccceee,,, ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn iiisss rrraaarrreeelllyyy uuussseeeddd bbbeeecccaaauuussseee iiinnn vvviiirrrtttuuuaaallllllyyy aaallllll cccaaassseeesss,,, ttthhheee cccuuurrrlll operator ccaann bbee aapppplliieedd uussiinngg ssoommee sseett ooff curvilinear coordinates,, ffoorr wwhhiicchh ssiimmpplleerr rreepprreesseennttaattiioonnss have been derived.
The notation ∇×F hhaass iittss oorriiggiinnss iinn tthhee ssiimmiillaarriittiieess ttoo tthhee 33 ddiimmeennssiioonnaall ccrroossss pprroodduucctt, and it is useful as a mnemonic in CCaarrtteessiiaann ccoooorrddiinnaatteess if we take ∇ as a vector ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ooppeerraattoorr del.. SSuucchh nnoottaattiioonn iinnvvoollvviinngg operators is common in physics and aallggeebbrraa.
If certain ccoooorrddiinnaattee ssyysstteemmss aarree uusseedd,, ffoorr iinnssttaannccee,, ppoollaarr-ttoorrooiiddaall ccoooorrddiinnaatteess ((ccoommmmoonn iinn ppllaassmmaa physics) using the notation ∇××F will yield an incorrect result.
Expanded in CCaarrtteessiiaann ccoooorrddiinnaatteess (see: DDeell iinn ccyylliinnddrriiccaall aanndd sspphheerriiccaall ccoooorrddiinnaatteess for spherical and ccyylliinnddrriiccaall ccoooorrddiinnaattee representations), ∇×F is, for F ccoommppoosseedd ooff [[F , F , F ]: x y z 66  where i, j, and k are the uunniitt vveeccttoorrss for the x-, y-, and z-aaxxeess,, rreessppeeccttiivveellyy.. TThhiiss eexxppaannddss aass follows:[4] AAAlllttthhhooouuuggghhh eeexxxppprrreeesssssseeeddd iiinnn ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss,,, ttthhheee rrreeesssuuulllttt iiisss iiinnnvvvaaarrriiiaaannnttt uuunnndddeeerrr ppprrrooopppeeerrr rrroootttaaatttiiiooonnnsss ooofff tthhee ccoooorrddiinnaattee aaxxeess bbuutt tthhee rreessuulltt iinnvveerrttss uunnddeerr rreefflleeccttiioonn.. IInn aa ggeenneerraall ccoooorrddiinnaattee ssyysstteemm,, tthhee ccuurrll is given by[2] where ε denotes the Levi-CCiivviittaa ssyymmbbooll, the metric tensor is used to lloowweerr tthhee iinnddeexx on F, and the EEiinnsstteeiinn ssuummmmaattiioonn ccoonnvveennttiioonn iimmpplliieess tthhaatt rreeppeeaatteedd iinnddiicceess aarree ssuummmmeedd oovveerr.. Equivalently, where e aarree tthhee ccoooorrddiinnaattee vveeccttoorr ffiieellddss.. EEqquuiivvaalleennttllyy,, uussiinngg tthhee eexxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee, the curl k can be expressed as: Here and are the mmuussiiccaall iissoommoorrpphhiissmmss, and is the Hodge dual.. TThhiiss ffoorrmmuullaa sshhoowwss hhooww tttooo cccaaalllcccuuulllaaattteee ttthhheee cccuuurrrlll ooofff FFF iiinnn aaannnyyy cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteee sssyyysssttteeemmm,,, aaannnddd hhhooowww tttooo eeexxxttteeennnddd ttthhheee cccuuurrrlll tttooo aaannnyyy oriented three dimensional RRiieemmaannnniiaann mmaanniiffoolldd.. SSiinnccee tthhiiss ddeeppeennddss oonn aa cchhooiiccee ooff oorriieennttaattiioonn,, ccuurrll iiss a chiral ooopppeeerrraaatttiiiooonnn... IIInnn ooottthhheeerrr wwwooorrrdddsss,,, iiifff ttthhheee ooorrriiieeennntttaaatttiiiooonnn iiisss rrreeevvveeerrrssseeeddd,,, ttthhheeennn ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee cccuuurrrlll is also reversed.
Directional derivative TThhee ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa scalar function along a unit vector 67 is the function ddeeffiinneedd bbyy tthhee limit ((SSeeee ootthheerr nnoottaattiioonnss bbeellooww..)) IIff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn f is differentiable at ,, tthheenn tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee eexxiissttss aalloonngg aannyy uunniitt vveeccttoorr and one has where the oonn tthhee rriigghhtt ddeennootteess tthhee gradient and is the EEuucclliiddeeaann iinnnneerr pprroodduucctt.
At any point ,, tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f intuitively represents the rraattee ooff cchhaannggee in f along at the point .
One sometimes permits non-uuunnniiittt vvveeeccctttooorrrsss,,, aaallllllooowwwiiinnnggg ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee tttooo bbbeee tttaaakkkeeennn iiinnn ttthhheee direction of , where iiisss aaannnyyy nnnooonnnzzzeeerrrooo vvveeeccctttooorrr... IIInnn ttthhhiiisss cccaaassseee,,, ooonnneee mmmuuusssttt mmmooodddiiifffyyy ttthhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnnsss to account for the fact that mmaayy nnoott bbee normalized, so one has or in case f iiss ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee aatt , Such notation for non-uuunnniiittt vvveeeccctttooorrrsss (((uuunnndddeeefffiiinnneeeddd fffooorrr ttthhheee zzzeeerrrooo vvveeeccctttooorrr))),,, hhhooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, iiisss iiinnncccooommmpppaaatttiiibbbllleee wwwiiittthhh nnnoootttaaatttiiiooonnn uuussseeeddd eeelllssseeewwwhhheeerrreee iiinnn mmmaaattthhheeemmmaaatttiiicccsss,,, wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhheee ssspppaaaccceee ooofff dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiiooonnnsss iiinnn aaa derivation algebra iiss eexxppeecctteedd ttoo bbee aa vveeccttoorr ssppaaccee..
Notation DDiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ccaann bbee aallssoo ddeennootteedd bbyy:: IInn tthhee ccoonnttiinnuuuumm mmeecchhaanniiccss ooff ssoolliiddss SSSeeevvveeerrraaalll iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannnttt rrreeesssuuullltttsss iiinnn cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuuuummm mmmeeeccchhhaaannniiicccsss rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreee ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff vvveeeccctttooorrrsss wwwiiittthhh respect to vectors and of tteennssoorrss with respect to vectors and tensors.
[[11]] The directional directive pprroovviiddeess aa ssyysstteemmaattiicc wwaayy ooff ffiinnddiinngg tthheessee ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. TTThhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnnsss ooofff dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss fffooorrr vvvaaarrriiiooouuusss sssiiitttuuuaaatttiiiooonnnsss aaarrreee gggiiivvveeennn bbbeeelllooowww... IIIttt iiisss aaassssssuuummmeeeddd that the functtiioonnss aarree ssuuffffiicciieennttllyy ssmmooootthh tthhaatt ddeerriivvaattiivveess ccaann bbee ttaakkeenn.. 68  DDeerriivvaattiivveess ooff ssccaallaarr vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff vveeccttoorrss Let bbee aa rreeaall vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn ooff tthhee vveeccttoorr .. TThheenn tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff with respect to (or at )) iinn tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonn is the vector defined as for all vectors .
Properties: 1) If then 22)) IIff then 3) If tthheenn DDeerriivvaattiivveess ooff vveeccttoorr vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff vveeccttoorrss Let bbee aa vveeccttoorr vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn ooff tthhee vveeccttoorr .. TThheenn tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff with respect to (or at )) iinn tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonn is the second order tensor ddeeffiinneedd aass for all vectors .
Properties: 1) If then 22)) IIff then 3) If tthheenn 69  DDeerriivvaattiivveess ooff ssccaallaarr vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff sseeccoonndd-order tensors Let bbee aa rreeaall vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn ooff tthhee sseeccoonndd oorrddeerr tteennssoorr .. TThheenn tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff with respect to ((oorr aatt ) in the direction is the sseeccoonndd oorrddeerr tteennssoorr defined as for all second order tensors .
Properties: 1) If then 22)) IIff then 3) If tthheenn DDeerriivvaattiivveess ooff tteennssoorr vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff sseeccoonndd-order tensors Let bbbeee aaa ssseeecccooonnnddd ooorrrdddeeerrr ttteeennnsssooorrr vvvaaallluuueeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd ooorrrdddeeerrr ttteeennnsssooorrr .
Then the derivative of wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo (or at ) in the direction is the ffoouurrtthh oorrddeerr tteennssoorr defined as for all second order tensors .
Properties: 1) If then 22)) IIff then 70 3) If then 4) If tthheenn Exterior derivative TThhee eexxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ffoorrmm ooff ddeeggrreeee k iiss aa ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ffoorrmm ooff ddeeggrreeee k + 1.
TThheerree aarree aa vvaarriieettyy ooff eeqquuiivvaalleenntt ddeeffiinniittiioonnss ooff tthhee eexxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee.. EExxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn If ƒ iiss aa ssmmooootthh ffuunnccttiioonn,, tthheenn tthhee eexxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ƒ is the ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall of ƒ.
That is, dƒ is the unique one-form ssuucchh tthhaatt ffoorr eevveerryy ssmmooootthh vector field X, dƒ(X) = XXƒƒ, where Xƒ is the directional derivative of ƒ iinn tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonn ooff X.
Thus the exterior derivvaattiivvee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn ((oorr 0-form) is a one-form.
Exterior derivative of a k-ffoorrmm TThhee eexxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss ddeeffiinneedd ttoo bbee tthhee uunniiqquuee R-lliinneeaarr mmaappppiinngg ffrroomm k-forms to (k+1)- ffoorrmmss ssaattiissffyyiinngg tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg pprrooppeerrttiieess:: 1. dƒ iiss tthhee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ooff ƒ for smooth functions ƒ.
2. d(dƒ)) == 00 ffoorr aannyy ssmmooootthh ffuunnccttiioonn ƒ.
3. d(α∧β) = dα∧β + (−−11))p(α∧dβ) where α is a p-ffoorrmm.. TThhaatt iiss ttoo ssaayy,, dd iiss aann antiderivation ooff ddeeggrreeee 11 on the exterior algebra ooff ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ffoorrmmss.. TThhee sseeccoonndd ddeeffiinniinngg pprrooppeerrttyy hhoollddss iinn mmoorree ggeenneerraalliittyy:: iinn ffaacctt,, dd((ddα)) == 00 ffoorr aannyy k-form α.
This is part of the PPooiinnccaarréé lleemmmmaa.. TThhee tthhiirrdd ddeeffiinniinngg pprrooppeerrttyy iimmpplliieess aass aa ssppeecciiaall ccaassee tthhaatt if ƒ is a function and α a k-ffoorrmm,, tthheenn dd((ƒα) = dƒ∧α + ƒ∧dα bbeeccaauussee ffuunnccttiioonnss aarree ffoorrmmss ooff degree 0.
Exterior ddeerriivvaattiivvee iinn llooccaall ccoooorrddiinnaatteess AAlltteerrnnaattiivveellyy,, oonnee ccaann wwoorrkk eennttiirreellyy iinn aa local coordinate system (xx1,...,xn).
First, the coordinate differentials dx1,,......,,ddxn form a basic set of one-ffoorrmmss wwiitthhiinn tthhee coordinate chart.
Given a multi-index I = (i ,,......,,i ) with 1 ≤ i ≤ n for 1 ≤ p ≤ k,, tthhee eexxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa k- 1 k p form over Rn is defined as 71 For general k-forms ω = Σ f dx (where the components of the multi-iinnddeexx I run over all the I I I values in {1, ..., n}}}))),,, ttthhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee eeexxxttteeerrriiiooorrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss eeexxxttteeennndddeeeddd linearly.
Note that whenever i iiss oonnee ooff tthhee ccoommppoonneennttss ooff tthhee mmuullttii-index I then dx∧dxx = 0 (see wedge i I product).
TTThhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee eeexxxttteeerrriiiooorrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiinnn lllooocccaaalll cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss fffooollllllooowwwsss fffrrrooommm ttthhheee ppprrreeeccceeedddiiinnnggg definition.
Indeed, if ω = ƒ dxx ∧...∧dx , then I i1 ik Here, we have herree iinntteerrpprreetteedd ƒ as a zero-ffoorrmm,, aanndd tthheenn aapppplliieedd tthhee pprrooppeerrttiieess ooff tthhee I exterior derivative.
Invariant formula AAAlllttteeerrrnnnaaatttiiivvveeelllyyy,,, aaannn eeexxxpppllliiiccciiittt fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa cccaaannn bbbeee gggiiivvveeennn fffooorrr ttthhheee eeexxxttteeerrriiiooorrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa k-form ω, when paired with k++11 aarrbbiittrraarryy ssmmooootthh vector fields V ,V , ..., V : 1 2 k where [V,V] denotes LLiiee bbrraacckkeett aanndd tthhee hhaatt ddeennootteess tthhee oommiissssiioonn ooff tthhaatt eelleemmeenntt:: i j In particular, for 1-ffoorrmmss wwee hhaavvee:: ddω(X,Y) = Xω(Y) − Yω(X) − ω([X,Y]])),, wwhheerree X and Y are vector fields.
Examples 1.
Consider σ = u dx1∧dx2 oovveerr aa 11-form basis dx1,...,dxn.. TThhee eexxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss:: 72  TThhee llaasstt ffoorrmmuullaa ffoolllloowwss eeaassiillyy ffrroomm tthhee pprrooppeerrttiieess ooff tthhee wweeddggee pprroodduucctt.
Namely, .
2.
For a 1-form σ = u dx + v ddy defined over R2.. WWee hhaavvee,, bbyy aappppllyyiinngg tthhee aabboovvee ffoorrmmuullaa ttoo each term (consider x1 = x aanndd x2 = y) the following sum, D'Alembert operator In special relativity, eelleeccttrroommaaggnneettiissmm and wave theory, the dd''AAlleemmbbeerrtt ooppeerraattoorr (represented by a box: )),, aallssoo ccaalllleedd tthhee d'Alembertian or the wwaavvee ooppeerraattoorr, is the Laplace operator of MMiinnkkoowwsskkii ssppaaccee.
The operator is named for Frenchh mmaatthheemmaattiicciiaann aanndd physicist JJeeaann llee RRoonndd dd''AAlleemmbbeerrtt.. IInn MMiinnkkoowwsskkii ssppaaccee iinn ssttaannddaarrdd ccoooorrddiinnaatteess ((t, x, y, z) it has the form: Applications he Klein–Gordon equation hhaass tthhee ffoorrmm The wave equation ffoorr tthhee eelleeccttrroommaaggnneettiicc ffiieeld in vacuum is 73  where Aµ is the eelleeccttrroommaaggnneettiicc ffoouurr-potential.
The wave equation ffoorr ssmmaallll vviibbrraattiioonnss iiss ooff tthhee ffoorrmm where iiss tthhee ddiissppllaacceemmeenntt.. Green's function The Green's function ffoorr tthhee dd''AAlleemmbbeerrttiiaann iiss ddeeffiinneedd bbyy tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn where is the DDiirraacc ddeellttaa ffuunnccttiioonn and and aarree ttwwoo ppooiinnttss iinn MMiinnkkoowwsskkii ssppaaccee..
Explicitly we have where is the HHeeaavviissiiddee sstteepp ffuunnccttiioonn DDDooouuubbbllleee IIInnnttteeegggrrraaalll The ddoouubbllee iinntteeggrraall ooff ff((xx,, yy)) oovveerr tthhee rreeggiioonn RR iinn tthhee xxyy-plane iiss ddeeffiinneedd aass f(x, y) dx dy R == ((vvoolluummee aabboovvee RR aanndd uunnddeerr tthhee ggrraapphh ooff ff)) - ((vvoolluummee bbeellooww RR and above the graph of f).
• TTThhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg fffiiiggguuurrreee iiilllllluuussstttrrraaattteeesss ttthhhiiisss vvvooollluuummmeee (((iiinnn ttthhheee cccaaassseee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee gggrrraaappphhh ooofff fff iiisss aaabbbooovvveee the region R).
74 • • • CCCooommmpppuuutttiiinnnggg DDDooouuubbbllleee IIInnnttteeegggrrraaalllsss If R is the rectangle a (cid:11)(cid:11) x (cid:11) b and c (cid:11) y (cid:11) dd ((sseeee ffiigguurree bbeellooww)) tthheenn d b f(x, y) dx dy = f(x, y) dx dy R c a b d = f(x, y) dy dx a c • • • If R is the region a (cid:11)(cid:11) xx (cid:11)(cid:11) b and c(x) (cid:11) y (cid:11) dd((xx)) ((sseeee ffiigguurree bbeellooww)) tthheenn wwee iinntteeggrraattee oovveerr RR aaccccoorrddiinngg ttoo tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg eeqquuaattiioonn.. b d(x) ff((xx,, yy)) ddxx ddyy == f(x, y) dy dx R a c(x) • 75 2 J A C O B I AN MATRIX The Jacobian of a function describes the oorriieennttaattiioonn of a tangent plane ttoo tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn aatt aa ggiivveenn ppooiinntt.. IInn tthhiiss wwaayy,, the Jacobian generalizes the gradient ooofff aaa ssscccaaalllaaarrr vvvaaallluuueeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff mmmuuullltttiiipppllleee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiitttssseeelllfff gggeeennneeerrraaallliiizzzeeesss ttthhheee derivative of a scalar-vvvaaallluuueeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff aaa ssscccaaalllaaarrr... LLLiiikkkeeewwwiiissseee,,, ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn cccaaannn aaalllsssooo bbbeee ttthhhooouuuggghhhttt ooofff aaasss dddeeessscccrrriiibbbiiinnnggg ttthhheee aammoouunntt ooff ""ssttrreettcchhiinngg"" tthhaatt aa ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn iimmppoosseess.. FFoorr eexample, if (x ,y ) = f(x ,y ) iiss uusseedd ttoo ttrraannssffoorrmm aann iimmaaggee,, 2 2 1 1 the Jacobian of f, J(x ,y ) ddeessccrriibbeess hhooww mmuucchh tthhee iimmaaggee iinn tthhee nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd ooff (x ,yy ) is stretched in the x and y 1 1 1 1 directions.
IIIfff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiisss dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee aaattt aaa pppoooiiinnnttt,,, iiitttsss dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss gggiiivvveeennn iiinnn cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss bbbyyy ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn,,, bbbuuuttt aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn dddoooeeesssnnn'''ttt nneeeedd ttoo bbee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee ffoorr tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ttoo bbee ddeeffiinneedd,, ssiinnccee oonnllyy tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess are required to exist.
TThhee iimmppoorrttaannccee ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann lliieess iinn tthhee ffaacctt tthhaatt iitt rreepprreesseennttss tthhee bbeesstt linear aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ttoo aa ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn nnneeeaaarrr aaa gggiiivvveeennn pppoooiiinnnttt... IIInnn ttthhhiiisss ssseeennnssseee,,, ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn iiisss ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa mmmuuullltttiiivvvaaarrriiiaaattteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn...
If p is a point in Rn and F is ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee at p, then its derivative is given by J (p)).. IInn tthhiiss ccaassee,, tthhee linear map F described by J (p) is the best lliinneeaarr aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn of F near the point p,, iinn tthhee sseennssee tthhaatt F for x close to p and where o is the little o-nnoottaattiioonn (for ) and is the ddiissttaannccee between x and p. In a sense, both the gradient aanndd JJaaccoobbiiaann aarree ""first derivatives" — tthhee ffoorrmmeerr tthhee ffiirrsstt ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa scalar function ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess,, tthhee llaatttteerr tthhee ffiirrsstt ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa vector function ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess.. IInn ggeenneerraall,, tthhee gradient can determina bbbeee rrreeegggaaarrrdddeeeddd aaasss aaa ssspppeeeccciiiaaalll vvveeerrrsssiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn::: iiittt iiisss ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn ooofff aaa ssscccaaalllaaarrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss...
The Jacobian of the gradient hhaass aa ssppeecciiaall nnaammee:: tthhee Hessian matrix,, wwhhiicchh iinn aa sseennssee iiss tthhee ""second derivative" of tthhee ssccaallaarr ffuunnccttiioonn ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess iinn qquueessttiioonn.. Inverse According to the iinnvveerrssee ffuunnccttiioonn tthheeoorreemm, the matrix inverse ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx ooff aann invertible function is the Jacobian matrix of the inverse ffuunnccttiioonn.. TThhaatt iiss,, ffoorr ssoommee ffuunnccttiioonn F : Rn → Rn aanndd aa ppooiinntt p in Rn, IIIttt fffooollllllooowwwsss ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee (((ssscccaaalllaaarrr))) iiinnnvvveeerrrssseee ooofff ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnnaaannnttt ooofff aaa tttrrraaannnsssfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn iiisss ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnnaaannnttt ooofff ttthhheee inverse transformation.
Uses Dynamical systems Consider a dynamical system of the form xx' = F(x), where x' is the (component-wwiissee)) ttiimmee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff x, and F : Rn → Rn iiss ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss aanndd ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee.. IIff F(x ) = 0, then x iiss aa ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinntt ((aallssoo ccaalllleedd aa ffiixxeedd ppooiinntt)).. TThhee 0 0 bbeehhaavviioorr ooff tthhee ssyysstteemm nneeaarr aa ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinntt iiss rreellaatteedd ttoo tthhee eigenvalues of J (xx ), the Jacobian of F at the F 0 stationary point.
[1] SSSpppeeeccciiifffiiicccaaallllllyyy,,, iiifff ttthhheee eeeiiigggeeennnvvvaaallluuueeesss aaallllll hhhaaavvveee aaa nnneeegggaaatttiiivvveee rrreeeaaalll pppaaarrrttt,,, ttthhheeennn ttthhheee sssyyysssttteeemmm iiisss ssstttaaabbbllleee iiinnn ttthhheee 76 operating point, if any eigenvalue has a positive real part, then the point is unstable.
Newton's method A system of coupled nonlinear equations can be solved iteratively by Newton's method.
This method uses the Jacobian matrix of the system of equations.
The following is the dettail code in MATLAB function s = jacobian(f, x, tol) % f is a multivariable function handle, x is a starting point if nargin == 2 tol = 10- 5; end while 1 % if x and f(x) are row vectors, we need transpose operations here y = x' - jacob(f, x)\f(x)'; % get the next point if norm(f(y))<tol % check error tolerate s = y'; return; end x = y'; end function j = jacob(f, x) % approximately calculate Jacobian matrix k = length(x); j = zeros(k, k); for m = 1: k x2 = x; x2(m) =x(m)+0.001; j(m, :) = 1000*(f(x2)-f(x)); % partial derivatives in m-th row end Jacobian determinant If m = n, then F is a function from n-space to n-space and the Jacobian matrix is a square matrix.
We can then form its determinant, known as the Jacobian determinant.
The Jacobian determinant is sometimes simply called "the Jacobian."
The Jacobian determinant at a given point gives important information about the behavior of F near that point.
For instance, the continuously differentiable function F is invertible near a point p ∈ Rn if the Jacobian determinant at p is non-zero.
This is the inverse function theorem.
Furthermore, if the Jacobian determinant at p is positive, then F preserves orientation near p; if it is negative, F reverses orientation.
The absolute value of the Jacobian determinant at p gives us the factor by which the function F expands or shrinks volumes near p; this is why it occurs in the general substitution rule.
Uses 77 TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt iiss uusseedd wwhheenn mmaakkiinngg aa change of variables wwhheenn eevvaalluuaattiinngg aa multiple integral of a fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooovvveeerrr aaa rrreeegggiiiooonnn wwwiiittthhhiiinnn iiitttsss dddooommmaaaiiinnn... TTTooo aaaccccccooommmmmmooodddaaattteee fffooorrr ttthhheee ccchhhaaannngggeee ooofff cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss ttthhheee mmmaaagggnnniiitttuuudddeee ooofff ttthhheee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt aarriisseess aass aa mmuullttiipplliiccaattiivvee ffaaccttoorr wwiitthhiinn tthhee iinntteeggrraall.. NNoorrmmaallllyy iitt iiss rreeqquuiirreedd tthhaatt tthhee cchhaannggee ooff ccoooorrddiinnaatteess bbee ddoonnee iinn aa mmaannnneerr wwhhiicchh mmaaiinnttaaiinnss aann injectivity bbeettwweeeenn tthhee ccoooorrddiinnaatteess tthhaatt ddeetteerrmmiinnee tthhee ddoommaaiinn.
TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt,, aass aa rreessuulltt,, iiss uussuuaallllyy wweellll ddeeffiinneedd..
Examples Example 1.
The transformation from sspphheerriiccaall ccoooorrddiinnaatteess (r, θ, φ) to CCaarrtteessiiaann ccoooorrddiinnaatteess (x , x , x ) , is given by 1 2 3 the function F : R+ × [0,π] × [0,2π) → R3 wwiitthh ccoommppoonneennttss:: The Jacobian matrix for this coordinate cchhaannggee iiss The determinant is r2 sin θ.. AAss aann eexxaammppllee,, ssiinnccee dV = dx dx dx tthhiiss ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt iimmpplliieess tthhaatt tthhee differential 1 2 3 volume element dV = r2 sin θ dr dθ dϕϕ.. NNeevveerrtthheelleessss tthhiiss ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt vvaarriieess wwiitthh ccoooorrddiinnaatteess.. TToo aavvooiidd aannyy vvaarriiaattiioonn tthhee nneeww ccoooorrddiinnaatteess ccaann bbee ddeeffiinneedd aas [2] Now the determinant equals to 1 and volume element becomes .
Example 2.
TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn F : R3 → R4 with components is 78  This eexxaammppllee sshhoowwss tthhaatt tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann nneeeedd nnoott bbee aa ssqquuaarree mmaattrriixx..
Example 3.
The Jacobian determinant is equal to r.. TThhiiss sshhoowwss hhooww aann iinntteeggrraall iinn tthhee CCaarrtteessiiaann ccoooorrddiinnaattee ssyysstteemm is transformed into an integral in the ppoollaarr ccoooorrddiinnaattee ssyysstteemm: .
Example 4.
TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn F : R3 → R3 with components is From this we see that F rreevveerrsseess oorriieennttaattiioonn nneeaarr tthhoossee ppooiinnttss wwhheerree x and x hhaavvee tthhee ssaammee ssiiggnn;; tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn iiss 1 2 locally iinnvveerrttiibbllee eevveerryywwhheerree eexxcceepptt nneeaarr ppooiinnttss wwhheerree x = 0 or x == 00.. IInnttuuiittiivveellyy,, iiff yyoouu ssttaarrtt wwiitthh aa ttiinnyy oobbjjeecctt 1 2 around the point (1,1,1) and apply F tttooo ttthhhaaattt ooobbbjjjeeecccttt,,, yyyooouuu wwwiiillllll gggeeettt aaannn ooobbbjjjeeecccttt ssseeettt wwwiiittthhh aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaattteeelllyyy 444000 tttiiimmmeeesss ttthhheee vvvooollluuummmeee of the original one 79 CONCLUSION In this unit you have aaappppppllliiieeeddd pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee tttooo sssooolllvvveee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee aaannnddd cccuuurrrlll (((mmmaaattthhheeemmmaaatttiiicccsss))) ... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee aaalllsssooo aaappppppllliiieeeddd pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee sssooolllvvveee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss aaannnddd DDD’’’ Alamber operator.
You hhhaaavvveee aaappppppllliiieeeddd pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn DDDooouuubbbllleee iiinnnttteeegggrrraaalll aaannnddd EEExxxttteeerrriiiooorrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee... YYYooouuu aaalllsssooo uuussseeeddd pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx aaannnddd determinant.
SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied the : AApppplliiccaattiioonn ooff ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabbllee iinn CChhaaiinn rruullee.. AAAppppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn CCCuuurrrlll (((MMMaaattthhheeemmmaaatttiiicccsss))) AApppplliiccaattiioonn ooff ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff sseevveerraall variable in Derivatives AAAppppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn DDD’’’ AAAlllaaammmbbbeeerrr ooopppeeerrraaatttooorrr AAAppppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn DDDooouuubbbllleee iiinnnttteeegggrrraaalll Application of partial derivatiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn EEExxxttteeerrriiiooorrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee AAAppppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx aaannnddd dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnnaaannnttt TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
FFiinndd tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn ooff tthhee ttaannggeenntt ppllaannee ttoo at 2.Find the linear approximation to AATTAA aa at 22..FFiinndd tthhee aabbssoolluuttee mmiinniimmuumm aanndd aabbssoolluuttee mmaaxxiimmuumm ooff on the rectangle given by and 4.
FFFiiinnnddd ttthhheee aaabbbsssooollluuuttteee mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm aaannnddd aaabbbsssooollluuuttteee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm ooofff on the disk of radius 4, 5.
FFFiiinnnddd ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff ttthhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg iiinnn ttthhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd ooorrrdddeeerrr ::: a. F(x,y) = x2- 2xy+6xx- 2y+1 b. F(x,y) = exy References 80 J. E. Marsden and T. J. R. Hughes, 2000, Mathematical Foundations of Elasticity, Dover.
Hildebrand, F. B.
(1976).
Advanced Calculus for Applications.
Prentice Hall.
ISBN 0130111899.
Hernandez Rodriguez and Lopez Fernandez, A Semiotic Reflection on the Didactics of the Chain Rule, The Montana Mathematics Enthusiast, ISSN 1551-3440, Vol.
7, nos.2&3, pp.321–332.
Apostol, Tom (1974).
Mathematical analysis (2nd ed.
ed.).
Addison Wesley.
Theorem 5.5.
Flanders, Harley (1989).
Differential forms with applications to the physical sciences.
New York: Dover Publications.
pp.
20.
ISBN 0-486-66169-5.
Ramanan, S. (2005).
Global calculus.
Providence, Rhode Island: American Mathematical Society.
pp.
54.
ISBN 0-8218-3702-8.
Conlon, Lawrence (2001).
Differentiable manifolds.
Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser.
pp.
239.
ISBN 0-8176-4134-3.
Darling, R. W. R. (1994).
Differential forms and connections.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
pp.
35.
ISBN 0-521-46800-0.
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Exterior_derivative&oldid=472668495" D.K.
Arrowsmith and C.M.
Place, Dynamical Systems, Section 3.3, Chapman & Hall, London, 1992.
ISBN 0-412-39080-9.
Taken from http://www.sjcrothers.plasmaresources.com/schwarzschild.pdf - On the Gravitational Field of a Mass Point according to Einstein’s Theory by K. Schwarzschild - arXiv:physics/9905030 v1 (text of the original paper, in Wikisource MODULE 3 TOTAL DERIVATIVES OF FUNCTION OF SEVERAL VARIABLES -Unit 1:Derivative -Unit 2: Total derivative.
-Unit 3:Application of Total derivative.
UNIT 1 : DERIVATIVE CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Solve directional derivatives 81 UUUssseee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee tttooo sssooolllvvveee TTToootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,, tttoootttaaalll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalll aaannnddd JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-MMaarrkkeedd AAssssiiggnnmmeenntt 77..00 RReeffeerreenncceess//FFuurrtthheerr RReeaaddiinnggss Introduction TTThhhiiisss aaarrrtttiiicccllleee iiisss aaannn ooovvveeerrrvvviiieeewww ooofff ttthhheee ttteeerrrmmm aaasss uuussseeeddd iiinnn cccaaalllcccuuullluuusss... FFFooorrr aaa llleeessssss ttteeeccchhhnnniiicccaaalll ooovvveeerrrvvviiieeewww ooofff the subject, see DDiiffffeerreennttiiaall ccaallccuulluuss.
For other uses, see DDeerriivvaattiivvee ((ddiissaammbbiigguuaattiioonn)).
TThhee ggrraapphh ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn,, ddrraawwnn iinn bbllaacckk,, aanndd aa tangent line ttoo tthhaatt ffuunnccttiioonn,, ddrraawwnn iinn rreedd.. TThhee ssslllooopppeee ooofff ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt llliiinnneee iiisss eeeqqquuuaaalll tttooo ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaattt ttthhheee mmmaaarrrkkkeeeddd pppoooiiinnnttt...
In calculus, a branch of mmaatthheemmaattiiccss, the derivative iiss aa mmeeaassuurree ooff hhooww aa function changes as its input changes.
LLLoooooossseeelllyyy ssspppeeeaaakkkiiinnnggg,,, aaa dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee cccaaannn bbbeee ttthhhooouuuggghhhttt ooofff aaasss hhhooowww mmmuuuccchhh ooonnneee qqquuuaaannntttiiitttyyy iiisss ccchhhaaannngggiiinnnggg iiinnn rrreeessspppooonnnssseee tttooo ccchhhaaannngggeeesss iiinnn sssooommmeee ooottthhheeerrr qqquuuaaannntttiiitttyyy;;; fffooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff ttthhheee pppooosssiiitttiiiooonnn ooofff aaa mmmooovvviiinnnggg ooobbbjjjeeecccttt wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo tttiiimmmeee iiisss ttthhheee ooobbbjjjeeecccttt'''sss iiinnnssstttaaannntttaaannneeeooouuusss velocity.
TThhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn aatt aa cchhoosseenn iinnppuutt vvaalluuee ddeessccrriibbeess tthhee bbeesstt lliinneeaarr aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn of thee ffuunnccttiioonn nneeaarr tthhaatt iinnppuutt vvaalluuee.. FFoorr aa real-valued function ooff aa ssiinnggllee rreeaall vvaarriiaabbllee,, tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee aatt aa ppooiinntt eeqquuaallss tthhee slope of the tangent line to the ggrraapphh ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn at that ppooiinntt.. IInn hhiigghheerr ddiimmeennssiioonnss,, tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn aatt aa ppooiinntt iiss aa lliinneeaarr ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn called the linearization.
[1] AA cclloosseellyy rreellaatteedd nnoottiioonn iiss tthhee differreennttiiaall ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn.
TThhee pprroocceessss ooff ffiinnddiinngg aa ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss ccaalllleedd differentiation.. TThhee rreevveerrssee pprroocceessss iiss ccaalllleedd antidifferentiation.
The ffuunnddaammeennttaall tthheeoorreemm ooff ccaallccuulluuss ssttaatteess tthhaatt aannttiiddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn iiss tthhee same as integration.. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn aanndd iinntteeggrraattiioonn ccoonnssttiittuuttee tthhee ttwwoo ffuunnddaammeennttaall ooppeerraattiioonnss in single-variable calculus.
OBJECTIVES IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo :: 82 Solve directional derivatives UUUssseee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee tttooo sssooolllvvveee TTToootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,, tttoootttaaalll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalll aaannnddd JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx Main content Directional derivatives If ƒ is a real-vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn oonn Rn, then the partial derivatives of ƒ mmeeaassuurree iittss vvaarriiaattiioonn iinn tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonn ooff tthhee ccoooorrddiinnaattee aaxxeess.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, iiff ƒ is a function of x aanndd y, then its partial ddeerriivvaattiivveess mmeeaassuurree tthhee vvaarriiaattiioonn iinn ƒ in the x direction and the y ddiirreeccttiioonn.. TThheeyy ddoo nnoott,, hhoowweevveerr,, ddiirreeccttllyy mmeeaassuurree tthhee vvaarriiaattiioonn ooff ƒ iinn aannyy ootthheerr ddiirreeccttiioonn,, ssuucchh aass aalloonngg tthhee ddiiaaggoonnaall line y = x... TTThhheeessseee aaarrreee mmmeeeaaasssuuurrreeeddd uuusssiiinnnggg dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss... CCChhhoooooossseee aaa vvveeeccctttooorrr The directional derivative ooff ƒ in the direction of v at the point x iiss tthhee lliimmiitt IIInnn sssooommmeee cccaaassseeesss iiittt mmmaaayyy bbbeee eeeaaasssiiieeerrr tttooo cccooommmpppuuuttteee ooorrr eeessstttiiimmmaaattteee ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee aaafffttteeerrr ccchhhaaannngggiiinnnggg ttthhheee llleeennngggttthhh ooofff ttthhheee vvveeeccctttooorrr... OOOfffttteeennn ttthhhiiisss iiisss dddooonnneee tttooo tttuuurrrnnn ttthhheee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm iiinnntttooo ttthhheee cccooommmpppuuutttaaatttiiiooonnn of a directionaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiinnn ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff aaa uuunnniiittt vvveeeccctttooorrr... TTTooo ssseeeeee hhhooowww ttthhhiiisss wwwooorrrkkksss,,, sssuuuppppppooossseee that v = λu.
Substitute h = k//λλ iiinnntttooo ttthhheee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnccceee qqquuuoootttiiieeennnttt... TTThhheee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnccceee qqquuuoootttiiieeennnttt bbbeeecccooommmeeesss::: This is λ ttiimmeess tthhee ddiiffffeerreennccee qquuoottiieenntt ffoorr tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ff with respect to u. FFuurrtthheerrmmoorree,, ttaakkiinngg tthhee lliimmiitt aass h tteennddss ttoo zzeerroo iiss tthhee ssaammee aass ttaakkiinngg tthhee lliimmiitt aass k tends to zero because h and k aarree mmuullttiipplleess ooff eeaacchh ootthheerr.. TThheerreeffoorree D (ƒ) = λD ((ƒƒ)).. BBeeccaauussee ooff tthhiiss v u rreessccaalliinngg pprrooppeerrttyy,, ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aarree ffrreeqquueennttllyy ccoonnssiiddeerreedd oonnllyy ffoorr uunniitt vveeccttoorrss.. IIff aallll tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff ƒ exist and are continuous at x,, tthheenn tthheeyy ddeetteerrmmiinnee tthhee directional derivative of ƒ iinn tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonn v by the formula: TThhiiss iiss aa ccoonnsseeqquueennccee ooff tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff tthhee total derivative.. IItt ffoolllloowwss tthhaatt tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonnaall derivative is linear in v,, mmeeaanniinngg tthhaatt D (ƒ) = D (ƒ) + D (ƒ).
v + w v w TThhee ssaammee ddeeffiinniittiioonn aallssoo wwoorrkkss wwhheenn ƒ is a function with values in Rm.. TThhee aabboovvee ddeeffiinniittiioonn iiisss aaappppppllliiieeeddd tttooo eeeaaaccchhh cccooommmpppooonnneeennnttt ooofff ttthhheee vvveeeccctttooorrrsss... IIInnn ttthhhiiisss cccaaassseee,,, ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss aaa vvveeeccctttooorrr in Rm.
83  TToottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee,, ttoottaall ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall aanndd JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrix When ƒ iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn ffrroomm aann ooppeenn ssuubbsseett ooff Rn to Rm,, tthheenn tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ƒ in a cchhoosseenn ddiirreeccttiioonn iiss tthhee bbeesstt lliinneeaarr aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ttoo ƒ aatt tthhaatt ppooiinntt aanndd iinn tthhaatt ddiirreeccttiioonn.. BBuutt when n >> 11,, nnoo ssiinnggllee ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ccaann ggiivvee aa ccoommpplleettee ppiiccttuurree ooff tthhee bbeehhaavviioorr ooff ƒ. TThhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee,, aallssoo ccaalllleedd tthhee ((total) differential,, ggiivveess aa ccoommpplleettee ppiiccttuurree bbyy ccoonnssiiddeerriinngg aallll ddiirreeccttiioonnss aatt oonncce.
That is, for any vector v ssttaarrttiinngg aatt a, the linear aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ffoorrmmuullaa hhoollddss:: Just like the single-vvaarriiaabbllee ddeerriivvaattiivvee,, ƒ(cid:11)′(a)) iiss cchhoosseenn ssoo tthhaatt tthhee eerrrroorr iinn tthhiiss aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn iiss aass ssmmaallll aass ppoossssiibbllee..
If n and m aarree bbootthh oonnee,, tthheenn tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ƒ(cid:11)′(a)) iiss aa nnuummbbeerr aanndd tthhee eexxpprreessssiioonn ƒ(cid:11)′(a)v is ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt ooofff tttwwwooo nnnuuummmbbbeeerrrsss... BBBuuuttt iiinnn hhhiiiggghhheeerrr dddiiimmmeeennnsssiiiooonnnsss,,, iiittt iiisss iiimmmpppooossssssiiibbbllleee fffooorrr ƒ(cid:11)′(a) to be a nnuummbbeerr.. IIff iitt wweerree aa nnuummbbeerr,, tthheenn ƒ(cid:11)′(a)v would be a vector in Rn wwhhiillee tthhee ootthheerr tteerrmmss would be vectors in Rm,, aanndd tthheerreeffoorree tthhee ffoorrmmuullaa wwoouulldd nnoott mmaakkee sseennssee.. FFoorr tthhee lliinneeaarr aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ffoorrmmuullaa ttoo mmaakkee sseennssee,, ƒ(cid:11)′(a)) mmuusstt bbee aa ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt sseennddss vveeccttoorrss iinn Rn to vectors in Rm, and ƒ(cid:11)′(a)v mmuusstt ddeennoottee tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn eevvaalluuaatteedd aatt v. TToo ddeetteerrmmiinnee wwhhaatt kkiinndd ooff ffuunnccttiioonn iitt iiss,, nnoottiiccee tthhaatt tthhee lliinneeaarr aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ffoorrmmuullaa ccaann bbee rewritten as NNoottiiccee tthhaatt iiff wwee cchhoooossee aannootthheerr vveeccttoorr w,, tthheenn tthhiiss aapppprrooxxiimmaattee eeqquuaattiioonn ddeetteerrmmiinneess aannootthheerr aapppprrooxxiimmaattee eeqquuaattiioonn bbyy ssuubbssttiittuuttiinngg w for v.. IItt ddeetteerrmmiinneess aa tthhiirrdd aapppprrooxxiimmaattee eeqquuaattiioonn bbyy substituting both w for v and aa + v for a.. BByy ssuubbttrraaccttiinngg tthheessee ttwwoo nneeww eeqquuaattiioonnss,, wwee ggeett If we assume that v iiisss sssmmmaaallllll aaannnddd ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee vvvaaarrriiieeesss cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuooouuussslllyyy iiinnn a, then ƒ(cid:11)′(a + v) is approximately equal to ƒ(cid:11)(cid:11)′′((a), and therefore the right-hhaanndd ssiiddee iiss aapppprrooxxiimmaatteellyy zzeerroo.. TThhee left-hhhaaannnddd sssiiidddeee cccaaannn bbbeee rrreeewwwrrriiitttttteeennn iiinnn aaa dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt wwwaaayyy uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee llliiinnneeeaaarrr aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnn fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa wwwiiittthhh v + w substituted for v.. TThhee lliinneeaarr aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ffoorrmmuullaa iimmpplliieess:: This suggests that ƒ(cid:11)′(a) is aa linear transformation ffrroomm tthhee vveeccttoorr ssppaaccee Rn to the vector space Rm... IIInnn fffaaacccttt,,, iiittt iiisss pppooossssssiiibbbllleee tttooo mmmaaakkkeee ttthhhiiisss aaa ppprrreeeccciiissseee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiiooonnn bbbyyy mmmeeeaaasssuuurrriiinnnggg ttthhheee eeerrrrrrooorrr iiinnn ttthhheee apppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnnsss... AAAssssssuuummmeee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee eeerrrrrrooorrr iiinnn ttthhheeessseee llliiinnneeeaaarrr aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnn fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa iiisss bbbooouuunnndddeeeddd bbbyyy aaa constant times ||v||||,, wwhheerree tthhee ccoonnssttaanntt iiss iinnddeeppeennddeenntt ooff v bbuutt ddeeppeennddss ccoonnttiinnuuoouussllyy oonn a. TTThhheeennn,,, aaafffttteeerrr aaaddddddiiinnnggg aaannn aaapppppprrroooppprrriiiaaattteee eeerrrrrrooorrr ttteeerrrmmm,,, aaallllll ooofff ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaattteee equalities can be rreepphhrraasseedd aass iinneeqquuaalliittiieess.. IInn ppaarrttiiccuullaarr,, ƒ(cid:11)′(a)) iiss aa lliinneeaarr ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn uupp ttoo aa ssmmaallll eerrrroorr term.
In the limit as v and w tteenndd ttoo zzeerroo,, iitt mmuusstt tthheerreeffoorree bbee aa lliinneeaarr ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn.. SSiinnccee 84 wwee ddeeffiinnee tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee bbyy ttaakkiinngg aa lliimmiitt aass v goes to zero, ƒ(cid:11)′(aa) must be a linear transformation.
IIInnn ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee,,, ttthhheee fffaaacccttt ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss ttthhheee bbbeeesssttt llliiinnneeeaaarrr aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnn iiisss eeexxxppprrreeesssssseeeddd bbbyyy tthhee ffaacctt tthhaatt iitt iiss tthhee lliimmiitt ooff ddiiffffeerreennccee qquuoottiieennttss.. HHoowweevveerr,, tthhee uussuuaall ddiiffffeerreennccee qquuoottiieenntt ddooeess nnnooottt mmmaaakkkeee ssseeennnssseee iiinnn hhhiiiggghhheeerrr dddiiimmmeeennnsssiiiooonnnsss bbbeeecccaaauuussseee iiittt iiisss nnnooottt uuusssuuuaaallllllyyy pppooossssssiiibbbllleee tttooo dddiiivvviiidddeee vvveeeccctttooorrrsss... IIInnn pppaaarrrtttiiicccuuulllaaarrr,,, ttthhheee nnnuuummmeeerrraaatttooorrr aaannnddd dddeeennnooommmiiinnnaaatttooorrr ooofff ttthhheee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnccceee qqquuuoootttiiieeennnttt aaarrreee nnnooottt eeevvveeennn iiinnn ttthhheee sssaaammmeee vector space: The numeraattoorr lliieess iinn tthhee ccooddoommaaiinn Rm wwhhiillee tthhee ddeennoommiinnaattoorr lliieess iinn tthhee domain Rn... FFFuuurrrttthhheeerrrmmmooorrreee,,, ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss aaa llliiinnneeeaaarrr tttrrraaannnsssfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn,,, aaa dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt tttyyypppeee ooofff ooobbbjjjeeecccttt ffrroomm bbootthh tthhee nnuummeerraattoorr aanndd ddeennoommiinnaattoorr.. TToo mmaakkee pprreecciissee tthhee iiddeeaa tthhaatt ƒƒ(cid:11)′(cid:11)(a) is the best linear apppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnn,,, iiittt iiisss nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrryyy tttooo aaadddaaapppttt aaa dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa fffooorrr ttthhheee ooonnneee-variable ddeerriivvaattiivvee iinn wwhhiicchh tthheessee pprroobblleemmss ddiissaappppeeaarr.. IIff ƒ : R → R,, tthheenn tthhee uussuuaall ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee mmaayy bbee mmaanniippuullaatteedd ttoo sshhooww tthhaatt tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ƒ at a iiss tthhee uunniiqquuee nnumber ƒ(cid:11)′(a) such that This is equivalent to bbbeeecccaaauuussseee ttthhheee llliiimmmiiittt ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ttteeennndddsss tttooo zzzeeerrrooo iiifff aaannnddd ooonnnlllyyy iiifff ttthhheee llliiimmmiiittt ooofff ttthhheee aaabbbsssooollluuuttteee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn tteennddss ttoo zzeerroo.. TThhiiss llaasstt ffoorrmmuullaa ccaann bbee aaddaapptteedd ttoo tthhee mmaannyy-vvaarriiaabbllee ssiittuuaattiioonn bbyy replacing the abssoolluuttee vvaalluueess wwiitthh norms.
The definition of the ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee of ƒ at a,, tthheerreeffoorree,, iiss tthhaatt iitt iiss tthhee uunniiqquuee lliinneeaarr transformation ƒ(cid:11)′(a) : Rn →→ Rm such that Here h is a vector in Rn,,, sssooo ttthhheee nnnooorrrmmm iiinnn ttthhheee dddeeennnooommmiiinnnaaatttooorrr iiisss ttthhheee ssstttaaannndddaaarrrddd llleeennngggttthhh ooonnn Rn.
However, ƒ′(a)h iiss aa vveeccttoorr iinn Rm,, aanndd tthhee nnoorrmm iinn tthhee nnuummeerraattoorr iiss tthhee ssttaannddaarrdd lleennggtthh oonn Rm.
If v iiss aa vveeccttoorr ssttaarrttiinngg aatt a, then ƒ(cid:11)′(a)v is called the ppuusshhffoorrwwaarrdd of v by ƒ and is sometimes written ƒ v. * IIff tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee eexxiissttss aatt a,, tthheenn aallll tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aanndd ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff ƒ exist at a, and for all v, ƒ(cid:11)(cid:11)′′(a)v is the directional derivative of ƒ iinn tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonn v. If we write ƒ uussiinngg ccoooorrddiinnaattee ffuunnccttiioonnss,, ssoo tthhaatt ƒ = (ƒ , ƒ , ..., ƒ )),, tthheenn tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ccaann bbee 1 2 m eexxpprreesssseedd uussiinngg tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aass aa matrix.. TThhiiss mmaattrriixx iiss ccaalllleedd tthhee Jacobian matrix of ƒ at a: 85 The existence of the ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ƒ′(a)) iiss ssttrriiccttllyy ssttrroonnggeerr tthhaann tthhee eexxiisstteennccee ooff aallll tthhee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss,,, bbbuuuttt iiifff ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss eeexxxiiisssttt aaannnddd aaarrreee cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuooouuusss,,, ttthhheeennn ttthhheee tttoootttaaalll ddeerriivvaattiivvee eexxiissttss,, iiss ggiivveenn bbyy tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann,, aanndd ddeeppeennddss ccoonnttiinnuuoouussllyy oonn a.
The definitionnn ooofff ttthhheee tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee sssuuubbbsssuuummmeeesss ttthhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiinnn ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee... That is, if ƒ is a real-vvvaaallluuueeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff aaa rrreeeaaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee,,, ttthhheeennn ttthhheee tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee eeexxxiiissstttsss iiifff aaannnddd oonnllyy iiff tthhee uussuuaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee eexxiissttss.. TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx rreedduucceess ttoo aa 11××11 mmaattrriixx wwhhoossee oonnllyy entry is the derivative ƒ′(x)))... TTThhhiiisss 111×××111 mmmaaatttrrriiixxx sssaaatttiiisssfffiiieeesss ttthhheee ppprrrooopppeeerrrtttyyy ttthhhaaattt ƒ(a + h) − ƒ(a) − ƒ(cid:11)′(a)h iiss aapppprrooxxiimmaatteellyy zzeerroo,, iinn ootthheerr wwoorrddss tthhaatt UUUppp tttooo ccchhhaaannngggiiinnnggg vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss,,, ttthhhiiisss iiisss ttthhheee ssstttaaattteeemmmeeennnttt ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn is the best linear approximation to ƒ at a. TTThhheee tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn dddoooeeesss nnnooottt gggiiivvveee aaannnooottthhheeerrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiinnn ttthhheee sssaaammmeee wwwaaayyy aaasss ttthhheee ooonnneee- vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee cccaaassseee... TTThhhiiisss iiisss bbbeeecccaaauuussseee ttthhheee tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa mmmuuullltttiiivvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn hhhaaasss tttooo rrreeecccooorrrddd much more information thann tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ssiinnggllee-vvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonn.. IInnsstteeaadd,, tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ggiivveess aa ffuunnccttiioonn ffrroomm tthhee tangent bundle ooff tthhee ssoouurrccee ttoo tthhee ttaannggeenntt bbuunnddllee ooff tthhee target.
The naturraall aannaalloogg ooff sseeccoonndd,, tthhiirrdd,, aanndd hhiigghheerr-oorrddeerr ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess iiss nnoott aa lliinneeaarr tttrrraaannnsssfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn,,, iiisss nnnooottt aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooonnn ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt bbbuuunnndddllleee,,, aaannnddd iiisss nnnooottt bbbuuuiiilllttt bbbyyy rrreeepppeeeaaattteeedddlllyyy tttaaakkkiiinnnggg tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee.. TThhee aannaalloogg ooff aa hhiigghheerr-order derivative, called a jet,, ccaannnnoott bbee aa lliinneeaarr ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn bbeeccaauussee hhiigghheerr-oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess rreefflleecctt ssuubbttllee ggeeoommeettrriicc iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn,, ssuucchh aass ccoonnccaavviittyy,, wwhhiicchh ccaannnnoott bbee ddeessccrriibbeedd iinn tteerrmmss ooff lliinneeaarr ddaattaa ssuucchh aass vveeccttoorrss.. IItt ccaannnnoott bbee aa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooonnn ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt bbbuuunnndddllleee bbbeeecccaaauuussseee ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt bbbuuunnndddllleee ooonnnlllyyy hhhaaasss rrroooooommm fffooorrr ttthhheee bbbaaassseee ssspppaaaccceee aanndd tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. BBeeccaauussee jjeettss ccaappttuurree hhiigghheerr-oorrddeerr iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn,, tthheeyy ttaakkee aass aarrgguummeennttss aaddddiittiioonnaall ccoooorrddiinnaatteess rreepprreesenting higher-oorrddeerr cchhaannggeess iinn ddiirreeccttiioonn.. TThhee ssppaaccee ddeetteerrmmiinneedd bbyy tthheessee aaddddiittiioonnaall ccoooorrddiinnaatteess iiss ccaalllleedd tthhee jet bundle.. TThhee rreellaattiioonn bbeettwweeeenn tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee aanndd tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn iiss ppaarraalllleelleedd iinn tthhee rreellaattiioonn bbeettwweeeenn the kttthhh ooorrrdddeeerrr jjjeeettt ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaannnddd iiitttsss pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff ooorrrdddeeerrr llleeessssss ttthhhaaannn ooorrr eeeqqquuuaaalll tttooo k. Conclusion IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee uuussseeeddd dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee tttooo sssooolllvvveee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss ooonnn dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss aaannnddd hhhaaavvveee aaalllsssooo sssooolllvvveee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss ooonnn tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,,tttoootttaaalll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn aaannnddd JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx... Summary In this unit you have studied : Solve directional derivatives UUUssseee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee tttooo sssooolllvvveee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss ooonnn tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee,,, tttoootttaaalll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn aaannnddd JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx... Tutor-Marked Assignment 11..EEvvaalluuaattee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff FF((xx,,yy,,zz)) == 33((x2+ y)sin(z2) 86 2.Find the derivative of F(x,y,z) = xy3+ z4 3.Let F(x,y,z) = x5+ y4z3+sin z2 ,find the derivative.
4.Evaluate the derivatives of F(x,y,z) = x2- xy+ z4 sin x+cos2x 5.Find the derivative of F(x,y,z) = tan- 1x References/Further Readings (cid:11) Anton, Howard; Bivens, Irl; Davis, Stephen (February 2, 2005), Calculus: Early Transcendentals Single and Multivariable (8th ed.
), New York: Wiley, ISBN 978-0-471- 47244-5 (cid:11) Apostol, Tom M. (June 1967), Calculus, Vol.
1: One-Variable Calculus with an Introduction to Linear Algebra, 1 (2nd ed.
), Wiley, ISBN 978-0-471-00005-1 (cid:11) Apostol, Tom M. (June 1969), Calculus, Vol.
2: Multi-Variable Calculus and Linear Algebra with Applications, 1 (2nd ed.
), Wiley, ISBN 978-0-471-00007-5 (cid:11) Courant, Richard; John, Fritz (December 22, 1998), Introduction to Calculus and Analysis, Vol.
1, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-65058-4 (cid:11) Eves, Howard (January 2, 1990), An Introduction to the History of Mathematics (6th ed.
), Brooks Cole, ISBN 978-0-03-029558-4 (cid:11) Larson, Ron; Hostetler, Robert P.; Edwards, Bruce H. (February 28, 2006), Calculus: Early Transcendental Functions (4th ed.
), Houghton Mifflin Company, ISBN 978-0-618- 60624-5 (cid:11) Spivak, Michael (September 1994), Calculus (3rd ed.
), Publish or Perish, ISBN 978-0- 914098-89-8 (cid:11) Stewart, James (December 24, 2002), Calculus (5th ed.
), Brooks Cole, ISBN 978-0-534- 39339-7 (cid:11) Thompson, Silvanus P. (September 8, 1998), Calculus Made Easy (Revised, Updated, Expanded ed.
), New York: St. Martin's Press, ISBN 978-0-312-18548-0 87  UUNNIITT 22:: TTOOTTAALL DDEERRIIVVAATTIIVVEE CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee wwiitthh iinnddiirreecctt ddeeppeennddeenntt 3.2 TThhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee vviiaa differentials 3.3 TThhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee aass aa lliinneeaarr mmaapp 3.4 sTToottaall ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall eeqquuaattiioonn.. 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-MMaarrkkeedd AAssssiiggnnmmeenntt 77..00 RReeffeerreenncceess//FFuurrtthheerr RReeaaddiinnggss 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the mathematical field of ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ccaallccuulluuss, the term ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee has a number of closely related meanings.
TThhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ((ffuullll ddeerriivvaattiivvee)) ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn f,, ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess,, ee..gg..,, t, x, y, etc., with rreessppeecctt ttoo oonnee ooff iittss iinnppuutt vvaarriiaabblleess,, ee..gg..,, t, is different from the ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee (( ).
CCaallccuullaattiioonn ooff tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f with respect to t ddooeess nnoott aassssuummee tthhaatt tthhee ootthheerr aarrgguummeennttss aarree ccoonnssttaanntt wwhhiillee t vvaarriieess;; iinnsstteeaadd,, iitt aalllloowwss tthhee ootthheerr aarrgguummeennttss ttoo ddeeppeenndd oonn t. TThhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee aaddddss iinn tthheessee indirect dependencies ttoo ffiinndd tthhee oovveerraallll ddeeppeennddeennccyy ooff f on t.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f(t,x,y) with respect to t is CCoonnssiiddeerr mmuullttiippllyyiinngg bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn bbyy tthhee differential : 88 TThhee rreessuulltt wwiillll bbee tthhee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall cchhaannggee in the function f. Because f ddeeppeennddss oonn t, some ooff tthhaatt cchhaannggee wwiillll bbee dduuee ttoo tthhee partial derivative of f with respect to t.. HHoowweevveerr,, ssoommee ooff that change will aallssoo bbee dduuee ttoo tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff f wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo tthhee vvaarriiaabblleess x and y.
So, the differential iiss aapppplliieedd ttoo tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff x and y ttoo ffiinndd ddiiffffeerreennttiiaallss and , wwhhiicchh ccaann tthheenn bbee uusseedd ttoo ffiinndd tthhee ccoonnttrriibbuuttiioonn ttoo .
• It refers to a ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ooppeerraattoorr such as wwhhiicchh ccoommppuutteess tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn ((wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo xx in this case).
• IItt rreeffeerrss ttoo tthhee ((ttoottaall)) ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ddf ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn,, eeiitthheerr iinn tthhee ttrraaddiittiioonnaall llaanngguuaaggee ooff infinitesimals oorr tthhee mmooddeerrnn llaanngguuaaggee ooff differential forms.
• AA ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ooff tthhee ffoorrmm is called a ttoottaall ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall or an exact differential iiff iitt iiss tthhee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall ooff aa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn... AAAgggaaaiiinnn ttthhhiiisss cccaaannn bbbeee iiinnnttteeerrrppprrreeettteeeddd iiinnnfffiiinnniiittteeesssiiimmmaaallllllyyy,,, ooorrr bbbyyy uuusssiiinnnggg dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalll fffooorrrmmmsss and the eexxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee.
• IItt iiss aannootthheerr nnaammee ffoorr tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee aass aa lliinneeaarr mmaapp,, ii..ee..,, iiff f is a ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonn from Rn to Rm,, tthheenn tthhee ((ttoottaall)) ddeerriivvaattiivvee ((oorr ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall)) ooff f at x∈RRn is the linear map from Rn to Rm wwhhoossee mmaattrriixx iiss tthhee Jacobian matrix of f at x.
• It is a synonym for the ggrraaddiieenntt,, wwhhiicchh iiss eesssseennttiiaallllyy tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn ffrroomm Rn to R. • IItt iiss ssoommeettiimmeess uusseedd aass aa ssyynnoonnyymm ffoorr tthhee material derivative, ,, iinn fflluuiidd mmeecchhaanniiccss 2.0 OBJECTIVE After sttuuddyyiinngg tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee wwiitthh iinnddiirreecctt ddeeppeennddeenntt ffiinndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee vviiaa ddiiffffeerreennttiiaallss ssoollvvee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee aass aa lliinneeaarr mmaapp 89 kknnooww ttoottaall ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall eeqquuaattiioonn.. 3.0 MAIN CONTENT DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn wwiitthh iinnddiirreecctt ddeeppeennddeenncciieess Suppose that f iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff ttwwoo vvaarriiaabblleess,, x and y.. NNoorrmmaallllyy tthheessee vvaarriiaabblleess aarree aassssuummeedd ttoo bbbeee iiinnndddeeepppeeennndddeeennnttt... HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, iiinnn sssooommmeee sssiiitttuuuaaatttiiiooonnnsss ttthhheeeyyy mmmaaayyy bbbeee dddeeepppeeennndddeeennnttt ooonnn eeeaaaccchhh ooottthhheeerrr... FFFooorrr example y ccoouulldd bbee aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff x, constraining the domain of f ttoo aa ccuurrvvee in R2.
In this case the partial derivative of f wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x ddooeess nnoott ggiivvee tthhee ttrruuee rraattee ooff cchhaannggee ooff f with respect to changing x bbeeccaauussee cchhaannggiinngg x necessarily changes y.
The ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee takes ssuucchh ddeeppeennddeenncciieess iinnttoo aaccccoouunntt.. For example, suppose f(x,y) = xy.
The rate of change of f wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x iiss uussuuaallllyy tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f with respect to x; in this case, .
However, if y depends on x,,, ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee dddoooeeesss nnnooottt gggiiivvveee ttthhheee tttrrruuueee rrraaattteee ooofff ccchhhaaannngggeee ooofff f as x changes because it holds y ffiixxeedd.. SSuuppppoossee wwee aarree ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd ttoo tthhee lliinnee y = x then f(x,y) = f(x,x) = x2.
IInn tthhaatt ccaassee,, tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f with respect to x is .
Notice that thhiiss iiss nnoott eeqquuaall ttoo tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee:: .
90 WWWhhhiiillleee ooonnneee cccaaannn ooofffttteeennn pppeeerrrfffooorrrmmm sssuuubbbssstttiiitttuuutttiiiooonnnsss tttooo eeellliiimmmiiinnnaaattteee iiinnndddiiirrreeecccttt dddeeepppeeennndddeeennnccciiieeesss,,, ttthhheee chain rule pprroovviiddeess ffoorr aa mmoorree eeffffiicciieenntt aanndd ggeenneerraall tteecchhnniiqquuee.. SSuuppppoossee M(t, p ,, ......,, pp ) is a function of 1 n time t and n variables p wwwhhhiiiccchhh ttthhheeemmmssseeelllvvveeesss dddeeepppeeennnddd ooonnn tttiiimmmeee... TTThhheeennn,,, ttthhheee tttoootttaaalll tttiiimmmeee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff i M is TThhiiss eexxpprreessssiioonn iiss oofftteenn uusseedd iinn physics for a gauge transformation ooff tthhee Lagrangian, as two LLLaaagggrrraaannngggiiiaaannnsss ttthhhaaattt dddiiiffffffeeerrr ooonnnlllyyy bbbyyy ttthhheee tttoootttaaalll tttiiimmmeee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff tttiiimmmeee aaannnddd ttt generalized coordinates lleeaadd ttoo tthhee ssaammee eeqquuaattiioonnss ooff mmoottiioonn.. TThhee ooppeerraattoorr iinn bbrraacckkeettss ((iinn tthhee fffiiinnnaaalll eeexxxppprrreeessssssiiiooonnn))) iiisss aaalllsssooo cccaaalllllleeeddd ttthhheee tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooopppeeerrraaatttooorrr (((wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo t).
FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f(x(t), y(t)) is Here there is no ∂f / ∂t tteerrmm ssiinnccee f iittsseellff ddooeess nnoott ddeeppeenndd oonn tthhee iinnddeeppeennddeenntt vvaarriiaabbllee t directly TThhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee vviiaa ddiiffffeerreennttiiaallss DDDiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalllsss ppprrrooovvviiidddeee aaa sssiiimmmpppllleee wwwaaayyy tttooo uuunnndddeeerrrssstttaaannnddd ttthhheee tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee... FFFooorrr iiinnnssstttaaannnccceee,,, sssuuuppppppooossseee iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff ttiimmee t and n variables p aass iinn tthhee pprreevviioouuss sseeccttiioonn.. TThheenn,, i the differential of M is This expprreessssiioonn iiss oofftteenn iinntteerrpprreetteedd heuristically aass aa rreellaattiioonn bbeettwweeeenn infinitesimals.
However, if the variables t aanndd p are interpreted as functions, and is j iinntteerrpprreetteedd ttoo mmeeaann tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ooff M wwiitthh tthheessee ffuunnccttiioonnss,, tthheenn tthhee aabboovvee eexxpprreessssiioonn mmaakkeess ppeerrffeecctt sseennssee aass aann eeqquuaalliittyy ooff differential 1-forms,, aanndd iiss iimmmmeeddiiaattee ffrom the chain rule for the eexxtteerriioorr ddeerriivvaattiivvee.. TThhee aaddvvaannttaaggee ooff tthhiiss ppooiinntt ooff vviieeww iiss tthhaatt iitt ttaakkes into aaaccccccooouuunnnttt aaarrrbbbiiitttrrraaarrryyy dddeeepppeeennndddeeennnccciiieeesss bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, iiifff then .
In particular, if the variables p aarree aallll ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff t, as in j the previous section, then TThhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee aass aa lliinneeaarr mmaapp 91 Let be an ooppeenn ssuubbsseett.
Then a function iiss ssaaiidd ttoo bbee ((totally) differentiable at a point , if there exists a linear map (also denoted D f or Df((pp)))) ssuucchh tthhaatt p The linear map iiss ccaalllleedd tthhee (total) derivative or (total) ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall of f at p. A function is (totally) ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee iiff iittss ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee eexxiissttss aatt eevveerryy ppooiinntt iinn iittss ddoommaaiinn..
Note that f iiisss dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee iiifff aaannnddd ooonnnlllyyy iiifff eeeaaaccchhh ooofff iiitttsss cccooommmpppooonnneeennntttsss is dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee... FFFooorrr ttthhhiiisss iiittt iiisss nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrryyy,,, bbbuuuttt nnnooottt sssuuuffffffiiiccciiieeennnttt,,, ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff eeeaaaccchhh function f eeexxxiiisssttt... HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, iiifff ttthhheeessseee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss eeexxxiiisssttt aaannnddd aaarrreee cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuooouuusss,,, ttthhheeennn f is j ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee aanndd iittss ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall aatt aannyy ppooiinntt iiss tthhee lliinneeaarr mmaapp ddeetteerrmmiinneedd bbyy tthhee Jacobian matrix ooff ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aatt tthhaatt ppooiinntt.. Total differential equation A total differential equation iiss aa differential equation eexxpprreesssseedd iinn tteerrmmss ooff ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess..
Since the exterior derivative is a natural operator,, iinn aa sseennssee tthhaatt ccaann bbee ggiivveenn aa tteecchhnniiccaall mmeeaanniinngg,, ssuucchh eeqquuaattiioonnss aarree iinnttrriinnssiicc aanndd geometric.
CONCLUSION IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee kkknnnooowwwnnn hhhooowww tttooo dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee wwwiiittthhh iiinnndddiiirrreeecccttt dddeeepppeeennndddeeennnttt... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee uuussseeeddd tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee vvviiiaaa dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalllsss aaannnddd hhhaaavvveee kkknnnooowwwnnn ttthhheee tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee aaasss aaa llliiinnneeeaaarrr mmmaaappp... YYYooouuu have SUMMARY IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg :: Differentiationn wwiitthh iinnddiirreecctt ddeeppeennddeenntt TThhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee vviiaa ddiiffffeerreennttiiaallss TThhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee aass aa lliinneeaarr mmaapp TThhee ttoottaall ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall eeqquuaattiioonn TUTOR – MMAARRKK AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 11..FFiinndd tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ffoorr tthhee sseeccoonndd – order of the function F(x,y,z)=x3+ y4- z3 92 2.Find the total derivative for the function F(x,y,z)= x2 y3+ z3 3.Solve the total derivative to the third - order of the function F(x,y,z)=x3 y4+ x2 y+ y3x4 z4 REFFERENCE A. D. Polyanin and V. F. Zaitsev, Handbook of Exact Solutions for Ordinary Differential Equations (2nd edition), Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2003.
ISBN 1-58488- 297-2 nton, Howard; Bivens, Irl; Davis, Stephen (February 2, 2005), Calculus: Early Transcendentals Single and Multivariable (8th ed.
), New York: Wiley, ISBN 978-0-471- 47244-5 Apostol, Tom M. (June 1967), Calculus, Vol.
1: One-Variable Calculus with an Introduction to Linear Algebra, 1 (2nd ed.
), Wiley, ISBN 978-0-471-00005-1 Apostol, Tom M. (June 1969), Calculus, Vol.
2: Multi-Variable Calculus and Linear Algebra with Applications, 1 (2nd ed.
), Wiley, ISBN 978-0-471-00007-5 Courant, Richard; John, Fritz (December 22, 1998), Introduction to Calculus and Analysis, Vol.
1, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-65058-4 Eves, Howard (January 2, 1990), An Introduction to the History of Mathematics (6th ed.
), Brooks Cole, ISBN 978-0-03-029558-4 Larson, Ron; Hostetler, Robert P.; Edwards, Bruce H. (February 28, 2006), Calculus: Early Transcendental Functions (4th ed.
), Houghton Mifflin Company, ISBN 978-0-618-60624-5 Spivak, Michael (September 1994), Calculus (3rd ed.
), Publish or Perish, ISBN 978-0- 914098-89-8 Stewart, James (December 24, 2002), Calculus (5th ed.
), Brooks Cole, ISBN 978-0-534- 39339-7 Thompson, Silvanus P. (September 8, 1998), Calculus Made Easy (Revised, Updated, Expanded ed.
), New York: St. Martin's Press, ISBN 978-0-312-18548-0 93  UNIT 3: APPLICATION OF TOTAL DERIVATIVE OF A FUNCTION .
1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 chain rule 3.2 directional derivative 3.3 differentiation under integral sign 3.4 lebnitz rule 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS INTRODUCTION Let us consider a function 1) u = f(x, y, z, p, q, ... ) of several variables.
Such a function can be studied by holding all variables except one constant and observing its variation with respect to one single selected variable.
If we consider all the variables except x to be constant, then represents the partial derivative of f(x, y, z, p, q, ... ) with respect to x (the hats indicating variables held fixed).
The variables held fixed are viewed as parameters.
OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to correctly : apply total derivative on chain rule for functions of functions 94  apply total derivative to find directional derivative apply total derivative to solve differentiation under integral sign apply total derivative on lebnitz rule APPLICATION OF TOTAL DERIVATIVES.
Chain rule for functions of functions.
If w = f(x, y, z, ...) is a continuous function of n variables x, y, z, ..., with continuous partial derivatives , ... and if x, y, z, ... are differentiable functions x = x(t), y = y(t) , z = z(t), etc.
of a variable t, then the total derivative of w with respect to t is given by 2) This rule is called the chain rule for the partial derivatives of functions of functions.
Similarly, if w = f(x, y, z, ...) is a continuous function of n variables x, y, z, ..., with continuous partial derivatives , ... and if x, y, z, ... are differentiable functions of m independent variables r, s, t ... , then This rule is called the chain rule for the partial derivatives of functions of functions.
Similarly, if w = f(x, y, z, ...) is a continuous function of n variables x, y, z, ..., with continuous partial derivatives , ... and if x, y, z, ... are differentiable functions of m independent variables r, s, t ... , then 95  Note the similarity between total differentials and total derivatives.
The total derivative above can be obtained by dividing the total differential by dt.
As a special application of the chain rule let us consider the relation defined by the two equations z = f(x, y); y = g(x) Here, z is a function of x and y while y in turn is a function of x.
Thus z is really a function of the single variable x.
If we apply the chain rule we get which is the total derivative of z with respect to x. Defination of Scalar point function.
A scalar point function is a function that assigns a real number (i.e.
a scalar) to each point of some region of space.
If to each point (x, y, z) of a 96 region R in space there is assigned a real number u = Φ(x, y, z), then Φ is called a scalar point function.
Examples.
1.
The temperature distribution within some body at a particular point in time.
2.
The density distribution within some fluid at a particular point in time.
Directional derivatives.
Let Φ(x, y, z) be a scalar point function defined over some region R of space.
The function Φ(x, y, z) could, for example, represent the temperature distribution within some body.
At some specified point P(x, y, z) of R we wish to know the rate of change of Φ in a particular direction.
The rate of change of a function Φ at a particular point P, in a specified direction, is called the directional derivative of Φ at P in that direction.
We specify the direction by supplying the direction angles or direction cosines of a unit vector e pointing in the desired direction.
Theorem.
The rate of change of a function Φ(x, y, z) in the direction of a vector with direction angles (α, β, γ) is given by 3) where s corresponds to distance in the metric of the coordinate system.
That direction for which the function Φ at point P has its maximum value is called the gradient of Φ at P. We shall prove the theorem shortly.
First let us consider the same problem for two dimensional space.
97 Let Φ(x, y) be a scalar point function defined over some region R of the plane.
At some specified point P(x, y) of R we wish to know the rate of change of Φ in a particular direction.
We specify the direction by supplying the angle α that a unit vector e pointing in the desired direction makes with the positive x direction.
See Fig.
4.
The rate of change of function Φ at point P in the direction of e corresponding to angle α is given by where s corresponds to distance in the metric of the coordinate system.
We show this as follows: Let T = f(x, y) where T is the temperature at any point of the plate shown in Fig.
5.
We wish to derive expression 4) above.
In other words, we wish to derive the expression for the rate of change of T with respect to the distance moved in any selected direction.
Suppose we move from point P to point P'.
This represents a displacement ∆x in the x-direction and ∆y in the y- direction.
The distance moved along the plate is 98  The direction is given by the angle α that PP' makes with the positive x-direction.
The change in the value of T corresponding to the displacement from P to P' is where ε is a quantity that approaches 0 when ∆x and ∆y approach 0.
If we divide ∆T by the distance moved along the plate, we have From Fig.
5 we observe that ∆x/∆s = cos α and ∆y/∆s = sin α .
Making these substitutions and letting P' approach P along line PP', we have 99  This is the directional derivative of T in the direction α.
A geometric interpretation of a directional derivative in the case of a function z = f(x, y) is that of a tangent to the surface at point P as shown in Fig.
6.
Def.
Directional derivative.
The directional derivative of a scalar point function Φ(x, y, z) is the rate of change of the function Φ(x, y, z) at a particular point P(x, y, z) as measured in a specified direction.
Tech.
Let Φ(x, y, z) be a scalar point function possessing first partial derivatives throughout some region R of space.
Let P(x , y , z ) be some point in R at which we wish to compute the 0 0 0 directional derivative and let P'(x , y , z ) be a neighboring point.
Let the distance from P to 1 1 1 P' be ∆s.
Then the directional derivative of Φ in the direction PP' is given by 5) where P' approaches P along the line PP' and ∆s approaches 0.
Using this definition, let us now derive 3) above.
In moving from P to P' the function Φ will change by an amount 100 where ε , ε , ε are higher order infinitesimals which approach zero as P' approaches P i.e.
as 1 2 3 ∆x, ∆y and ∆z approach zero.
If we divide the change ∆Φ by the distance ∆s we obtain a measure of the rate at which Φ changes as we move from P to P': 6) We now observe that ∆x/∆s, ∆y/∆s, ∆z/∆s are the direction cosines of the line segment PP'.
They are also the direction cosines of a unit vector e located at P pointing in the direction of '.
If the direction angles of e are α, β, γ, then ∆x/∆s, ∆y/∆s, ∆z/∆s are equal to cos α, cos β, and cos γ, respectively.
Thus 6) becomes and 7) Let us note that 7) can be written in vector form as the following dot product: 8) The vector is called the gradient of Φ.
Thus the directional derivative of Φ is equal to the dot product of the gradient of Φ and the vector e. In other words, 101  where is the directional derivative of Φ in the direction of unit vector e. If the vector e is pointed in the same direction as the gradient of Φ then the directional derivative of Φ is equal to the gradient of Φ. Differentiation under the integral sign.
Leibnitz’s rule.
We now consider differentiation with respect to a parameter that occurs under an integral sign, or in the limits of integration, or in both places.
Theorem 1.
Let where a x b and f is assumed to be integrable on [a, b].
Then the function F(x) is continuous and = f(x) at each point where f(x) is continuous.
Theorem 2.
Let f(x, α) and ∂f/∂α be continuous in some region R: (a x b, c α d) of the x-α plane.
Let Then 102  Theorem 3.
Leibnitz’s rule.
Let where u and u are functions of the parameter α i.e.
1 2 u = u (α) 1 1 u = u (α).
2 2 Let f(x, α) and ∂f/∂α be continuous in both x and α in a region R of the x-α plane that includes the region u x u , c α d. Let u and u be continuous and have continuous 1 2 1 2 derivatives for c α d. Then where f(u , α) is the expression obtained by substituting the expression u (α) for x in f(x, α).
1 1 Similarly for f(u , α).
The quantities f(u , α) and f(u , α) correspond to ∂G/u and ∂G/u 2 1 2 1 2 respectively and 12) represents the chain rule.
Order of differentiation.
For most functions that one meets 103 HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, iiinnn sssooommmeee cccaaassseeesss iiittt iiisss nnnooottt tttrrruuueee... UUUnnndddeeerrr wwwhhhaaattt ccciiirrrcccuuummmssstttaaannnccceeesss iiisss iiittt tttrrruuueee???
IIIttt iiisss tttrrruuueee iiifff bbbooottthhh functions f and f aaarrreee cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuooouuusss aaattt ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalllsss aaarrreee bbbeeeiiinnnggg tttaaakkkeeennn... yx xy Theorem.
LLeett tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn ff((xx,, yy)) bbee ddeeffiinneedd iinn ssoommee nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd ooff tthhee ppooiinntt ((aa,, bb)).. LLeett the partial derivatives f , f ,, ff , and f aallssoo bbee ddeeffiinneedd iinn tthhiiss nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd.. TThheenn iiff ff and x y xxyy yx xy f aarree bbootthh ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss aatt ((aa,, bb)),, ff (a, b) = f (a, b).
yx xy yx EXAMPLE Given where and ,, ddeetteerrmmiinnee tthhee vvaalluuee ooff and using the chain rule.
and 4.0 CONCLUSION IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee aaappppppllliiieeeddd tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooonnn ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee sssooolllvvveeeddd ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss ooonnn dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss uuusssiiinnnggg tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee uuussseeeddd tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee tttooo sssooolllvvveee differentiation under integral ssiiggnn aanndd lleeiibbnniittzz rruullee.. 5,0 SUMMARY IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg:: TThhee aapppplliiccaattiioonn ooff ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee oonn cchhaaiinn rruullee TThhee aapppplliiccaattiioonn ooff ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee oonn ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee TThhee aapppplliiccaattiioonn ooff ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee oonn ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn uunnddeerr integral sign TThhee aapppplliiccaattiioonn ooff ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee oonn lleeiibbnniittzz rruullee.. 6.0 TUTOR - MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 11..FFiinndd aallll ddiirreeccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn ( ) 11 F(x,y) = 3x2+ y4 44 (where )),, iinn tthhee ppooiinntt 2.
FFiinndd tthhee iinntteeggrraall ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn 104 F(x,y,z) = 3x2 + 2xyz In the point (0,1) 3.Find the total derivative of the function F(xy) = 3xy + 4 y2 REFERENCES James & James.
Mathematics Dictionary Middlemiss.
Differential and Integral Calculus Spiegel.
Advanced Calculus Taylor.
Advanced Calculus Spiegel.
Vector Analysis Bernard R. Gelbaum and John M. H. Olmsted.
Counterexamples in Analysis.
Dover, 2003.
105  MODULE 4 PARTIAL DIFFERENTIABILITY AND TOTAL DIFFERENTIABILITY OF FUNCTION OF SEVERAL VARIABLE -Unit 1: Partial differentials of function of several variables.
-Unit 2: Total differentials of function of several variables.
-Unit 3: Application of partial and total differentials of function of several variables.
UNIT 1 PARTIAL DIFFERENTIABILITY OF FUNCTION OF SEVERAL VARIABLE CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Partial derivatives 3.2 Second partial derivatives 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS INTRODUCTION Differentiation is a method to compute the rate at which a dependent output y changes with respect to the change in the independent input x.
This rate of change is called the derivative of y with respect to x.
In more precise language, the dependence of y upon x means that y is a function of x.
This functional relationship is often denoted y = ƒ(x), where ƒ denotes the function.
If x and y are real numbers, and if the graph of y is plotted against x, the derivative measures the slope of this graph at each point.
The simplest case is when y is a linear function of x, meaning that the graph of y against x is a straight line.
In this case, y = ƒ(x) = m x + b, for real numbers m and b, and the slope m is given by 106  where the symbol ∆ ((tthhee uuppppeerrccaassee ffoorrmm ooff tthhee GGrreeeekk lleetttteerr Delta)) iiss aann aabbbbrreevviiaattiioonn ffoorr ""cchhaannggee iinn.."" TThhiiss ffoorrmmuullaa iiss ttrruuee bbeeccaauussee y + ∆y = ƒ(x+ ∆x) = m (x + ∆xx) + b = m x + b + m ∆x = y + m∆x.
It follows that ∆y = m ∆x.
TThhiiss ggiivveess aann eexxaacctt vvaalluuee ffoorr tthhee ssllooppee ooff aa ssttrraaiigghhtt lliinnee.. IIff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn ƒ iiss nnoott lliinneeaarr ((ii..ee.. iittss ggrraapphh iiss nnoott aa ssttrraaiigghhtt lliinnee)),, hhoowweevveerr,, tthheenn tthhee cchhaannggee iinn y ddiivviiddeedd bbyy tthhee cchhaannggee iinn x varies: diiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn iiisss aaa mmmeeettthhhoooddd tttooo fffiiinnnddd aaannn eeexxxaaacccttt vvvaaallluuueee fffooorrr ttthhhiiisss rrraaattteee ooofff ccchhhaaannngggeee aaattt aaannnyyy gggiiivvveeennn vvvaaallluuueee ooofff x. RRaattee ooff cchhaannggee aass aa lliimmiittiinngg vvaalluuee Figure 1.
The tangent lliinnee aatt ((x, ƒ(x)) Figure 2.
The secant ttoo ccuurrvvee y= ƒ(x) determined by points (x, ƒ(x)) and (xx+h, ƒ(x+h)) Figure 3.
TThhee ttaannggeenntt lliinnee aass lliimmiitt ooff sseeccaannttss 107 TThhee iiddeeaa,, iilllluussttrraatteedd bbyy FFiigguurreess 11-33,, iiss ttoo ccoommppuuttee tthhee rraattee ooff cchhaannggee aass tthhee limiting value of the ratio of the differences ∆y / ∆x as ∆x becomes infinitely small.
In Leibniz's notation,, ssuucchh aann infinitesimal change in x is denoted by dx,, aanndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff y with respect to x is written sssuuuggggggeeessstttiiinnnggg ttthhheee rrraaatttiiiooo ooofff tttwwwooo iiinnnfffiiinnniiittteeesssiiimmmaaalll qqquuuaaannntttiiitttiiieeesss... (((TTThhheee aaabbbooovvveee eeexxxppprrreeessssssiiiooonnn iiisss rrreeeaaaddd aaasss """ttthhheee derivative of y wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x", "d y bbyy dd xx"",, oorr ""dd yy oovveerr dd xx"".. TThhee oorraall ffoorrmm ""dd yy dd xx"" iiss oofftteenn uusseedd ccoonnvveerrssaattiioonnaallllyy,, aalltthhoouugghh iitt mmaayy lleeaadd ttoo ccoonnffuussiioonn..)) The most common approach[[22]] to turn this intuitive idea into a preecciissee ddeeffiinniittiioonn uusseess lliimmiittss,, bbuutt tthheerree aarree ootthheerr mmeetthhooddss,, ssuucchh aass non-standard analysis.
[3] Derivatives BBoouunndd aass wwee hhuummaannss aarree ttoo tthhrreeee ssppaacciiaall ddiimmeennssiioonnss,, mmuullttii-vvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonnss ccaann bbee vveerryy dddiiiffffffiiicccuuulllttt tttooo gggeeettt aaa gggooooooddd fffeeeeeelll fffooorrr... (((TTTrrryyy pppiiiccctttuuurrriiinnnggg aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiinnn ttthhheee 111777ttthhh dddiiimmmeeennnsssiiiooonnn aaannnddd ssseeeeee hhhooowww ffaarr yyoouu ggeett!!))
WWee ccaann aatt lleeaasstt mmaakkee tthhrreeee-dimensional models of two-vvaarriiaabble functions, but eeevvveeennn ttthhheeennn aaattt aaa ssstttrrreeetttccchhh tttooo ooouuurrr iiinnntttuuuiiitttiiiooonnn... WWWhhhaaattt iiisss nnneeeeeedddeeeddd iiisss aaa wwwaaayyy tttooo ccchhheeeaaattt aaannnddd lllooooookkk aaattt mmmuuullltttiii- vvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonnss aass iiff tthheeyy wweerree oonnee-variable functions.
We can do this by using ppaarrttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonnss.
A partial function is a one-vvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiion ooobbbtttaaaiiinnneeeddd fffrrrooommm aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss bbbyyy aaassssssiiigggnnniiinnnggg cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt vvvaaallluuueeesss tttooo aaallllll bbbuuuttt ooonnneee ooofff tthhee iinnddeeppeennddeenntt vvaarriiaabblleess.. WWhhaatt wwee aarree ddooiinngg iiss ttaakkiinngg ttwwoo-ddiimmeennssiioonnaall ""sslliicceess"" ooff tthhee ssuurrffaaccee rreepprreesseenntteedd bbyy tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn.. For Example: z=x2-y2 ccaann bbee mmooddeelleedd iinn tthhrreeee ddiimmeennssiioonnaall ssppaaccee,, bbuutt ppeerrssoonnaallllyy II ffiinndd iitt ddiiffffiiccuulltt ttoo sskkeettcchh!!
IInn tthhee section on critical points aa ppiiccttuurree ooff aa pplloott ooff tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn can be found as ann eexxaammppllee ooff aa ssaaddddllee ppooiinntt.. BBuutt bbyy alternately setting x=1 (red), xx=0.5 (white), and x=0.25 (green), we can take slices of zz=x2-y2 (each one a plane parallel to the z-y ppllaannee)) aanndd sseeee ddiiffffeerreenntt ppaarrttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonnss.. WWee ccaann ggeett aa ffuurrtthheerr iiddeeaa ooff tthhee bbeehhaavviioorr of the function by ccoonnssiiddeerriinngg tthhaatt tthhee ssaammee ccuurrvveess aarree oobbttaaiinneedd ffoorr x=-1, -0.5 and -0.25.
Food For Thought: HHooww ddoo ppaarrttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonnss ccoommppaarree ttoo level curves and lleevveell ssuurrffaacceess?
If the function f iiss aa ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss ffuunnccttiioonn,, ddooeess tthhee lleevveell sseett oorr ssuurrffaaccee hhaavvee ttoo bbee ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss??
WWhhaatt aabboouutt ppaarrttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonnss??
AAAllllll ooofff ttthhhiiisss hhheeelllpppsss uuusss tttooo gggeeettt tttooo ooouuurrr mmmaaaiiinnn tttooopppiiiccc,,, ttthhhaaattt iiisss,,, pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn... WWWeee kkknnnooowww hhhooowww tttooo take the derivative of a single--vvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonn.. WWhhaatt aabboouutt tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa mmuullttii-variable ffuunnccttiioonn??
WWhhaatt ddooeess tthhaatt eevveenn mmeeaann??
PPaarrttiiaall DDeerriivvaattiivveess aarree tthhee bbeeggiinnnniinngg ooff aann aannsswweerr ttoo that question.
OBJECTIVES 108 IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo :: IIddeennttiiffyy aanndd ssoollvvee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess SSoollvvee sseeccoonndd ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. MAIN CONTENT A partial derivative iiss tthhee rraattee ooff cchhaannggee ooff aa mmuullttii-vvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonn wwhheenn we allow only ooonnneee ooofff ttthhheee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss tttooo ccchhhaaannngggeee... SSSpppeeeccciiifffiiicccaaallllllyyy,,, wwweee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo ooonnnlllyyy ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee,,, rrreeegggaaarrrdddiiinnnggg aaallllll ooottthhheeerrrsss aaasss cccooonnnssstttaaannntttsss (((nnnooowww wwweee ssseeeeee ttthhheee rrreeelllaaatttiiiooonnn tttooo pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss!!!)))...
WWhhiicchh eesssseennttiiaallllyy mmeeaannss iiff yyoouu kknnooww hhooww ttoo ttaakkee aa ddeerriivvaattiivvee,, yyoouu kknnooww hhooww ttoo ttaakkee aa partial derivative.
AA ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn f with respect to a variable x, say z=f(x,y ,,y ,...y ) (where the 1 2 n y'''sss aaarrreee ooottthhheeerrr iiinnndddeeepppeeennndddeeennnttt vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss))) iiisss cccooommmmmmooonnnlllyyy dddeeennnooottteeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg wwwaaayyysss::: i (rreeffeerrrreedd ttoo aass ````ppaarrttiiaall z, partial x'') (rreeffeerrrreedd ttoo aass ````ppaarrttiiaall ff,, ppaarrttiiaall xx'''' ) NNoottee tthhaatt tthhiiss iiss nnoott tthhee uussuuaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ````d'''' .. TThhee ffuunnnnyy ````dd'''' ssyymmbbooll iinn tthhee nnoottaattiioonn iiss ccaalllleedd ``````rrrooouuunnndddbbbaaaccckkk ddd'''''',,, ``````cccuuurrrlllyyy ddd'''''' ooorrr ``````dddeeelll ddd'''''' (((tttooo dddiiissstttiiinnnggguuuiiissshhh fffrrrooommm ``````dddeeellltttaaa ddd'''''';;; ttthhheee sssyyymmmbbbooolll iiisss aaaccctttuuuaaalllly a ``lowercase Greek `delta' '').
TTThhheee nnneeexxxttt ssseeettt ooofff nnnoootttaaatttiiiooonnnsss fffooorrr pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss iiisss mmmuuuccchhh mmmooorrreee cccooommmpppaaacccttt aaannnddd eeessspppeeeccciiiaaallllllyyy uuussseeeddd wwwhhheeennn yyyooouuu aaarrreee wwwrrriiitttiiinnnggg dddooowwwnnn sssooommmeeettthhhiiinnnggg ttthhhaaattt uuussseeesss llloootttsss ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss,,, eeessspppeeeccciiiaaallllllyyy iiifff ttthhheeeyyy are all different kinds: (referreedd ttoo aass ````ppaarrttiiaall zz,, ppaarrttiiaall xx'''') (rreeffeerrrreedd ttoo aass ````ppaarrttiiaall ff,, ppaarrttiiaall xx'''') ((rreeffeerrrreedd ttoo aass ````ppaarrttiiaall ff,, ppaarrttiiaall xx'''')) AAnnyy ooff tthhee aabboovvee iiss eeqquuiivvaalleenntt ttoo tthhee lliimmiitt 109 .
TToo ggeett aann iinnttuuiittiivvee ggrraasspp ooff ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess,, ssuuppppoossee yyoouu wweerree aann aanntt ccrraawwlliinngg oovveerr ssoommee rugged terrain (a two-vvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonn)) wwhheerree tthhee x-axis is north-ssoouutthh wwiitthh ppoossiittiivvee x to the north, the y-axis is east-wweesstt aanndd tthhee z-axis is up-ddoowwnn.. YYoouu ssttoopp aatt aa ppooiinntt P=(x , y , z ) on a 0 0 0 hhiillll aanndd wwoonnddeerr wwhhaatt ssoorrtt ooff ssllooppee yyoouu wwiillll eennccoouunntteerr iiff yyoouu wwaallkk iinn aa ssttrraaiigghhtt lliinnee nnoorrtthh.. SSiinnccee oouurr lloonnggiittuuddee wwoonn''tt bbee cchhaannggiinngg aass wwee ggoo nnoorrtthh,, tthhee y iinn oouurr ffuunnccttiioonn iiss ccoonnssttaanntt.. TThhee ssllooppee ttoo tthhee nnoorrtthh iiss tthhee vvaalluuee ooff f (x , y ).
x 0 0 TTThhheee aaaccctttuuuaaalll cccaaalllcccuuulllaaatttiiiooonnnsss ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss fffooorrr mmmooosssttt fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss iiisss vvveeerrryyy eeeaaasssyyy!!!
TTTrrreeeaaattt eeevvveeerrryyy iiinnndddpppeeennndddeeennnttt vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee eeexxxccceeepppttt ttthhheee ooonnneee wwweee aaarrreee iiinnnttteeerrreeesssttteeeddd iiinnn aaasss iiifff iiittt wwweeerrreee aaa cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt aaannnddd aaapppppplllyyy ttthhheee familiar rules!
Example: Let's find f and f ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn z=f=x2 -3x2y+y3.
To find f , we will treat yy as a constant and x y x differentiate.
So, f =2x-6xy.. BByy ttrreeaattiinngg x as a constant, we find f =-3x2+3y22.
x y Second Partial Derivatives OObbsseerrvvee ccaarreeffuullllyy tthhaatt tthhee eexxpprreessssiioonn f implies that the function f iiss ddiiffffeerreennttiiaatteedd ffiirrsstt wwiitthh xy respect to x aanndd tthheenn wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo y, which is a natural inference since f is really (f ) .
xxyy x y FFoorr tthhee ssaammee rreeaassoonnss,, iinn tthhee ccaassee ooff tthhee eexxpprreessssiioonn,, iitt iiss iimmpplliieedd tthhaatt wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee ffiirrsstt wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo y aanndd tthheenn wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x.
Below are examples of ppuurree sseeccoonndd ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess: Example: Lets find f and f of f=exy + yy(sinx).
xy yx • f =yexy + ycosx x 110 • f =xyexy + cosx xy • f =xexy + sinx y • f =xyexy + cosx yx In this example f =f ... IIIsss ttthhhiiisss tttrrruuueee iiinnn gggeeennneeerrraaalll???
MMMooosssttt ooofff ttthhheee tttiiimmmeee aaannnddd iiinnn mmmooosssttt eeexxxaaammmpppllleeesss ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu xy yx wwiillll pprroobbaabbllyy eevveerr sseeee,, yyeess.. MMoorree pprreecciisseellyy,, iiff • both f and f eexxiisstt ffoorr aallll ppooiinnttss nneeaarr ((x ,y ) xy yx 0 0 • aanndd aarree ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss aatt ((x ,y ), 0 0 then f =f .
xy yx PPPaaarrrtttiiiaaalll DDDeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff hhhiiiggghhheeerrr ooorrrdddeeerrr aaarrreee dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee ooobbbvvviiiooouuusss wwwaaayyy... AAAnnnddd aaasss lllooonnnggg aaasss sssuuuiiitttaaabbbllleee cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuiiitttyyy eeexxxiiissstttsss,,, iiittt iiisss iiimmmmmmaaattteeerrriiiaaalll iiinnn wwwhhhaaattt ooorrrdddeeerrr aaa ssseeeqqquuueeennnccceee ooofff pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn iiisss cccaaarrrrrriiieeeddd out.
total differential (Definition) There is the generalisattiioonn ooff tthhee theorem in the parent entry ccoonncceerrnniinngg tthhee real functions of several variables;; hheerree wwee ffoorrmmuullaattee iitt ffoorr tthhrreeee vvaarriiaabblleess:: Theorem.
Suppose that S is a bbaallll in 3 , the function f:S is ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss and has partial derivatives fx fy fz in S aanndd tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aarree ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss iinn aa ppooiinntt (x y z) of S .
Then the increment f:=f(x+ x y+ y z+ z))−f(x y z) which f ggeettss wwhheenn oonnee mmoovveess ffrroomm (x y z) to another point (x+ x y+ yy z+ z) of S , can bbee sspplliitt iinnttoo ttwwoo ppaarrttss aass ffoolllloowwss:: (1) Here, := x2+ y2+ z2 and iiss aa qquuaannttiittyy tteennddiinngg ttoo 00 aalloonngg wwiitthh .
The former part of x iiss ccaalllleedd tthhee ((total) differential or the eexxaacctt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall of the function f in the point (x y z) aanndd iitt iiss ddeennootteedd bbyy df(x y z) of briefly df .. IInn tthhee ssppeecciiaall ccaassee f(x y z) x , we see that df= x aanndd tthhuuss x=dx ; similarly y=dy and z=dz .
Accordingly, we oobbttaaiinn ffoorr tthhee ggeenneerraall ccaassee tthhee mmoorree ccoonnssiisstteenntt nnoottaattiioonn (2) where dx dy dz mmaayy bbee tthhoouugghhtt aass iinnddeeppeennddeenntt vvaarriiaabblleess.. We now assume conversely tthhaatt tthhee iinnccrreemmeenntt ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn f in 3 ccaann bbee sspplliitt iinnttoo ttwwoo parts as follows: 111 (3 ) where the coefficients A B CC are independent on the quantities x y z and are aass iinn tthhee aabboovvee tthheeoorreemm.. TThheenn oonnee ccaann iinnffeerr tthhaatt tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess fx fy fz exist in the point (x y z) aanndd hhaavvee tthhee vvaalluueess A B C ,, rreessppeeccttiivveellyy.. IInn ffaacctt,, iiff wwee cchhoooossee y= z=0 , then = x wwhheennccee ((33)) aattttaaiinnss tthhee ffoorrmm f(x+ x y+ y z+ z)−f(x y z)=A x+ x x and therefore A=lim x 0 xf(x+ x y+ y z+ z)−f(x y z)=fx (x y z) SSiimmiillaarrllyy wwee sseeee tthhee vvaalluueess ooff fy and fz .
TThhee llaasstt ccoonnssiiddeerraattiioonn sshhoowweedd tthhee uunniiqquueenneessss ooff tthhee ttoottaall ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall..
Definition.
A function f in 33 ,, ssaattiissffyyiinngg tthhee ccoonnddiittiioonnss ooff tthhee aabboovvee tthheeoorreemm iiss ssaaiidd ttoo bbee differentiable in the point (x yy z) .
CONCLUSION IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee iiidddeeennntttiiifffiiieeeddd aaannnddd sssooolllvvveeeddd ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm ooonnn pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalll ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee aaalllsssooo uuussseeeddd pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalll ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss tttooo ssoollvvee pprroobblleemmss oonn sseeccoonndd ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. SUMMARY In tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd :: Partial derivatives Second partial derivatives TUTOR – MMAARRKK AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTTSS 11..FFiinndd tthhee ffiirrsstt oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg ffuunnccttiioonn F(x,y,z) = x2 y z4 2.Find f f f ,given thaatt FF((xx,,yy,,zz)) == ssiinn((xxyyzz)) xx yy zz 33..EEvvaalluuaattee tthhee sseeccoonndd oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f f f = x3 y4+2xy+ z4 xx yy zz 112 4.Evaluate the second order derivative of F(x,y,z) = x3+ y2z3 REFFERENCE Jacques, I.
1999.
Mathematics for Economics and Business.
3rd Edition.
Prentice Hall.
UNIT 2 TOTAL DIFFERENTIABILITY OF FUNCTION OF SEVERAL VARIABLE CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Identify and solve problems on total differentials of functions of several variables 4.0 Conclusion 5.0- Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings INTRODUCTION In the case of a function of a single variable the differential of the function y = f(x) is the quantity dy = f '(x) ∆x .
This quantity is used to compute the approximate change in the value of f(x) due to a change 113 ∆x in x.
As is shown in Fig.
2, ∆y = CB = f(x + ∆x) - f(x) while dy = CT = f '(x)∆x .
When ∆x is small the approximation is close.
Line AT represents the tangent to the curve at point A.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify and solve problems on total differentials of functions of several variables MAIN CONTENT In the case of a function of two variables the situation is analogous.
Let us start at point A(x , 1 y , z ) on the surface 1 1 z = f(x, y) shown in Fig.
3 and let x and y change by small amounts ∆x and ∆y, respectively.
The change produced in the value of the function z is ∆z = CB = f(x + ∆x, y + ∆y) - f(x , y ) .
1 1 1 1 An approximation to ∆z is given by When ∆x and ∆y are small the approximation is close.
Point T lies in that plane tangent to the surface at point A.
114 The quantity is called the total differential of the function z = f(x, y).
Because is customary to denote increments ∆x and ∆y by dx and dy, the total differential of a function z = f(x, y) is defined as The total differential of three or more variables is defined similarly.
For a function z = f(x, y, .. , u) the total differential is defined as Each of the terms represents a partial differential.
For example, the term is the partial differential of z with respect to x.
The total differential is the sum of the partial differentials.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have identified and solved problems on total differentials of functions of several variables 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied total differentials of functions of several variables.
115 6.0TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT Find the total differentiability of the following : a. F(x,y) = x + 2xy + y2 b. F(x,y,z) = x4+2 y3+ z2 c. F(x,y,z) = x3 y2z3 d. F(x,y,z) = 4x2 y3+ z2 e. F(x,y,z) = x2+ y3- 2xyz 7.0 REFERENCES James & James.
Mathematics Dictionary Middlemiss.
Differential and Integral Calculus Spiegel.
Advanced Calculus Taylor.
Advanced Calculus 116  MODULE 5 COMPOSITE DIFFERENTIATION, EULER’S THEOREM, IMPLICIT DIFFERENTIATION.
Unit 1: Composite differentiation Unit 2: Euler’s Theorem Unit 3: Implicit differentiation.
UNIT 1: COMPOSITE DIFFERENTIATION 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The chain rule 3.2 Composites of more than two functions 3.4 The quotient rule 3.5 Higher derivative 3.6 Proof of the chain rule 3.7 The rule in higher dimension 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION In calculus, the chain rule is a formula for computing the derivative of the composition of two or more functions.
That is, if f is a function and g is a function, then the chain rule expresses the derivative of the composite function f ∘ g in terms of the derivatives of f and g. Calculate the derivatives of each function.
Write in fraction form, if needed, so that all exponents are positive in your final answer.
Use the "modified power rule" for each.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to 117 uussee cchhaaiinn rruullee ttoo ssoollvvee mmaatthheemmaattiiccaall pprroobblleemmss ssoollvvee ccoommppoossiitteess ooff mmoorree tthhaann ttwwoo ffuunnccttiioonnss uussee tthhee qquuoottiieenntt rruullee ttoo ssoollvvee ccoommppoossiittee ffuunnccttiioonnss iiidddeeennntttiiifffyyy ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss iiinnn cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn wwwhhhiiiccchhh cccooouuulllddd bbbeee sssooolllvvveee bbbyyy ttthhheee uuussseee ooofff hhhiiiggghhheeerrr derivative.
Proof the chain rule KKnnooww tthhee rruullee iinn hhiigghheerr ddiimmeennssiioonn 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Statement of the Rule TThhee ssiimmpplleesstt ffoorrmm ooff tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee iiss ffoorr rreeaall-valued functions of one rreeaall variable.
It says tthhaatt iiff gg iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt iiss ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee aatt aa ppooiinntt cc ((ii..ee.. tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee gg′(c) exists) and f iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt iiss ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee aatt gg((cc)),, tthheenn tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ffuunnccttiioonn ff ∘ g is differentiable at c, and the derivative is TThhee rruullee iiss ssoommeettiimmeess aabbbbrreevviiaatteedd aass If y = f(u) and u = g(x)),, tthheenn tthhiiss aabbbbrreevviiaatteedd ffoorrmm iiss wwrriitttteenn iinn LLeeiibbnniizz nnoottaattiioonn as: TTThhheee pppoooiiinnntttsss wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss aaarrreee eeevvvaaallluuuaaattteeeddd mmmaaayyy aaalllsssooo bbbeee ssstttaaattteeeddd eeexxxpppllliiiccciiitttlllyyy::: Further examples TThhee cchhaaiinn rruullee iinn tthhee aabbsseennccee ooff ffoorrmmuullaass IIIttt mmmaaayyy bbbeee pppooossssssiiibbbllleee tttooo aaapppppplllyyy ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee eeevvveeennn wwwhhheeennn ttthhheeerrreee aaarrreee nnnooo fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaasss fffooorrr ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss wwwhhhiiiccchhh aaarrreee bbbeeeiiinnnggg dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteeeddd... TTThhhiiisss cccaaannn hhhaaappppppeeennn wwwhhheeennn ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss aaarrreee mmmeeeaaasssuuurrreeeddd dddiiirrreeeccctttlllyyy... SSSuuuppppppooossseee ttthhhaaattt aaa cccaaarrr iiisss dddrrriiivvviiinnnggg uuuppp aaa tttaaallllll mmmooouuunnntttaaaiiinnn... TTThhheee cccaaarrr'''sss ssspppeeeeeedddooommmeeettteeerrr mmeeaassuurreess iittss ssppeeeedd ddiirreeccttllyy.. IIff tthhee grade iiss kknnoowwnn,, tthheenn tthhee rraattee ooff aasscceenntt ccaann bbee ccaallccuullaatteedd using trigonometry.. SSuuppppoossee tthhaatt tthhee ccaarr iiss aasscceennddiinngg aatt 22..55 kkmm//hh.. SSttaannddaarrdd mmooddeellss ffoorr tthhee EEaarrtthh''ss aattmmoosspphheerree iimmppllyy tthhaatt tthhee tteemmppeerraattuurree ddrrooppss aabboouutt 66..55 °°CC ppeerr kkiilloommeetteerr aasscceennddeedd (see lapse rate)))... TTTooo fffiiinnnddd ttthhheee ttteeemmmpppeeerrraaatttuuurrreee dddrrroooppp pppeeerrr hhhooouuurrr,,, wwweee aaapppppplllyyy ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee... LLLeeettt ttthhheee function g(t)) bbee tthhee aallttiittuuddee ooff tthhee ccaarr aatt ttiimmee t, and let the function f(h)) bbee tthhee tteemmppeerraattuurree h kkiilloommeetteerrss aabboovvee sseeaa lleevveell.. f and g aarree nnoott kknnoowwnn eexxaaccttllyy:: FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, tthhee aallttiitude 118 wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhheee cccaaarrr ssstttaaarrrtttsss iiisss nnnooottt kkknnnooowwwnnn aaannnddd ttthhheee ttteeemmmpppeeerrraaatttuuurrreee ooonnn ttthhheee mmmooouuunnntttaaaiiinnn iiisss nnnooottt kkknnnooowwwnnn... HHoowweevveerr,, tthheeiirr ddeerriivvaattiivveess aarree kknnoowwnn:: f′ is −6.5 °C/km, and g′ is 2.5 kkmm//hh.. TThhee cchhaaiinn rruullee sssaaayyysss ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff ttthhheee cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiisss ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt ooofff ttthhheee dddeeerrrivative of f and the derivative of g. This is −−66..55 °°CC//kkmm ·· 22..55 km/h = −16.25 °C/h.
OOnnee ooff tthhee rreeaassoonnss wwhhyy tthhiiss ccoommppuuttaattiioonn iiss ppoossssiibbllee iiss bbeeccaauussee f′′ iiss aa ccoonnssttaanntt ffuunnccttiioonn.. TTThhhiiisss iiisss bbbeeecccaaauuussseee ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee mmmooodddeeelll iiisss vvveeerrryyy sssiiimmmpppllleee... AAA mmmooorrreee aaaccccccuuurrraaattteee dddeeessscccrrriiippptttiiiooonnn ooofff hhhooowww the ttteeemmmpppeeerrraaatttuuurrreee nnneeeaaarrr ttthhheee cccaaarrr vvvaaarrriiieeesss ooovvveeerrr tttiiimmmeee wwwooouuulllddd rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreee aaannn aaaccccccuuurrraaattteee mmmooodddeeelll ooofff hhhooowww ttthhheee ttteeemmmpppeeerrraaatttuuurrreee vvvaaarrriiieeesss aaattt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt aaallltttiiitttuuudddeeesss... TTThhhiiisss mmmooodddeeelll mmmaaayyy nnnooottt hhhaaavvveee aaa cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee... TTTooo cccooommmpppuuuttteee ttthhheee ttteeemmmpppeeerrraaatttuuurrreee ccchhhaaannngggeee iiinnn sssuuuccchhh aaa mmmooodddeeelll,,, iiittt wwwooouuulllddd bbbeee nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrryyy tttooo kkknow g and not just g′,, bbeeccaauussee wwiitthhoouutt kknnoowwiinngg g iitt iiss nnoott ppoossssiibbllee ttoo kknnooww wwhheerree ttoo eevvaalluuaattee f′.
CCoommppoossiitteess ooff mmoorree tthhaann ttwwoo ffuunnccttiioonnss TTThhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee cccaaannn bbbeee aaappppppllliiieeeddd tttooo cccooommmpppooosssiiittteeesss ooofff mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn tttwwwooo fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... TTTooo tttaaakkkeee ttthhheee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ccoommppoossiittee ooff mmoorree tthhaann ttwwoo ffuunnccttiioonnss,, nnoottiiccee tthhaatt tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ooff f, g, and h ((iinn tthhaatt oorrddeerr)) iiss tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ooff f with g ∘ h.. TThhee cchhaaiinn rruullee ssaayyss tthhaatt ttoo ccoommppuuttee tthhee derivative of f ∘ g ∘ h,, iitt iiss ssuuffffiicciieenntt ttoo ccoommppuuttee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f aanndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff g ∘ h. The derivative of f ccaann bbee ccaallccuullaatteedd ddiirreeccttllyy,, aanndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff g ∘ h can be ccaallccuullaatteedd bbyy aappppllyyiinngg tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee aaggaaiinn.. FFoorr ccoonnccrreetteenneessss,, ccoonnssiiddeerr tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn TThhiiss ccaann bbee ddeeccoommppoosseedd aass tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ooff tthhrreeee ffuunnccttiioonnss:: Their derivatives are: TThhee cchhaaiinn rruullee ssaayyss tthhaatt tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff tthheeiirr ccoommppoossiittee aatt tthhee ppooiinntt x == a is: In Leibniz notation, this is: 119 or for short, TThhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ffuunnccttiioonn iiss tthheerreeffoorree:: AAAnnnooottthhheeerrr wwwaaayyy ooofff cccooommmpppuuutttiiinnnggg ttthhhiiisss dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss tttooo vvviiieeewww ttthhheee cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn f ∘ g ∘ h as the composite of f ∘ g and h.. AAppppllyyiinngg tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee ttoo tthhiiss ssiittuuaattiioonn ggiivveess:: TTThhhiiisss iiisss ttthhheee sssaaammmeee aaasss wwwhhhaaattt wwwaaasss cccooommmpppuuuttteeeddd aaabbbooovvveee... TTThhhiiisss ssshhhooouuulllddd bbbeee eeexxxpppeeecccttteeeddd bbbeeecccaaauuussseee (((f ∘ g) ∘ h = f ∘ (g ∘ h).
The quotient rule TThhee cchhaaiinn rruullee ccaann bbee uusseedd ttoo ddeerriivvee ssoommee wweellll-kknnoowwnn ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn rruulleess.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ttthhheee qqquuuoootttiiieeennnttt rrruuullleee iiisss aaa cccooonnnssseeeqqquuueeennnccceee ooofff ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee aaannnddd ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt rrruuullleee... TTTooo ssseeeeee ttthhhiiisss,,, wwwrrriiittteee the function f(x)/g(x)) aass tthhee pprroodduucctt f(x) · 1/g(x).
First apply the produucctt rruullee:: TToo ccoommppuuttee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff 11//g(x), notice that it is the composite of g wwiitthh tthhee rreecciipprrooccaall ffuunnccttiioonn,, tthhaatt iiss,, tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt sseennddss x to 1/x.. TThhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff tthhee rreecciipprrooccaall ffuunnccttiioonn iiss −1/x2.. BByy aappppllyyiinngg tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee,, tthhee llaasstt eexxpprreessssiion becomes: wwhhiicchh iiss tthhee uussuuaall ffoorrmmuullaa ffoorr tthhee qquuoottiieenntt rruullee.. DDeerriivvaattiivveess ooff iinnvveerrssee ffuunnccttiioonnss Suppose that y = g(x)) hhaass aann inverse function.
Call its inverse function f ssoo tthhaatt wwee hhaavvee xx === fff(((yyy)))... TTThhheeerrreee iiisss aaa fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa fffooorrr ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff fff iiinnn ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff ggg... TTTooo ssseeeeee ttthhhiiisss,,, nnoottee tthhaatt ff aanndd gg ssaattiissffyy tthhee ffoorrmmuullaa f(g(x)) = x.
Because the functions f(g(x)))) aanndd x aarree eeqquuaall,, tthheeiirr ddeerriivvaattiivveess mmuusstt bbee eeqquuaall.. TThhee 120 derivative of x iiisss ttthhheee cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn wwwiiittthhh vvvaaallluuueee 111,,, aaannnddd ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff f(g(x)) is ddeetteerrmmiinneedd bbyy tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee.. TThheerreeffoorree wwee hhaavvee:: f'(g(x))g'(x) = 1.
To express f′ aass aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff aann iinnddeeppeennddeenntt vvaarriiaabbllee y, we substitute f(y)) ffoorr x wherever it appearrss.. TThheenn wwee ccaann ssoollvvee ffoorr f′.
FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ccoonnssiiddeerr tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn g(x) = ex.. IItt hhaass aann iinnvveerrssee wwhhiicchh iiss ddeennootteedd f(y) = ln y.
Because g′(x) = ex,, tthhee aabboovvee ffoorrmmuullaa ssaayyss tthhaatt TThhiiss ffoorrmmuullaa iiss ttrruuee wwhheenneevveerr g is differentiable and its inverse f iiss aallssoo ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee.. TTThhhiiisss fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa cccaaannn fffaaaiiilll wwwhhheeennn ooonnneee ooofff ttthhheeessseee cccooonnndddiiitttiiiooonnnsss iiisss nnnooottt tttrrruuueee... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, cccooonnnsssiiidddeeerrr g(x) = x3.
Its inverse is f(y) = y1/3,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss nnnooottt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee aaattt zzzeeerrrooo... IIIfff wwweee aaatttttteeemmmpppttt tttooo uuussseee ttthhheee aabboovvee ffoorrmmuullaa ttoo ccoommppuuttee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f aatt zzeerroo,, tthheenn wwee mmuusstt eevvaalluuaattee 11//g′(f(0)).
f(0) = 0 and g′(((000))) === 000,,, sssooo wwweee mmmuuusssttt eeevvvaaallluuuaaattteee 111///000,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss uuunnndddeeefffiiinnneeeddd... TTThhheeerrreeefffooorrreee ttthhheee fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa fffaaaiiilllsss iinn tthhiiss ccaassee.. TThhiiss iiss nnoott ssuurrpprriissiinngg bbeeccaauussee f is not differentiable at zero.
Higher derivatives Faà di Bruno's formula gggeeennneeerrraaallliiizzzeeesss ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee tttooo hhhiiiggghhheeerrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss... TTThhheee fffiiirrrsssttt fffeeewww derivatives are Proofs of the chain rule 121 First proof One proof of the chain rruullee bbeeggiinnss wwiitthh tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee:: AAssssuummee ffoorr tthhee mmoommeenntt tthhaatt g(x) does not equal g(a) for any x near a.. TThheenn tthhee pprreevviioouuss eexxpprreessssiioonn iiss eeqquuaall ttoo tthhee pprroodduucctt ooff ttwwoo ffaaccttoorrss:: When g oscillates near a,,, ttthhheeennn iiittt mmmiiiggghhhttt hhhaaappppppeeennn ttthhhaaattt nnnooo mmmaaatttttteeerrr hhhooowww ccclllooossseee ooonnneee gggeeetttsss tttooo a, there is always an even closer x ssuucchh tthhaatt g(x) equals g(a)).. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, tthhiiss hhaappppeennss ffoorr g(x) = x2sin(1 / x) near the point a === 000... WWWhhheeennneeevvveeerrr ttthhhiiisss hhhaaappppppeeennnsss,,, ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee eeexxxppprrreeessssssiiiooonnn iiisss uuunnndddeeefffiiinnneeeddd because it involves ddiivviissiioonn bbyy zzeerroo.. TToo wwoorrkk aarroouunndd tthhiiss,, iinnttrroodduuccee aa ffuunnccttiioonn Q as follows: WWee wwiillll sshhooww tthhaatt tthhee ddiiffffeerreennccee qquuoottiieenntt ffoorr f ∘ g is always equal to: Whenever g(x)) iiss nnoott eeqquuaall ttoo g(a), this is clear because the factors of g(xx) - g(a) cancel.
When g(x) equals g(a)),, tthheenn tthhee ddiiffffeerreennccee qquuoottiieenntt ffoorr f ∘ g iiss zzeerroo bbeeccaauussee f(g(x)) equals f(g(a)))),, aanndd tthhee aabboovvee pprroodduucctt iiss zzeerroo bbeeccaauussee iitt eeqquuaallss f′(g(a)) timess zzeerroo.. SSoo tthhee aabboovvee ppprrroooddduuucccttt iiisss aaalllwwwaaayyysss eeeqqquuuaaalll tttooo ttthhheee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnccceee qqquuuoootttiiieeennnttt,,, aaannnddd tttooo ssshhhooowww ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff f ∘ g at a eexxiissttss aanndd ttoo ddeetteerrmmiinnee iittss vvaalluuee,, wwee nneeeedd oonnllyy sshhooww tthhaatt tthhee lliimmiitt aass x ggooeess ttoo a of the aabboovvee pprroodduucctt eexxiissttss aanndd ddeetteerrmmiinnee iittss vvaalluuee.. TTTooo dddooo ttthhhiiisss,,, rrreeecccaaallllll ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee llliiimmmiiittt ooofff aaa ppprrroooddduuucccttt eeexxxiiissstttsss iiifff ttthhheee llliiimmmiiitttsss ooofff iiitttsss fffaaaccctttooorrrsss eeexxxiiisssttt... WWWhhheeennn ttthhhiiisss hhhaaappppppeeennnsss,,, ttthhheee llliiimmmiiittt ooofff ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt ooofff ttthhheeessseee tttwwwooo fffaaaccctttooorrrsss wwwiiillllll eeeqqquuuaaalll ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt ooofff ttthhheee llliiimmmiiitttsss ooofff tthhee ffaaccttoorrss.. TThhee ttwwoo ffaaccttoorrss aarree Q(g(x)) and (g(x) - g(a)) / (x - a)).. TThhee llaatttteerr iiss tthhee difference quotient for g at aa, and because g is differentiable at a bbyy aassssuummppttiioonn,, iittss lliimmiitt aass x tends to a eexxiissttss aanndd eeqquuaallss g′(a).
It remains to study Q(g(x)).
QQ is defined wherever f iiss.. FFuurrtthheerrmmoorree,, bbeeccaauussee f is differentiable at g(a)) bbyy aassssuummppttiioonn,, Q is continuous at g(a).
g iiss ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss aatt a because it is differentiable at a,, aanndd tthheerreeffoorree Q ∘ g is continuous at a.. SSoo iittss lliimmiitt aass x goes to a exists and equals Q(g(a)))),, wwhhiicchh iiss f′(g(a)).
TThhiiss sshhoowwss tthhaatt tthhee lliimmiittss ooff bbootthh ffaaccttoorrss eexxiisstt aanndd tthhaatt tthheeyy eeqquuaall f′(g(a)))) aanndd g′(a), rreessppeeccttiivveellyy.. TThheerreeffoorree tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff f ∘ g at a exists and equals f′(g(a))))g′(a).
Second proof 122 AAnnootthheerr wwaayy ooff pprroovviinngg tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee iiss ttoo mmeeaassuurree tthhee eerrrroorr iinn tthhee lliinneeaarr aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnneeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee... TTThhhiiisss ppprrroooooofff hhhaaasss ttthhheee aaadddvvvaaannntttaaagggeee ttthhhaaattt iiittt gggeeennneeerrraaallliiizzzeeesss tttooo ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss... IIIttt rrreeellliiieeesss ooonnn ttthhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg eeeqqquuuiiivvvaaallleeennnttt dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn ooofff dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbiiillliiitttyyy aaattt aaa pppoooiiinnnttt::: AAA function g iiss ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee aatt a if there exists a real number g′(a)) aanndd aa ffuunnccttiioonn ε(h) that tends to zero as h tteennddss ttoo zzeerroo,, aanndd ffuurrtthheerrmmoorree Here the left-hhhaaannnddd sssiiidddeee rrreeeppprrreeessseeennntttsss ttthhheee tttrrruuueee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnccceee bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff g at a and at a + h, whereas the right-hhaanndd ssiiddee rreepprreesseennttss tthhee aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ddeetteerrmmiinneedd bbyy tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee plus an error term.
IInn tthhee ssiittuuaattiioonn ooff tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee,, ssuucchh aa ffuunnccttiioonn ε exists because g iiss aassssuummeedd ttoo bbee differentiable at a... AAAgggaaaiiinnn bbbyyy aaassssssuuummmppptttiiiooonnn,,, aaa sssiiimmmiiilllaaarrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaalllsssooo eeexxxiiissstttsss fffooorrr f at g(a).
Calling this function η, we have TThhee aabboovvee ddeeffiinniittiioonn iimmppoosseess nnoo ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss oonn η((00)),, eevveenn tthhoouugghh iitt iiss aassssuummeedd tthhaatt η(k) tends to zero as k tteennddss ttoo zzeerroo.. IIff wwee sseett η(0) = 0, then η iiss ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss aatt 00.. PPrroovviinngg tthhee tthheeoorreemm rreeqquuiirreess ssttuuddyyiinngg tthhee ddiiffffeerreennccee f(g(a + h)) − f(g(a)))) aass h tends to zzeerroo.. TThhee ffiirrsstt sstteepp iiss ttoo ssuubbssttiittuuttee ffoorr g(a + h)) uussiinngg tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbiilliittyy ooff g at a: f(g(a + h)) − f(g(a)) = f(g(a)) ++ g'(a)h + ε(h)h) − f(g(a)).
TThhee nneexxtt sstteepp iiss ttoo uussee tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbiilliittyy ooff f at g(a)).. TThhiiss rreeqquuiirreess aa tteerrmm ooff the form f(g(a) + k)) ffoorr ssoommee k. In the above equation, the correct k vvaarriieess wwiitthh h. Set k = h g′(a)h + ε(h)h aanndd tthhee rriigghhtt hhaanndd ssiiddee bbeeccoommeess f(g(a) + k ) − f(g(a)))).. AAppppllyyiinngg tthhee h ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ggiivveess:: TToo ssttuuddyy tthhee bbeehhaavviioorr ooff tthhiiss eexxpprreessssiioonn aass h tends to zero, expand k .. AAfftteerr rreeggrroouuppiinngg tthhee h terms, the right-hhaanndd ssiiddee bbeeccoommeess:: Because ε(h) and η(k ) tteenndd ttoo zzeerroo aass h tteennddss ttoo zzeerroo,, tthhee bbrraacckkeetteedd tteerrmmss tteenndd ttoo zzeerroo aass h h tteennddss ttoo zzeerroo.. BBeeccaauussee tthhee aabboovve expression is equal to the difference f(g((a + h)) − f(g(a)), bbyy tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee f ∘ g is differentiable at a aanndd iittss ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss f′(g(a))g′(a).
The role of Q iinn tthhee ffiirrsstt pprrooooff iiss ppllaayyeedd bbyy η iinn tthhiiss pprrooooff.. TThheeyy aarree rreellaatteedd bbyy tthhee equation: The need to define Q at g(a)) iiss aannaallooggoouuss ttoo tthhee nneeeedd ttoo ddeeffiinnee ηη aatt zzeerroo.. HHoowweevveerr,, tthhee ppprrroooooofffsss aaarrreee nnnooottt eeexxxaaaccctttlllyyy eeeqqquuuiiivvvaaallleeennnttt... TTThhheee fffiiirrrsssttt ppprrroooooofff rrreeellliiieeesss ooonnn aaa ttthhheeeooorrreeemmm aaabbbooouuuttt ppprrroooddduuuccctttsss ooofff llliiimmmiiitttsss tttooo ssshhhooowww ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee eeexxxiiissstttsss... TTThhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd ppprrroooooofff dddoooeeesss nnnooottt nnneeeeeeddd ttthhhiiisss bbbeeecccaaauuussseee 123 showing that the errrrooorrr ttteeerrrmmm vvvaaannniiissshhheeesss ppprrrooovvveeesss ttthhheee eeexxxiiisssttteeennnccceee ooofff ttthhheee llliiimmmiiittt dddiiirrreeeccctttlllyyy... TThhee cchhaaiinn rruullee iinn hhiigghheerr ddiimmeennssiioonnss TTThhheee sssiiimmmpppllleeesssttt gggeeennneeerrraaallliiizzzaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee tttooo hhhiiiggghhheeerrr dddiiimmmeeennnsssiiiooonnnsss uuussseeesss ttthhheee total derivative.
TTThhheee tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss aaa llliiinnneeeaaarrr tttrrraaannnsssfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn ttthhhaaattt cccaaappptttuuurrreeesss hhhooowww ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ccchhhaaannngggeeesss iiinnn aaallllll directions.
Let f : Rm → Rk aanndd g : Rn → Rm bbee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonnss,, aanndd lleett D be the total derivative operator.
If aa is a point in Rn, then tthhee hhiigghheerr ddiimmeennssiioonnaall cchhaaiinn rruullee ssaayyss that: or for short, In terms of JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriicceess, the rule says TThhaatt iiss,, tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ooff tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ffuunnccttiioonn iiss tthhee pprroodduucctt ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaannss ooff tthhee ccoommppoosseedd ffuunnccttiioonnss.. TThhee hhiigghheerr-ddiimmeennssiioonnaall cchhaaiinn rruullee ccaann bbee pprroovveedd uussiinngg aa tteecchhnniiqquuee ssiimmiillaarr ttoo tthhee sseeccoonndd pprrooooff ggiivveenn aabboovvee..
The higher-ddiimmeennssiioonnaall cchhaaiinn rruullee iiss aa ggeenneerraalliizzaattiioonn ooff tthhee oonnee-ddiimmeennssiioonnaall cchhaaiinn rruullee.. IIff k, m, and n are 1, so that f : RR → R and g : R → R,, tthheenn tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriicceess ooff f and g aarree 11 ×× 11.. SSppeecciiffiiccaallllyy,, tthheeyy aarree:: The Jacobian of f ∘ g iiss tthhee pprroodduucctt ooff tthheessee 11 ×× 11 mmaattrriicceess,, ssoo iitt iiss f′(g(a))))g′(a), as expected from the one-dddiiimmmeeennnsssiiiooonnnaaalll ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee... IIInnn ttthhheee lllaaannnggguuuaaagggeee ooofff llliiinnneeeaaarrr tttrrraaannnsssfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnnsss,,, D (g)) iiss tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn wwhhiicchh ssccaalleess aa vveeccttoorr bbyy aa ffaaccttoorr ooff g′(a) and D (ff)) iiss tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn a g(a) wwhhiicchh ssccaalleess aa vveeccttoorr bbyy aa ffaaccttoorr ooff f′(g(a)).
The chain rule says tthhaatt tthhee ccoommppoossiittee ooff tthheessee ttwwoo lliinneeaarr ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonnss iiss tthhee lliinneeaarr ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn D (f ∘ g)),, aanndd tthheerreeffoorree iitt iiss tthhee a ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt ssccaalleess aa vveeccttoorr bbyy f′(g(a))g′(a).
AAnnootthheerr wwaayy ooff wwrriittiinngg tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee iiss uusseedd wwhheenn f and g aarree eexxpprreesssseedd iinn tteerrmmss ooff tthheeiir components as y = f(u) = (f ((u), ..., f (u)) and u = g(x) = (g (x), ..., g (x)))).. IInn tthhiiss ccaassee,, tthhee 1 k 1 m aabboovvee rruullee ffoorr JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriicceess iiss uussuuaallllyy wwrriitttteenn aass:: TTThhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee fffooorrr tttoootttaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss iiimmmpppllliiieeesss aaa ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee fffooorrr pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss... RRReeecccaaallllll ttthhhaaattt wwhheenn tthhee ttoottaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee eexxiissttss,, tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee iinn tthhee itthh ccoooorrddiinnaattee ddiirreeccttiioonn iiss ffoouunndd bbyy mmuullttiippllyyiinngg tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx bbyy tthhee ith basis vector.
By ddooiinngg tthhiiss ttoo tthhee formula above, we find: 124  SSSiiinnnccceee ttthhheee eeennntttrrriiieeesss ooofff ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx aaarrreee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss,,, wwweee mmmaaayyy sssiiimmmpppllliiifffyyy ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee formula to get: MMoorree ccoonncceeppttuuaallllyy,, tthhiiss rruullee eexxpprreesssseess tthhee ffaacctt tthhaatt aa cchhaannggee iinn tthhee x ddiirreeccttiioonn mmaayy cchhaannggee i all of g through g ,, aanndd aannyy ooff tthheessee cchhaannggeess mmaayy aaffffeecctt f. 1 k In the special case where k == 11,, ssoo tthhaatt f is a real-vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn,, tthheenn tthhiiss ffoorrmmuullaa simplifies even further: Example Given wwhheerree and ,, ddeetteerrmmiinnee tthhee vvaalluuee ooff and uussiinngg tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee.. and Higher ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff mmuullttiivvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonnss FFaaàà ddii BBrruunnoo''ss ffoorrmmuullaa ffoorr hhiigghheerr-order derivatives of single-vvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonnss ggeenneerraalliizzeess to the multivariable case.
If ff is a function of u = g(x)) aass aabboovvee,, tthheenn tthhee sseeccoonndd ddeerriivvaattiivvee of f ∘ g is: The composite function cchhaaiinn rruullee nnoottaattiioonn ccaann aallssoo bbee aaddjjuusstteedd ffoorr tthhee mmuullttiivvaarriiaattee ccaassee:: 125  TThheenn tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff zz wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo iittss ttwwoo iinnddeeppeennddeenntt vvaarriiaabblleess aarree ddeeffiinneedd aass:: LLLeeettt'''sss dddooo ttthhheee sssaaammmeee eeexxxaaammmpppllleee aaasss aaabbbooovvveee,,, ttthhhiiisss tttiiimmmeee uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn nnnoootttaaatttiiiooonnn wwwhhheeerrreee ffuunnccttiioonnss wwiitthhiinn tthhee zz ffuunnccttiioonn aarree rreennaammeedd.. NNoottee tthhaatt eeiitthheerr rruullee ccoouulldd bbee uusseedd ffoorr tthhiiss problem, so when iiisss iiittt nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrryyy tttooo gggooo tttooo ttthhheee tttrrrooouuubbbllleee ooofff ppprrreeessseeennntttiiinnnggg ttthhheee mmmooorrreee fffooorrrmmmaaalll cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee function notation?
AAAsss ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss bbbeeecccooommmeee mmmooorrreee cccooommmpppllliiicccaaattteeeddd,,, rrreeennnaaammmiiinnnggg pppaaarrrtttsss ooofff aaa cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee ffuunnccttiioonn iiss aa bbeetttteerr wwaayy ttoo kkeeeepp ttrraacckk ooff aallll ppaarrttss ooff tthhee pprroobblleemm.. IItt iiss sslliigghhttllyy mmoorree ttiimme ccoonnssuummiinngg,, bbuutt mmiissttaakkeess wwiitthhiinn tthhee pprroobblleemm aarree lleessss lliikkeellyy.. TThhee ffiinnaall sstteepp iiss tthhee ssaammee,, rreeppllaaccee uu wwiitthh ffuunnccttiioonn gg:: Multivariate function TTThhheee rrruuullleee fffooorrr dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiinnnggg mmmuuullltttiiivvvaaarrriiiaaattteee nnnaaatttuuurrraaalll lllooogggaaarrriiittthhhmmmiiiccc fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss,,, wwwiiittthhh appropriate nnoottaattiioonn cchhaannggeess iiss aass ffoolllloowwss:: TTThhheeennn ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff zzz wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo iiitttsss iiinnndddeeepppeeennndddeeennnttt vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss aaarrreee dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd aaasss::: 126 Let's do an example.
FFFiiinnnddd ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff ttthhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn::: TThhee rruullee ffoorr ttaakkiinngg ppaarrttiiaallss ooff eexxppoonneennttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonnss ccaann bbee wwrriitttteenn aass:: TTThhheeennn ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff zzz wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo iiitttsss iiinnndddeeepppeeennndddeeennnttt vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss aaarrreee dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd aaasss::: OOnnee llaasstt ttiimmee,, wwee llooookk ffoorr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg ffuunnccttiioonn uussiinngg tthhee eexxppoonneennttiiaall rule: HHiigghheerr oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall aanndd ccrroossss ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess TTThhheee ssstttooorrryyy bbbeeecccooommmeeesss mmmooorrreee cccooommmpppllliiicccaaattteeeddd wwwhhheeennn wwweee tttaaakkkeee hhhiiiggghhheeerrr ooorrrdddeeerrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff mmmuuullltttiiivvvaaarrriiiaaattteee functions.
The interpretation ooofff ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee rrreeemmmaaaiiinnnsss ttthhheee sssaaammmeee,,, bbbuuuttt ttthhheeerrreee aaarrreee nnnooowww tttwwwooo sseeccoonndd oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess ttoo ccoonnssiiddeerr.. FFiirrsstt,, tthheerree iiss tthhee ddiirreecctt sseeccoonndd-order derivative.
IInn tthhiiss ccaassee,, tthhee mmuullttiivvaarriiaattee ffuunnccttiioonn iiss ddiiffffeerreennttiiaatteedd oonnccee,, wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo aann iinnddeeppeennddeenntt vvaarriiaabbllee,, hhoollddiinngg aallll ootthheerr vvaarriiaabblleess constant.
TTThhheeennn ttthhheee rrreeesssuuulllttt iiisss dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteeeddd aaa ssseeecccooonnnddd tttiiimmmeee,,, aaagggaaaiiinnn wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo ttthhheee sssaaammmeee independent variable.
IInn aa ffuunnccttiioonn ssuucchh aass tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg:: There are 2 direct second-oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess,, aass iinnddiiccaatteedd bbyy tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg eexxaammpplleess ooff notation: 127  TTThhheeessseee ssseeecccooonnnddd dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss cccaaannn bbbeee iiinnnttteeerrrppprrreeettteeeddd aaasss ttthhheee rrraaattteeesss ooofff ccchhhaaannngggeee ooofff ttthhheee tttwwwooo ssslllooopppeeesss ooofff ttthhheee function z. NNooww tthhee ssttoorryy ggeettss aa lliittttllee mmoorree ccoommpplliiccaatteedd..
The cross-partials, f and f are defined in the xy yyxx following way.
FFiirrsstt,, ttaakkee tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff zz wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo xx.. TThheenn ttaakkee tthhee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee aaagggaaaiiinnn,,, bbbuuuttt ttthhhiiisss tttiiimmmeee,,, tttaaakkkeee iiittt wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo yyy,,, aaannnddd hhhooolllddd ttthhheee xxx cccooonnnssstttaaannnttt... Spatially, tthhiinnkk ooff tthhee ccrroossss ppaarrttiiaall aass aa mmeeaassuurree ooff hhooww tthhee ssllooppee ((cchhaannggee iinn zz wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo xx)) cchhaannggeess,, wwhheenn tthhee yy vvaarriiaabbllee cchhaannggeess.. TThhee ffoolllloowwiinngg aarree eexxaammpplleess ooff nnoottaattiioonn ffoorr ccrroossss- partials: WWWeee'''llllll dddiiissscccuuussssss eeecccooonnnooommmiiiccc mmmeeeaaannniiinnnggg fffuuurrrttthhheeerrr iiinnn ttthhheee nnneeexxxttt ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn,,, bbbuuuttt fffooorrr nnnooowww,,, wwweee'''llllll jjjuuusssttt ssshhhooowww aaannn example,, aanndd nnoottee tthhaatt iinn aa ffuunnccttiioonn wwhheerree tthhee ccrroossss-ppaarrttiiaallss aarree ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss,, tthheeyy wwiillll bbee identical.
FFoorr tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg ffuunnccttiioonn:: TTaakkee tthhee ffiirrsstt aanndd sseeccoonndd ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. NNooww,, ssttaarrttiinngg wwiitthh tthhee ffiirrsstt ppaarrttiiaallss,, ffiinndd tthhee cross partial derivatives: 4.0 CONCLUSION IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee bbbeeeeeennn iiinnntttrrroooddduuuccceeeddd tttooo ttthhheee cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn aaalllsssooo cccaaalllllleeeddd ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee kkknnnooowwwnnn ttthhheee CCCooommmpppooosssiiittteeesss ooofff mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn tttwwwooo fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee aaalllsssooo kkknnnooowwwnnn ttthhheee quotient ruuullleee... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee sssooolllvvveeeddd ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss ooonnn hhhiiiggghhheeerrr dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee uuussseee ooofff cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee ppprrroooooofff ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee aaannnddd kkknnnooowwwnnn ttthhheee rrruuullleee iiinnn hhhiiiggghhheeerrr dddiiimmmeeennnsssiiiooonnn... 5.0 SUMMARY 128 In this unit, you have studied : The chain rule Composites of more than two functions The quotient rule Higher derivative Proof of the chain rule The rule in higher dimension 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.0 What are the second – order derivatives of the function F(x,y)=xy2+ x3 y5 2.0 Express x- and y- derivatives of W(x3 y3) in terms of x,y.
3.0 What are the second - order derivatives of the function F(x,y) = x4 y6.
4.0 What are the second – order derivatives of the function K(x,y) = ln (2x-3y).
1 1 5.0 What are the second – order derivatives of the function R(x,y) = x2 y3.
6.0 What are the second – order derivatives of the function N(x,y) =tan- 1(x, y).
REFERENCES Hernandez Rodriguez and Lopez Fernandez, A Semiotic Reflection on the Didactics of the Chain Rule, The Montana Mathematics Enthusiast, ISSN 1551-3440, Vol.
7, nos.2&3, pp.321–332.
Apostol, Tom (1974).
Mathematical analysis (2nd ed.
ed.).
Addison Wesley.
Theorem 5.
129 UNIT 22:: EEUULLEERR’’SS TTHHEEOORREEMM CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Sttaatteemmeenntt aanndd pprroovvee ooff EEuulleerr’’ss tthheeoorreemm 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 77..00 RREEFFEERREENNCCEESS//FFUURRTTHHEERR RREEAADDIINNGGSS 1.0 INTRODUCTION In number theory, EEuulleerr''ss tthheeoorreemm (also known as the Fermat–EEuulleerr tthheeoorreemm or Euler's totient theorem)) ssttaatteess tthhaatt iiff n and a are coprime positive integers, then where φ(n) is EEuulleerr''ss ttoottiieenntt ffuunnccttiioonn and "... ≡ ... (mod n)" denotes ccoonnggrruueennccee mmoodduulloo nn.
2.0 OBJECTIVES IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, tthhee ssttuuddeenntt sshhoouulldd aabbllee ttoo ssttaattee aanndd pprroovvee tthhee EEuulleerr’’ss tthheeoorreemm.. 3.0 MAIN CONTENT The converse of EEEuuullleeerrr'''sss ttthhheeeooorrreeemmm iiisss aaalllsssooo tttrrruuueee::: iiifff ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee cccooonnngggrrruuueeennnccceee hhhooollldddsss fffooorrr pppooosssiiitttiiivvveee iinntteeggeerrss aa aanndd nn,, tthheenn aa aanndd nn aarree ccoopprriimmee.. TThhee tthheeoorreemm iiss aa ggeenneerraalliizzaattiioonn ooff Fermat's little theorem,, aanndd iiss ffuurrtthheerr ggeenneerraalliizzeedd bbyy Carmichael's theorem.
TThhee tthheeoorreemm mmaayy bbee uusseedd ttoo eeaassiillyy rreedduuccee llaarrggee ppoowweerrss mmoodduulloo n.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ccoonnssiiddeerr finding the oonneess ppllaaccee ddeecciimmaall ddiiggiitt ooff 77222, i.e.
7222 ((mmoodd 1100)).. NNoottee tthhaatt 77 aanndd 1100 aarree coprime, and φ((1100)) == 44.. SSoo EEuulleerr''ss tthheeoorreemm yyiieellddss 774 ≡ 11 ((mmoodd 1100)),, aanndd wwee ggeett 77222 ≡ 74×55 + 2 ≡ (74)55×72 ≡ 155×72 ≡≡ 49 ≡≡ 99 ((mmoodd 1100)).. IInn ggeenneerraall,, wwhheenn rreedduucciinngg aa ppoowweerr ooff a modulo n (where a and n aarree ccoopprriimmee)),, oonnee nneeeeddss ttoo work modulo φ(n)) iinn tthhee eexxppoonneenntt ooff a: if x ≡ y (mod φ(n)), then ax ≡ aay (mod n).
EEuulleerr''ss tthheeoorreemm aallssoo ffoorrmmss tthhee bbaassiiss ooff tthhee RSA eennccrryyppttiioonn ssyysstteemm:: eennccrryyppttiioonn aanndd 130 decryption in this system together amount to exponentiating the original text by kφ(n)+1 for some positive integer k, so Euler's theorem shows that the decrypted result is the same as the original.
Proofs 1.
Leonhard Euler published a proof in 1789.
Using modern terminology, one may prove the theorem as follows: the numbers b which are relatively prime to n form a group under multiplication mod n, the group G of (multiplicative) units of the ring Z/nZ.
This group has φ(n) elements.
The element a := a (mod n) is a member of the group G, and the order o(a) of a (the least k > 0 such that ak = 1) must have a multiple equal to the size of G. (The order of a is the size of the subgroup of G generated by a, and Lagrange's theorem states that the size of any subgroup of G divides the size of G.) Thus for some integer M > 0, M·o(a) = φ(n).
Therefore aφ(n) = ao(a)·M = (ao(a))M = 1M = 1.
This means that aφ(n) = 1 (mod n).
2.
Another direct proof: if a is coprime to n, then multiplication by a permutes the residue classes mod n that are coprime to n; in other words (writing R for the set consisting of the φ(n) different such classes) the sets { x : x in R } and { ax : x in R } are equal; therefore, the two products over all of the elements in each set are equal.
Hence, P ≡ aφ(n)P (mod n) where P is the product over all of the elements in the first set.
Since P is coprime to n, it follows that aφ(n) ≡ 1 (mod 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have stated and proved the Euler’s theorem 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have known the statement of euler’s theorem and proved euler’s theorem.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT State and prove euler’s theorem.
References Hernandez Rodriguez and Lopez Fernandez, A Semiotic Reflection on the Didactics of the Chain Rule, The Montana Mathematics Enthusiast, ISSN 1551-3440, Vol.
7, nos.2&3, pp.321–332.
Apostol, Tom (1974).
Mathematical analysis (2nd ed.
ed.).
Addison Wesley.
Theorem 5.5.
131 UUNNIITT 33 ::IIMMPPLLIICCIITT DDIIFFFFEERREENNTTIIAATTIIOONN CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 KKnnooww tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff IInnvveerrssee TTrriiggoonnoommeettrriicc FFuunnccttiioonnss 3.2 DDeeffiinnee aanndd iiddeennttiiffyy IImmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn 3.3 KKnnooww ffoorrmmuullaa ffoorr two variables 3.4 KKnnooww aapppplliiccaattiioonnss iinn eeccoonnoommiiccss 3.5 Solve IImmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn pprroobblleemmss 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 77..00 RREEFFEERREENNCCEESS//FFUURRTTHHEERR RREEAADDIINNGGSS INTRODUCTION MMMooosssttt ooofff ooouuurrr mmmaaattthhh wwwooorrrkkk ttthhhuuusss fffaaarrr hhhaaasss aaalllwwwaaayyysss aaallllllooowwweeeddd uuusss tttooo sssooolllvvveee aaannn eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnn fffooorrr y in terms of x.. WWhheenn aann eeqquuaattiioonn ccaann bbee ssoollvveedd ffoorr yy wwee ccaallll iitt aann explicit ffuunnccttiioonn.. BBuutt nnoott aallll eeqquuaattiioonnss can be solved for y.. AAnn eexxaammppllee iiss:: TThhiiss eeqquuaattiioonn ccaannnnoott bbee ssoollvveedd ffoorr y.. WWhheenn aann eeqquuaattiioonn ccaannnnoott bbee ssoollvveedd ffoorr y, we call it an implicit fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn... TTThhheee gggooooooddd nnneeewwwsss iiisss ttthhhaaattt wwweee cccaaannn ssstttiiillllll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee sssuuuccchhh aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn... TTThhheee technique is called iimmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn.
When we implicitly differentiiaattee,, wwee mmuusstt ttrreeaatt y aass aa ccoommppoossiittee ffuunnccttiioonn aanndd tthheerreeffoorree wwee must use the chain rule with yy tteerrmmss.. TThhee rreeaassoonn ffoorr tthhiiss ccaann bbee sseeeenn iinn LLeeiibbnniittzz nnoottaattiioonn:: .. TThhiiss nnoottaattiioonn tteellllss uuss tthhaatt wwee aarree ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiinngg wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x.. BBeeccaauussee yy iiss nnoott nnaattiivvee ttoo whhhaaattt aaarrreee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiinnnggg wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo,,, wwweee nnneeeeeeddd tttooo rrreeegggaaarrrddd iiittt aaasss aaa cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn... AAAsss yyyooouuu kkknnnooowww,,, wwwhhheeennn wwweee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee aaa cccooommmpppooosssiiittteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn wwweee mmmuuusssttt uuussseee ttthhheee ccchhhaaaiiinnn rrruuullleee... LLeett’’ss nnooww ttrryy ttoo ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee tthhee iimmpplliicciitt ffuunnccttiioonn,, .
132 TThhiiss iiss aa ""folium of Descartes"" ccuurrvvee.. TThhiiss wwoouulldd bbee vveerryy dddiiiffffffiiicccuuullltttyyy tttooo sssooolllvvveee fffooorrr yyy,,, sssooo wwweee wwwiiillllll wwwaaannnttt tttooo uuussseee iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn.. HHHeeerrreee wwweee ssshhhooowww wwwiiittthhh LLLeeeiiibbbnnniiitttzzz nnnoootttaaatttiiiooonnn ttthhhaaattt wwweee aaarrreee iiimmmpppllliiiccciiitttlllyyy ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiinngg bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff the equation.
OOOnnn ttthhheee llleeefffttt sssiiidddeee wwweee nnneeeeeeddd tttooo iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaallllllyyy tttaaakkkeee ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff eeeaaaccchhh ttteeerrrmmm... OOOnnn ttthhheee rrriiiggghhhttt sssiiidddeee wwweee wwwiiillllll hhhaaavvveee tttooo uuussseee ttthhheee ppprrroooddduuucccttt rrruuullleee... ((( ) HHHeeerrreee wwweee tttaaakkkeee ttthhheee iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss... NNNooottteee::: WWWhhheeerrreee dddiiiddd ttthhheee y’ ccoommee ffrroomm??
BBeeccaauussee wwee aarree ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiinngg wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x, we nneeeedd ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee oonn tthhee y.. NNoottiiccee tthhaatt wwee ddiidd uussee tthhee pprroodduucctt rruullee oonn tthhee rriigghhtt ssiiddee.. NNooww wwee ggeett tthhee y’ tteerrmmss oonn tthhee ssaammee ssiiddee ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn.. NNooww wwee ffaaccttoorr y’ oouutt ooff tthhee eexxpprreessssiioonn oonn tthhee lleefftt ssiiddee.. NNooww wwee ddiivviiddee bbootthh ssiiddeess bbyy tthhee ffaaccttoorr aanndd ssiimmpplliiffyy.. WWWeee cccaaannn ssseeeeee iiinnn aaa ppplllooottt ooofff ttthhheee iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee ssslllooopppeee ooofff ttthhheee ttaannggeenntt lliinnee aatt tthhee ppooiinntt ((33,,33)) ddooeess aappppeeaarr ttoo bbee --1.
133 AAnnootthheerr eexxaammppllee:: DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee:: GGiivveenn iimmpplliicciitt ffuunnccttiioonn DDooiinngg iimmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn oonn tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn.. NNoottee tthhee uussee ooff tthhee pprroodduucctt rruullee oonn tthhee sseeccoonndd tteerrmm WWee ddoo tthhee aallggeebbrraa ttoo ssoollvvee ffoorr yy''.. HHeerree wwee sseeee aa ppoorrttiioonn ooff pplloott ooff tthhee iimmpplliicciitt eeqquuaattiioonn wwiitthh c sseett eeqquuaall ttoo 55.... WWhheenn ddooeess iitt aappppeeaarr tthhaatt tthhee ssllooppee ooff tthhee ttaannggeenntt lliinnee wwiillll bbee zzeerroo??
IItt aappppeeaarrss ttoo bbee aatt aabboouutt ((22..22,,22..22)).. WWee ttaakkee oouurr ddeerriivvaattiivvee,, sseett iitt eeqquuaall ttoo zzeerroo,, aanndd ssoollvvee.. 134 NNooww ppuuttttiinngg x == y in the oorriiggiinnaall iimmpplliicciitt eeqquuaattiioonn,, wwee ffiinndd tthhaatt...... WWee ssttiillll mmuusstt uussee aa ccoommppuutteerr aallggeebbrraa ssyysstteemm ttoo ssoollvvee tthhiiss ccuubbiicc eeqquuaattiioonn.. TThhee oonnee rreeaall aannsswweerr iiss sshhoowwnn aatt tthhee lleefftt.. TThhiiss x = y = 2.116343299 aannsswweerr ddooeess sseeeemm ccoonnssiisstteenntt wwiitthh oouurr vviissuuaall eessttiimmaattee.. TThhiiss ccaann bbee ddoonnee iinn MMaappllee wwiitthh tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg 2.0 OBJECTIVES AAtt tthhee eenndd ooff tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo :: KKnnooww tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff IInnvveerrssee TTrriiggoonnoommeettrriicc FFuunnccttiioonnss DDeeffiinnee aanndd iiddeennttiiffyy IImmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn Know formula for two vvaarriiaabblleess KKnnooww aapppplliiccaattiioonnss iinn eeccoonnoommiiccss Solve IImmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn pprroobblleemmss 135 3.0 MAIN CONTENT LLiinnkkss ttoo ootthheerr eexxppllaannaattiioonnss ooff IImmpplliicciitt DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn DDeerriivvaattiivveess ooff IInnvveerrssee TTrriiggoonnoommeettrriicc FFuunnccttiioonnss TThhaannkkss ttoo iimmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn,, wwee ccaann ddeevveelloopp iimmppoorrttaanntt ddeerriivvaattiivveess tthhaatt wwee ccoouulldd nnoott hhhaaavvveee dddeeevvveeelllooopppeeeddd ooottthhheeerrrwwwiiissseee... TTThhheee iiinnnvvveeerrrssseee tttrrriiigggooonnnooommmeeetttrrriiiccc fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss fffaaallllll uuunnndddeeerrr ttthhhiiisss cccaaattteeegggooorrryyy... WWWeee wwwiiillllll dddeeevvveeellloooppp aaannnddd rrreeemmmeeemmmbbbeeerrr ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff ttthhheee iiinnnvvveeerrrssseee sssiiinnneee aaannnddd iiinnnvvveeerrrssseee tttaaannngggeeennnttt... Inverse sine function.
This is what inverse sine means.
WWee iimmpplliicciittllyy ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn with respect to x.. BBeeccaauussee wwee aarree ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiinngg with respect to x,, wwee nneeeedd ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee oonn the left side.
We solve the equation for .
TThhiiss iiss bbeeccaauussee ooff tthhee ttrriiggoonnoommeettrriicc iiddeennttiittyy,, .
RReeffeerr bbaacckk ttoo tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn iinn sstteepp ttwwoo aabboovvee.. WWee have our derivative.
136  Implicit differentiation In The inverse tangent function.
This is what inverse tangent means.
WWee iimmpplliicciittllyy ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee equation with respect to x.. BBeeccaauussee wwee aarree differentiating with respect to x,, wwee nneeeedd ttoo uussee tthhee chain rule on the left side.
We solve the equation for .
TThhiiss iiss bbeeccaauussee ooff tthhee ttrriiggoonnoommeettrriicc iiddeennttiittyy,, .
RReeffeerr bbaacckk ttoo tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn iinn sstteepp ttwwoo aabboovvee.. WWee have our derivative.
calculus, a method called iimmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn makes use of the cchhaaiinn rruullee to differentiate implicitly defined functions.
AAss eexxppllaaiinneedd iinn tthhee iinnttrroodduuccttiioonn,, y can be given as a function of x iimmpplliicciittllyy rraatthheerr tthhaann eexxpplliicciittllyy.. WWhheenn wwee hhaavvee aann eeqquuaattiioonn R(x, y) = 00,, wwee mmaayy bbee aabbllee ttoo ssoollvvee iitt ffoorr y and then ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee.. HHoowweevveerr,, ssoommeettiimmeess iitt iiss ssiimmpplleerr ttoo ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee R(x, y)) wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x and y and then solve for dy/dx.
Examples 1.
Consider for example TThhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn nnoorrmmaallllyy ccaann bbee mmaanniippuullaatteedd bbyy using algebra ttoo cchhaannggee tthhiiss equation to one expressing y in terms of an eexxpplliicciitt ffuunnccttiioonn: wwhheerree tthhee rriigghhtt ssiiddee iiss tthhee eexxpplliicciitt ffuunnccttiioonn wwhhoossee oouuttppuutt vvaalluuee iiss y.. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn tthheenn ggiivveess .. AAlltteerrnnaattiivveellyy,, oonnee ccaann totally differentiate tthhee oorriiggiinnaall eeqquuaattiioonn:: 137  Solving for gives: tthhee ssaammee aannsswweerr aass oobbttaaiinneedd pprreevviioouussllyy.. 2.
AAnn eexxaammppllee ooff aann iimmpplliicciitt ffuunnccttiioonn,, ffoorr wwhhiicchh iimmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn mmiigghhtt bbee eeaassiieerr tthhaann aatttteemmppttiinngg ttoo uussee eexxpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn,, iiss IInn oorrddeerr ttoo ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee tthhiiss eexxpplliicciittllyy wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x,, oonnee wwoouulldd hhaavvee ttoo oobbttaaiinn ((vviiaa algebra) aanndd tthheenn ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn.. TThhiiss ccrreeaatteess ttwwoo ddeerriivvaattiivveess:: oonnee ffoorr y >> 0 and another for y < 0.
OOOnnneee mmmiiiggghhhttt fffiiinnnddd iiittt sssuuubbbssstttaaannntttiiiaaallllllyyy eeeaaasssiiieeerrr tttooo iiimmmpppllliiiccciiitttlllyyy dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnnaaalll fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn::: giving, 3.
SSSooommmeeetttiiimmmeeesss ssstttaaannndddaaarrrddd eeexxxpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn cccaaannnnnnooottt bbbeee uuussseeeddd aaannnddd,,, iiinnn ooorrrdddeeerrr tttooo ooobbbtttaaaiiinnn ttthhheee ddeerriivvaattiivvee,, iimmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn mmuusstt bbee eemmppllooyyeedd.. AAnn eexxaammppllee ooff ssuucchh aa ccaassee iiss tthhee equation y5 − y = xx.. IItt iiss iimmppoossssiibbllee ttoo eexxpprreessss y explicitly as a function of xx and therefore dy/dx cccaaannnnnnooottt bbbeee fffooouuunnnddd bbbyyy eeexxxpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn... UUUsssiiinnnggg ttthhheee iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt mmmeeettthhhoooddd,,, dy/dx can be expressed: where FFaaccttoorriinngg oouutt shows that 138  which yields the final answer which is defined for Formula for two variables ""TThhee IImmpplliicciitt FFuunnccttiioonn TThheeoorreemm ssttaatteess tthhaatt iiff F iiss ddeeffiinneedd oonn aann ooppeenn ddiisskk ccoonnttaaiinniinngg (a,b), where F(a,b) = 0, , and F and F aarree ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss oonn tthhee ddiisskk,, tthheenn tthhee x y equation F(x,y) = 0 defines y aass aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff x near the point (a,b) aanndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff tthhiiss function is given by..."[1]:§ 11.5 where F and F iinnddiiccaattee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff F with respect to x and y. x y TThhee aabboovvee ffoorrmmuullaa ccoommeess ffrroomm uussiinngg tthhee generalized chain rule ttoo oobbttaaiinn tthhee total derivative—with respect to x——of both sides of F(x, y) = 0: and hence Implicit function theorem It can be shown that if R(x,y) iiss ggiivveenn bbyy aa smooth submanifold M in ,, aanndd (a,b) is a point ooff tthhiiss ssuubbmmaanniiffoolldd ssuucchh tthhaatt tthhee tangent space tthheerree iiss nnoott vveerrttiiccaall ((tthhaatt iiss ), then M in some small enough nneeiigghhbboouurrhhoooodd of (a,b) is given by a ppaarraammeettrriizzaattiioonn (x,f(x)) where f is a smooth function.
In llleeessssss ttteeeccchhhnnniiicccaaalll lllaaannnggguuuaaagggeee,,, iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss eeexxxiiisssttt aaannnddd cccaaannn bbbeee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteeeddd,,, uuunnnllleeessssss ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt tttooo ttthhheee sssuuuppppppooossseeeddd gggrrraaappphhh wwwooouuulllddd bbbeee vvveeerrrtttiiicccaaalll... IIInnn ttthhheee ssstttaaannndddaaarrrddd ccaassee wwhheerree wwee aarree ggiivveenn aann eeqquuaattiioonn R(x,y) = 0 the condition on R ccaann bbee cchheecckkeedd bbyy mmeeaannss ooff partial derivatives .
139  Applications in economics Marginal rate of substitution In economics,, wwhheenn tthhee lleevveell sset R(x,y) = 0 is an indifference curve ffoorr tthhee qquuaannttiittiieess x and y cccooonnnsssuuummmeeeddd ooofff tttwwwooo gggoooooodddsss,,, ttthhheee aaabbbsssooollluuuttteee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff ttthhheee iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss iiinnnttteeerrrppprrreeettteeeddd aaasss ttthhheee marginal rate of substitution ooff tthhee ttwwoo ggooooddss:: hhooww mmuucchh mmoorree ooff y oonnee mmuusstt rreecceeiivvee iinn oorrddeerr ttoo bbee iinnddiiffffeerreenntt ttoo aa lloossss ooff 11 uunniitt ooff x.
IMPLICIT DIFFFEERREENNTTIIAATTIIOONN PPRROOBBLLEEMMSS TTThhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreee ttthhheee uuussseee ooofff iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn... IIImmmpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn iiisss nnootthhiinngg mmoorree tthhaann aa ssppeecciiaall ccaassee ooff tthhee wweellll-kknnoowwnn cchhaaiinn rruullee ffoorr ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. TThhee mmaajjoorriittyy ooff ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn pprroobblleemmss iinn ffiirrsstt-year calculus involve functions y wwrriitttteenn EEXXPPLLIICCIITTLLYY aass functions of x .. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, iiff , then the derivative of y is .
However, some functions y aarree wwrriitttteenn IIMMPPLLIICCIITTLLYY aass ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff x .. AA ffaammiilliiaarr eexxaammppllee of this is the equation x2 + y2 = 25 , wwwhhhiiiccchhh rrreeeppprrreeessseeennntttsss aaa ccciiirrrcccllleee ooofff rrraaadddiiiuuusss fffiiivvveee ccceeennnttteeerrreeeddd aaattt ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnn... SSSuuuppppppooossseee ttthhhaaattt wwweee wwwiiissshhh tttooo fffiiinnnddd tthhee ssllooppee ooff tthhee lliinnee ttaannggeenntt ttoo tthhee ggrraapphh ooff tthhiiss eeqquuaattiioonn aatt tthhee ppooiinntt ((33,, -44)) .. HHooww ccoouulldd wwee ffiinndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff y in this instance ?
One way is to first write y explicitly as a function of x .
Thus, 140 x2 + y2 = 25 , y2 = 25 - x2 , and , wwhheerree tthhee ppoossiittiivvee ssqquuaarree rroooott rreepprreesseennttss tthhee ttoopp sseemmii-cciirrccllee aanndd tthhee nneeggaattiivvee ssqquuaarree rroooott represents the bottom semi-cciirrccllee.. SSiinnccee tthhee ppooiinntt ((33,, -4) lies on the bottomm sseemmii-circle given by , the derivative of y is , i.e., .
TThhuuss,, tthhee ssllooppee ooff tthhee lliinnee ttaannggeenntt ttoo tthhee ggrraapphh aatt tthhee ppooiinntt ((33,, -4) is .. UUnnffoorrttuunnaatteellyy,, nnoott eevveerryy eeqquuaattiioonn iinnvvoollvviinngg x and y ccaann bbee ssoollvveedd eexxpplliicciittllyy ffoorr y .
For the sake of illustratioonn wwee wwiillll ffiinndd tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff y WITHOUT writing y eexxpplliicciittllyy aass aa function of x .. RReeccaallll tthhaatt tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ((DD)) ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff x squared, (f(xx))2 , can be found using the chain rule : .
Since y ssyymmbboolliiccaallllyy rreepprreesseennttss aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff x, the derivative of y2 ccaann bbee ffoouunndd iinn tthhee ssaammee fashion : .
Now begin with x2 + y2 = 25 .
DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, ggeettttiinngg D ( x2 + y2 ) = D ( 25 ) , 141 D ( x2 ) + D ( y2 ) = D ( 25 ) , and 2x + 2 y y' = 0 , so that 2 y y' = - 2x , and , i.e., .
TThhuuss,, tthhee ssllooppee ooff tthhee lliinnee ttaannggeenntt ttoo tthhee ggrraapphh aatt tthhee ppooiinntt ((33,, -4) is .
TTThhhiiisss ssseeecccooonnnddd mmmeeettthhhoooddd iiilllllluuussstttrrraaattteeesss ttthhheee ppprrroooccceeessssss ooofff iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn... IIIttt iiisss iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannnttt tttooo nnnooottteee tthhaatt tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee eexxpprreessssiioonn ffoorr eexxpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn iinnvvoollvveess x oonnllyy,, wwhhiillee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee eexxpprreessssiioonn ffoorr iimmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn mmaayy iinnvvoollvvee BBOOTTHH x AND y .
TThhee ffoolllloowwiinngg pprroobblleemmss rraannggee iinn ddiiffffiiccuullttyy ffrroomm aavveerraaggee ttoo cchhaalllleennggiinngg..
PROBLEM 1 : Assume that y is a function of x .
Find y' = dy/dx for x3 + y3 = 4 .
SOLUTION 1 : Begin with x3 + y3 == 44 .. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, ggeettttiinngg D ( x3 + y3 ) = D ( 4 ) , D ( x3 ) + D ( y3 ) = D ( 4 ) , ((RReemmeemmbbeerr ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee oonn D ( y3 ) .)
3x2 + 3y2 y' = 0 , so that (Now solve for y' .)
3y2 y' = - 3x2 , and 142  SOLUTION 2 : Begin with (x--y)2 = x + y - 11 .. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, ggeettttiinngg D (x-y)2 = D ( x + y - 1 ) , D (x-y)2 = D ( x ) + D ( y ) - DD ( 1 ) , ((RReemmeemmbbeerr ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee oonn D (x-y)2 .)
, 2 (x-y) (1- y') = 1 + y' , so that (Now solve for y' .)
2 (x-y) - 2 (x-y) y' = 1 + y' , - 2 (x-y) y' - y' = 1 - 2 (x-y) , (Factor out y' .)
y' [ - 2 (x-y) - 1 ] = 1 - 2 (x-y)) ,, and .
SOLUTION 3 : Begin with .. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, getting , ((RReemmeemmbbeerr ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee oonn .)
, ,, so that (Now solve for y' .)
143 , , (Factor out y' .)
, and .
SOLUTION 4 : Begin with y == x2 y3 + x3 y2 .. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, ggeettttiinngg D(y) = D ( x2 y3 + x3 y2 ) , D(y) = D ( x2 y3 ) + D ( x3 y2 )) ,, (Use the product rule twice.)
, ((RReemmeemmbbeerr ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee oonn D ( y3 ) and D ( y2 ) .)
, y' = 3x2 y2 y' + 2x y3 + 2x3 y y'' ++ 33x2 y2 , so that (Now solve for y' .)
y' - 3x2 y2 y' - 2x3 y y' = 2x y3 ++ 33x2 y2 , (Factor out y' .)
y' [ 1 - 3x2 y2 - 2x3 y ] = 2x y3 ++ 33x2 y2 , and .
SOLUTION 5 : Begin with .. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, 144 getting ,, , , , so that (Now solve for .)
, , (Factor out .)
, and .
SOLUTION 6 : Begin with .. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee equation, getting , , , 145 , so that (Now solve for y' .)
, , (Factor out y' .)
, , , and .
SOLUTION 7 : Begin with .. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, getting , 1 = (1/2)( x2 + y2 )-1/2 D ( x2 ++ y2 ) , 1 = (1/2)( x2 + y2 )-1/2 ( 2x + 2yy yy' ) , so that (Now solve for y' .)
, , 146 , , and .
SOLUTION 8 : Begin with .. CClleeaarr tthhee ffrraaccttiioonn bbyy mmuullttiippllyyiinngg bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff the equation by y + x2 ,, ggeettttiinngg , or x - y3 = xy + 2y + x3 + 2x2 .
NNooww ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, ggeettttiinngg D ( x - y3 ) = D ( xy + 2y + x3 ++ 22x2 ) , D ( x ) - D (y3 ) = D ( xy ) + DD ( 2y ) + D ( x3 ) + D ( 2x2 ) , ((RReemmeemmbbeerr ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee oonn D (y3 ) .)
1 - 3 y2 y' = ( xy' + (1)y ) + 2 yy' + 3x2 + 4x , so that (Now solve for y' .)
1 - y - 3x2 - 4x = 3 y2 y' + xy'' ++ 22 y' , (Factor out y' .)
1 - y - 3x2 - 4x = (3y2 + x ++ 22)) yy' , and .
147  SOLUTION 9 : Begin with .. CClleeaarr tthhee ffrraaccttiioonnss bbyy mmuullttiippllyyiinngg bbootthh ssiiddeess of the equation by x3 y3 ,, ggeettttiinngg , , y4 + x4 = x5 y7 .
NNooww ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, ggeettttiinngg D ( y4 + x4 ) = D ( x5 y7 ) , D ( y4 ) + D ( x4 ) = x5 D (y7 )) ++ D ( x5 ) y7 , ((RReemmeemmbbeerr ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee oonn D (y4 ) and D (y7 ) .)
4 y3 y' + 4 x3 = x5 (7 y6 y'' )) ++ (( 55 x4 ) y7 , so that (Now solve for y' .)
4 y3 y' - 7 x5 y6 y' = 5 x4 y7 - 4 xx3 , (Factor out y' .)
y' [ 4 y3 - 7 x5 y6 ] = 5 x4 y7 - 44 x3 , and .
SOLUTION 10 : Begin with (xx2+y2)3 = 8x2y2 .. NNooww ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn,, getting D (x2+y2)3 = D ( 8x2y2 ) , 3 (x2+y2)2 D (x2+y2) = 8x2 D (yy2 ) + D ( 8x2 ) y2 , ((RReemmeemmbbeerr ttoo uussee tthhee cchhaaiinn rruullee oonn D (y2 ) .)
3 (x2+y2)2 ( 2x + 2 y y' ) = 8x2 (2 y y' ) + ( 16 x ) y2 , 148 so that (Now solve for y' .)
6x (x2+y2)2 + 6 y (x2+y2)2 y'' == 1166 x2 y y' + 16 x y2 , 6 y (x2+y2)2 y' - 16 x2 y y'' == 1166 x y2 - 6x (x2+y2)2 , (Factor out y' .)
y' [ 6 y (x2+y2)2 - 16 x2 y ]] == 1166 x y2 - 6x (x2+y2)2 , and .. TThhuuss,, tthhee ssllooppee ooff tthhee lliinnee ttaannggeenntt ttoo tthhee ggrraapphh aatt tthhee ppooiinntt ((-1, 1) is , aanndd tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn ooff tthhee ttaannggeenntt lliinnee iiss y - ( 1 ) = (1) ( x - ( -1 ) ) or y = x + 2 SOLUTION 11 : Begin with xx2 + (y-x)3 = 9 .
If x=1 , then (1)2 + ( y-1 )3 = 9 so that ( y-1 )3 = 8 , y-1 = 2 , y = 3 , aaannnddd ttthhheee tttaaannngggeeennnttt llliiinnneee pppaaasssssseeesss ttthhhrrrooouuuggghhh ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt (((111,,, 333))) ... NNNooowww dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee bbbooottthhh sssiiidddeeesss ooofff ttthhheee original equation, getting D ( x2 + (y-x)3 ) = D ( 9 ) , D ( x2 ) + D (y-x)3 = D ( 9 ) , 2x + 3 (y-x)2 D (y-x) = 0 , 2x + 3 (y-x)2 (y'-1) = 0 , so that (Now solve for y' .)
149 2x + 3 (y-x)2 y'- 3 (y-x)2 = 0 , 3 (y-x)2 y' = 3 (y-x)2 - 2x , and .
TThhuuss,, tthhee ssllooppee ooff tthhee lliinnee ttaannggeenntt ttoo tthhee ggrraapphh aatt ((11,, 33)) iiss , aanndd tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn ooff tthhee ttaannggeenntt lliinnee iiss y - ( 3 ) = (5/6) ( x - ( 1 ) ) , or y = (7/6) x + (13/6) .
SOLUTION 12 : Begin with xx2y + y4 = 4 + 2x .. NNooww ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee bbootthh ssiiddeess ooff tthhee oorriiggiinnaall equation, getting D ( x2 y + y4 ) = D ( 4 + 2x ) , D ( x2 y ) + D (y4 ) = D (( 44 )) ++ D ( 2x ) , ( x2 y' + (2x) y ) + 4 y3 y'' == 00 ++ 22 ,, so that (Now solve for y' .)
x2 y' + 4 y3 y' = 2 - 2x y , (Factor out y' .)
y' [ x2 + 4 y3 ] = 2 - 2x y , and (Equation 1) .
TThhuuss,, tthhee ssllooppee ooff tthhee ggrraapphh ((tthhee ssllooppee ooff tthhee lliinnee ttaannggeenntt ttoo tthhee ggrraapphh)) aatt ((--1, 1) is 150 .
Since y'''=== 444///555 ,,, ttthhheee ssslllooopppeee ooofff ttthhheee gggrrraaappphhh iiisss 444///555 aaannnddd ttthhheee gggrrraaappphhh iiisss iiinnncccrrreeeaaasssiiinnnggg aaattt ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt (((-1, 1) .
NNooww ddeetteerrmmiinnee tthhee ccoonnccaavviittyy ooff tthhee ggrraapphh aatt ((-11,, 11)) .. DDiiffffeerreennttiiaattee EEqquuaattiioonn 11,, ggeettttiinngg .
Now let x=-1 , y=1 , and y''==44//55 ssoo tthhaatt tthhee sseeccoonndd ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss .
Since y'''' << 00 ,, tthhee ggrraapphh iiss ccoonnccaavvee ddoowwnn aatt tthhee ppooiinntt ((-1, 1) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff iiinnnvvveeerrrssseee ooofff tttrrriiigggooonnnooommmeeetttrrriiiccc fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee kkknnnooowwwnnn ttthhheee dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn ooofff iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn aaannnddd hhhaaavvveee iiidddeeennntttiiifffiiieeeddd ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss ooonnn implicit dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee aaalllsssooo ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd ttthhheee fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaarrr fffooorrr tttwwwooo vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss aaannnddd iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn aaappppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnnsss iiinnn eeecccooonnnooommmiiicccsss... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee sssooolllvvveeeddd vvvaaarrriiiooouuusss eeexxxaaammmpppllleeesss ooonnn iiimmmpppllliiiccciiittt differentiation.
5.0 SUMMARY IInn tthhiiss ccoouurrssee yyoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd The ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff IInnvveerrssee TTrriiggoonnoommeettrriicc FFuunnccttiioonnss DDeeffiinniittiioonn aanndd iiddeennttiiffiiccaattiioonn ooff IImmpplliicciitt ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn TThhee ffoorrmmuullaa ffoorr ttwwoo vvaarriiaabblleess TThhee aapppplliiccaattiioonnss iinn eeccoonnoommiiccss 151  Implicit differentiation problems 5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Find the equation of the tangent line to the ellipse 25 x2 + y2 = 109 if Find y' if Find y' if xy3 + x2y2 + 3x2 - 6 = 1. .
Show that if a normal line to each point on an ellipse passes through the center of an ellipse, then the ellipse is a circle.
7.0 REFERENCES ^ a b Stewart, James (1998).
Calculus Concepts And Contexts.
Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
ISBN 0-534-34330-9.
Rudin, Walter (1976).
Principles of Mathematical Analysis.
McGraw-Hill.
ISBN 0-07- 054235-X.
Spivak, Michael (1965).
Calculus on Manifolds.
HarperCollins.
ISBN 0-8053-9021-9.
Warner, Frank (1983).
Foundations of Differentiable Manifolds and Lie Groups.
Springer.
ISBN 0-387-90894 152  MODULE 6 TAYLOR’S SERIES EXPANSION -Unit 1: Function of two variables -Unit 2: Taylor’s series expansion for functions of two variables.
-Unit 3: Application of Taylor’s series.
UNIT 1 : FUNCTIONS OF TWO VARIABLES CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Solve problems on partial derivatives in calculus 3.2 Solve problems on higher order partial derivative 3.3 State and apply clairauts theorem 3.4 Solve problem on maxima and manima 3.5 Identify Taylor series of function of two variable 3.6 Know analytical function 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Functions of Two Variables Definition of a function of two variables Until now, we have only considered functions of a single variable.
However, many real-world functions consist of two (or more) variables.
E.g., the area function of a rectangular shape depends on both its width and its height.
And, the pressure of a given quantity of gas varies with respect to the temperature of the gas and its volume.
We define a function of two variables as follows: A function f of two variables is a relation that assigns to every ordered pair of input values x, y in a set called the domain of a unique output value denoted by,f (x, y).
The set of output values is called the range.
Since the domain consists of ordered pairs, we may consider the domain to be all (or part) of the x-y plane.
153 Unless otherwise stated, we will assume that the variables x and y and the output Value f (x, y).
2.0 OBJECTIVE At this unit, you should be able to : • Solve problems on partial derivatives in calculus • Solve problems on higher order partial derivative • State and apply clairauts theorem • Solve problem on maxima and manima • Identify Taylor series of function of two variable • Know analytical function 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Partial Derivatives in Calculus Let f(x,y) be a function with two variables.
If we keep y constant and differentiate f (assuming f is differentiable) with respect to the variable x, we obtain what is called the partial derivative of f with respect to x which is denoted by ∂f or fx ∂x We might also define partial derivatives of function f as follows: f(x + h , y) - f(x , y) ∂f lim = h→0 h ∂x f(x , y + k) - f(x , y) ∂f lim = k→0 K ∂y We now present several examples with detailed solution on how to calculate partial derivatives.
Example 1: Find the partial derivatives f and f if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = x2 y + 2x + y Solution to Example 1: Assume y is constant and differentiate with respect to x to obtain 154 ∂f ∂ fx = = [ x2 y + 2x + y ] ∂x ∂x ∂ ∂ ∂ = [ x2 y] + [ 2 x ] + [ y ] = [2 x y] + [ 2 ] + [ 0 ] = 2x y + 2 ∂x ∂x ∂x Now assume x is constant and differentiate with respect to y to obtain ∂f ∂ fy = = [ x2 y + 2x + y ] ∂y ∂y ∂ ∂ ∂ = [ x2 y] + [ 2 x ] + [ y ] = [ x2 ] + [ 0 ] + [ 1 ] = x2 + 1 ∂y ∂y ∂y Example 2: Find f and f if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = sin(x y) + cos x Solution to Example 2: Differentiate with respect to x assuming y is constant ∂f ∂ fx = = [ sin(x y) + cos x ] = y cos(x y) - sin x ∂x ∂x Differentiate with respect to y assuming x is constant ∂f ∂ fy = = [ sin(x y) + cos x ] = x cos(x y) ∂y ∂y Example 3: Find f and f if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = x ex y Solution 3: Differentiate with respect to x assuming y is constant ∂f ∂ fx = = [ x ex y ] = ex y + x y ex y = (x y + 1)ex y ∂x ∂x 155  Differentiate with respect to y ∂f ∂ fy = = [ x ex y ] = (x) (x ex y) = x2 ex y ∂y ∂y Example 4: Find f and f if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = ln ( x2 + 2 y) Solution Differentiate with respect to x to obtain ∂f ∂ 2x fx = = [ ln ( x2 + 2 y) ] = ∂x ∂x x2 + 2 y Differentiate with respect to y ∂f ∂ 2 fy = = [ ln ( x2 + 2 y) ] = ∂y ∂y x2 + 2 y Example 5: Find f (2 , 3) and f (2 , 3) if f(x , y) is given by x y f(x , y) = y x2 + 2 y Solution to Example 5: We first find f and f x y f (x,y) = 2x y x f (x,y) = x2 + 2 y We now calculate f (2 , 3) and f (2 , 3) by substituting x and y by their given values x y f (2,3) = 2 (2)(3) = 12 x f (2,3) = 22 + 2 = 6 y Exercise: Find partial derivatives f and f of the following functions x y 1. f(x , y) = x ex + y 156  2. f(x , y) = ln ( 2 x + y x) 3. f(x , y) = x sin(x - y) Answer to Above Exercise: 1. f =(x + 1)ex + y , f = x exx ++ yy x y 2. f = 1 / x , f = 1 / (y + 2) x y 3. f = x cos (x - y) + sin (x - yy)) ,, f = -x cos (x - y) x y MMoorree oonn ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aanndd mmuuttlliivvaarriiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonnss.. MMuullttiivvaarriiaabbllee FFuunnccttiioonnss HHiigghheerr OOrrddeerr PPaarrttiiaall DDeerriivvaattiivveess JJuusstt aass wwee hhaadd hhiigghheerr oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess wwiitthh ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff oonnee vvaarriiaabbllee wwee wwiillll aallssoo hhaavvee hhiigghheerr oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff mmoorree tthhaann oonnee vvaarriiaabbllee.. HHoowweevveerr,, tthhiiss ttiimmee wwee wwiillll hhhaaavvveee mmmooorrreee oooppptttiiiooonnnsss sssiiinnnccceee wwweee dddooo hhhaaavvveee mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee......CCCooonnnsssiiidddeeerrr ttthhheee cccaaassseee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn of two variables, sinccee bbootthh ooff tthhee ffiirrsstt oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aarree aallssoo functions of x and y wwee ccoouulldd iinn ttuurrnn ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee eeaacchh wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo x oorr y.
This means that fffooorrr ttthhheee cccaaassseee ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff tttwwwooo vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss ttthhheeerrreee wwwiiillllll bbbeee aaa tttoootttaaalll ooofff fffooouuurrr pppooossssssiiibbbllleee ssseeecccooonnnddd ooorrrdddeeerrr derivatives.
HHeerree tthheeyy aarree aanndd tthhee nnoottaattiioonnss tthhaatt wwee’’llll uussee ttoo ddeennoottee tthheemm.. TTThhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd aaannnddd ttthhhiiirrrddd ssseeecccooonnnddd ooorrrdddeeerrr pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss aaarrreee ooofffttteeennn cccaaalllllleeeddd mmmiiixxxeeeddd pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss sssiiinnnccceee wwweee aaarrreee tttaaakkkiiinnnggg dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee...
Note as wweellll tthhaatt tthhee oorrddeerr tthhaatt wwee ttaakkee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess iinn iiss ggiivveenn bbyy tthhee nnoottaattiioonn ffoorr eeaacchh tthheessee..
If wwee aarree uussiinngg tthhee ssuubbssccrriippttiinngg nnoottaattiioonn,, e.g.
,, tthheenn wwee wwiillll ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee ffrroomm lleefftt ttoo right.
IIInnn ooottthhheeerrr wwwooorrrdddsss,,, iiinnn ttthhhiiisss cccaaassseee,,, wwweee wwwiiillllll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee fffiiirrrsssttt wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo x and then with respect to y. WWiitthh tthhee ffrraaccttiioonnaall nnoottaattiioonn e.g.
, it is the opposite.
IInn tthheessee ccaasseess wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee mmoovviinngg aalloonngg tthhee ddeennoommiinnaattoorr ffrroomm rriigghhtt ttoo lleefftt.. SSoo,, aaggaaiinn,, iinn tthhiiss ccaassee wwee differentiate with respect to x first and then LLeett’’ss ttaakkee aa qquuiicckk llooookk aatt aann eexxaammppllee.. 157 Example 1 FFiinndd aallll tthhee sseeccoonndd oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess ffoorr Solution WWee’’llll ffiirrsstt nneeeedd tthhee ffiirrsstt oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess ssoo hheerree tthheeyy aarree.. NNooww,, lleett’’ss ggeett tthhee sseeccoonndd oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. Notice that we dropped the from the derivatives.
TThhiiss iiss ffaaiirrllyy ssttaannddaarrdd aanndd wwee wwiillll bbee ddooiinngg iitt mmoosstt ooff tthhee ttiimmee ffrroomm tthhiiss ppooiinntt oonn.. WWee wwiillll aallssoo bbee ddrrooppppiinngg iitt ffoorr tthhee ffiirrsstt oorrddeerr derivatives in most cases.
Now let’ss aallssoo nnoottiiccee tthhaatt,, iinn tthhiiss ccaassee,, .
TThhiiss iiss nnoott bbyy ccooiinncciiddeennccee..
If the function iiss ““nniiccee eennoouugghh”” tthhiiss wwiillll aallwwaayyss bbee tthhee ccaassee.. SSoo,, wwhhaatt’’ss ““nniiccee eennoouugghh””??
The following theorem tells us.
Clairaut’s Theorem Suppose that f iiss ddeeffiinneedd oonn aa ddiisskk D that contains the point .
IIff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonnss and aarree ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss oonn tthhiiss ddiisskk tthheenn,, NNNooowww,,, dddooo nnnooottt gggeeettt tttoooooo eeexxxccciiittteeeddd aaabbbooouuuttt ttthhheee dddiiissskkk bbbuuusssiiinnneeessssss aaannnddd ttthhheee fffaaacccttt ttthhhaaattt wwweee gggaaavvveee ttthhheee ttthhheeeooorrreeemmm iiisss for a specific point.
IIInnn ppprrreeettttttyyy mmmuuuccchhh eeevvveeerrryyy eeexxxaaammmpppllleee iiinnn ttthhhiiisss ccclllaaassssss iiifff ttthhheee tttwwwooo mmmiiixxxeeeddd ssseeecccooonnnddd ooorrrdddeeerrr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aarree ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss tthheenn tthheeyy wwiillll bbee eeqquuaall..
Example 2 VVeerriiffyy CCllaaiirraauutt’’ss TThheeoorreemm ffoorr .
Solution WWee’’llll ffiirrsstt nneeeedd tthhee ttwwoo ffiirrsstt oorrddeerr derivatives.
158  NNooww,, ccoommppuuttee tthhee ttwwoo ffiixxeedd sseeccoonndd oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess.. SSuurree eennoouugghh tthheeyy aarree tthhee ssaammee.. SSoo ffaarr wwee hhaavvee oonnllyy llooookkeedd aatt sseeccoonndd oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess..
There are, ooff ccoouurrssee,, hhiigghheerr oorrddeerr derivatives as well.
HHHeeerrreee aaarrreee aaa cccooouuupppllleee ooofff ttthhheee ttthhhiiirrrddd ooorrrdddeeerrr pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff tttwwwooo variables.
NNNoootttiiiccceee aaasss wwweeellllll ttthhhaaattt fffooorrr bbbooottthhh ooofff ttthhheeessseee wwweee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee ooonnnccceee wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo y and twice with respect to x. TTThhheeerrreee iiisss aaalllsssooo aaannnooottthhheeerrr ttthhhiiirrrddd ooorrrdddeeerrr pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiinnn wwwhhhiiiccchhh wwweee cccaaannn dddooo ttthhhiiisss,,, .
TTThhheeerrreee iiisss aaannn eeexxxttteeennnsssiiiooonnn tttooo CCClllaaaiiirrraaauuuttt’’’sss TTThhheeeooorrreeemmm ttthhhaaattt sssaaayyysss iiifff aaallllll ttthhhrrreeeeee ooofff ttthhheeessseee aaarrreee ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss tthheenn tthheeyy sshhoouulldd aallll bbee eeqquuaall,, TToo tthhiiss ppooiinntt wwee’’vvee oonnllyy llooookkeedd aatt ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff ttwwoo vvaarriiaabblleess,, bbuutt eevveerryytthhiinngg tthhaatt wwee’’vvee ddoonnee tttooo ttthhhiiisss pppoooiiinnnttt wwwiiillllll wwwooorrrkkk rrreeegggaaarrrdddllleeessssss ooofff ttthhheee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr ooofff vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss ttthhhaaattt wwweee’’’vvveee gggooottt iiinnn ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaannnddd ttthhheeerrreee aaarrreee nnnaaatttuuurrraaalll eeexxxttteeennnsssiiiooonnnsss tttooo CCClllaaaiiirrraaauuuttt’’’sss ttthhheeeooorrreeemmm tttooo aaallllll ooofff ttthhheeessseee cccaaassseeesss aaasss wwweeellllll... For instance, pprroovviiddeedd bbootthh ooff tthhee ddeerriivv aattiivveess aarree ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss.. IIInnn gggeeennneeerrraaalll,,, wwweee cccaaannn eeexxxttteeennnddd CCClllaaaiiirrraaauuuttt’’’sss ttthhheeeooorrreeemmm tttooo aaannnyyy fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaannnddd mmmiiixxxeeeddd pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss... TTThhheee ooonnnlllyyy rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreeemmmeeennnttt iiisss ttthhhaaattt iiinnn eeeaaaccchhh dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee wwweee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo eeeaaaccchhh vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee the same number of times.
IIInnn ooottthhheeerrr wwwooorrrdddsss,,, ppprrrooovvviiidddeeeddd wwweee mmmeeeeeettt ttthhheee cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuiiitttyyy cccooonnndddiiitttiiiooonnn,,, ttthhheee following will be equal 159 bbeeccaauussee iinn eeaacchh ccaassee wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo t once, s tthhrreeee ttiimmeess aanndd r three times.
LLeett’’ss ddoo aa ccoouuppllee ooff eexxaammpplleess wwiitthh hhiigghheerr ((wweellll hhiigghheerr oorrddeerr tthhaann ttwwoo aannyywwaayy)) oorrddeerr ddeerriivvaattiivveess aanndd ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff mmoorree tthhaann ttwwoo vvaarriiaabblleess..
Example 3 FFFiiinnnddd ttthhheee iiinnndddiiicccaaattteeeddd dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee fffooorrr eeeaaaccchhh ooofff ttthhheee fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... (a) Find ffoorr (b) Find for Solution (a)Find for IInn tthhiiss ccaassee rreemmeemmbbeerr tthhaatt wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee ffrroomm lleefftt ttoo rriigghhtt.. HHeerree aarree tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess ffoorr tthhiiss part.
(b) Find for HHeerree wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee ffrroomm rriigghhtt ttoo lleefftt..
Here aarree tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess ffoorr tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn.. 160  Maxima and minima For other uses, see MMaaxxiimmaa (disambiguation) and MMaaxxiimmuumm ((ddiissaammbbiigguuaattiioonn)).
For use in statistics, see MMaaxxiimmuumm ((ssttaattiissttiiccss)).
LLooccaall aanndd gglloobbaall mmaaxxiimmaa aanndd mmiinniimmaa ffoorr ccooss((33πx)/x, 0.1≤x≤1.1 In mathematics, the mmaaxxiimmuumm and minimum ((pplluurraall:: mmaaxxiimmaa aanndd mmiinniimmaa)) ooff aa function, known collectively as eexxttrreemmaa ((ssiinngguullaarr:: eexxttrreemmuumm)),, aarree tthhee llaarrggeesstt aanndd ssmmaalllleesstt vvaalluuee tthhaatt tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn ttaakkeess aatt aa ppooiinntt eeiitthheerr wwiitthhiinn aa ggiivveenn nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd ((local oorr relative extremum) or on the function domain iinn iittss eennttiirreettyy ((global or absolute extremum).
]MMoorree ggeenneerraallllyy,, tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm aanndd mmiinniimmuumm ooff aa set (as defined in set theory) are the ggrreeaatteesstt aand least element iinn tthhee sseett.. UUnnbboouunnddeedd iinnffiinniittee sseettss ssuucchh aass tthhee sseett ooff real numbers hhaavvee nnoo mmiinniimmuumm aanndd maximum.
TToo llooccaattee eexxttrreemmee vvaalluueess iiss tthhee bbaassiicc oobbjjeeccttiivvee ooff optimization real-valued function f ddeeffiinneedd oonn aa real line is said to have a llooccaall ((oorr rreellaattiivvee)) mmaaxxiimmuumm point at the point x∗,, iiff tthheerree eexxiissttss ssoommee ε > 0 such that f(x∗) ≥ f(x)) wwhheenn ||x − x∗| < ε.
The vvaalluuee ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn aatt tthhiiss ppooiinntt iiss ccaalllleedd maximum ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn.. SSiimmiillaarrllyy,, aa ffuunnccttiioonn has a local minimum point aatt x∗, if f(x∗) ≤ f(x) when |x − x∗| < ε.. TThhee vvaalluuee ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn aatt this point is called mmiinniimmuumm of the function.
A function has a gglloobbaall (or absolute) maximum point at x∗ if f(x∗)) ≥ f(x) for all x.
Similarly, a function has a gglloobbaall ((oorr aabbssoolluuttee)) minimum point at x∗ if f(x∗∗) ≤ f(x) for all x.. TThhee gglloobbaall mmaaxxiimmuumm aanndd gglloobbaall mmiinniimmuumm ppooiinnttss aarree aallssoo kknnoowwnn aass tthhee arg max and arg miinn:: tthhee aarrgguummeenntt ((iinnppuutt)) aatt wwhhiicchh tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm ((rreessppeeccttiivveellyy,, mmiinniimmuumm)) ooccccuurrss..
Restricted domains::: TTThhheeerrreee mmmaaayyy bbbeee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaa aaannnddd mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa fffooorrr aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn wwwhhhooossseee domain does not include all real numbers.. AA rreeaall-valued function, whose domain is any sseett, can have a global mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm aaannnddd mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm... TTThhheeerrreee mmmaaayyy aaalllsssooo bbbeee lllooocccaaalll mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaa aaannnddd lllooocccaaalll mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa pppoooiiinnntttsss,,, bbbuuuttt ooonnnlllyyy aatt ppooiinnttss ooff tthhee ddoommaaiinn sseett wwhheerree tthhee ccoonncceepptt ooff neighborhood iiss ddeeffiinneedd.. AA nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd plays the role of the set of x ssuucchh tthhaatt ||x − x∗| < ε.
161 A continuous (real-vvaalluueedd)) ffuunnccttiioonn oonn aa compact sseett aallwwaayyss ttaakkeess mmaaxxiimmuumm aanndd mmiinniimmuumm vvvaaallluuueeesss ooonnn ttthhhaaattt ssseeettt... AAAnnn iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannnttt eeexxxaaammmpppllleee iiisss aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn wwwhhhooossseee dddooommmaaaiiinnn iiisss aaa ccclllooossseeeddd (((aaannnddd bounded) interval of rreeaall nnuummbbeerrss (see the graph above).
The nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd requirement precludes a local mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm ooorrr mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm aaattt aaannn eeennndddpppoooiiinnnttt ooofff aaannn iiinnnttteeerrrvvvaaalll... HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, aaannn eeennndddpppoooiiinnnttt may still be a global mmaaxxiimmuumm oorr mmiinniimmuumm.. TThhuuss iitt iiss not always true, for finite domains, ttthhhaaattt aaa ggglllooobbbaaalll mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm (((mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm))) mmmuuusssttt aaalllsssooo bbbeee aaa lllooocccaaalll mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm (((mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm)))... Finding fuunnccttiioonnaall mmaaxxiimmaa aanndd mmiinniimmaa FFiinnddiinngg gglloobbaall mmaaxxiimmaa aanndd mmiinniimmaa iiss tthhee ggooaall ooff mmaatthheemmaattiiccaall ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn.
If a function is ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss oonn aa cclloosseedd iinntteerrvvaall,, tthheen by the extreme value theorem gglloobbaall mmaaxxiimmaa aanndd mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa eeexxxiiisssttt... FFFuuurrrttthhheeerrrmmmooorrreee,,, aaa ggglllooobbbaaalll mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm (((ooorrr mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm))) eeeiiittthhheeerrr mmmuuusssttt bbbeee aaa lllooocccaaalll mmaaxxiimmuumm ((oorr mmiinniimmuumm)) iinn tthhee iinntteerriioorr ooff tthhee ddoommaaiinn,, oorr mmuusstt lliiee oonn tthhee bboouunnddaarryy ooff tthhee dddooommmaaaiiinnn... SSSooo aaa mmmeeettthhhoooddd ooofff fffiiinnndddiiinnnggg aaa ggglllooobbbaaalll mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm (((ooorrr mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm))) iiisss tttooo lllooooookkk aaattt aaallllll ttthhheee lllooocccaaalll mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaa (((ooorrr mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa))) iiinnn ttthhheee iiinnnttteeerrriiiooorrr,,, aaannnddd aaalllsssooo lllooooookkk aaattt ttthhheee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaa (((ooorrr mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa))) ooofff ttthhheee pppoooiiinnntttsss ooonnn the boundary; and take tthhee bbiiggggeesstt ((oorr ssmmaalllleesstt)) oonnee.. LLooccaall eexxttrreemmaa ccaann bbee ffoouunndd bbyy Fermat's theorem,, wwhhiicchh ssttaatteess tthhaatt tthheeyy mmuusstt ooccccuurr aatt critical points... OOOnnneee cccaaannn dddiiissstttiiinnnggguuuiiissshhh wwwhhheeettthhheeerrr aaa cccrrriiitttiiicccaaalll pppoooiiinnnttt iiisss aaa lllooocccaaalll mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm ooorrr lllooocccaaalll mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm bbbyyy using the first derivative test oorr second derivative test.
FFoorr aannyy ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt iiss ddeeffiinneedd piecewise,, oonnee ffiinnddss aa mmaaxxiimmaa ((oorr mmiinniimmaa)) bbyy ffiinnddiinngg tthhee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm (((ooorrr mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm))) ooofff eeeaaaccchhh pppiiieeeccceee ssseeepppaaarrraaattteeelllyyy;;; aaannnddd ttthhheeennn ssseeeeeeiiinnnggg wwwhhhiiiccchhh ooonnneee iiisss bbbiiiggggggeeesssttt (((ooorrr smallest).
Examples The global maximum of ooccccuurrss aatt x = e. • The function x2 hhaass aa uunniiqquuee gglloobbaall mmiinniimmuumm aatt x = 0.
• The function x3 hhhaaasss nnnooo ggglllooobbbaaalll mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa ooorrr mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaa... AAAlllttthhhooouuuggghhh ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee (((333x2) is 0 at x = 0, this is an iinnfflleeccttiioonn ppooiinntt.
• The function hhaass aa uunniiqquuee gglloobbaall mmaaxxiimmuumm aatt x = e.. ((SSeeee ffiigguurree aatt rriigghhtt)) • The function x-x hhhaaasss aaa uuunnniiiqqquuueee ggglllooobbbaaalll mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm ooovvveeerrr ttthhheee pppooosssiiitttiiivvveee rrreeeaaalll nnnuuummmbbbeeerrrsss aaattt x = 1/e.
• The function x3/3 − x hhaass ffiirrsstt ddeerriivvaattiivvee x2 − 1 and second derivative 2x.
Setting the first ddeerriivvaattiivvee ttoo 00 aanndd ssoollvviinngg ffoorr x gives stationary points at −−11 aanndd ++11.. FFrroomm tthhee ssiiggnn ooff tthhee sseeccoonndd ddeerriivvaattiivvee wwee ccaann sseeee tthhaatt −−11 iiss aa llooccaall mmaaxxiimmuumm aanndd ++11 iiss aa llooccaall mmiinniimmuumm.. NNoottee tthhaatt tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn hhaass nnoo gglloobbal maximum or minimum.
162 • The function |x|| hhaass aa gglloobbaall mmiinniimmuumm aatt x == 00 tthhaatt ccaannnnoott bbee ffoouunndd bbyy ttaakkiinngg ddeerriivvaattiivveess,, bbeeccaauussee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ddooeess nnoott eexxiisstt aatt x = 0.
• The function cos(x)) hhaass iinnffiinniitteellyy mmaannyy gglloobbaall mmaaxxiimmaa aatt 00,, ±±22ππ,, ±±44ππ, …, and infinitely many gglloobbaall mmiinniimmaa aatt ±±ππ, ±3π, ….
• The function 2 cos(x) − xx hhaass iinnffiinniitteellyy mmaannyy llooccaall mmaaxxiimmaa aanndd mmiinniimmaa,, bbuutt nnoo gglloobbaall maximum or minimum.
• The function cos(3πx)/x wwiitthh 00..11 ≤ x ≤ 1.1 has a global maximum at x = 0.1 (a boundary), a global minimum near x = 0.3, a local maximum near x == 00..66,, aanndd aa llooccaall mmiinniimmuumm nneeaarr x == 11..00.. ((SSeeee ffiigguurree aatt ttoopp ooff ppaaggee..)) • The function x3 + 3x2 −− 22xx ++ 11 ddeeffiinneedd oovveerr tthhee cclloosseedd iinntteerrvvaall ((sseeggmmeenntt)) [[−4,2] has two eexxttrreemmaa:: oonnee llooccaall mmaaxxiimmuumm aatt x = −1−√15⁄ , one local minimum at x == −1+√15⁄ , a global 3 3 maximum at x == 22 aanndd aa gglloobbaall mmiinniimmuumm aatt x = −4.
FFuunnccttiioonnss ooff mmoorree tthhaann oonnee vvaarriiaabbllee Second partial derivative test FFFooorrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee,,, sssiiimmmiiilllaaarrr cccooonnndddiiitttiiiooonnnsss aaapppppplllyyy... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, iiinnn ttthhheee ((eennllaarrggeeaabbllee)) ffiigguurree aatt tthhee rriigghhtt,, tthhee nneecceessssaarryy ccoonnddiittiioonnss ffoorr aa local mmaaxxiimmuumm aarree ssiimmiillaarr ttoo tthhoossee ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn wwiitthh oonnllyy oonnee vvaarriiaabbllee.. TThhee ffiirrsstt partial derivatives aass ttoo z (the variable to bbbeee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmiiizzzeeeddd))) aaarrreee zzzeeerrrooo aaattt ttthhheee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm (((ttthhheee ggglllooowwwiiinnnggg dddooottt ooonnn tttoooppp iiinnn ttthhheee fffiiiggguuurrreee)))... TTThhheee ssseeecccooonnnddd ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess aarree nneeggaattiivvee.. TThheessee aarree oonnllyy nneecceessssaarryy,, nnoott ssuuffffiicciieenntt,, ccoonnddiittiioonnss ffoorr aa llooccaall mmaaxxiimmuumm bbeeccaauussee ooff tthhee ppoossssiibbiilliittyy ooff aa saddle point.. FFoorr uussee ooff tthheessee ccoonnddiittiioonnss ttoo ssoollvvee ffoorr a maximum, the function z must also be differentiable tthhrroouugghhoouutt.. TThhee second partial derivative test can help ccclllaaassssssiiifffyyy ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt aaasss aaa rrreeelllaaatttiiivvveee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm ooorrr rrreeelllaaatttiiivvveee mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm... IIInnn cccooonnntttrrraaasssttt,,, ttthhheeerrreee aaarrreee sssuuubbbssstttaaannntttiiiaaalll dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnccceeesss bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee aaannnddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee iiinnn ttthhheee iiidddeeennntttiiifffiiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff ggglllooobbbaaalll eeexxxtttrrreeemmmaaa... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, iiifff aaa bbbooouuunnndddeeeddd differentiable function f dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd ooonnn aaa ccclllooossseeeddd iiinnnttteeerrrvvvaaalll iiinnn ttthhheee rrreeeaaalll llliiinnneee hhhaaasss aaa sssiiinnngggllleee cccrrriiitttiiicccaaalll pppoooiiinnnttt,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss aaa lllooocccaaalll mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm,,, ttthhheeennn iiittt iiisss aaalllsssooo aaa ggglllooobbbaaalll mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm (((uuussseee ttthhheee intermediate value theorem and RRoollllee''ss tthheeoorreemm to prove this by reductio ad absurdum)).. IInn ttwwoo aanndd mmoorree ddiimmeennssiioonnss,, tthhiiss aarrgguummeenntt ffaaiillss,, aass tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn ssshhhooowwwsss... IIItttsss ooonnnlllyyy cccrrriiitttiiicccaaalll pppoooiiinnnttt iiisss aaattt (((000,,,000))),,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss aaa lllooocccaaalll mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm wwwiiittthhh ƒƒƒ(((000,,,000))) = 0.
However, iitt ccaannnnoott bbee aa gglloobbaall oonnee,, bbeeccaauussee ƒƒ((44,,11)) = −11.
163 TThhee gglloobbaall mmaaxxiimmuumm iiss tthhee point at the top Counterexample In relation to sets MMMaaaxxxiiimmmaaa aaannnddd mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa aaarrreee mmmooorrreee gggeeennneeerrraaallllllyyy dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd fffooorrr ssseeetttsss... IIInnn gggeeennneeerrraaalll,,, iiifff aaannn ordered set S has a greatest element m,, m is a maximal element.
Furthermore, if SS is a subset of an ordered set T and m iiss tthhee ggrreeaatteesstt eelleemmeenntt ooff S wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo oorrddeerr iinndduucceedd bbyy T, m is a least upper bound of S iinn T. The similar result holds for lleeaasstt eelleemmeenntt, minimal element and greatest lower bound.
In the case of a general ppaarrttiiaall oorrddeerr, the least element ((ssmmaalllleerr tthhaann aallll ootthheerr)) sshhoouulldd nnoott be confused with a mmiinniimmaall eelleemmeenntt ((nnootthhiinngg iiss ssmmaalllleerr)).. LLiikkeewwiissee,, aa greatest element of a partially ordered set ((ppoosseett)) iiss aann upper bound ooff tthhee sseett wwhhiicchh iiss ccoonnttaaiinneedd wwiitthhiinn tthhee set, whereas a mmaaxxiimmaall eelleemmeenntt m of a poset A is an element of A ssuucchh tthhaatt iiff m ≤ b (for any b in A) then m = b... AAAnnnyyy llleeeaaasssttt eeellleeemmmeeennnttt ooorrr gggrrreeeaaattteeesssttt eeellleeemmmeeennnttt ooofff aaa pppooossseeettt iiisss uuunnniiiqqquuueee,,, bbbuuuttt aaa ppoosseett ccaann hhaavvee sseevveerraall mmiinniimmaall oorr mmaaxxiimmaall eelleemmeennttss.. IIff aa ppoosseett hhaass mmoorree tthhaann oonnee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaalll eeellleeemmmeeennnttt,,, ttthhheeennn ttthhheeessseee eeellleeemmmeeennntttsss wwwiiillllll nnnooottt bbbeee mmmuuutttuuuaaallllllyyy cccooommmpppaaarrraaabbbllleee...
In a totally ordered sseett,, oorr chain, all elements are mutuaallllyy ccoommppaarraabbllee,, ssoo ssuucchh aa sseett ccaann hhhaaavvveee aaattt mmmooosssttt ooonnneee mmmiiinnniiimmmaaalll eeellleeemmmeeennnttt aaannnddd aaattt mmmooosssttt ooonnneee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaalll eeellleeemmmeeennnttt... TTThhheeennn,,, ddduuueee tttooo mmmuuutttuuuaaalll cccooommmpppaaarrraaabbbiiillliiitttyyy,,, ttthhheee mmmiiinnniiimmmaaalll eeellleeemmmeeennnttt wwwiiillllll aaalllsssooo bbbeee ttthhheee llleeeaaasssttt eeellleeemmmeeennnttt aaannnddd ttthhheee mmaaxxiimmaall eelleemmeenntt wwiillll aallssoo bbee tthhee ggrreeaatteesstt eelleemmeenntt.. TThhuuss iinn aa ttoottaallllyy oorrddeerreedd sseett wwee ccaann simply use the terms mmiinniimmuumm and maximum.. IIff aa cchhaaiinn iiss ffiinniittee tthheenn iitt wwiillll aallwwaayyss hhaavvee aaa mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm aaannnddd aaa mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm... IIIfff aaa ccchhhaaaiiinnn iiisss iiinnnfffiiinnniiittteee ttthhheeennn iiittt nnneeeeeeddd nnnooottt hhhaaavvveee aaa mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm ooorrr aaa mmiinniimmuumm.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, tthhee sseett ooff natural numbers hhaass nnoo mmaaxxiimmuumm,, tthhoouugghh iitt hhaass aa mmiinniimmuumm.. IIff aann iinnffiinniittee cchhaaiinn S is bounded, then the closure Cl(S) ooff tthhee sseett ooccccaassiioonnaallllyy hhaass aa mmiinniimmuumm aanndd aa mmaaxxiimmuumm,, iinn ssuucchh ccaassee tthheeyy aarree ccaalllleedd tthhee ggrreeaatteesstt lloowweerr bboouunndd and the lleeaasstt uuppppeerr bboouunndd of the set S, respectively.
TAYLOR SERIES The Maclaurin series for any ppoollyynnoommiiaall is the polynomial itself.
The Maclaurin series for (1 −− x)−1 for |x| < 1 is the geometric series so the Taylor series for x−−11 at a = 1 is BBByyy iiinnnttteeegggrrraaatttiiinnnggg ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee MMMaaaccclllaaauuurrriiinnn ssseeerrriiieeesss wwweee fffiiinnnddd ttthhheee MMMaaaccclllaaauuurrriiinnn ssseeerrriiieeesss fffooorrr log(1 − x), where log denotes the natural llooggaarriitthhmm: aanndd tthhee ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ffoorr lloogg((x) at a = 1 is 164  The Taylor series for the eexxppoonneennttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonn ex at a = 0 is The above expansion holds bbeeccaauussee tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff eex wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo xx iiss aallssoo eex and e0 equals 11.. TThhiiss lleeaavveess tthhee tteerrmmss (x − 0)n in the numerator and n!!
iinn tthhee ddeennoommiinnaattoorr ffoorr eeaacchh term in the infinite sum.
History The Greek philosopher Zeno cccooonnnsssiiidddeeerrreeeddd ttthhheee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm ooofff sssuuummmmmmiiinnnggg aaannn iiinnnfffiiinnniiittteee ssseeerrriiieeesss tttooo aaaccchhhiiieeevvveee aa ffiinniittee rreessuulltt,, bbuutt rreejjeecctteedd iitt aass aann iimmppoossssiibbiilliittyy:: tthhee rreessuulltt wwaass ZZeennoo''ss ppaarraaddooxx.
Later, Aristotle ppprrrooopppooossseeeddd aaa ppphhhiiilllooosssoooppphhhiiicccaaalll rrreeesssooollluuutttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee pppaaarrraaadddoooxxx,,, bbbuuuttt ttthhheee mmmaaattthhheeemmmaaatttiiicccaaalll cccooonnnttteeennnttt wwaass aappppaarreennttllyy uunnrreessoollvveedd uunnttiill ttaakkeenn uupp bbyy Democritus and then AArrcchhiimmeeddeess.
It was through Archimedes's mmeetthhoodd ooff eexxhhaauussttiioonn tthhaatt aann iinnffiinniittee nnuummbbeerr ooff pprrooggrreessssiivvee ssuubbddiivviissiioonnss ccoouulldd bbee ppeerrffoorrmmeedd ttoo aacchhiieevvee aa ffiinniittee rreessuulltt.. Liu Hui iinnddeeppeennddeennttllyy eemmppllooyyeedd aa ssiimmiillaarr mmeetthhoodd aa few centuries later IIInnn ttthhheee 111444ttthhh ccceeennntttuuurrryyy,,, ttthhheee eeeaaarrrllliiieeesssttt eeexxxaaammmpppllleeesss ooofff ttthhheee uuussseee ooofff TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss aaannnddd ccclllooossseeelllyyy rrreeelllaaattteeeddd methods were given by MMaaddhhaavvaa ooff SSaannggaammaaggrraammaa TThhoouugghh nnoo rreeccoorrdd ooff hhis work survives, writings of later IInnddiiaann mmaatthheemmaattiicciiaannss ssuuggggeesstt tthhaatt hhee ffoouunndd aa nnuummbbeerr ooff ssppeecciiaall ccaasseess ooff tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess,, iinncclluuddiinngg tthhoossee ffoorr tthhee trigonometric functions of sine, ccoossiinnee, tangent, and arctangent.
The KKeerraallaa sscchhooooll ooff aassttrroonnoommyy aanndd mmaatthheemmaattiiccss ffuurrtthheerr eexxppaannddeedd hhiiss wwoorrkkss wwwiiittthhh vvvaaarrriiiooouuusss ssseeerrriiieeesss eeexxxpppaaannnsssiiiooonnnsss aaannnddd rrraaatttiiiooonnnaaalll aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnnsss uuunnntttiiilll ttthhheee 111666ttthhh ccceeennntttuuurrryyy...
In the 17th century, JJaammeess GGrreeggoorryy aallssoo wwoorrkkeedd iinn tthhiiss aarreeaa aanndd ppuubblliisshheedd sseevveerraall MMaaccllaauurriinn sseerriieess.. IItt wwaass nnoott uunnttiill 11771155 hhoowweevveerr tthhaatt aa ggeenneerraall mmeetthhoodd ffoorr ccoonnssttrruuccttiinngg tthheessee sseerriieess ffoorr aallll ffuunnccttiioonnss ffoorr wwhhiicchh tthheeyy eexxiisstt wwaass ffiinnaallllyy pprroovviiddeedd bbyy BBrrooookk TTaayylloorr, after whom the series are now named.
TThhee MMaaccllaauurriinn sseerriieess wwaass nnaammeedd aafftteer Colin Maclaurin,, aa pprrooffeessssoorr iinn EEddiinnbbuurrgghh,, wwhhoo ppuubblliisshheedd tthhee ssppeecciiaall ccaassee ooff tthhee TTaayylloorr rreessuulltt iinn tthhee 1188tthh cceennttuurryy.. Analytic functions 165  The function e−1/x² iiss nnoott aannaallyyttiicc aatt x = 00:: tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess iiss iiddeennttiiccaallllyy 00,, aalltthhoouugghh tthhee function is not.
If f(x))) iiisss gggiiivvveeennn bbbyyy aaa cccooonnnvvveeerrrgggeeennnttt pppooowwweeerrr ssseeerrriiieeesss iiinnn aaannn ooopppeeennn dddiiisssccc (((ooorrr iiinnnttteeerrrvvvaaalll iiinnn ttthhheee rrreeeaaalll llliiinnneee))) centered at b,, iitt iiss ssaaiidd ttoo bbee analytic in this disc.
Thus for x iinn tthhiiss ddiisscc,, f is given by a convergent power series Differentiating by x tthhee aabboovvee ffoorrmmuullaa n times, then setting x=b gives: aaannnddd sssooo ttthhheee pppooowwweeerrr ssseeerrriiieeesss eeexxxpppaaannnsssiiiooonnn aaagggrrreeeeeesss wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss... TTThhhuuusss aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiisss aaannnaaalllyyytttiiiccc iiinnn an open disc centered at b iiifff aaannnddd ooonnnlllyyy iiifff iiitttsss TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss cccooonnnvvveeerrrgggeeesss tttooo ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff ttthhheee ffuunnccttiioonn aatt eeaacchh ppooiinntt ooff tthhee ddiisscc..
If f(x)) iiss eeqquuaall ttoo iittss TTaayylloorr sseerriieess eevveerryywwhheerree iitt iiss ccaalllleedd entire.. TThhee ppoollyynnoommiiaallss aanndd tthhee exponential function ex aanndd tthhee trigonometric functions ssiinnee aanndd ccoossiinnee aarree eexxaammpplleess ooff eennttiirree ffuunnccttiioonnss.. EExxaammpplleess ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss tthhaatt aarree nnoott eennttiirree iinncclluuddee tthhee llooggaarriitthhmm, the trigonometric function ttaannggeenntt,, aanndd iittss iinnvveerrssee arctan.. FFoorr tthheessee ffuunnccttiioonnss tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ddoo nnoott converge if x is far from a... TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss cccaaannn bbbeee uuussseeeddd tttooo cccaaalllcccuuulllaaattteee ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff aaannn eeennntttiiire function in eeevvveeerrryyy pppoooiiinnnttt,,, iiifff ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn,,, aaannnddd ooofff aaallllll ooofff iiitttsss dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss,,, aaarrreee kkknnnooowwwnnn aaattt aaa sssiiinnngggllleee point.
4.0 CONCLUSION IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee bbbeeeeeennn iiinnntttrrroooddduuuccceeeddd tttooo pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiinnn cccaaalllcccuuullluuusss aaannnddd sssooommmeee hhhiiiggghhheeerrr ooorrrdddeeerrr partial derivative.
Clairauuutttsss ttthhheeeooorrreeemmm wwwaaasss ssstttaaattteeeddd aaannnddd aaappppppllliiieeeddd...YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee bbbeeeeeennn iiinnntttrrroooddduuuccceeeddd tttooo 166 Maxima and minima, functions of more than one variable and the relation of maxima and minima to set.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have studied : Partial derivatives in calculus Higher order partial derivative Clairauts theorem Maxima and manima Taylor series of function of two variable Analytical function 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.
Stewart, James (2008).
Calculus: Early Transcendentals (6th ed.).
Brooks/Cole.
ISBN 0-495-01166-5.
2.
Larson, Ron; Edwards, Bruce H. (2009).
Calculus (9th ed.).
Brooks/Cole.
ISBN 0- 547-16702-4.
Thomas, George B.; Weir, Maurice D.; Hass, Joel (2010).
Thomas' Calculus: Early Transcendentals (12th ed.).
Addison-Wesley.
ISBN 0-321-58876-2.
• Maxima and Minima From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource.
• Thomas Simpson's work on Maxima and Minima at Convergence • Apostol, Tom (1967), Calculus, Jon Wiley & Sons, Inc., ISBN 0-471-00005-1.
• Bartle; Sherbert (2000), Introduction to Real Analysis (3rd ed.
), John Wiley & Sons, Inc., ISBN 0-471-32148-6.
• Hörmander, L. (1976), Linear Partial Differential Operators, Volume 1, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3540006626.
• Klein, Morris (1998), Calculus: An Intuitive and Physical Approach, Dover, ISBN 0- 486-40453-6.
• Pedrick, George (1994), A First Course in Analysis, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387- 94108-8.
• Stromberg, Karl (1981), Introduction to classical real analysis, Wadsworth, Inc., ISBN 978-0534980122.
• Rudin, Walter (1987), Real and complex analysis, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill Book Company, ISBN 0-07-054234 167 UUUNNNIIITTT 222 :::TTTAAAYYYLLLOOORRR SSSEEERRRIIIEEESSS OOOFFF EEEXXXPPPAAANNNSSSIIIOOONNN FFFOOORRR FFFUUUNNNCCCTTTIIIOOONNNSSS OOOFFF TWO VARIABLES CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DDeeffiinniittiioonn ooff ttaaiilloorrss sseerriieess ooff eexxppaannssiioonn 3.2 Analytical function 3.3 UUsseess ooff ttaayylloorr sseerriieess ffoorr aannaallyyttiiccaall ffuunnccttiioonnss 3.4 AApppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn aanndd ccoonnvveerrggeennccee 3.5 LLiisstt ooff mmaaccllaauurriinnee sseerriieess ooff ssoommee ccoommmmoonn ffuunnccttiioonn 3.6 CCaallccuullaattiioonn ooff ttaaiilloorrss sseerriieess 3.7 TTaayylloorrss sseerriieess iinn sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabbllee 3.8 FFrraaccttiioonnaall ttaayylloorr sseerriieess 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 7.0 RREEFFEERREENNCCEESS//FFUURRTTHHEERR RREEAADDIINNGGSS Introduction As the degree of the Taylor pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalll rrriiissseeesss,,, iiittt aaapppppprrroooaaaccchhheeesss ttthhheee cccooorrrrrreeecccttt fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn... TTThhhiiisss iiimmmaaagggeee shows sin x (((iiinnn bbblllaaaccckkk))) aaannnddd TTTaaayyylllooorrr aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnnsss,,, pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalllsss ooofff dddeeegggrrreeeeee 111,,, 333,,, 555,,, 777,,, 999,,, 111111 aaannnddd 168  The exponential function ((iinn bblluuee)),, aanndd tthhee ssuumm ooff tthhee ffiirrsstt n++11 tteerrmmss ooff iittss TTaayylloorr sseerriieess aatt 00 (in red).
In mathematics, a TTaayylloorr sseerriieess is a representation of a function as an iinnffiinniittee ssuumm of terms tthhaatt aarree ccaallccuullaatteedd ffrroomm tthhee vvaalluueess ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn''ss derivatives aatt aa ssiinnggllee ppooiinntt.. TTThhheee cccooonnnccceeepppttt ooofff aaa TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss wwwaaasss fffooorrrmmmaaallllllyyy iiinnntttrrroooddduuuccceeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee EEEnnngggllliiissshhh mmmaaattthhheeemmmaaatttiiiccciiiaaannn Brook Taylor iiinnn 111777111555... IIIfff ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss iiisss ccceeennnttteeerrreeeddd aaattt zzzeeerrrooo,,, ttthhheeennn ttthhhaaattt ssseeerrriiieeesss iiisss aaalllsssooo cccaaalllllleeeddd aaa Maclaurin series,, nnaammeedd aafftteerr tthhee SSccoottttiisshh mmaatthheemmaattiicciiaann CCoolliinn MMaaccllaauurriinn, who made eexxtteennssiivvee uussee ooff tthhiiss ssppeecciiaall ccaassee ooff TTaayylloorr sseerriieess iinn tthhee 1188tthh cceennttuurryy.. IIIttt iiisss cccooommmmmmooonnn ppprrraaaccctttiiiccceee tttooo aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaattteee aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn bbbyyy uuusssiiinnnggg aaa fffiiinnniiittteee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr ooofff ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff iiitttsss Taylor series.
TTaayylloorr''ss tthheeoorreemm ggiivveess qquuaannttiittaattiivvee eessttiimmaatteess oonn tthhee eerrrroorr iinn tthhiiss aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnn... AAAnnnyyy fffiiinnniiittteee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr ooofff iiinnniiitttiiiaaalll ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiisss cccaaalllllleeeddd aaa Taylor polynomial.. TThhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn iiss tthhee limit ooff tthhaatt ffuunnccttiioonn''ss TTaayylloorr pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalllsss,,, ppprrrooovvviiidddeeeddd ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee llliiimmmiiittt eeexxxiiissstttsss... AAA fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn mmmaaayyy nnnooottt bbbeee eeeqqquuuaaalll tttooo iiits Taylor series, eeevvveeennn iiifff iiitttsss TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss cccooonnnvvveeerrrgggeeesss aaattt eeevvveeerrryyy pppoooiiinnnttt... AAA fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ttthhhaaattt iiisss eeeqqquuuaaalll tttooo iiitttsss TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss in an open interval ((oorr aa ddiisscc iinn tthhee complex plane) is known as an aannaallyyttiicc ffuunnccttiioonn.
OBJECTIVE AAtt tthhee eenndd ooff tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo :: Definition ttaayylloorr sseerriieess ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff ttwwoo vvaarraabblleess SSoollvvee pprroobblleemmss oonn aannaallyyttiiccaall pprroobblleemm UUssee tthhee ttaayylloorr sseerriieess ttoo ssoollvvee aannaallyyttiicc ffuunnccttiioonn SSoollvvee pprroobblleemmss tthhaatt iinnvvoollvvee aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn aanndd ccoonnvveerrggeennccee TThhee lliisstt ooff mmaaccllaauurriinnee sseerriieess ooff ssoommee ccoommmmoonn ffuunnccttiioonnss Calculation of taylor series 169 TTaayylloorrss sseerriieess iinn sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess Fractional taylor series 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Definition The Taylor series of a real or complex function ƒ(x) that is iinnffiinniitteellyy ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee in a neighborhood of a real or ccoommpplleexx nnuummbbeerr a is the power series wwhhiicchh ccaann bbee wwrriitttteenn iinn tthhee mmoorree ccoommppaacctt sigma notation as where n!
denotes the ffaaccttoorriiaall of n and ƒ (n)(a) denotes the nth derivative ooff ƒ evaluated at the point a.. TThhee zzeerrootthh ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff ƒ is defined to be ƒ itself and (x − a)0 aanndd 00!!
aarree bbootthh ddeeffiinneedd to be 1.
In the case that a == 00,, tthhee sseerriieess iiss aallssoo ccaalllleedd aa MMaaccllaauurriinn sseerriieess..
Examples The Maclaurin series for any ppoollyynnoommiiaall is the polynomial itself.
The Maclaurin series for (1 −− x)−1 for |x| < 1 is the geometric series so the Taylor series for x−1 at aa = 1 is BBByyy iiinnnttteeegggrrraaatttiiinnnggg ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee MMMaaaccclllaaauuurrriiinnn ssseeerrriiieeesss wwweee fffiiinnnddd ttthhheee MMMaaaccclllaaauuurrriiinnn ssseeerrriiieeesss fffooorrr llloooggg(((111 − x), where log denotes the natural llooggaarriitthhmm: aanndd tthhee ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ffoorr lloogg((x) at a = 1 is 170 The Taylor series for the eexxppoonneennttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonn ex at a = 0 is TThhee aabboovvee eexxppaannssiioonn hhoollddss bbeecause the derivative of ex wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo xx iiss aallssoo eex and e0 equals 11.. TThhiiss lleeaavveess tthhee tteerrmmss ((x − 0)n in the numerator and n!!
iinn tthhee ddeennoommiinnaattoorr ffoorr eeaacchh term in the infinite sum.
Analytic functions The function e−1/x² iiss nnoott aannaallyyttiicc aatt x = 0: the TTaayylloorr sseerriieess iiss iiddeennttiiccaallllyy 00,, aalltthhoouugghh tthhee function is not.
If f(x))) iiisss gggiiivvveeennn bbbyyy aaa cccooonnnvvveeerrrgggeeennnttt pppooowwweeerrr ssseeerrriiieeesss iiinnn aaannn ooopppeeennn dddiiisssccc (((ooorrr iiinnnttteeerrrvvvaaalll iiinnn ttthhheee rrreeeaaalll llliiinnneee))) centered at b,, iitt iiss ssaaiidd ttoo bbee analytic in this disc.
Thus for x iinn tthhiiss ddiisscc,, f is given by a convergent power series Differentiating by x tthhee aabboovvee ffoorrmmuullaa n times, then setting x=b gives: aaannnddd sssooo ttthhheee pppooowwweeerrr ssseeerrriiieeesss eeexxxpppaaannnsssiiiooonnn aaagggrrreeeeeesss wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss... TTThhhuuusss aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiisss aaannnaaalllyyytttiiiccc iiinnn an open disc centered at b iiifff aaannnddd ooonnnlllyyy iiifff iiitttsss TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss cccooonnnvvveeerrrgggeeesss tttooo ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff ttthhheee ffuunnccttiioonn aatt eeaacchh ppooiinntt ooff tthhee ddiisscc..
If f(x)) iiss eeqquuaall ttoo iittss TTaayylloorr sseerries everywhere it is called entire.. TThhee ppoollyynnoommiiaallss aanndd tthhee exponential function ex andd tthhee trigonometric functions ssiinnee aanndd ccoossiinnee aarree eexxaammpplleess ooff eennttiirree ffuunnccttiioonnss.. EExxaammpplleess ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss tthhaatt aarree nnoott eennttiirree iinncclluuddee tthhee llooggaarriitthhmm, the trigonometric function ttaannggeenntt,, aanndd iittss iinnvveerrssee arctan.. FFoorr tthheessee ffuunnccttiioonnss tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ddoo nnoott converge if x is far from a... TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss cccaaannn bbbeee uuussseeeddd tttooo cccaaalllcccuuulllaaattteee ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff aaannn eeennntttiiirrreee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiinnn 171 every point, iiifff ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn,,, aaannnddd ooofff aaallllll ooofff iiitttsss dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss,,, aaarrreee kkknnnooowwwnnn aaattt aaa sssiiinnngggllleee point.
UUsseess ooff tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ffoorr aannaallyyttiicc ffuunnccttiioonnss iinncclluuddee:: The partial sums (the Tayylloorr ppoollyynnoommiiaallss)) ooff tthhee sseerriieess ccaann bbee uusseedd aass aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonnss ooff tthhee eeennntttiiirrreee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn... TTThhheeessseee aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnnsss aaarrreee gggooooooddd iiifff sssuuuffffffiiiccciiieeennntttlllyyy mmmaaannnyyy ttteeerrrmmmsss aaarrreee iiinnncccllluuudddeeeddd... DDDiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn aaannnddd iiinnnttteeegggrrraaatttiiiooonnn ooofff pppooowwweeerrr ssseeerrriiieeesss cccaaannn bbbeee pppeeerrrfffooorrrmmmeeeddd ttteeerrrmmm bbbyyy ttteeerrrmmm aaannnddd iiisss hhheeennnccceee particularly easy.
An analytic function iiss uunniiqquueellyy eexxtteennddeedd ttoo aa holomorphic function on aann open disk in the complex plane.. TThhiiss mmaakkeess tthhee mmaacchhiinneerryy ooff complex analysis available.
TTThhheee (((tttrrruuunnncccaaattteeeddd))) ssseeerrriiieeesss cccaaannn bbbeee uuussseeeddd tttooo cccooommmpppuuuttteee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn vvvaaallluuueeesss nnnuuummmeeerrriiicccaaallllllyyy,,, (((ooofffttteeennn bbbyyy rreeccaassttiinngg tthhee ppoollyynnoommiiaall iinnttoo tthhee Chebyshev form aanndd eevvaalluuaattiinngg iitt wwiitthh tthhee Clenshaw algorithm).
AAAlllgggeeebbbrrraaaiiiccc ooopppeeerrraaatttiiiooonnnsss cccaaannn bbbeee dddooonnneee rrreeeaaadddiiilllyyy ooonnn ttthhheee pppooowwweeerrr ssseeerrriiieeesss rrreeeppprrreeessseeennntttaaatttiiiooonnn;;; fffooorrr iiinnnssstttaaannnccceee ttthhheee Euler's formula fffooollllllooowwwsss fffrrrooommm TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss eeexxxpppaaannnsssiiiooonnnsss fffooorrr tttrrriiigggooonnnooommmeeetttrrriiiccc aaannnddd eeexxxpppooonnneeennntttiiiaaalll ffuunnccttiioonnss.. TThhiiss rreessuulltt iiss ooff ffuunnddaammeennttaall iimmppoorrttaannccee iinn ssuucchh ffiieellddss aass hhaarrmmoonniicc aannaallyyssiiss.
AApppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn aanndd ccoonnvveerrggeennccee TTThhheee sssiiinnneee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn (((bbbllluuueee))) iiisss ccclllooossseeelllyyy aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaattteeeddd bbbyyy iiitttsss TTTaaayyylllooorrr pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalll ooofff dddeeegggrrreeeeee 777 (((pppiiinnnkkk))) ffoorr aa ffuullll ppeerriioodd cceenntteerreedd aatt tthhee oorriiggiinn.. 172  The TTaayylloorr ppoollyynnoommiiaallss ffoorr lloogg((1+x)) oonnllyy pprroovviiddee aaccccuurraattee aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonnss iinn tthhee rraannggee −1 < x ≤ 1.
Note that, for x >> 11,, tthhee TTaayylloorr ppoollyynnoommiiaallss ooff hhiigghheerr ddeeggrreeee aarree wwoorrssee approximations.
PPiiccttuurreedd oonn tthhee rriigghhtt iiss aann aaccccuurraattee aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ooff ssiinn((x)) aarroouunndd tthhee ppooint x = 0.
The pink ccuurrvvee iiss aa ppoollyynnoommiiaall ooff ddeeggrreeee sseevveenn:: TThhee eerrrroorr iinn tthhiiss aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn iiss nnoo mmoorree tthhaann ||x|9/9!.
In particular, for −−11 << x < 1, the error is less than 0.000003.
IInn ccoonnttrraasstt,, aallssoo sshhoowwnn iiss aa ppiiccttuurree ooff tthhee nnaattuurraall llooggaarriitthhmm ffuunnccttiioonn log((11 ++ x) and some of its Taylor polynomials aarroouunndd a = 0.
These approximations converge ttoo tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn oonnllyy iinn the region −1 < x ≤ 11;; oouuttssiiddee ooff tthhiiss rreeggiioonn tthhee hhiigghheerr-ddeeggrreeee TTaayylloorr ppoollyynnoommiiaallss aarree worse aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonnss ffoorr tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn.. TThhiiss iiss ssiimmiillaarr ttoo Runge's phenomenon.
The error iinnccuurrrreedd iinn aapppprrooxxiimmaattiinngg aa ffuunnccttiioonn bbyy iittss nth-ddeeggrreeee TTaayylloorr ppoollyynnoommiiaall iiss ccaalllleedd the remainder or residual aanndd iiss ddenoted by the function R (x).
TTaayylloorr''ss tthheeoorreemm can be used n ttoo oobbttaaiinn aa bboouunndd oonn tthhee ssiizzee ooff tthhee rreemmaaiinnddeerr.. IInn ggeenneerraall,, TTaayylloorr sseerriieess nneeeedd nnoott bbee convergent aatt aallll.. AAnndd iinn ffaacctt tthhee sseett ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss wwiitthh aa convergent Taylor series is a mmeeaaggeerr sseett in the Fréchet space of ssmmooootthh ffuunnccttiioonnss.
Even if the Taylor series of a function f ddooeess ccoonnvveerrggee,, iittss lliimmiitt nneeeedd nnoott iinn ggeenneerraall bbee eeqquuaall ttoo tthhee vvaalluuee of the function f(x)).. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn 173 is infinitely differentiable aatt x = 0, and has all deerriivvaattiivveess zzeerroo tthheerree.. CCoonnsseeqquueennttllyy,, tthhee Taylor series of f(x) about x = 0 is identically zero.
However, f(x)) iiss nnoott eeqquuaall ttoo tthhee zzeerroo ffuunnccttiioonn,, aanndd ssoo iitt iiss nnoott eeqquuaall ttoo iittss TTaayylloorr sseerriieess aarroouunndd tthhee oorriiggiinn..
In real analysis,, tthhiiss eexxaammppllee sshhoowwss tthhaatt tthheerree aarree iinnffiinniitteellyy ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee ffuunnccttiioonnss f(x) whose Taylor series are not equal to f(x)) eevveenn iiff tthheeyy ccoonnvveerrggee.. BByy ccoonnttrraasstt iinn complex analysis there are no hhoolloommoorrpphhiicc ffuunnccttiioonnss f(z)) wwhhoossee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ccoonnvveerrggeess ttoo aa vvaalluuee different from f(z)).. TThhee ccoommpplleexx ffuunnccttiioonn ee−z−2 does not approach 0 as z aapppprrooaacchheess 00 aalloonngg the imagiinnaarryy aaxxiiss,, aanndd iittss TTaayylloorr sseerriieess iiss tthhuuss nnoott ddeeffiinneedd tthheerree.. MMMooorrreee gggeeennneeerrraaallllllyyy,,, eeevvveeerrryyy ssseeeqqquuueeennnccceee ooofff rrreeeaaalll ooorrr cccooommmpppllleeexxx nnnuuummmbbbeeerrrsss cccaaannn aaappppppeeeaaarrr aaasss cccoooeeeffffffiiiccciiieeennntttsss iiinnn ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss ooofff aaannn iiinnnfffiiinnniiittteeelllyyy dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd ooonnn ttthhheee rrreeeaaalll llliiinnneee,,, aaa cccooonnnssseeeqqquuueeennnccceee ooofff Borel's lemma (see also NNoonn-analytic smooth ffuunnccttiioonn##AApppplliiccaattiioonn ttoo TTaayylloorr sseerriieess).
As a result, the rraaddiiuuss ooff ccoonnvveerrggeennccee ooff aa TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ccaann bbee zzeerroo.. TThheerree aarree eevveenn iinnffiinniitteellyy differentiable functions deeefffiiinnneeeddd ooonnn ttthhheee rrreeeaaalll llliiinnneee wwwhhhooossseee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss hhhaaavvveee aaa rrraaadddiiiuuusss ooofff convergence 0 everywhere.
[5] SSoommee ffuunnccttiioonnss ccaannnnoott bbee wwrriitttteenn aass TTaayylloorr sseerriieess bbeeccaauussee tthheeyy hhaavvee aa ssiinngguullaarriittyy; in these cccaaassseeesss,,, ooonnneee cccaaannn ooofffttteeennn ssstttiiillllll aaaccchhhiiieeevvveee aaa ssseeerrriiieeesss eeexxxpppaaannnsssiiiooonnn iiifff ooonnneee aaallllllooowwwsss aaalllsssooo nnneeegggaaatttiiivvveee pppooowwweeerrrsss ooofff ttthhheee variable x; see Laurent series.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, f(x) = e−x−2 ccaann bbee wwrriitttteenn aass aa LLaauurreenntt sseerriieess.. TThheerree iiss,, hhoowweevveerr,, aa ggeenneerraalliizzaattiioonn[6][7] ooff tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess tthhaatt ddooeess ccoonnvveerrggee ttoo tthhee vvaalluuee ooff the function itself for any bboouunnddeedd continuous function on (0,∞)),, uussiinngg tthhee ccaallccuulluuss ooff finite differences.
Specifically, onee hhaass tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg tthheeoorreemm,, dduuee ttoo EEiinnaarr HHiillllee, that for any t > 0, Here ∆n h is the n-tthh ffiinniittee ddiiffffeerreennccee ooppeerraattoorr wwiitthh sstteepp ssiizzee h.. TThhee sseerriieess iiss pprreecciisseellyy tthhee TTaayylloorr ssseeerrriiieeesss,,, eeexxxccceeepppttt ttthhhaaattt dddiiivvviiidddeeeddd dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnccceeesss aaappppppeeeaaarrr iiinnn ppplllaaaccceee ooofff dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn::: ttthhheee ssseeerrriiieeesss iiisss formally similar to the NNeewwttoonn sseerriieess.
When the function f iiss aannaallyyttiicc aatt a, the terms in ttthhheee ssseeerrriiieeesss cccooonnnvvveeerrrgggeee tttooo ttthhheee ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss,,, aaannnddd iiinnn ttthhhiiisss ssseeennnssseee gggeeennneeerrraaallliiizzzeeesss ttthhheee usual Taylor series.
IInn ggeenneerraall,, ffoorr aannyy iinnffiinniittee sseeqquueennccee a,, tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg ppoowweerr sseerriieess iiddeennttiittyy hhoollddss:: i So in particular, TThhee sseerriieess oonn tthhee rriigghhtt iiss tthhee expectation value of f(a + X), where X iiss aa Poisson distributed random variable tthhaatt ttaakkeess tthhee vvaalluuee jh with probability e−t/h(t/h)j/j!!..
HHeennccee,, 174  The law of large numbers implies that the identity holds.
LLiisstt ooff MMaaccllaauurriinn sseerriieess ooff ssoommee ccoommmmoonn ffuunnccttiioonnss TThhee rreeaall ppaarrtt ooff tthhee ccoossiinnee ffuunnccttiioonn iinn tthhee complex plane.
AAnn 88tthh ddeeggrreeee aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ooff tthhee ccoossiinnee ffuunnccttiioonn iinn tthhee ccoommpplleexx ppllaannee.
TThhee ttwwoo aabboovvee ccuurrvveess ppuutt ttooggeetthheerr.. SSSeeevvveeerrraaalll iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannnttt MMMaaaccclllaaauuurrriiinnn ssseeerrriiieeesss eeexxxpppaaannnsssiiiooonnnsss fffooollllllooowww...AAAllllll ttthhheeessseee eeexxxpppaaannnsssiiiooonnnsss aaarrreee vvvaaallliiiddd ffoorr ccoommpplleexx aarrgguummeennttss x. Exponential function: 175 Natural logarithm: Finite geometric series: Infinite geometric series: VVaarriiaannttss ooff tthhee iinnffiinniittee ggeeoommeettrriicc sseerriieess:: Square root: Binomial series ((iinncclluuddeess tthhee ssqquuaarree rroooott ffoorr α == 11//22 aanndd tthhee iinnffiinniittee ggeeoommeettrriicc sseerriieess ffoorr α = −1): with generalized bbiinnoommiiaall ccooeeffffiicciieennttss 176  Trigonometric functions: where the B are BBeerrnnoouullllii nnuummbbeerrss.
s Hyperbolic functions: 177  Lambert's W function: The numbers B appearinngg iinn tthhee summation expansions of tan(x)) aanndd ttaannhh((x) are the k Bernoulli numbers.
The E iinn ttee eexxppaannssiioonn ooff sseecc((x) are Euler numbers.
k Calculation of Taylor series SSSeeevvveeerrraaalll mmmeeettthhhooodddsss eeexxxiiisssttt fffooorrr ttthhheee cccaaalllcccuuulllaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss ooofff aaa lllaaarrrgggeee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... OOOnnneee ccaann aatttteemmpptt ttoo uussee tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess aass-iiss aanndd ggeenneerraalliizzee tthhee ffoorrmm ooff tthhee ccooeeffffiicciieennttss,, oorr oonnee ccaann uussee mmaanniippuullaattiioonnss ssuucchh aass ssuubbssttiittuuttiioonn,, mmuullttiipplliiccaattiioonn oorr ddiivviissiioonn,, aaddddiittiioonn oorr ssuubbttrraaccttiioonn ooofff ssstttaaannndddaaarrrddd TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss tttooo cccooonnnssstttrrruuucccttt ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn,,, bbbyyy vvviiirrrtttuuueee ooofff TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss bbbeeeiiinnnggg pppooowwweeerrr ssseeerrriiieeesss... IIInnn sssooommmeee cccaaassseeesss,,, ooonnneee cccaaannn aaalllsssooo dddeeerrriiivvveee ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss bbbyyy rrreeepppeeeaaattteeedddlllyyy applying integration by parts.. PPaarrttiiccuullaarrllyy ccoonnvveenniieenntt iiss tthhee uussee ooff ccoommppuutteerr aallggeebbrraa ssyysstteemmss to calculate Taylor series.
First example Compute the 7th ddeeggrreeee MMaaccllaauurriinn ppoollyynnoommiiaall ffoorr tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn .
FFiirrsstt,, rreewwrriittee tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn aass .
WWee hhaavvee ffoorr tthhee nnaattuurraall llooggaarriitthhmm ((bbyy uussiinngg tthhee big O notation) and for the cosine function TThhee llaatttteerr sseerriieess eexxppaannssiioonn hhaass aa zzeerroo constant term,, wwhhiicchh eennaabblleess uuss ttoo ssuubbssttiittuuttee tthhee sseeccoonndd sseerriieess iinnttoo tthhee ffiirrsstt oonnee aanndd ttoo eeaassiillyy oommiitt tteerrmmss ooff hhiigghheerr oorrddeerr tthhaann tthhee 77th degree by using the big O notation 178 Since the cosine is an eevveenn ffuunnccttiioonn,, tthhee ccooeeffffiicciieennttss ffoorr aallll tthhee oodddd ppoowweerrss x, x3, x5, x7, ... have to be zero.
Second example SSuuppppoossee wwee wwaanntt tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess aatt 00 ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn .
WWee hhaavvee ffoorr tthhee eexxppoonneennttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonn and, as in the first example, Assume the power series is TThheenn mmuullttiipplliiccaattiioonn wwiitthh tthhee ddeennoommiinnaattoorr aanndd ssuubbssttiittuuttiioonn ooff tthhee sseerriieess ooff tthhee ccoossiinnee yyiieellddss 179 CCoolllleeccttiinngg tthhee tteerrmmss uupp ttoo ffoouurrtthh oorrddeerr yyiieellddss CCCooommmpppaaarrriiinnnggg cccoooeeeffffffiiiccciiieeennntttsss wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee ssseeerrriiieeesss ooofff ttthhheee eeexxxpppooonnneeennntttiiiaaalll fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn yyyiiieeellldddsss ttthhheee dddeeesssiiirrreeeddd Taylor series CCoommppaarriinngg ccooeeffffiicciieennttss wwiitthh tthhee aabboovvee sseerriieess ooff tthhee eexxppoonneennttiiaall ffuunnccttiioonn yyiieellddss tthhee ddeessiirreedd Taylor series Third example HHHeeerrreee wwweee uuussseee aaa mmmeeettthhhoooddd cccaaalllllleeeddd """IIInnndddiiirrreeecccttt EEExxxpppaaannnsssiiiooonnn""" tttooo eeexxxpppaaannnddd ttthhheee gggiiivvveeennn fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn... TTThhhiiisss mmmeeettthhhoooddd uusseess tthhee kknnoowwnn ffuunnccttiioonn ooff TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ffoorr eexxppaannssiioonn.. QQ:: EExxppaanndd tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg ffuunnccttiioonn aass aa ppoowweerr sseerriieess of x (1 + x)ex.
WWee kknnooww tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ooff ffuunnccttiioonn ex is: Thus, .
180  TTaayylloorr sseerriieess iinn sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess TTThhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss mmmaaayyy aaalllsssooo bbbeee gggeeennneeerrraaallliiizzzeeeddd tttooo fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee wwwiiittthhh FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ffoorr aa ffuunnccttiioonn tthhaatt ddeeppeennddss oonn ttwwoo vvaarriiaabblleess,, x and y,, tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ttoo sseeccoonndd oorrddeerr aabboouutt tthhee ppooiinntt ((a, b) is: wwhheerree tthhee ssuubbssccrriippttss ddeennoottee tthhee rreessppeeccttiivvee partial derivatives.
A second-oorrddeerr TTaayylloorr sseerriieess eexxppaannssiioonn ooff aa ssccaallaarr-vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn ooff mmoorree tthhaann oonnee vvaarriiaabbllee can be written compactly as ere is the gradient ooff evaluated at and iiss tthhee Hessian matrix.
Applying the multi-iinnddeexx nnoottaattiioonn tthhee TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ffoorr sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess bbeeccoommeess wwhhiicchh iiss ttoo bbee uunnddeerrssttoooodd aass aa ssttiillll mmoorree aabbbbrreevviiaatteedd multi-index verssiioonn ooff tthhee ffiirrsstt eeqquuaattiioonn ooff tthhiiss ppaarraaggrraapphh,, aaggaaiinn iinn ffuullll aannaallooggyy ttoo tthhee ssiinnggllee vvaarriiaabbllee ccaassee..
Example 181 Second-oorrddeerr TTaayylloorr sseerriieess aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn ((iinn ggrraayy)) ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn f(x,y) = eexlog (1 + y) around origin.
Compute a second-oorrddeerr TTaayylloorr sseerriieess eexxppaannssiioonn aarroouunndd ppooiinntt (a,b)) == ((00,,00)) of a function FFiirrssttllyy,, wwee ccoommppuuttee aallll ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess wwee nneeeedd TTThhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss iiisss which in this case becomes Since log(1 + y) iiss aannaallyyttiicc iinn ||y| < 1, we have for |y| < 1.
Fractional Taylor series With the emergence of ffrraaccttiioonnaall ccaallccuulluuss,, aa nnaattuurraall qquueessttiioonn aarriisseess aabboouutt wwhhaatt tthhee TTaayylloorr SSSeeerrriiieeesss eeexxxpppaaannnsssiiiooonnn wwwooouuulllddd bbbeee... OOOdddiiibbbaaattt aaannnddd SSShhhaaawwwaaagggfffeeehhh aaannnssswwweeerrreeeddd ttthhhiiisss iiinnn 222000000777... BBByyy uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee 182 CCaappuuttoo ffrraaccttiioonnaall ddeerriivvaattiivvee,, , and iinnddiiccaattiinngg tthhee lliimmiitt aass wwee aapppprrooaacchh ffrroomm tthhee rriigghhtt,, tthhee ffrraaccttiioonnaall TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ccaan be written as 4.0 CONCLUSION IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd tttaaaiiilllooorrrsss ssseeerrriiieeesss ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ooofff tttwwwooo vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleee... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd aaannnaaalllyyytttiiicccaaalll fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn aaannnddd hhhaaavvveee uuussseeeddd tttaaaiiilllooorrrsss ssseeerrriiieeesss tttooo sssooolllvvveee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm sss ttthhhaaattt iiinnnvvvooolllvvveee aaannnaaalllyyytttiiicccaaalll functions.
You have studied aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaatttiiiooonnn aaannnddd cccooonnnvvveeerrrgggeeennnccceee... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee aaalllsssooo ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd ttthhheee llliiisssttt ooofff mmmaaaccclllaaauuurrriiinnneee ssseeerrriiieeesss ooofff sssooommmeee cccooommmmmmooonnn fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss aaannnddd hhhaaavvveee dddooonnneee sssooommmeee cccaaalllcccuuulllaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff tttaaaiiilllooorrrsss ssseeerrriiieeesss... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee aaalllsssooo ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd tttaaaiiilllooorrrsss iiinnn ssseeevvveeerrraaalll vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss aaannnddd ttthhheee fffrrraaaccctttiiiooonnnaaalll tttaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss... 5.0 SUMMARY Inn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg :: DDeeffiinniittiioonn ttaayylloorr sseerriieess ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss ooff ttwwoo vvaarraabblleess SSoollvvee pprroobblleemmss oonn aannaallyyttiiccaall pprroobblleemm UUssee tthhee ttaayylloorr sseerriieess ttoo ssoollvvee aannaallyyttiicc ffuunnccttiioonn SSoollvvee pprroobblleemmss tthhaatt iinnvvoollvvee aapppprrooxxiimmaattiioonn aanndd ccoonnvveerrggeennccee The list of mmaaccllaauurriinnee sseerriieess ooff ssoommee ccoommmmoonn ffuunnccttiioonnss Calculation of taylor series TTaayylloorrss sseerriieess iinn sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess Fractional taylor series TUTOR – MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 1 11..UUssee tthhee ttaaiilloorr sseerriieess ttoo eexxppaanndd FF((zz)) == aabboouutt tthhee ppooiinntt zz == 11 ,,aanndd ffiinndd the values of z z+1 ffoorr wwhhiicchh tthhee eexxppaannssiioonn iiss vvaalliidd.. 1 22..UUssee tthhee ttaaiilloorr sseerriieess ttoo eexxppaanndd FF((xx)) == aabboouutt tthhee ppooiinntt xx == 11 ,,aanndd ffiinndd tthhee vvaalluueess ooff zz x+2 ffoorr wwhhiicchh tthhee eexxppaannssiioonn iiss vvaalliidd.. 1 33..UUssee tthhee ttaaiilloorr sseerriieess ttoo eexxppaanndd FF((xx)) == aabboouutt tthhee ppooiinntt xx == 22 ,,aanndd ffiinndd tthhee vvaalluueess (x- 2)2 ooff zz ffoorr wwhhiicchh tthhee eexxppaannssiioonn iiss vvaalliidd.. 1 44..UUssee tthhee ttaaiilloorr sseerriieess ttoo eexxppaanndd FF((xx)) == aabboouutt tthhee ppooiinntt xx == 22 ,,aanndd ffiinndd tthhee vvaalluueess (x+4)2 ooff zz ffoorr wwhhiicchh tthhee eexxppaannssiioonn iiss vvaalliidd.. 183 2 5.Use the tailor series to expand F(b) = about the point b = 1 ,and find the values (b+2)3 of z for which the expansion is valid.
REFERENCES Abramowitz, Milton; Stegun, Irene A.
(1970), Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables, New York: Dover Publications, Ninth printing Thomas, George B. Jr.; Finney, Ross L. (1996), Calculus and Analytic Geometry (9th ed.
), Addison Wesley, ISBN 0-201-53174-7 Greenberg, Michael (1998), Advanced Engineering Mathematics (2nd ed.
), Prentice Hall, ISBN 0-13-321431 Abramowitz, M. and Stegun, I.
A.
(Eds.).
Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables, 9th printing.
New York: Dover, p. 880, 1972.
Arfken, G. "Taylor's Expansion."
§5.6 in Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 3rd ed.
Orlando, FL: Academic Press, pp.
303-313, 1985.
Askey, R. and Haimo, D. T. "Similarities between Fourier and Power Series."
Amer.
Math.
Monthly 103, 297-304, 1996.
Comtet, L. "Calcul pratique des coefficients de Taylor d'une fonction algébrique."
Enseign.
Math.
10, 267-270, 1964.
Morse, P. M. and Feshbach, H. "Derivatives of Analytic Functions, Taylor and Laurent Series."
§4.3 in Methods of Theoretical Physics, Part I.
New York: McGraw-Hill, pp.
374- 398, 1953.
Whittaker, E. T. and Watson, G. N. "Forms of the Remainder in Taylor's Series."
§5.41 in A Course in Modern Analysis, 4th ed.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, pp.
95-96, 1990.
184 UNIT 3 : APPLICATIONS OF TAYLOR SERIES CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Evaluating definite integrals 3.2 Understanding the asymptotic behaviour 3.3 Understanding the growth of functions 3.4 Solving differential equations 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION We started studying Taylor Series because we said that polynomial functions are easy and that if we could find a way of representing complicated functions as series ("infinite polynomials") then maybe some properties of functions would be easy to study too.
In this section, we'll show you a few ways in Taylor series can make life easy.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to : Evaluate definite integrals with taylors series Understand the asymptotic behaviour with taylors series Understand the growth of functions with taylors series Solve differential equations with taylors series 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Evaluating definite integrals Remember that we've said that some functions have no antiderivative which can be expressed in terms of familiar functions.
This makes evaluating definite integrals of these functions difficult because the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus cannot be used.
However, if we have a series representation of a function, we can often times use that to evaluate a definite integral.
Here is an example.
Suppose we want to evaluate the definite integral 185  TThhee iinntteeggrraanndd hhaass nnoo aannttiiddeerriivvaattiivvee eexxpprreessssiibbllee iinn tteerrmmss ooff ffaammiilliiaarr ffuunnccttiioonnss.. HHoowweevveerr,, wwee kknnooww hhooww ttoo ffiinndd iittss TTaayylloorr sseerriieess:: wwee kknnooww tthhaatt Now if we substitute ,, wwee hhaavvee IIInnn ssspppiiittteee ooofff ttthhheee fffaaacccttt ttthhhaaattt wwweee cccaaannnnnnooottt aaannntttiiidddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn,,, wwweee cccaaannn aaannntttiiidddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee ttthhheee Taylor series: Notice that this is an alterrrnnnaaatttiiinnnggg ssseeerrriiieeesss sssooo wwweee kkknnnooowww ttthhhaaattt iiittt cccooonnnvvveeerrrgggeeesss... IIIfff wwweee aaadddddd uuuppp ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt ffoouurr tteerrmmss,, tthhee ppaatttteerrnn bbeeccoommeess cclleeaarr:: tthhee sseerriieess ccoonnvveerrggeess ttoo 0.31026.
UUnnddeerrssttaannddiinngg aassyymmppttoottiicc bbeehhaavviioouurr SSSooommmeeetttiiimmmeeesss,,, aaa TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss cccaaannn ttteeellllll uuusss uuussseeefffuuulll iiinnnfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn aaabbbooouuuttt hhhooowww aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn behaves in an iimmppoorrttaanntt ppaarrtt ooff iittss ddoommaaiinn.. HHeerree iiss aann eexxaammppllee wwhhiicchh wwiillll ddeemmoonnssttrraattee.. AA ffaammoouuss ffaacctt ffrroomm eelleeccttrriicciittyy aanndd mmaaggnneettiissmm ssaayyss tthhaatt aa cchhaarrggee q ggeenneerraatteess aann eelleeccttrriicc ffiieelldd wwhhoossee ssttrreennggtthh iiss iinnvveerrsseellyy pprrooppoorrttiioonnaall ttoo tthhee ssqquuaarree ooff tthhee ddiissttaannccee ffrroomm tthhee cchhaarrggee.. TThhaatt iiss,, at a distance r aawwaayy ffrroomm tthhee cchhaarrggee,, tthhee eelleeccttrriicc ffiieelldd iiss where k iiss ssoommee ccoonnssttaanntt ooff pprrooppoorrttiioonnaalliittyy.. Often tttiiimmmeeesss aaannn eeellleeeccctttrrriiiccc ccchhhaaarrrgggeee iiisss aaaccccccooommmpppaaannniiieeeddd bbbyyy aaannn eeeqqquuuaaalll aaannnddd oooppppppooosssiiittteee ccchhhaaarrrgggeee nnneeeaaarrrbbbyyy... SSSuuuccchhh aaannn ooobbbjjjeeecccttt iiisss cccaaalllllleeeddd aaannn eeellleeeccctttrrriiiccc dddiiipppooollleee... TTTooo dddeeessscccrrriiibbbeee ttthhhiiisss,,, wwweee wwwiiillllll pppuuuttt aaa ccchhhaaarrrgggeee q at the point and a charge -q at .
186 Along the x aaxxiiss,, tthhee ssttrreennggtthh ooff tthhee eelleeccttrriicc ffiieellddss iiss tthhee ssuumm ooff tthhee eelleeccttrriicc ffiieellddss ffrroomm eeaacchh ooff tthhee ttwwoo cchhaarrggeess.. IInn ppaarrttiiccuullaarr,, IIIfff wwweee aaarrreee iiinnnttteeerrreeesssttteeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee eeellleeeccctttrrriiiccc fffiiieeelllddd fffaaarrr aaawwwaaayyy fffrrrooommm ttthhheee dddiiipppooollleee,,, wwweee cccaaannn cccooonnnsssiiidddeeerrr wwwhhhaaattt happens for values of x mmuucchh llaarrggeerr tthhaann d. WWee wwiillll uussee aa TTaayylloorr sseerriieess ttoo ssttuuddyy tthhee behaviour in this region.
RReemmeemmbbeerr tthhaatt tthhee ggeeoommeettrriicc sseerriieess hhaass tthhee ffoorrmm IIff wwee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattee tthhiiss sseerriieess,, wwee oobbttaaiinn IInnttoo tthhiiss eexxpprreessssiioonn,, wwee ccaann ssuubbssttiittuuttee to obtain IInn tthhee ssaammee wwaayy,, iiff wwee ssuubbssttiittuuttee , we have NNooww ppuuttttiinngg tthhiiss ttooggeetthheerr ggiivveess 187 IInn ootthheerr wwoorrddss,, ffaarr aawwaayy ffrroomm tthhee ddiippoollee wwhheerree x iiss vveerryy llaarrggee,, wwee sseeee tthhaatt tthhee eelleeccttrriicc ffiieelldd ssttrreennggtthh iiss pprrooppoorrttiioonnaall ttoo tthhee iinnvveerrssee cube ooff tthhee ddiissttaannccee.. TThhee ttwwoo cchhaarrggeess ppaarrttiiaallllyy ccaanncceell oonnee aannootthheerr oouutt ttoo pprroodduuccee aa wweeaakkeerr eelleeccttrriicc ffiieelldd aatt aa ddiissttaannccee.. UUnnddeerrssttaannddiinngg tthhee ggrroowwtthh ooff ffuunnccttiioonnss TTThhhiiisss eeexxxaaammmpppllleee iiisss sssiiimmmiiilllaaarrr iiisss ssspppiiirrriiittt tttooo ttthhheee ppprrreeevvviiiooouuusss ooonnneee... SSSeeevvveeerrraaalll tttiiimmmeeesss iiinnn ttthhhiiisss cccooouuurrrssseee,,, wwweee hhhaaavvveee used thhheee fffaaacccttt ttthhhaaattt eeexxxpppooonnneeennntttiiiaaalllsss gggrrrooowww mmmuuuccchhh mmmooorrreee rrraaapppiiidddlllyyy ttthhhaaannn pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalllsss... WWWeee rrreeecccooorrrdddeeeddd ttthhhiiisss by saying that for any exponent n ... LLLeeettt'''sss ttthhhiiinnnkkk aaabbbooouuuttt ttthhhiiisss fffooorrr aaa mmmiiinnnuuuttteee bbbeeecccaaauuussseee iiittt iiisss aaannn iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannnttt ppprrrooopppeeerrrtttyyy ooofff exponentials.
The ratio iiss mmeeaassuurriinngg hhooww llaarrggee tthhee eexxppoonneennttiiaall iiss ccoommppaarreedd ttoo tthhee pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalll... IIIfff ttthhhiiisss rrraaatttiiiooo wwwaaasss vvveeerrryyy sssmmmaaallllll,,, wwweee wwwooouuulllddd cccooonnncccllluuudddeee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalll iiisss lllaaarrrgggeeerrr ttthhhaaannn ttthhheee eeexxxpppooonnneeennntttiiiaaalll... BBBuuuttt iiifff ttthhheee rrraaatttiiiooo iiisss lllaaarrrgggeee,,, wwweee wwwooouuulllddd cccooonnncccllluuudddeee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee eeexxxpppooonnneeennntttiiiaaalll iiisss mmmuuuccchhh llaarrggeerr tthhaann tthhee ppoollyynnoommiiaall.. TThhee ffaacctt tthhaatt tthhiiss rraattiioo bbeeccoommeess aarrbbiittrraarriillyy llaarrggee mmeeaannss tthhaatt tthhee eeexxxpppooonnneeennntttiiiaaalll bbbeeecccooommmeeesss lllaaarrrgggeeerrr ttthhhaaannn ttthhheee pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalll bbbyyy aaa fffaaaccctttooorrr wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss aaasss lllaaarrrgggeee aaasss wwweee wwwooouuulllddd llliiikkkeee... TTThhhiiisss iiisss wwwhhhaaattt wwweee mmmeeeaaannn wwwhhheeennn wwweee sssaaayyy """aaannn eeexxxpppooonnneeennntttiiiaaalll gggrrrooowwwsss fffaaasssttteeerrr ttthhhaaannn aaa pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalll...""" To see why this relationship hhhooollldddsss,,, wwweee cccaaannn wwwrrriiittteee dddooowwwnnn ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss fffooorrr .
TTTooo ssseeeeee wwwhhhyyy ttthhhiiisss rrreeelllaaatttiiiooonnnssshhhiiippp hhhooollldddsss,,, wwweee cccaaannn wwwrrriiittteee dddooowwwnnn ttthhheee TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss fffooorrr .
NNoottiiccee tthhaatt tthhiiss llaasstt tteerrmm bbeeccoommeess aarrbbiittrraarriillyy llaarrggee aass .. TThhaatt iimmpplliieess tthhaatt tthhee rraattiioo wwee aarree iinntteerreesstteedd iinn ddooeess aass wweellll:: Basically, the exponential ggrroowwss ffaasstteerr tthhaann aannyy ppoollyynnoommiiaall bbeeccaauussee iitt bbeehhaavveess lliikkee aann iinnffiinniittee ppoollyynnoommiiaall wwhhoossee ccooeeffffiicciieennttss aarree aallll ppoossiittiivvee.. SSoollvviinngg ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall eeqquuaattiioonnss SSSooommmeee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalll eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnnsss cccaaannnnnnooottt bbbeee sssooolllvvveeeddd iiinnn ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff fffaaammmiiillliiiaaarrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss (((jjjuuusssttt aaasss sssooommmeee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss dddooo nnnooottt hhhaaavvveee aaannntttiiidddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss wwwhhhiiiccchhh cccaaannn bbbeee eeexxxppprrreeesssssseeeddd iiinnn ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff fffaaammmiiillliiiaaarrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss)))... 188 HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss cccaaannn cccooommmeee tttooo ttthhheee rrreeessscccuuueee aaagggaaaiiinnn... HHHeeerrreee wwweee wwwiiillllll ppprrreeessseeennnt two examples to give you the idea.
Example 1: WWee wwiillll ssoollvvee tthhee iinniittiiaall vvaalluuee pprroobblleemm OOff ccoouurrssee,, wwee kknnooww tthhaatt tthhee ssoolluuttiioonn iiss ,, bbuutt wwee wwiillll sseeee hhooww ttoo ddiissccoovveerr tthhiiss iinn aa dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt wwwaaayyy... FFFiiirrrsssttt,,, wwweee wwwiiillllll wwwrrriiittteee ooouuuttt ttthhheee sssooollluuutttiiiooonnn iiinnn ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff iiitttsss TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrries: SSiinnccee tthhiiss ffuunnccttiioonn ssaattiissffiieess tthhee ccoonnddiittiioonn , we must have .
We also have SSiinnccee tthhee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall eeqquuaattiioonn ssaayyss tthhaatt ,, wwee ccaann eeqquuaattee tthheessee ttwwoo TTaayylloorr sseerriieess:: IIff wwee nnooww eeqquuaattee tthhee ccooeeffffiicciieennttss,, wwee oobbttaaiinn:: This means that aass wwee eexxppeecctt.. OOOfff cccooouuurrrssseee,,, ttthhhiiisss iiisss aaannn iiinnntttiiiaaalll vvvaaallluuueee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm wwweee kkknnnooowww hhhooowww tttooo sssooolllvvveee... TTThhheee rrreeeaaalll vvvaaallluuueee ooofff ttthhhiiisss mmmeeettthhhoooddd iiisss iiinnn ssstttuuudddyyyiiinnnggg iiinnniiitttiiiaaalll vvvaaallluuueee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss ttthhhaaattt wwweee dddooo nnnooottt kkknnnooowww hhhooowww tttooo sssooolllvvveee...
Example 2: HHeerree wwee wwiillll ssttuuddyy Airy's equation with initial conditions: 189  This equation iiisss iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannnttt iiinnn oooppptttiiicccsss... IIInnn fffaaacccttt,,, iiittt eeexxxppplllaaaiiinnnsss wwwhhhyyy aaa rrraaaiiinnnbbbooowww aaappppppeeeaaarrrsss ttthhheee wwwaaayyy iiinnn wwhhiicchh iitt ddooeess!!
AAss bbeeffoorree,, wwee wwiillll wwrriittee tthhee ssoolluuttiioonn aass aa sseerriieess:: SSiinnccee wwee hhaavvee tthhee iinniittiiaall ccoonnddiittiioonnss,, and .
NNooww wwee ccaann wwrriittee ddoowwnn tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivveess:: The equation then gives AAggaaiinn,, wwee ccaann eeqquuaattee tthhee ccooeeffffiicciieennttss ooff x to obtain TThhiiss ggiivveess uuss tthhee ffiirrsstt ffeeww tteerrmmss ooff tthhee ssoolluuttiioonn:: IIIfff wwweee cccooonnntttiiinnnuuueee iiinnn ttthhhiiisss wwwaaayyy,,, wwweee cccaaannn wwwrrriiittteee dddooowwwnnn mmmaaannnyyy ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff ttthhheee ssseeerrriiieeesss (((pppeeerrrhhhaaapppsss yyyooouuu ssseeeeee ttthhheee pppaaatttttteeerrrnnn aaalllrrreeeaaadddyyy???)))
aaannnddd ttthhheeennn dddrrraaawww aaa gggrrraaappphhh ooofff ttthhheee sssooollluuutttiiiooonnn... TTThhhiiisss lllooooookkksss llliiikkkeee ttthhhiiisss::: NNNoootttiiiccceee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee sssooollluuutttiiiooonnn ooosssccciiillllllaaattteeesss tttooo ttthhheee llleeefffttt ooofff ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnn aaannnddd gggrrrooowwwsss llliiikkkeee aaannn eeexxxppponential to the rrriiiggghhhttt ooofff ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnn... CCCaaannn yyyooouuu eeexxxppplllaaaiiinnn ttthhhiiisss bbbyyy lllooooookkkiiinnnggg aaattt ttthhheee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalll eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnn 4.0 CONCLUSION 190 IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee bbbeeeeeennn iiinnntttrrroooddduuuccceeeddd tttooo ttthhheee aaappppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff tttaaayyylllooorrrsss ssseeerrriiieeesss aaannnddd ssoommee bbaassiicc wwaayyss ooff uussiinngg ttaayylloorrss sseerriieess ssuucchh aass tthhee eevvaalluuaattiinngg ooff ddeeffiinniittee iinntteeggrraallss,, uuunnndddeeerrrssstttaaannndddiiinnnggg ttthhheee aaasssyyymmmppptttoootttiiiccc bbbeeehhhaaavvviiiooouuurrr,,, uuunnndddeeerrrssstttaaannndddiiinnnggg ttthhheee gggrrrooowwwttthhh ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss aaannnddd sssooolllvvviiinnnggg dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaalll eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnnsss... SSSooommmeee eeexxxaaammmpppllleeesss wwwhhheeerrreee uuussseeeddd tttooo iiilllllluuussstttrrraaattteee ttthhheee aaappppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnnsss... 5 SUMMARY HHaavviinngg ggoonnee tthhrroouugghh tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu nnooww kknnooww tthhaatt;; Innn ttthhhiiisss ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn,,, wwweee ssshhhooowww yyyooouuu wwwaaayyysss iiinnn wwwhhhiiiccchhh TTTaaayyylllooorrr ssseeerrriiieeesss cccaaannn mmmaaakkkeee llliiifffeee eeeaaasssyyy ::: i. IIInnn eeevvvaaallluuuaaatttiiinnnggg dddeeefffiiinnniiittteee iiinnnttteeegggrrraaalllsss ,,, wwweee uuussseeeddd ssseeerrriiieeesss rrreeeppprrreeessseeennntttaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn tttooo eevvaalluuaattee ssoommee ffuunnccttiioonnss tthhaatt hhaavvee nnoo aannttiiddeerriivvaattiivvee .. SSuuppppoossee wwee wwaanntt ttoo eevvaalluuaattee tthhee ddeeffiinniittee integral TTThhheee iiinnnttteeegggrrraaannnddd hhhaaasss nnnooo aaannntttiiidddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee eeexxxppprrreeessssssiiibbbllleee iiinnn ttteeerrrmmmsss ooofff fffaaammmiiillliiiaaarrr fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, wwweee kknnooww hhooww ttoo ffiinndd iittss TTaayylloorr sseerriieess:: wwee kknnooww tthhaatt Now if we substitute ,, wwee hhaavvee IIInnn ssspppiiittteee ooofff ttthhheee fffaaacccttt ttthhhaaattt wwweee cccaaannnnnnooottt aaannntttiiidddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn,,, wwweee cccaaannn aaannntttiiidddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaattteee ttthhheee Taylor series: (((iiiiii))) WWWeee uuussseeeddd tttaaayyylllooorrrsss ssseeerrriiieeesss tttooo uuunnndddeeerrrssstttaaannnddd aaasssyyymmmppptttoootttiiiccc bbbeeehhhaaavvviiiooouuurrr ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ttthhhaaattt bbbeeehhhaaavvveee iiinnn tthhee iimmppoorrttaanntt ppaarrtt ooff tthhee ddoommaaiinn .. AAnndd ssoommee eexxaammpplleess aarree sshhoowwnn ttoo ddeemmoonnssttrraattee ,, (iii) Taylors series is used to uuunnndddeeerrrssstttaaannnddd ttthhheee gggrrrooowwwttthhh ooofff fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss... BBBeeecccaaauuussseee wwweee kkknnnooowww ttthhheee fffaaacccttt ttthhhaaattt eeexxxpppooonnneeennntttiiiaaalllsss gggrrrooowww mmmuuuccchhh mmmooorrreee rrraaapppiiidddlllyyy ttthhhaaannn pppooolllyyynnnooommmiiiaaalllsss... WWWeee rrreeecccooorrrdddeeeddd ttthhhiiisss bbbyyy sssaaayyyiiinnnggg ttthhhaaattt for any exponent n .
(iv) We used tttaaayyylllooorrrsss ssseeerrriiieeesss tttooo sssooolllvvveee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss wwwhhhiiiccchhh cccooouuulllddd nnnooottt bbbeee sssooolllvvveeeddd ooorrrdddiiinnnaaarrriiilllyyy ttthhhrrrooouuuggghhh differential equations.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
CCoommppuuttee aa sseeccoonndd-oorrddeerr TTaayylloorr sseerriieess eexxppaannssiioonn aarroouunndd ppooiinntt ((a,b) = (0,0) of a function 191 F(x,y)= exlog(2+y) 2.
Show that the taylor series expansion of f(x,y) = exy about the point (2,3) .
7.0 REFERENCE Arfken and Weber, Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 6th Edition, 352-354, Academic press 200 [2] http://www.ugrad.math.ubc.ca/coursedoc/math101 /notes/series/appsTaylor.html September,29 2008 [3] Broadhead MK (Broadhead, Michael K.) , geophysical prospecting 56, 5, 729-735 SEP 2008 [4] Guyenne P (Guyenne, Philippe), Nicholls DP (Nicholls, David P.), siam journal on scientific computing 30, 1, 81-101, 2007 [5] Popa C (Popa, Cosmin), IEEE transactions on very large scale integration (VLSI) systems,16, 3,318-321, MAR 2008 [6] Janssen AJEM (Janssen, A. J. E. M.), van Leeuwaarden JSH (van Leeuwaarden, J. S. H.) stochastic processes and their applications 117 ,12, 1928-1959, DEC 2007 [7] Sahu S (Sahu, Sunil), Baker AJ (Baker, A.
J.)
Source: international journal for numerical methods in fluids 55, 8, 737-783, NOV 20, 2007 192 MODULE 7 MAXIMA AND MINIMA OF FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES, STATIONARY POINT, LAGRANGE’S METHOD OF MULTIPLIERS Unit 1: MAXIMISATION AND MINIMISATION OF FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Recognise problems on maximum and minimum functions of several variables 3.2 Necessary condition for a maxima or minima function of several variable 3.3 Sufficient condition for a maxima or minima function of several variable 3.4 Maxima and minima of functions subject to constraints 3.5 Method of finding maxima and minima of functions subject to constraints 3.6Identify the different types of examples of maxima and minima functions of several variables 3.7Solve problems on maxima and minima functions of several variables 4.0CONCLUSION 5.0SUMMARY 6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Def.
Stationary (or critical) point.
For a function y = f(x) of a single variable, a stationary (or critical) point is a point at which dy/dx = 0; for a function u = f(x , x , ... , x ) of n 1 2 n variables it is a point at which In the case of a function y = f(x) of a single variable, a stationary point corresponds to a point on the curve at which the tangent to the curve is horizontal.
In the case of a function y = f(x, y) of two variables a stationary point corresponds to a point on the surface at which the tangent plane to the surface is horizontal.
In the case of a function y = f(x) of a single variable, a stationary point can be any of the following three: a maximum point, a minimum point or an inflection point.
For a function y = f(x, y) of two variables, a stationary point can be a maximum point, a minimum point or a saddle point.
For a function of n variables it can be a maximum point, a minimum point or a point that is analogous to an inflection or saddle point.
2.0 OBJECTIVE 193 At the end of this unit, you should be able to : - recognise problems on maximum and minimum functions of several variables - know the necessary condition for a maxima or minima function of several variable - know the Sufficient condition for a maxima or minima function of several variable - identify the maxima and minima of functions subject to constraints - know the method of finding maxima and minima of functions subject to constraints - identify the different types of examples of maxima and minima functions of several variables - solve problems on maxima and minima functions of several variables Maxima and minima of functions of several variables.
A function f(x, y) of two independent variables has a maximum at a point (x , y ) if f(x , y ) 0 0 0 0 f(x, y) for all points (x, y) in the neighborhood of (x , y ).
Such a function has a minimum 0 0 at a point (x , y ) if f(x , y ) f(x, y) for all points (x, y) in the neighborhood of (x , y ).
0 0 0 0 0 0 A function f(x , x , ... , x ) of n independent variables has a maximum at a point (x ', x ', ... , 1 2 n 1 2 x ') if f(x ', x ', ... , x ') f(x , x , ... , x ) at all points in the neighborhood of (x ', x ', ... , x ').
n 1 2 n 1 2 n 1 2 n Such a function has a minimum at a point (x ', x ', ... , x ') if f(x ', x ', ... , x ') f(x , x , ... , 1 2 n 1 2 n 1 2 x ) at all points in the neighborhood of (x ', x ', ... , x ').
n 1 2 n Necessary condition for a maxima or minima.
A necessary condition for a function f(x, y) of two variables to have a maxima or minima at point (x , y ) is that 0 0 at the point (i.e.
that the point be a stationary point).
In the case of a function f(x , x , ... , x ) of n variables, the condition for the function to have 1 2 n a maximum or minimum at point (x ', x ', ... , x ') is that 1 2 n at that point (i.e.
that the point be a stationary point).
To find the maximum or minimum points of a function we first locate the stationary points using 1) above.
After locating the stationary points we then examine each stationary point to determine if it is a maximum or minimum.
To determine if a point is a maximum or minimum we may consider values of the function in the neighborhood of the point as well as the values of its first and second partial derivatives.
We also may be able to establish what it is by arguments of one kind or other.
The following theorem may be useful in establishing maximums and minimums for the case of functions of two variables.
194 Sufficient condition for a maximum or minimum of a function z = f(x, y).
Let z = f(x, y) have continuous first and second partial derivatives in the neighborhood of point (x , y ).
If at 0 0 the point (x , y ) 0 0 and then there is a maximum at (x , y ) if 0 0 and a minimum if If ∆ > 0 , point (x , y ) is a saddle point (neither maximum nor minimum).
If ∆ = 0 , the 0 0 nature of point (x , y ) is undecided.
More investigation is necessary.
0 0 Example.
Find the maxima and minima of function z = x2 + xy + y2 - y .
Solution.. 2x + y = 0 x + 2y = 1 x = -1/3 , y = 2/3 This is the stationary point.
At this point ∆ > 0 and 195  and the point is a minimum.
The minimum value of the function is - 1/3.
Maxima and minima of functions subject to constraints.
Let us set ourselves the following problem: Let F(x, y) and G(x, y) be functions defined over some region R of the x-y plane.
Find the points at which the function F(x, y) has maximums subject to the side condition G(x, y) = 0.
Basically we are asking the question: At what points on the solution set of G(x, y) = 0 does F(x, y) have maximums?
The solution set of G(x, y) = 0 corresponds to some curve in the plane.
See Figure 1.
The solution set (i.e.
locus) of G(x, y) = 0 is shown in red.
Figure 2 shows the situation in three dimensions where function z = F(x, y) is shown rising up above the x-y plane along the curve G(x, y) = 0.
The problem is to find the maximums of z = F(x, y) along the curve G(x, y) = 0.
196  Let us now consider the same problem in three variables.
Let F(x, y, z) and G(x, y, z) be functions defined over some region R of space.
Find the points at which the function F(x, y, z) has maximums subject to the side condition G(x, y, z) = 0.
Basically we are asking the question: At what points on the solution set of G(x, y, z) = 0 does F(x, y, z) have maximums?
G(x, y, z) = 0 represents some surface in space.
In Figure 3, G(x, y, z) = 0 is depicted as a spheroid in space.
The problem then is to find the maximums of the function F(x, y, z) as evaluated on this spheroidal surface.
Let us now consider another problem.
Suppose instead of one side condition we have two.
Let F(x, y, z), G(x, y, z) and H(x, y, z) be functions defined over some region R of space.
Find the points at which the function F(x, y, z) has maximums subject to the side conditions 2) G(x, y, z) = 0 3) H(x, y, z) = 0.
Here we wish to find the maximum values of F(x, y, z) on that set of points that satisfy both equations 2) and 3).
Thus if D represents the solution set of G(x, y, z) = 0 and E represents the solution set of H(x, y, z) = 0 we wish to find the maximum points of F(x, y, z) as evaluated on set F = D E (i.e.
the intersection of sets D and E).
In Fig.
4 G(x, y, z) = 0 is depicted as an ellipsoid and H(x, y, z) = 0 as a plane.
The intersection of the ellipsoid and the plane is the set F on which F(x, y, z) is to be evaluated.
197 The above can be generalized to functions of n variables F(x , x , ... , x ), G(x , x , ... , x ), 1 2 n 1 2 n etc.
and m side conditions.
Methods for finding maxima and minima of functions subject to constraints.
1.
Method of direct elimination.
Suppose we wish to find the maxima or minima of a function F(x, y) with the constraint Φ(x, y) = 0.
Suppose we are so lucky that Φ(x, y) = 0 can be solved explicitly for y, giving y = g(x).
We can then substitute g(x) for y in F(x, y) and then find the maximums and minimums of F(x, g(x)) by standard methods.
In some cases, it may be possible to do this kind of thing.
We express some of the variables in the equations of constraint in terms of other variables and then substitute into the function whose extrema are sought, and find the extrema by standard methods.
2.
Method of implicit functions.
Suppose we wish to find the maxima or minima of a function u = F(x, y, z) with the constraint Φ(x, y, z) = 0.
We note that Φ(x, y, z) = 0 defines z implicitly as a function of x and y i.e.
z = f(x, y).
We thus seek the extrema of the quantity u = F(x, y, f(x, y)) .
The necessary condition for a stationary point, as given by 1) above, becomes (where F represents the partial of F with respect to x, etc.)
1 Taking partials of Φ with respect to x and y it follows that (since the partial derivative of a function that is constant is zero).
From the pair of equations consisting of the first equation in 4) and 5) we can eliminate giving 6) F Φ - F Φ = 0 1 3 3 1 From the pair of equations consisting of the second equation in 4) and 5) we can eliminate giving 7) F Φ - F Φ = 0 2 3 3 2 Equations 6) and 7) can be written in determinant form as 198  Equations 8) combined with the equation Φ(x, y, z) = 0 give us three equations which we can solve simultaneously for x, y, z to obtain the stationary points of function F(x, y, z).
The maxima and minima will be among the stationary points.
This same method can be used for functions of an arbitrary number of variables and an arbitrary number of side conditions (smaller than the number of variables).
Extrema for a function of four variables with two auxiliary equations.
Suppose we wish to find the maxima or minima of a function u = F(x, y, z, t) with the side conditions 9) Φ(x, y, z, t) = 0 ψ(x, y, z, t) = 0.
Equations 9) define variables z and t implicitly as functions of x and y i.e.
10) z = f (x,y) t = f (x, y) .
1 2 We thus seek the extrema of the quantity u = F(x, y, f (x, y), f (x, y)) .
1 2 The necessary condition for a stationary point, as given by 1) above, becomes Taking partials of Φ with respect to x and y it follows that Taking partials of ψ with respect to x and y it follows that From 12) and 13) we can derive the conditions 199  Equations 14) combined with the auxiliary equations Φ(x, y, z, t) = 0 and ψ(x, y, z, t) = 0 give us four equations which we can solve simultaneously for x, y, z, t to obtain the stationary points of function F(x, y, z, t).
The maxima and minima will be among the stationary points.
Extrema for a function of n variables with p auxiliary equations.
The p equations corresponding to equation 14) above for the case of a function of n variables u = F(x , x , ... .x ) 1 2 n and p auxiliary equations (i.e.
side conditions) Φ(x , x , ... , x ) = 0 1 2 n Ψ(x , x , ... , x ) = 0 1 2 n ................................. Ω(x , x , ... , x ) = 0 1 2 n are These p equations along with the p auxiliary equations Φ(x , x , ... , x ) = 0 1 2 n Ψ(x , x , ... , x ) = 0 1 2 n ................................. Ω(x , x , ... , x ) = 0 1 2 n can be solved simultaneously for the n variables x , x , ... .x to obtain the stationary 1 2 n points of F(x , x , ... .x ).
The maxima and minima will be among the stationary points.
1 2 n ********************************* 200 Geometrical interpretation for extrema of function F(x, y, z) with a constraint.
We shall now present a theorem that gives a geometrical interpretation for the case of extremal values of functions of type F(x, y, z) with a constraint.
Theorem 1.
Suppose the functions F(x, y, z) and Φ(x, y, z) have continuous first partial derivatives throughout a certain region R of space.
Let the equation Φ(x, y, z) = 0 define a surface S, every point of which is in the interior of R, and suppose that the three partial derivatives Φ , Φ , Φ are never simultaneously zero at a point of S. Then a necessary 1 2 3 condition for the values of F(x, y, z) on S to attain an extreme value (either relative or absolute) at a point of S is that F , F , F be proportional to Φ , Φ , Φ at that point.
If C is the 1 2 3 1 2 3 value of F at the point, and if the constant of proportionality is not zero, the geometric meaning of the proportionality is that the surface S and the surface F(x, y, z) = C are tangent at the point in question.
Rationale behind theorem.
From 8) above, a necessary condition for F(x, y, z) to attain a maxima or minima (i.e.
a condition for a stationary point) at a point P is that F Φ - F Φ = 0 F Φ - F Φ = 0 1 3 3 1 2 3 3 2 or Thus at a stationary point the partial derivatives F , F , F and Φ , Φ , Φ are proportional.
1 2 3 1 2 3 Now the partial derivatives F , F , F and Φ , Φ , Φ represent the gradients of the functions F 1 2 3 1 2 3 and Φ; and the gradient, at any point P, of a scalar point function ψ(x, y, z) is a vector that is normal to that level surface of ψ(x, y, z) that passes through point P. If C is the value of F at the stationary point P, then the vector (F , F , F ) at point P is normal to the surface F(x, y, z) 1 2 3 = C at P. Similarly, the vector (Φ , Φ , Φ ) at point P is normal to the surface Φ(x, y, z) = 0 at 1 2 3 P. Since the partial derivatives F , F , F and Φ , Φ , Φ are proportional, the normals to the 1 2 3 1 2 3 two surfaces point in the same direction at P and the surfaces must be tangent at point P. Example.
Consider the maximum and minimum values of F(x, y, z) = x2 + y2 + z2 on the surface of the ellipsoid Since F(x, y, z) is the square of the distance from (x, y, z) to the origin, it is clear that we are looking for the points at maximum and minimum distances from the center of the ellipsoid.
The maximum occurs at the ends of the longest principal axis, namely at ( 8, 0, 0).
The minimum occurs at the ends of the shortest principal axis, namely at (0, 0, 5).
Consider the maximum point (8, 0, 0).
The value of F at this point is 64, and the surface F(x, y, z) = 64 is a sphere.
The sphere and the ellipsoid are tangent at (8, 0, 0) as asserted by the theorem.
In this case the ratios G :G :G and F :F :F at (8, 0, 0) are 1/4 : 0 : 0 and 16 : 0 : 0 respectively.
1 2 3 1 2 3 201 This example brings out the fact that the tangency of the surfaces (or the proportionality of the two sets of ratios), is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for a maximum or minimum value of F, for we note that the condition of proportionality exists at the points (0, 6, 0), which are the ends of the principal axis of intermediate length.
But the value of F in neither a maximum nor a minimum at this point.
Case of extrema of function F(x, y) with a constraint.
A similar geometrical interpretation can be given to the problem of extremal values for F(x, y) subject to the constraint Φ(x, y) = 0.
Here we have a curve defined by the constraint, and a one-parameter family of curves F(x, y) = C. At a point of extremal value of F the curve F(x, y) = C through the point will be tangent to the curve defined by the constraint.
3.
Lagrange’s Method of Multipiers.
Let F(x, y, z) and Φ(x, y, z) be functions defined over some region R of space.
Find the points at which the function F(x, y, z) has maximums and minimums subject to the side condition Φ(x, y, z) = 0.
Lagrange’s method for solving this problem consists of forming a third function G(x, y, z) given by 17) G(x, y, z) = F(x, y, z) + λΦ(x, y, z) , where λ is a constant (i.e.
a parameter) to which we will later assign a value, and then finding the maxima and minima of the function G(x, y, z).
A reader might quickly ask, “Of what interest are the maxima and minima of the function G(x, y, z)?
How does this help us solve the problem of finding the maxima and minima of F(x, y, z)?” The answer is that examination of 17) shows that for those points corresponding to the solution set of Φ(x, y, z) = 0 the function G(x, y, z) is equal to the function F(x, y, z) since at those points equation 17) becomes G(x, y, z) = F(x, y, z) + λ·0 .
Thus, for the points on the surface Φ(x, y, z) = 0, functions F and G are equal so the maxima and minima of G are also the maxima and minima of F. The procedure for finding the maxima and minima of G(x, y, z) is as follows: We regard G(x, y, z) as a function of three independent variables and write down the necessary conditions for a stationary point using 1) above: 18) F + λΦ = 0 F + λΦ = 0 F + λΦ = 0 1 1 2 2 3 3 We then solve these three equations along with the equation of constraint Φ(x, y, z) = 0 to find the values of the four quantities x, y, z, λ.
More than one point can be found in this way and this will give us the locations of the stationary points.
The maxima and minima will be among the stationary points thus found.
Let us now observe something.
If equations 18) are to hold simultaneously, then it follows from the third of them that λ must have the value If we substitute this value of λ into the first two equations of 18) we obtain 202  F Φ - F Φ = 0 F Φ - F Φ = 0 1 3 3 1 2 3 3 2 or We note that the two equations of 19) are identically the same conditions as 8) above for the previous method.
Thus using equations 19) along with the equation of constraint Φ(x, y, z) = 0 is exactly the same procedure as the previous method in which we used equations 8) and the same constraint.
One of the great advantages of Lagrange’s method over the method of implicit functions or the method of direct elimination is that it enables us to avoid making a choice of independent variables.
This is sometimes very important; it permits the retention of symmetry in a problem where the variables enter symmetrically at the outset.
Lagrange’s method can be used with functions of any number of variables and any number of constraints (smaller than the number of variables).
In general, given a function F(x , x , ... , 1 2 x ) of n variables and h side conditions Φ = 0, Φ = 0, .... , Φ = 0, for which this function n 1 2 h may have a maximum or minimum, equate to zero the partial derivatives of the auxiliary function F + λ Φ + λ Φ + ...... + λ Φ with respect to x , x , ... , x , regarding λ , λ , ..... ,λ 1 1 2 2 h h 1 2 n 1 2 h as constants, and solve these n equations simultaneously with the given h side conditions, treating the λ’s as unknowns to be eliminated.
The parameter λ in Lagrange’s method is called Lagrange’s multiplier.
Further examples Example 1.
Let us find the critical points of The partial derivatives are f_x=0 if 1-x^2=0 or the exponential term is 0. f_y=0 if -2y=0 or the exponential term is 0.
The exponential term is not 0 except in the degenerate case.
Hence we require 1-x^2=0 and - 2y=0, implying x=1 or x=-1 and y=0.
There are two critical points (-1,0) and (1,0) The Second Derivative Test for Functions of Two Variables 203 How can we determine if the critical points found above are relative maxima or minima?
We apply a second derivative test for functions of two variables.
Let (x_c,y_c) be a critical point and define We have the following cases: • If D>0 and f (x , y )〈0, then f(x,y) has a relative maximum at x , y .
xx c c c c • If D>0 and f (x , y )〈0, then f(x,y) has a relative minimum at x , y .
xx c c c c • If D<0, then f(x,y) has a saddle point at x , y .
c c • If D=0, the second derivative test is inconclusive.
An example of a saddle point is shown in the example below.
Example: Continued For the example above, we have For x=1 and y=0, we have D(1,0)=4exp(4/3)>0 with f_xx(1,0)=-2exp(2/3)<0.
Hence, (1,0) is a relative maximum.
For x=-1 and y=0, we have D(-1,0)=-4exp(-4/3)<0.
Hence, (-1,0) is a saddle point.
Example 2: Maxima and Minima in a Disk Another example of a bounded region is the disk of radius 2 centered at the origin.
We proceed as in the previous example, determining in the 3 classes above.
(1,0) and (-1,0) lie in the interior of the disk.
The boundary of the disk is the circle x^2+y^2=4.
To find extreme points on the disk we parameterize the circle.
A natural parameterization is x=2cos(t) and y=2sin(t) for 0<=t<=2*pi.
We substitute these expressions into z=f(x,y) and obtain 204 On the circle, the original functions of 2 variables is reduced to a function of 1 variable.
We can determine the extrema on the circle using techniques from calculus of on variable.
In this problem there are not any corners.
Hence, we determine the global max and min by considering points in the interior of the disk and on the circle.
An alternative method for finding the maximum and minimum on the circle is the method of Lagrange multipliers.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have been introduced to maximum and minimum functions of several variables, necessary condition for a maxima or minima function of several variables, problems on maximum and minimum functions of several variables e.t.c 5.0 SUMMARY A summary of maximum and minimum functions of several variables are as follows : A function f(x, y) of two independent variables has a maximum at a point (x , y ) if f(x , y ) 0 0 0 0 f(x, y) for all points (x, y) in the neighborhood of (x , y ).
Such a function has a minimum 0 0 at a point (x , y ) if f(x , y ) f(x, y) for all points (x, y) in the neighborhood of (x , y ).
0 0 0 0 0 0 Solve the following problem, Find the maxima and minima of function z = x2 + xy + y2 - y .
Solution.. .
2x + y = 0 , x + 2y = 1 x = -1/3 , y = 2/3 This is the stationary point.
At this point ∆ > 0 and and the point is a minimum.
The minimum value of the function is - 1/3.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.Determine the critical points and locate any relative minimum, maxima and saddle points of functions f defined by F(x,y) = 2x2- 2xy+2 y4- 6x 2.Determine the critical points and locate any relative minimum, maxima and saddle points of functions f defined by F(x,y) = 2x4- 4xy+ y3+4 205 3.Determine the critical points and locate any relative minimum, maxima and saddle points of functions f defined by F(x,y)=x4- y4+4xy Determine the critical points of the functions below and find out whether each point corresponds to a relative minimum, maximum and saddle point, or no conclusion can be made 4.F(x,y)=x2+3 y2- 2xy- 8x 5.
F(x,y)=x3+12x+ y3+3 y2- 9y 7.0 REFERENCES.
Taylor.
Advanced Calculus Osgood.
Advanced Calculus.
James and James.
Mathematics Dictionary.
Mathematics, Its Content, Methods and Meaning.
Vol.
UNIT 2 LAGRANGE MULTIPLIERS CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Handling multiple constraints 3.2 interpretation of the langrange multiplie 3.3 example 3.4 applications 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 206 INTRODUCTION Figure 1: Find x and y ttoo mmaaxxiimmiizzee f(x,y)) ssuubbjjeecctt ttoo aa ccoonnssttrraaiinntt ((sshhoowwnn iinn rreedd)) g(x,y) = c. FFiigguurree 22:: CCoonnttoouurr mmaapp ooff FFiigguurree 11.. TThhee rreedd lliinnee sshhoowwss tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinntt g((x,y) = c. The blue lines are contours of f(x,y)))... TTThhheee pppoooiiinnnttt wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhheee rrreeeddd llliiinnneee tttaaannngggeeennntttiiiaaallllllyyy tttooouuuccchhheeesss aaa bbbllluuueee cccooonnntttooouuurrr iiisss our solution.
In mmaatthheemmaattiiccaall ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn, the method of Lagrange multipliers ((nnaammeedd aafftteerr Joseph Louis Lagrange))) ppprrrooovvviiidddeeesss aaa ssstttrrraaattteeegggyyy fffooorrr fffiiinnndddiiinnnggg ttthhheee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaa aaannnddd mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa ooofff aaa function subject to constraints.
FFoorr iinnssttaannccee ((sseeee FFiigguurree 11)),, ccoonnssiiddeerr tthhee ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn pprroobblleemm maximize subject to WWee iinnttrroodduuccee aa nneeww vvaarriiaabbllee ((λ)) ccaalllleedd aa LLaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerr,, aanndd ssttuuddyy tthhee LLaaggrraannggee function defined by 207 where the λ tteerrmm mmaayy bbee eeiitthheerr aaddddeedd oorr ssuubbttrraacctteedd.. IIff f(x,y)) iiss aa mmaaxxiimmuumm ffoorr tthhee oorriiggiinnaall ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd pprroobblleemm,, tthheenn tthheerree eexxiissttss λ such that (x,y,λ) is a ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinntt for the Lagrange fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn (((ssstttaaatttiiiooonnnaaarrryyy pppoooiiinnntttsss aaarrreee ttthhhooossseee pppoooiiinnntttsss wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff Λ are zero).
HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, nnnooottt aaallllll ssstttaaatttiiiooonnnaaarrryyy pppoooiiinnntttsss yyyiiieeelllddd aaa sssooollluuutttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnnaaalll ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm... TTThhhuuusss,,, ttthhheee mmmeeettthhhoooddd ooff LLaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerrss yyiieellddss aa necessary condition ffoorr ooppttiimmaalliittyy iinn ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd pprroobblleemmss 2.0 OBJECTIVES AAfftteerr ssttuuddyyiinngg tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee ttoo ccoorrrreeccttllyy:: i. IIIdddeeennntttiiifffyyy ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm wwwhhhiiiccchhh cccooouuulllddd bbbeee sssooolllvvveee bbbyyy lllaaannngggrrraaannngggeeesss mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeerrr ii.
KKnnooww ssiinnggllee aanndd mmuullttiippllee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss iii.
KKnnooww tthhee iinntteerrpprreettaattiioonn ooff llaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerr iv.
SSoollvvee pprroobblleemmss wwiitthh tthhee uussee ooff llaannggrraannggeess mmuullttiipplliieerr 3.0 MAIN CONTENT OOOnnneee ooofff ttthhheee mmmooosssttt cccooommmmmmooonnn ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss iiinnn cccaaalllcccuuullluuusss iiisss ttthhhaaattt ooofff fffiiinnndddiiinnnggg mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaa ooorrr mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa (((iiinnn general, "extttrrreeemmmaaa"""))) ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn,,, bbbuuuttt iiittt iiisss ooofffttteeennn dddiiiffffffiiicccuuulllttt tttooo fffiiinnnddd aaa ccclllooossseeeddd fffooorrrmmm fffooorrr ttthhheee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn bbbeeeiiinnnggg eeexxxtttrrreeemmmiiizzzeeeddd... SSSuuuccchhh dddiiiffffffiiicccuuullltttiiieeesss ooofffttteeennn aaarrriiissseee wwwhhheeennn ooonnneee wwwiiissshhheeesss tttooo mmmaaaxxxiiimmmiiizzzeee ooorrr mmmiiinnniiimmmiiizzzeee aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn sssuuubbbjjjeeecccttt tttooo fffiiixxxeeeddd ooouuutttsssiiidddeee cccooonnndddiiitttiiiooonnnsss ooorrr cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss... TTThhheee mmmeeettthhhoooddd ooofff LLLaaagggrange mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeerrrsss iiisss aaa pppooowwweeerrrfffuuulll tttoooooolll fffooorrr sssooolllvvviiinnnggg ttthhhiiisss ccclllaaassssss ooofff ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss wwwiiittthhhooouuuttt ttthhheee nnneeeeeeddd tttooo eeexxxpppllliiiccciiitttlllyyy ssoollvvee tthhee ccoonnddiittiioonnss aanndd uussee tthheemm ttoo eelliimmiinnaattee eexxttrraa vvaarriiaabblleess..
Consider the two-ddiimmeennssiioonnaall pprroobblleemm iinnttrroodduucceedd aabboovvee:: maximize subject to We can visualize contours of ff given by for various values of d,, aanndd tthhee ccoonnttoouurr ooff g given by g(x,y) = c. SSuuppppoossee wwee wwaallkk aalloonngg tthhee ccoonnttoouurr lliinnee wwiitthh g = c.. IInn ggeenneerraall tthhee ccoonnttoouurr lliinneess ooff f and g mmaayy bbee ddiissttiinncctt,, ssoo ffoolllloowwiinngg tthhee ccoonnttoouurr lliinnee ffoorr g = c oonnee ccoouulldd iinntteerrsseecctt wwiitthh oorr ccrroossss tthhee contour lines of f... TTThhhiiisss iiisss eeeqqquuuiiivvvaaallleeennnttt tttooo sssaaayyyiiinnnggg ttthhhaaattt wwwhhhiiillleee mmmooovvviiinnnggg aaalllooonnnggg ttthhheee cccooonnntttooouuurrr llliiinnneee fffooorrr g = c the value of f ccaann vvaarryy.. OOnnllyy wwhheenn tthhee ccoonnttoouurr lliinnee ffor g = c mmeeeettss ccoonnttoouurr lliinneess ooff f tangentially,, ddoo wwee nnoott iinnccrreeaassee oorr ddeeccrreeaassee tthhee vvaalluuee ooff f — tthhaatt iiss,, wwhheenn tthhee ccoonnttoouurr lliinneess touch but do not cross The contour lines of f and g ttoouucchh wwhheenn tthhee tangent vectors ooff tthhee ccoonnttoouurr lliinneess aarree ppaarraalllleell..
Since the gradient ooofff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiisss pppeeerrrpppeeennndddiiicccuuulllaaarrr tttooo ttthhheee cccooonnntttooouuurrr llliiinnneeesss,,, ttthhhiiisss iiisss ttthhheee sssaaammmeee aaasss saying that the gradients of ff and g are parallel.
Thus we want points (x,yy) where g(x,y) = c and , 208 where and aarree tthhee rreessppeeccttiivvee ggrraaddiieennttss.. TThhee ccoonnssttaanntt λ iiss rreeqquuiirreedd bbeeccaauussee aalltthhoouugghh tthhee ttwwoo ggrraaddiieenntt vvveeeccctttooorrrsss aaarrreee pppaaarrraaalllllleeelll,,, ttthhheee mmmaaagggnnniiitttuuudddeeesss ooofff ttthhheee gggrrraaadddiiieeennnttt vvveeeccctttooorrrsss aaarrreee gggeeennneeerrraaallllllyyy nnnooottt eeeqqquuuaaalll... TToo iinnccoorrppoorraattee tthheessee ccoonnddiittiioonnss iinnttoo oonnee eeqquuaattiioonn,, wwee iinnttrroodduuccee aann aauuxxiilliiaarryy ffuunnccttiioonn and solve TThhiiss iiss tthhee mmeetthhoodd ooff LLaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerrss.. NNoottee tthhaatt implies g(x,y) = c. Not necessarily extrema The constrained extrema of ff are critical points of the Lagrangian Λ,, bbuutt tthheeyy aarree nnoott local extrema of Λ (see Example 2 below).
One may rreeffoorrmmuullaattee tthhee LLaaggrraannggiiaann as a Hamiltonian,, iinn wwhhiicchh ccaassee tthhee ssoolluuttiioonnss aarree llooccaall mmiinniimmaa ffoorr tthhee HHaammiillttoonniiaann.. TThhiiss iiss ddoonnee iinn optimal control tthheeoorryy,, iinn tthhee ffoorrmm ooff PPoonnttrryyaaggiinn''ss mmiinniimmuumm pprriinncciippllee.
TTThhheee fffaaacccttt ttthhhaaattt sssooollluuutttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ttthhheee LLLaaagggrrraaannngggiiiaaannn aaarrreee nnnooottt nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrriiilllyyy eeexxxtttrrreeemmmaaa aaalllsssooo pppooossseeesss dddiiiffffffiiicccuuullltttiiieeesss for numerical optimizzzaaatttiiiooonnn... TTThhhiiisss cccaaannn bbbeee aaaddddddrrreeesssssseeeddd bbbyyy cccooommmpppuuutttiiinnnggg ttthhheee magnitude of the gggrrraaadddiiieeennnttt,,, aaasss ttthhheee zzzeeerrrooosss ooofff ttthhheee mmmaaagggnnniiitttuuudddeee aaarrreee nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrriiilllyyy lllooocccaaalll mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa,,, aaasss iiilllllluuussstttrrraaattteeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee nnuummeerriiccaall ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn eexxaammppllee.
HHaannddlliinngg mmuullttiippllee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss 209  AAA pppaaarrraaabbbooollloooiiiddd,,, sssooommmeee ooofff iiitttsss llleeevvveeelll ssseeetttsss (((aaakkkaaa cccooonnntttooouuurrr llliiinnneeesss))) aaannnddd 222 llliiinnneee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss... ZZZoooooommmiiinnnggg iiinnn ooonnn ttthhheee llleeevvveeelllsss ssseeetttsss aaannnddd cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss,,, wwweee ssseeeeee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee tttwwwooo cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt llliiinnneeesss iiinnnttteeerrrssseeecccttt tttooo form a """jjjoooiiinnnttt""" cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt ttthhhaaattt iiisss aaa pppoooiiinnnttt... SSSiiinnnccceee ttthhheeerrreee iiisss ooonnnlllyyy ooonnneee pppoooiiinnnttt tttooo aaannnaaalllyyyzzzeee,,, ttthhheee cccooorrrrrreeessspppooonnndddiiinnnggg pppoooiiinnnttt ooonnn ttthhheee pppaaarrraaabbbooollloooiiiddd iiisss aaauuutttooommmaaatttiiicccaaallllllyyy aaa mmmiiinnniiimmmuuummm aaannnddd mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm... YYYeeettt ttthhheee sssiiimmmpppllliiifffiiieeeddd rrreeeaaasssooonnniiinnnggg ppprrreeessseeennnttteeeddd iiinnn ssseeeccctttiiiooonnnsss aaabbbooovvveee ssseeeeeemmmsss tttooo fffaaaiiilll bbbeeecccaaauuussseee ttthhheee llleeevvveeelll ssseeettt dddeeefffinitely aaappppppeeeaaarrrsss tttooo """cccrrrooossssss""" ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt aaannnddd aaattt ttthhheee sssaaammmeee tttiiimmmeee iiitttsss gggrrraaadddiiieeennnttt iiisss nnnooottt pppaaarrraaalllllleeelll tttooo ttthhheee gggrrraaadddiiieeennntttsss ooofff eeeiiittthhheeerrr cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt... TTThhhiiisss ssshhhooowwwsss wwweee mmmuuusssttt rrreeefffiiinnneee ooouuurrr eeexxxppplllaaannnaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee mmmeeettthhhoooddd tttooo hhhaaannndddllleee ttthhheee kkiinnddss ooff ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss tthhaatt aarree ffoorrmmeedd wwhheenn wwee hhaavvee mmoorree tthhaann oonnee ccoonnssttrraaiinntt aaccttiinngg aatt oonnccee..
The method of LLaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerrss ccaann aallssoo aaccccoommmmooddaattee mmuullttiippllee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss.. TToo sseeee hhooww ttthhhiiisss iiisss dddooonnneee,,, wwweee nnneeeeeeddd tttooo rrreeeeeexxxaaammmiiinnneee ttthhheee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm iiinnn aaa sssllliiiggghhhtttlllyyy dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt mmmaaannnnnneeerrr bbbeeecccaaauuussseee ttthhheee ccoonncceepptt ooff ““ccrroossssiinngg”” ddiissccuusssseedd aabboovvee bbeeccoommeess rraappiiddllyy uunncclleeaarr wwhheenn wwee ccoonnssiiddeerr tthhee ttyyppeess ooofff cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss ttthhhaaattt aaarrreee cccrrreeeaaattteeeddd wwwhhheeennn wwweee hhhaaavvveee mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt aaaccctttiiinnnggg tttooogggeeettthhheeerrr... As an example, consider a ppaarraabboollooiidd with a constraint thhaatt iiss aa ssiinnggllee ppooiinntt ((aass mmiigghhtt bbee ccrreeaatteedd iiff wwee hhaadd 22 lliinnee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss tthhaatt iinntteerrsseecctt)).. TThhee level set ((ii..ee..,, ccoonnttoouurr lliinnee)) cclleeaarrllyy aappppeeaarrss ttoo ““ccrroossss”” tthhaatt ppooiinntt aanndd iittss gradient iiss cclleeaarrllyy nnoott ppaarraalllleell ttoo tthhee ggrraaddiieennttss ooff eeiitthheerr ooff tthhee ttwwoo lliinnee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss.. YYeett,, iitt iiss oobbvviioouussllyy aa mmaaxxiimmuumm and aa mmiinniimmuumm bbeeccaauussee tthheerree iiss oonnllyy oonnee ppooiinntt oonn tthhee ppaarraabboollooiidd tthhaatt mmeeeettss tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinnt.
210 WWWhhhiiillleee ttthhhiiisss eeexxxaaammmpppllleee ssseeeeeemmmsss aaa bbbiiittt ooodddddd,,, iiittt iiisss eeeaaasssyyy tttooo uuunnndddeeerrrssstttaaannnddd aaannnddd iiisss rrreeeppprrreeessseeennntttaaatttiiivvveee ooofff ttthhheee sssooorrrttt ooofff “““eeeffffffeeeccctttiiivvveee””” cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt ttthhhaaattt aaappppppeeeaaarrrsss qqquuuiiittteee ooofffttteeennn wwwhhheeennn wwweee dddeeeaaalll wwwiiittthhh mmmuuullltttiiipppllleee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss iinntteerrsseeccttiinngg.. TThhuuss,, wwee ttaakkee aa sslliigghhttllyy ddiiffffeerreenntt aapppprrooaacchh bbeellooww ttoo eexxppllaaiinn aanndd ddeerriivvee tthhee LLaaggrraannggee MMuullttiipplliieerrss mmeetthhoodd wwiitthh aannyy nnuummbbeerr ooff ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss.. TThhrroouugghhoouutt tthhiiss sseeccttiioonn,, tthhee iinnddeeppeennddeenntt vvaarriiaabblleess wwiillll bbee ddeennootteedd bbyy and, aass aa ggrroouupp,, wwee wwiillll ddeennoottee tthheemm aass .. AAllssoo,, tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn bbeeiinngg aannaallyyzzeedd wwiillll bbee ddeennootteedd bbyy aanndd tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss wwiillll bbee rreepprreesseenntteedd bbyy tthhee eeqquuaattiioonnss .
TTThhheee bbbaaasssiiiccc iiidddeeeaaa rrreeemmmaaaiiinnnsss eeesssssseeennntttiiiaaallllllyyy ttthhheee sssaaammmeee::: iiifff wwweee cccooonnnsssiiidddeeerrr ooonnnlllyyy ttthhheee pppoooiiinnntttsss ttthhhaaattt sssaaatttiiisssfffyyy ttthhheee constraints (i.e.
are in tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss)),, tthheenn aa ppooiinntt iiss aa ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinntt ((ii..ee.. aa point in a “flat” region) of f iiifff aaannnddd ooonnnlllyyy iiifff ttthhheee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss aaattt ttthhhaaattt pppoooiiinnnttt dddooo nnnooottt aaallllllooowww mmmooovvveeemmmeeennnttt in a direction where f cchhaannggeess vvaalluuee.. OOOnnnccceee wwweee hhhaaavvveee lllooocccaaattteeeddd ttthhheee ssstttaaatttiiiooonnnaaarrryyy pppoooiiinnntttsss,,, wwweee nnneeeeeeddd tttooo dddooo fffuuurrrttthhheeerrr ttteeessstttsss tttooo ssseeeeee iiifff wwweee hhhaaavvveee ffoouunndd aa mmiinniimmuumm,, aa mmaaxxiimmuumm oorr jjuusstt aa ssttaattiioonnaarry point that is neither.
WWee ssttaarrtt bbyy ccoonnssiiddeerriinngg tthhee lleevveell sseett ooff f at .. TThhee sseett ooff vveeccttoorrss containing ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnsss iiinnn wwwhhhiiiccchhh wwweee cccaaannn mmmooovvveee aaannnddd ssstttiiillllll rrreeemmmaaaiiinnn iiinnn ttthhheee sssaaammmeee llleeevvveeelll ssseeettt aaarrreee ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnsss where the value of f ddooeess nnoott cchhaannggee ((ii..ee.. tthhee cchhaannggee eeqquuaallss zzeerroo)).. TThhuuss,, ffoorr eevveerryy vveeccttoorr v in ,, tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg rreellaattiioonn mmuusstt hhoolldd:: where the notation aabboovvee mmeeaannss tthhee x -component of the vector v.. TThhee eeqquuaattiioonn aabboovvee K cccaaannn bbbeee rrreeewwwrrriiitttttteeennn iiinnn aaa mmmooorrreee cccooommmpppaaacccttt gggeeeooommmeeetttrrriiiccc fffooorrrmmm ttthhhaaattt hhheeelllpppsss ooouuurrr iiinnntttuuuiiitttiiiooonnn::: This makes it clleeaarr tthhaatt iiff wwee aarree aatt p, then all ddiirreeccttiioonnss ffrroomm tthhiiss ppooiinntt tthhaatt ddoo not change the value of f mmuusstt bbee ppeerrppeennddiiccuullaarr to (the gradient of f at p).
NNNooowww llleeettt uuusss cccooonnnsssiiidddeeerrr ttthhheee eeeffffffeeecccttt ooofff ttthhheee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss... EEEaaaccchhh cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt llliiimmmiiitttsss ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnsss ttthhhaaattt wwweee cccaaannn mmmooovvveee fffrrrooommm aaa pppaaarrrtttiiicccuuulllaaarrr pppoooiiinnnttt aaannnddd ssstttiiillllll sssaaatttiiisssfffyyy ttthhheee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt... WWWeee cccaaannn uuussseee ttthhheee sssaaammmeee pprroocceedduurree,, ttoo llooookk ffoorr tthhee sseett ooff vveeccttoorrss ccoonnttaaiinniinngg tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonnss iinn which we can 211 mmoovvee aanndd ssttiillll ssaattiissffyy tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinntt.. AAss aabboovvee,, ffoorr eevveerryy vveeccttoorr v in , the following relation must hold: FFrroomm tthhiiss,, wwee sseeee tthhaatt aatt ppooiinntt p,, aallll ddiirreeccttiioonnss ffrroomm tthhiiss ppooiinntt tthhaatt wwiillll ssttiillll ssaattiissffyy tthhiiss ccoonnssttrraaiinntt mmuusstt bbee ppeerrppeennddiiccuullaarr ttoo .
NNNooowww wwweee aaarrreee rrreeeaaadddyyy tttooo rrreeefffiiinnneee ooouuurrr iiidddeeeaaa fffuuurrrttthhheeerrr aaannnddd cccooommmpppllleeettteee ttthhheee mmmeeettthhhoooddd::: a point on f is a ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinntt iiff aanndd oonnllyy iiff tthhee ddiirreeccttiioonn tthhaatt cchhaannggeess f vviioollaatteess aatt lleeaasstt oonnee ooff the constraints.. ((WWee ccaann sseeee tthhaatt tthhiiss iiss ttrruuee bbeeccaauussee iiff aa ddiirreeccttiioonn tthhaatt cchhaannggeess f did not vvviiiooolllaaattteee aaannnyyy cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss,,, ttthhheeennn ttthhheeerrreee wwwooouuulllddd aaa “““llleeegggaaalll””” pppoooiiinnnttt nnneeeaaarrrbbbyyy wwwiiittthhh aaa hhhiiiggghhheeerrr ooorrr lllooowwweeerrr vvvaaallluuueee for f aanndd tthhee ccuurrrreenntt ppooiinntt wwoouulldd tthheenn nnoott bbee aa ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinntt..)) Single constraint revisited FFoorr aa ssiinnggllee ccoonnssttrraaiinntt,, wwee uussee tthhee ssttaatteemmeenntt aabboovvee ttoo ssaayy tthhaatt aatt ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinnttss tthhee direction that changes f iiisss iiinnn ttthhheee sssaaammmeee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn ttthhhaaattt vvviiiooolllaaattteeesss ttthhheee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt... TTTooo dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnneee iiifff tttwwwooo vvveeeccctttooorrrsss aaarrreee iiinnn ttthhheee sssaaammmeee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn,,, wwweee nnnooottteee ttthhhaaattt iiifff tttwwwooo vvveeeccctttooorrrsss ssstttaaarrrttt fffrrrooommm ttthhheee sssaaammmeee pppoooiiinnnttt and are “in the same dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn”””,,, ttthhheeennn ooonnneee vvveeeccctttooorrr cccaaannn aaalllwwwaaayyysss “““rrreeeaaaccchhh””” ttthhheee ooottthhheeerrr bbbyyy ccchhhaaannngggiiinnnggg iiitttsss llleeennngggttthhh aaannnddd///ooorrr fffllliiippppppiiinnnggg tttooo pppoooiiinnnttt ttthhheee oooppppppooosssiiittteee wwwaaayyy aaalllooonnnggg ttthhheee sssaaammmeee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn llliiinnneee... IIInnn ttthhhiiisss wwwaaayyy,,, wwweee cccaaannn sssuuucccccciiinnnccctttlllyyy ssstttaaattteee ttthhhaaattt tttwwwooo vvveeeccctttooorrrsss pppoooiiinnnttt iiinnn ttthhheee sssaaammmeee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn iiifff aaannnddd ooonnnlllyyy iiifff ooonnneee ooofff them can bbbeee mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeeddd bbbyyy sssooommmeee rrreeeaaalll nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr sssuuuccchhh ttthhhaaattt ttthhheeeyyy bbbeeecccooommmeee eeeqqquuuaaalll tttooo ttthhheee ooottthhheeerrr... SSSooo,,, fffooorrr ooouuurrr purposes, we require that: IIIfff wwweee nnnooowww aaadddddd aaannnooottthhheeerrr sssiiimmmuuullltttaaannneeeooouuusss eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnn tttooo ggguuuaaarrraaannnttteeeeee ttthhhaaattt wwweee ooonnnlllyyy pppeeerrrfffooorrrmmm ttthhhiiisss ttteeesssttt wwhheenn wwee aarree aatt aa ppooiinntt tthhaatt ssaattiissffiieess tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinntt,, wwee eenndd uupp wwiitthh 22 ssiimmuullttaanneeoouuss eeqquuaattiioonnss tthhaatt wwhheenn ssoollvveedd,, iiddeennttiiffyy aallll ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinnttss:: NNNooottteee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee aaabbbooovvveee iiisss aaa sssuuucccccciiinnncccttt wwwaaayyy ooofff wwwrrriiitttiiinnnggg ttthhheee eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnnsss... FFFuuullllllyyy eeexxxpppaaannndddeeeddd,,, ttthhheeerrreee aaarrreee N + 1 ssiimmuullttaanneeoouuss eeqquuaattiioonnss tthhaatt nneeeedd ttoo bbee ssoollvved for the N + 1 vvaarriiaabblleess wwhhiicchh aarree λ and : 212  Multiple constraints FFFooorrr mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt,,, ttthhheee sssaaammmeee rrreeeaaasssooonnniiinnnggg aaappppppllliiieeesss... IIIfff ttthhheeerrreee iiisss mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ooonnneee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt aaaccctttiiivvveee tttooogggeeettthhheeerrr,,, eeeaaaccchhh cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt cccooonnntttrrriiibbbuuuttteeesss aaa dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn ttthhhaaattt wwwiiillllll vvviiiooolllaaattteee iiittt... TTTooogggeeettthhheeerrr,,, ttthhheeessseee ““vviioollaattiioonn ddiirreeccttiioonnss”” ffoorrmm aa ““vviioollaattiioonn ssppaaccee””,, wwhheerree iinnffiinniitteessiimmaall mmoovveemmeenntt iinn aannyy dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn wwwiiittthhhiiinnn ttthhheee ssspppaaaccceee wwwiiillllll vvviiiooolllaaattteee ooonnneee ooorrr mmmooorrreee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss... TTThhhuuusss,,, tttooo sssaaatttiiisssfffyyy mmmuuullltttiiipppllleee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss wwweee cccaaannn ssstttaaattteee (((uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhhiiisss nnneeewww ttteeerrrmmmiiinnnooolllooogggyyy))) ttthhhaaattt aaattt ttthhheee ssstttaaatttiiiooonnnaaarrryyy pppoooiiinnntttsss,,, ttthhheee direction that changes f iiss iinn tthhee ““vviioollaattiioonn ssppaaccee”” ccrreeaatteedd bbyy tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss aaccttiinngg jjooiinnttllyy..
The violation space cccrrreeeaaattteeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss cccooonnnsssiiissstttsss ooofff aaallllll pppoooiiinnntttsss ttthhhaaattt cccaaannn bbbeee rrreeeaaaccchhheeeddd bbbyyy aaaddddddiiinnnggg aaannnyyy cccooommmbbbiiinnnaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff ssscccaaallleeeddd aaannnddd///ooorrr fffllliiippppppeeeddd vvveeerrrsssiiiooonnnsss ooofff ttthhheee iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll vvviiiooolllaaatttiiiooonnn dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn vveeccttoorrss.. IInn ootthheerr wwoorrddss,, aallll tthhee ppooiinnttss tthhaatt aarree ““rreeaacchhaabbllee”” wwhheenn wwee uussee tthhee iinnddiivviidduuaall vvviiiooolllaaatttiiiooonnn dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnnsss aaasss ttthhheee bbbaaasssiiisss ooofff ttthhheee ssspppaaaccceee... TTThhhuuusss,,, wwweee cccaaannn sssuuucccccciiinnnccctttlllyyy ssstttaaattteee ttthhhaaattt v is in the space defined by iiff aanndd oonnllyy iiff tthheerree eexxiissttss aa sseett ooff ““mmuullttiipplliieerrss”” such that: which for our purpossseeesss,,, tttrrraaannnssslllaaattteeesss tttooo ssstttaaatttiiinnnggg ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttiiiooonnn ttthhhaaattt ccchhhaaannngggeeesss f at p is in the ““vviioollaattiioonn ssppaaccee”” ddeeffiinneedd bbyy tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss iiff aanndd oonnllyy iiff:: AAAsss bbbeeefffooorrreee,,, wwweee nnnooowww aaadddddd sssiiimmmuuullltttaaannneeeooouuusss eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnn tttooo ggguuuaaarrraaannnttteeeeee ttthhhaaattt wwweee ooonnnlllyyy pppeeerrrfffooorrrmmm ttthhhiiisss ttteeesssttt when we are at a point that sssaaatttiiisssfffiiieeesss eeevvveeerrryyy cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt,,, wwweee eeennnddd uuuppp wwwiiittthhh sssiiimmmuuullltttaaannneeeooouuusss eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnnsss tthhaatt wwhheenn ssoollvveedd,, iiddeennttiiffyy aallll ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinnttss:: The mmmeeettthhhoooddd iiisss cccooommmpppllleeettteee nnnooowww (((fffrrrooommm ttthhheee ssstttaaannndddpppoooiiinnnttt ooofff sssooolllvvviiinnnggg ttthhheee 213 pprroobblleemm ooff ffiinnddiinngg ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinnttss)) bbuutt aass mmaatthheemmaattiicciiaannss ddeelliigghhtt iinn ddooiinngg,, tthheessee eeqquuaattiioonnss cccaaannn bbbeee fffuuurrrttthhheeerrr cccooonnndddeeennnssseeeddd iiinnntttooo aaannn eeevvveeennn mmmooorrreee eeellleeegggaaannnttt aaannnddd sssuuucccccciiinnncccttt fffooorrrmmm... LLLaaagggrrraaannngggeee mmmuuusssttt hhhaaavvveee cccllleeevvveeerrrlllyyy nnnoootttiiiccceeeddd ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnnsss aaabbbooovvveee lllooooookkk llliiikkkeee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss ooofff sssooommmeee lllaaarrrgggeeerrr ssscccaaalllaaarrr function L that takes all the and all the as inputs.
Next, hhheee mmmiiiggghhhttt ttthhheeennn hhhaaavvveee nnnoootttiiiccceeeddd ttthhhaaattt ssseeettttttiiinnnggg eeevvveeerrryyy eeeqqquuuaaatttiiiooonnn eeeqqquuuaaalll tttooo zzzeeerrrooo iiisss eeexxxaaaccctttlllyyy wwwhhhaaattt ooonnneee wwoouulldd hhaavvee ttoo ddoo ttoo ssoollvvee ffoorr tthhee unconstrained ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinnttss ooff tthhaatt llaarrggeerr ffuunnccttiioonn.. FFiinnaallllyy,, hhee sshhoowweedd tthhaatt aa llaarrggeerr ffuunnccttiioonn L with partiall ddeerriivvaattiivveess tthhaatt aarree eexxaaccttllyy tthhee oonneess wwee rreeqquuiirree ccaann bbee ccoonnssttrruucctteedd vveerryy ssiimmppllyy aass bbeellooww:: SSoollvviinngg tthhee eeqquuaattiioonn aabboovvee ffoorr iittss unconstrained ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinnttss ggeenneerraatteess eexxaaccttllyy tthhee ssaammee ssttaattiioonnaarryy ppooiinnttss aass ssoollvviinngg ffoorr tthhee constrained stationary points of f uunnddeerr tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss .
IInn LLaaggrraannggee’’ss hhoonnoorr,, tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn aabboovvee iiss ccaalllleedd aa LLaaggrraannggiiaann, the scalars aarree ccaalllleedd Lagrange Multipliers aanndd tthhiiss ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn mmeetthhoodd iittsseellff iiss called TThhee MMeetthhoodd ooff LLaaggrraannggee MMuullttiipplliieerrss.
TThhee mmeetthhoodd ooff LLaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerrss iiss ggeenneerraalliizzeedd bbyy tthhee Karush–Kuhn––Tucker conditions, wwhhiicchh ccaann aallssoo ttaakkee iinnttoo aaccccoouunntt iinneeqquuaalliittyy constraints of the form h(x) ≤ cc.
IInntteerrpprreettaattiioonn ooff tthhee LLaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerrss OOOfffttteeennn ttthhheee LLLaaagggrrraaannngggeee mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeerrrsss hhhaaavvveee aaannn iiinnnttteeerrrppprrreeetttaaatttiiiooonnn aaasss sssooommmeee qqquuuaaannntttiiitttyyy ooofff iiinnnttteeerrreeesssttt... TTTooo ssseeeeee wwhhyy tthhiiss mmiigghhtt bbee tthhee ccaassee,, oobbsseerrvvee tthhaatt:: So, λ iiss tthhee rraattee ooff cchhaannggee ooff tthhee qquuaannttiittyy bbeeiinngg ooppttiimmiizzeedd aass aa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinntt k variable.
As examples, in LLaaggrraannggiiaann mmeecchhaanniiccss tthhee eeqquuaattiioonnss ooff mmoottiioonn aarree ddeerriivveedd bbyy finding stationary points of thhee action,, tthhee ttiimmee iinntteeggrraall ooff tthhee ddiiffffeerreennccee bbeettwweeeenn kkiinneettiicc aanndd ppootteennttiiaall eenneerrggyy.. TThhuuss,, tthhee ffoorrccee oonn aa ppaarrttiiccllee dduuee ttoo aa ssccaallaarr ppootteennttiiaall,, , can be interpreted as a Lagrannngggeee mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeerrr dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnniiinnnggg ttthhheee ccchhhaaannngggeee iiinnn aaaccctttiiiooonnn (((tttrrraaannnsssfffeeerrr ooofff pppooottteeennntttiiiaaalll tttooo kkkiiinnneeetttiiiccc eeennneeerrrgggyyy))) fffooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg aaa vvvaaarrriiiaaatttiiiooonnn iiinnn ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiicccllleee'''sss cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnneeeddd tttrrraaajjjeeeccctttooorrryyy... IIInnn eeecccooonnnooommmiiicccsss,,, ttthhheee oooppptttiiimmmaaalll ppprrrooofffiiittt tttooo aaa ppplllaaayyyeeerrr iiisss cccaaalllcccuuulllaaattteeeddd sssuuubbbjjjeeecccttt tttooo aaa cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnneeeddd ssspppaaaccceee ooofff aaaccctttiiiooonnnsss,,, where a LLLaaagggrrraaannngggeee mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeerrr iiisss ttthhheee iiinnncccrrreeeaaassseee iiinnn ttthhheee vvvaaallluuueee ooofff ttthhheee ooobbbjjjeeeccctttiiivvveee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn ddduuueee tttooo ttthhheee rrreeelllaaaxxxaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff aaa gggiiivvveeennn cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnnttt (((eee...ggg... ttthhhrrrooouuuggghhh aaannn iiinnncccrrreeeaaassseee iiinnn iiinnncccooommmeee ooorrr bbbrrriiibbbeeerrryyy ooorrr ooottthhheeerrr mmmeeeaaannnsss))) – the marginal cost ooff aa ccoonnssttrraaiinntt,, ccaalllleedd tthhee shadow price.
IInn ccoonnttrrooll tthheeoorryy tthhiiss iiss ffoorrmmuullaatteedd iinnsstteeaadd aass costate equations.
214  Examples Example 1 Fig.
3.
IIlllluussttrraattiioonn ooff tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd optimization problem SSuuppppoossee oonnee wwiisshheess ttoo mmaaxxiimmiizzee f(x,y) = x + y ssuubbjjeecctt ttoo tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinntt x2 + y2 = 1.
The ffeeaassiibbllee sseett iiss tthhee uunniitt cciirrccllee,, aanndd tthhee level sets of f aarree ddiiaaggoonnaall lliinneess ((wwiitthh ssllooppee -1), so one ccaann sseeee ggrraapphhiiccaallllyy tthhaatt tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm ooccccuurrss aatt ,, aanndd tthhee mmiinniimmuumm ooccccuurrss at .
Formally, set g(x,y) − c = x2 ++ y2 − 1, and Λ(x,y,λ) = f(x,y) + λ(g((x,y) − c) = x + y + λ(x2 + y2 − 1) Set the derivative dΛ = 0, wwhhiicchh yyiieellddss tthhee ssyysstteemm ooff eeqquuaattiioonnss:: As always, the eeqquuaattiioonn ((((iiiiii)) hheerree)) iiss tthhee oorriiggiinnaall ccoonnssttrraaiinntt.. CCoommbbiinniinngg tthhee ffiirrsstt ttwwoo eeqquuaattiioonnss yyiieellddss x = y (explicitly, ,, ootthheerrwwiissee ((ii)) yyiieellddss 11 == 00,, so one has x = − 1 / (2λ) = y).
215 Substituting into (iii) yields 22x2 = 1, so and , showing the stationary points are and .
Evaluating the oobbjjeeccttiivvee ffuunnccttiioonn f oonn tthheessee yyiieellddss thus the maximum is ,, wwhhiicchh iiss aattttaaiinneedd aatt ,, aanndd tthhee mmiinniimmuumm iiss , which is attained at .
Example 2 FFiigg.. 44.. IIlllluussttrraattiioonn ooff the ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn problem SSuuppppoossee oonnee wwaannttss ttoo ffiinndd tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm vvaalluueess ooff with the condition that the x aanndd y ccoooorrddiinnaatteess lliiee oonn tthhee cciirrccllee aarroouunndd tthhee oorriiggiinn wwiitthh rraaddiiuuss √33,, tthhaatt iiss,, ssuubbjjeecctt ttoo tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinntt As there is just a single constrraaiinntt,, wwee wwiillll uussee oonnllyy oonnee mmuullttiipplliieerr,, ssaayy λ.
The constraint g(x, y)-33 iiss iiddeennttiiccaallllyy zzeerroo oonn tthhee cciirrccllee ooff rraaddiiuuss √√33.. SSoo aannyy mmuullttiippllee ooff g(x, y)-3 may be added to f(x, y) leaving f(x, y)) uunncchhaannggeedd iinn tthhee rreeggiioonn ooff iinntteerreesstt ((aabboovvee tthhee circle where our oorriiggiinnaall ccoonnssttrraaiinntt iiss ssaattiissffiieedd)).. LLeett The critical values of Λ oooccccccuuurrr wwwhhheeerrreee iiitttsss gggrrraaadddiiieeennnttt iiisss zzzeeerrrooo... TTThhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss aaarrreee 216  EEqquuaattiioonn ((iiiiii)) iiss jjuusstt tthhee oorriiggiinnaall ccoonnssttrraaiinntt.. EEqquuaattiioonn ((ii)) iimmpplliieess x = 0 or λ = −y.
In the first case, if x = 0 then we must hhaavvee by (iii) and then by (ii) λ = 0.
In the second case, if λ = −y aanndd ssuubbssttiittuuttiinngg iinnttoo eeqquuaattiioonn ((iiii)) wwee hhaavvee tthhaatt,, Then x2 = 2y2.. SSuubbssttiittuuttiinngg iinnttoo eeqquuaattiioonn ((iiiiii)) aanndd ssoollvviinngg ffoorr y ggiivveess tthhiiss vvaalluuee ooff y: TThhuuss tthheerree aarree ssiixx ccrriittiiccaall ppooiinnttss:: Evaluaattiinngg tthhee oobbjjeeccttiivvee aatt tthheessee ppooiinnttss,, wwee ffiinndd TThheerreeffoorree,, tthhee oobbjjeeccttiivvee ffuunnccttiioonn aattttaaiinnss tthhee global maximum ((ssuubbjjeecctt ttoo tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss)) aatt and the gglloobbaall mmiinniimmuumm at The point iiss aa local minimum and is a llooccaall mmaaxxiimmuumm,, aass mmaayy bbee ddeetteerrmmiinneedd bbyy ccoonnssiiddeerraattiioonn ooff tthhee Hessian matrix of Λ.
Note that while is a critical point of Λ,, iitt iiss nnoott aa llooccaall eexxttrreemmuumm.. WWee hhaavvee .. GGiivveenn aannyy nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd ooff ,, wwee ccaann cchhoooossee aa ssmmaallll ppoossiittiivvee and a small δ ooff eeiitthheerr ssiiggnn ttoo ggeett Λ values both greater and less than 2.
Example: entropy SSuuppppoossee wwee wwiisshh ttoo ffiinndd tthhee ddiissccrreettee pprroobbaabbiilliittyy ddiissttrriibbuuttiioonn on the points wwiitthh mmaaxxiimmaall information entropy.. TThhiiss iiss tthhee ssaammee aass ssaayyiinngg tthhaatt wwee wish to find the least biased probability distribution on the points .
In ootthheerr wwoorrddss,, wwee wwiisshh ttoo mmaaxxiimmiizzee tthhee Shannon entropy equation: 217  FFoorr tthhiiss ttoo bbee aa pprroobbaabbiilliittyy ddiissttrriibbuuttiioonn tthhee ssuumm ooff tthhee pprroobabilities p aatt eeaacchh ppooiinntt x must i i equal 1, so our constraint is = 1: WWee uussee LLaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerrss ttoo ffiinndd tthhee ppooiinntt ooff mmaaxxiimmuumm eennttrrooppyy,, ,, aaccrroossss aallll ddiissccrreettee pprroobbaabbiilliittyy ddiissttrriibbuuttiioonnss on .. WWee rreeqquuiirree tthhaatt:: which gives a system of n eeqquuaattiioonnss,, , such that: CCaarrrryyiinngg oouutt tthhee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaattiioonn ooff tthheessee n equations, we get This shows that all aarree eeqquuaall ((bbeeccaauussee tthheeyy ddeeppeenndd oonn λ oonnllyy)).. BByy uussiinngg tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinntt ∑ j p = 1, we find j HHHeeennnccceee,,, ttthhheee uuunnniiifffooorrrmmm dddiiissstttrrriiibbbuuutttiiiooonnn iiisss ttthhheee dddiiissstttrrriiibbbuuutttiiiooonnn wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee gggrrreeeaaattteeesssttt eeennntttrrrooopppyyy,,, aaammmooonnnggg distributions on n points.
EExxaammppllee:: nnuummeerriiccaall ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn LLaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerrss ccaauussee tthhee ccrriittiiccaall ppooiinnttss ttoo ooccccuurr aatt ssaaddddllee ppooiinnttss.. 218  TThhee mmaaggnniittuuddee ooff tthhee ggrraaddiieenntt ccaann bbee uusseedd ttoo ffoorrccee tthhee ccrriittiiccaall ppooiinnttss ttoo ooccccuurr aatt llooccaall minima.
WWiitthh LLaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerrss,, tthhee ccrriittiiccaall ppooiinnttss ooccccuurr aatt saddle points,, rraatthheerr tthhaann aatt llooccaall mmaaxxiimmaa ((oorr mmiinniimmaa)).. UUnnffoorrttuunnaatteellyy,, mmaannyy nnuummeerriiccaall ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn tteecchhnniiqquueess,, ssuucchh aass hill climbing, gradient descent,, ssoommee ooff tthe quasi-Newton methods,, aammoonngg ootthheerrss,, aarree ddeessiiggnneedd tttooo fffiiinnnddd lllooocccaaalll mmmaaaxxxiiimmmaaa (((ooorrr mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa))) aaannnddd nnnooottt sssaaaddddddllleee pppoooiiinnntttsss... FFFooorrr ttthhhiiisss rrreeeaaasssooonnn,,, ooonnneee mmmuuusssttt eeeiiittthhheeerrr mmmooodddiiifffyyy ttthhheee fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaatttiiiooonnn tttooo eeennnsssuuurrreee ttthhhaaattt iiittt'''sss aaa mmmiiinnniiimmmiiizzzaaatttiiiooonnn ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm (((fffooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, bbbyyy eexxttrreemmiizziinngg tthhee ssqquuaarree ooff tthhee gradient ooff tthhee LLaaggrraannggiiaann aass bbeellooww)),, oorr eellssee uussee aann ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn tteecchhnniiqquuee tthhaatt ffiinnddss stationary points (such as NNeewwttoonn''ss mmeetthhoodd without an extremum seeking line search)) aanndd nnoott nneecceessssaarriillyy eexxttrreemmaa.. AAss aa ssiimmppllee eexxaammppllee,, ccoonnssiiddeerr tthhee pprroobblleemm ooff ffiinnddiinngg tthhee vvaalluuee ooff x tthhaatt mmiinniimmiizzeess f(x) = x2, constrained such that x2 = 1... (((TTThhhiiisss ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm iiisss sssooommmeeewwwhhhaaattt pppaaattthhhooolllooogggiiicccaaalll bbbeeecccaaauuussseee ttthhheeerrreee aaarrreee ooonnnlllyyy ttwwoo vvaalluueess tthhaatt ssaattiissffyy tthhiiss ccoonnssttrraaiinntt,, bbuutt iitt iiss uusseeffuull ffoorr iilllluussttrraattiioonn ppuurrppoosseess bbeeccaauussee tthhee cccooorrrrrreeessspppooonnndddiiinnnggg uuunnncccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnneeeddd fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn cccaaannn bbbeee vvviiisssuuuaaallliiizzzeeeddd iiinnn ttthhhrrreeeeee dddiiimmmeeennnsssiiiooonnnsss...))) UUUsssiiinnnggg LLLaaagggrrraaannngggeee mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeerrrsss,,, ttthhhiiisss ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm cccaaannn bbbeee cccooonnnvvveeerrrttteeeddd iiinnntttooo aaannn uuunnncccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnneeeddd optimization problem: Λ(x,λ) = x2 + λ(x2 −− 11)) TThhee ttwwoo ccrriittiiccaall ppooiinnttss ooccccuurr aatt ssaaddddllee ppooiinnttss wwhheerree x = 1 and x = − 1.
IIInnn ooorrrdddeeerrr tttooo sssooolllvvveee ttthhhiiisss ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm wwwiiittthhh aaa nnnuuummmeeerrriiicccaaalll oooppptttiiimmmiiizzzaaatttiiiooonnn ttteeeccchhhnnniiiqqquuueee,,, wwweee mmmuuusssttt fffiiirrrsssttt tttrrraaannnsssfffooorrrmmm ttthhhiiisss ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm sssuuuccchhh ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee cccrrriiitttiiicccaaalll pppoooiiinnntttsss oooccccccuuurrr aaattt lllooocccaaalll mmmiiinnniiimmmaaa... TTThhhiiisss iiisss dddooonnneee bbbyyy computttiiinnnggg ttthhheee mmmaaagggnnniiitttuuudddeee ooofff ttthhheee gggrrraaadddiiieeennnttt ooofff ttthhheee uuunnncccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnneeeddd oooppptttiiimmmiiizzzaaatttiiiooonnn ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm... FFFiiirrrsssttt,,, wwweee cccooommmpppuuuttteee ttthhheee pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff ttthhheee uuunnncccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnneeeddd ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm wwwiiittthhh rrreeessspppeeecccttt tttooo eeeaaaccchhh variable: 219  IIff tthhee ttaarrggeett ffuunnccttiioonn iiss nnoott eeaassiillyy ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee,, tthhee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo eeaacchh vvaarriiaabbllee can be approximated as , , where is a small value.
NNNeeexxxttt,,, wwweee cccooommmpppuuuttteee ttthhheee mmmaaagggnnniiitttuuudddeee ooofff ttthhheee gggrrraaadddiiieeennnttt,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss ttthhheee sssqqquuuaaarrreee rrroooooottt ooofff ttthhheee sssuuummm ooofff ttthhheee ssqquuaarreess ooff tthhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess:: ((SSiinnccee mmaaggnniittuuddee iiss aallwwaayyss nnoonn-negative, optimizziinngg oovveerr tthhee ssqquuaarreedd-magnitude is eeeqqquuuiiivvvaaallleeennnttt tttooo oooppptttiiimmmiiizzziiinnnggg ooovvveeerrr ttthhheee mmmaaagggnnniiitttuuudddeee... TTThhhuuusss,,, ttthhheee ``````sssqqquuuaaarrreee rrroooooottt""" mmmaaayyy bbbeee ooommmiiitttttteeeddd fffrrrooommm tthheessee eeqquuaattiioonnss wwiitthh nnoo eexxppeecctteedd ddiiffffeerreennccee iinn tthhee rreessuullttss ooff ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn..)) The critical points of h ooccccuurr aatt x = 1 and x = − 1, just as in Λ.. UUnnlliikkee tthhee ccrriittiiccaall ppooiinnttss iinn Λ, hhoowweevveerr,, tthhee ccrriittiiccaall ppooiinnttss iinn h ooccccuurr aatt llooccaall mmiinniimmaa,, ssoo nnuummeerriiccaall ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn tteecchhnniiqquueess can be used to find them.
CONCLUSION IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd hhooww ttoo iiddeennttiiffyy pprroobblleemm wwhhiicchh ccoouulldd bbee ssoollvvee by langranges mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeerrr... YYYooouuu ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd sssiiinnngggllleee aaannnddd mmmuuullltttiiipppllleee cccooonnnssstttrrraaaiiinnntttsss... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd ttthhheee iiinnnttteeerrrppprrreeetttaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff lllaaagggrrraaannngggeeesss mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeerrr...YYYooouuu cccooouuulllsss sssooolllvvveee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmmsss wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee uuussseee ooofff lllaaannngggrrraaannngggeeesss mmmuuullltttiiipppllliiieeerrr... Summary In this unit, you have : i. iiddeennttiiffiieedd pprroobblleemm wwhhiicchh ccoouulldd bbee ssoollvveedd bbyy llaannggrraannggeess mmuullttiipplliieerr ii.
kknnoowwnn ssiinnggllee aanndd mmuullttiippllee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss iii.
kknnoowwnn tthhee iinntteerrpprreettaattiioonn ooff llaaggrraannggee mmuullttiipplliieerr iv.
ssoollvveedd pprroobblleemmss wwiitthh tthhee uussee ooff llaannggrraannggeess mmuullttiipplliieerr Problems 220 Problem 1.
Let bbee oouurr oobbjjeeccttiivvee ffuunnccttiioonn.. ((NNoottee tthhaatt tthhee cccoooeeeffffffiiiccciiieeennntttsss aaarrreee dddeeeccciiimmmaaalllsss 000 ...333 aaannnddd 000 ...444 aaannnddd nnnooottt 333 aaannnddd 444...))) LLLeeettt aaannnddd ttthhheee eeelllllliiipppssseee be oouurr ccoonnssttrraaiinntt.. FFiinndd tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm aanndd tthhee mmiinniimmuumm vvaalluueess ooff subject to ffoolllloowwiinngg tthhee sstteeppss bbeellooww.. ((aa)) PPlloott tthhee 33dd ggrraapphh ooff tthhee ffuunnction , the ellipse iinn tthhee xxyy-plane, and the curve on the graph corresponding to the values of along the ellipse iiinnn ooonnneee cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteee sssyyysssttteeemmm... UUUssseee aaa pppaaarrraaammmeeetttrrriiiccc rrreeeppprrreeessseeennntttaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee eeelllllliiipppssseee ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu ssshhhooouuulllddd kkknnnooowww ffrroomm llaasstt sseemmeesstteerr.. HHooww mmaannyy ssoolluuttiioonnss yyoouu wwiillll eexxppeecctt tthhee LLaaggrraannggiiaann ssyysstteemm ooff eeqquuaattiioonnss ttoo hhaavvee.. EExxppllaaiinn yyoouurr rreeaassoonniinngg.. (((bbb))) DDDeeefffiiinnneee ttthhheee LLLaaagggrrraaannngggiiiaaannn fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn fffooorrr ttthhheee oooppptttiiimmmiiizzzaaatttiiiooonnn ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm aaannnddd ssseeettt uuuppp ttthhheee cccooorrrrrreeessspppooonnndddiiinnnggg system of equations.
(((ccc))) FFFiiinnnddd sssooollluuutttiiiooonnnsss tttooo ttthhheee sssyyysssttteeemmm uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee sssooolllvvveee cccooommmmmmaaannnddd... CCChhheeeccckkk ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu dddiiidddnnn'''ttt ooobbbtttaaaiiinnn aaannnyyy eexxttrraanneeoouuss ssoolluuttiioonnss.. IIss tthhee nnuummbbeerr ooff ssoolluuttiioonnss wwhhaatt yyoouu eexxppeecctteedd??
((dd)) UUssiinngg rreessuullttss ooff ((cc)),, ffiinndd tthhee mmiinniimmuumm aanndd tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm vvaalluueess ooff subject to the constraint .
TUTOR-MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 3.
FFiinndd tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm aanndd mmiinniimmuumm ooff subject to the constraint 4.
FFiinndd tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm aanndd mmiinniimmuumm vvaalluueess ooff subject to the constraint Assume that 5.
FFiinndd tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm aanndd mmiinniimmuumm vvaalluueess ooff on the disk 6.
FFiinndd tthhee mmaaxxiimmuumm aanndd mmiinniimmuumm of ssuubbjjeecctt ttoo tthhee ccoonnssttrraaiinnttss and .
221 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bertsekas, Dimitri P. (1999).
Nonlinear Programming (Second ed.).
Cambridge, MA.
: Athena Scientific.
ISBN 1-886529-00-0.
Vapnyarskii, I.B.
(2001), "Lagrange multipliers", in Hazewinkel, Michiel, Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Springer, ISBN 978-1556080104, http://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php?title=Lagrange_multipliers.
Lasdon, Leon S. (1970).
Optimization theory for large systems.
Macmillan series in operations research.
New York: The Macmillan Company.
pp.
xi+523.
MR337317.
Lasdon, Leon S. (2002).
Optimization theory for large systems (reprint of the 1970 Macmillan ed.).
Mineola, New York: Dover Publications, Inc.. pp.
xiii+523.
MR1888251.
Hiriart-Urruty, Jean-Baptiste; Lemaréchal, Claude (1993).
"XII Abstract duality for practitioners".
Convex analysis and minimization algorithms, Volume II: Advanced theory and bundle methods.
Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences].
306.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
pp.
136–193 (and Bibliographical comments on pp.
334–335).
ISBN 3-540-56852-2.
Lemaréchal, Claude (2001).
"Lagrangian relaxation".
In Michael Jünger and Denis Naddef.
Computational combinatorial optimization: Papers from the Spring School held in Schloß Dagstuhl, May 15–19, 2000.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
2241.
Berlin: Springer- Verlag.
pp.
112–156.
doi:10.1007/3-540-45586-8_4.
ISBN 3-540-42877-1.
MRdoi:[http://dx.doi.org/10.1007%2F3-540-45586-8_4 10.1007/3-540-45586-8_4 1900016.
[[Digital object identifier|doi]]:[http://dx.doi.org/10.1007%2F3-540-45586-8_4 10.1007/3-540-45586-8_4]].
UNIT 3.0 APPLICATIONS OF LANGRANGES MULTIPLIER CONTENTS 8.0 INTRODUCTION 9.0 OBJECTIVES 10.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1: DEFINITION 11.0 CONCLUSION 12.0 SUMMARY 13.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 14.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 Introduction Optimization problems, which seek to minimize or maximize a real function, play an important role in the real world.
It can be classified into unconstrained op timization problems and constrained optimization problems.
Many practical uses in science, engineering, economics, or even in our everyday life can be formulated as constrained 222 optimization problems, such as the minimization of the energy of a particle in physics;[1] how to maximize the profit of the investments in economics.
[2]In unconstrained problems, the stationary points theory gives the necessary condition to find the extreme points of the objective function f (x1; ¢ ¢ ¢ ; xn).
The stationary points are the points where the gradient rf is zero, that is each of the partial derivatives is zero.
All the variables in f (x1; ¢ ¢ ¢ ; xn)are independent, so they can be arbitrarily set to seek the extreme of f. However when it comes to the constrained optimization problems, the arbitration of the variables does not exist.
The constrained optimization problems can be formulated into the standard form.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to : i.
Apply the lagranges multiplier on a pringle surface ii.
Apply lagranges multiplier on Economics iii.
Apply lagranges multiplier on control theory iv.
Solve problems with the application of lagrange multiplier 3.0 Main content There are many cool applications for the Lagrange multiplier method.
For example, we will show you how to find the extrema on the world famous Pringle surface.
The Pringle surface can be given by the equation Let us bound this surface by the unit circle, giving us a very happy pringle.
:) In this case, the boundary would be The first step is to find the extrema on an unbounded f. .
Economics Constrained optimization plays a central role in economics.
For example, the choice problem for a consumer is represented as one of maximizing a utility function subject to a budget constraint.
The Lagrange multiplier has an economic interpretation as the shadow price associated with the constraint, in this example the marginal utility of income.
Control theory In optimal control theory, the Lagrange multipliers are interpreted as costate variables, and Lagrange multipliers are reformulated as the minimization of the Hamiltonian, in Pontryagin's minimum principle.
223 Example 1 Find the dimensions of the box with largest volume if the total surface area is 64 cm2.
We first need to identify the function that we’re going to optimize as well as the constraint.
Let’s set the length of the box to be x, the width of the box to be y and the height of the box to be z. Let’s also note that because we’re dealing with the dimensions of a box it is safe to assume that x, y, and z are all positive quantities.
We want to find the largest volume and so the function that we want to optimize is given by, Next we know that the surface area of the box must be a constant 64.
So this is the constraint.
The surface area of a box is simply the sum of the areas of each of the sides so the constraint is given by, Note that we divided the constraint by 2 to simplify the equation a little.
Also, we get the function from this.
Here are the four equations that we need to solve.
(1) (2) (3) (4)There are many ways to solve this system.
We’ll solve it in the following way.
Let’s multiply equation (1) by x, equation (2) by y and equation (3) by z.
This gives, (5) (6) 224 (7)Now notice that we can set equations (5) and (6) equal.
Doing this gives, This gave two possibilities.
The first, is not possible since if this was the case equation (1) would reduce to Since we are talking about the dimensions of a box neither of these are possible so we can discount This leaves the second possibility.
Since we know that (again since we are talking about the dimensions of a box) we can cancel the z from both sides.
This gives, (8) Next, let’s set equations (6) and (7) equal.
Doing this gives, As already discussed we know that won’t work and so this leaves, We can also say that since we are dealing with the dimensions of a box so we must have, (9) Plugging equations (8) and (9) into equation (4) we get, 225  However, we know that y must be positive since we are talking about the dimensions of a box.
Therefore the only solution that makes physical sense here is So, it looks like we’ve got a cube here.
We should be a little careful here.
Since we’ve only got one solution we might be tempted to assume that these are the dimensions that will give the largest volume.
The method of Lagrange Multipliers will give a set of points that will either maximize or minimize a given function subject to the constraint, provided there actually are minimums or maximums.
The function itself, will clearly have neither minimums or maximums unless we put some restrictions on the variables.
The only real restriction that we’ve got is that all the variables must be positive.
This, of course, instantly means that the function does have a minimum, zero.
The function will not have a maximum if all the variables are allowed to increase without bound.
That however, can’t happen because of the constraint, Here we’ve got the sum of three positive numbers (because x, y, and z are positive) and the sum must equal 32.
So, if one of the variables gets very large, say x, then because each of the products must be less than 32 both y and z must be very small to make sure the first two terms are less than 32.
So, there is no way for all the variables to increase without bound and so it should make some sense that the function, , will have a maximum.
This isn’t a rigorous proof that the function will have a maximum, but it should help to visualize that in fact it should have a maximum and so we can say that we will get a maximum volume if the dimensions are : .
Notice that we never actually found values for in the above example.
This is fairly standard for these kinds of problems.
The value of isn’t really important to determining if the point is a maximum or a minimum so often we will not bother with finding a value for it.
On occasion we will need its value to help solv 226 Example 2 Find the maximum and minimum of subject to the constraint Solution This one is going to be a little easier than the previous one since it only has two variables.
Also, note that it’s clear from the constraint that region of possible solutions lies on a disk of radius which is a closed and bounded region and hence by the Extreme Value Theorem we know that a minimum and maximum value must exist.
Here is the system that we need to solve.
Notice that, as with the last example, we can’t have since that would not satisfy the first two equations.
So, since we know that we can solve the first two equations for x and y respectively.
This gives, Plugging these into the constraint gives, We can solve this for Now, that we know we can find the points that will be potential maximums and/or minimums.
If we get, 227 and if To determine if we have maximums or minimums we just need to plug these into the function.
Also recall from the discussion at the start of this solution that we know these will be the minimum and maximums because the Extreme Value Theorem tells us that minimums and maximums will exist for this problem.
Here are the minimum and maximum values of the function.
Example 3 • Set up equations for the volume and the cost of building the silo.
• Using the Lagrange multiplier method, find the cheapest way to buld the silo.
• Do these dimensions seem reasonable?
Why?
Next, we will look at the cost of building a silo of volume 1000 cubic meters.
The curved surface on top of the silo costs $3 per square meter to build, while the walls cost $1 per square meter.
Of course, if all situations were this simple, there would be no need for the Lagrange multiplier method, since there are other methods for solving 2 variable functions that are much nicer.
However, with a greater number of variables, the Lagrange multiplier method is much more fun.
For the next example, imagine you are working at the State Fair (since you're so desperate for money that you can't even buy a bagel anymore).
You find yourself at the snowcone booth, and your boss, upon hearing that you are good at math, offers you a bonus if you can design the most efficient snowcone.
You assume the snowcone will be modelled by a half-ellipsoid perched upon a cone.
Your boss only wants to use 84 square centimeters of paper per cone, and wants to have it hold the maximum amount of snow.
This can be represented in 3 variables: r (the radius of the cone), h (the height of the cone), and s (the height of the half-ellipsoid).
In order to keep the snow from tumbling off the cone, s cannot be greater than 1.5*r. We have provided hints for the equations if you need them.
CONCLUSION: 228 In this unit, you should be able to apply the lagranges multiplier on a pringle surface, apply lagranges multiplier on Economics, apply lagranges multiplier on control theory and solve problems with the application of lagrange multiplier SUMMARY The Lagrange multipliers method is a very sufficient tool for the nonlinear optimization problems,which is capable of dealing with both equality constrained and inequality constrained nonlinear optimization problems.Many computational programming methods, such as the barrier and interior point method, penalizing and augmented Lagrange method,The lagrange multipliers method and its extended methods are widely applied in science, engineering, economics and our everyday life.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Find the dimensions of the box with largest volume if the total surface area is 64 cm2.
( ) 2.Consider two curves on the xy-plane: y = ex and y = - x- 2 2.
Find two points (x,y), (X,Y) on each of the two curves, respectively, whose distance apart is as small as possible.
Use the method of Lagrange multipliers.
Make a graph that illustrates your solution 3.
Find the maximum and minimum values of subject to the constraint Assume that 4.Find the maximum and minimum values of on the disk 5.Find the maximum and minimum of subject to the constraints and REFERENCE [1] G. B. Arfken and H. J. Weber, Mathematical Methods for Physicists (Elsevier academic, 2005), 5th ed.
[2] N. Scho¯eld, Mathematical Methods in Economics and So- cial Choice (Springer, 2003), 1st ed.
[3] D. P. Bertsekas, Constrained Optimization and Lagrange Multiplier Methods (Academic Press, 1982), 1st ed.
[4] R. Courant, Di®erential and Integral Calculus (Inter- science Publishers, 1937), 1st ed.
[5] D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming (Athena Sci- ent¯c, 1999), 2nd ed.
[6] M. Crow, Computational Methods for Electric Power Sys- tems (CRC, 2003), 1st ed.
229  MODULE 8 THE JACOBIANS UNIT 1: JACOBIANS UNIT 2: JACOBIAN DETERMINANTS UNIT 3: APPLICATIONS OF JACOBIAN UNIT 1 JACOBIAN CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 4 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 230  33..11 RReeccooggnniissee tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann rruullee 33..22 HHooww ttoo uussee tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann 5 CONCLUSION 6 SUMMARY 7 TUTOR-MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 8 RREEFFEERREENNCCEESS//FFUURRTTHHEERR RREEAADDIINNGGSS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Jacobian The Jacobian of functions ƒ(xx ,x , …,x ),i= 1, 2, …,n, of real variables x is the determinant i 1 2 n i of the matrix whose itthh rrooww lliissttss aallll tthhee ffiirrsstt-oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn ƒƒ(x ,x , i 1 2 …,x )).. AAllssoo kknnoowwnn aass JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt.. n ((oorr ffuunnccttiioonnaall ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt)),, aa ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt with elements a = ∂y/∂x where y = f(x , .
.
ik i kk i i 1 ., x ), 1 ≤ i ≤ n,,, aaarrreee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnnsss ttthhhaaattt hhhaaavvveee cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuooouuusss pppaaarrrtttiiiaaalll dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveeesss iiinnn sssooommmeee rrreeegggiiiooonnn ∆.
It is n denoted by TTThhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn wwwaaasss iiinnntttrrroooddduuuccceeeddd bbbyyy KKK... JJJaaacccooobbbiii iiinnn 111888333333 aaannnddd 111888444111... IIIfff,,, fffooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, n = 2, then the system of functions (1) y = f (x , x ) y = f (x , x ) l 1 1 2 2 2 1 2 ddeeffiinneess aa mmaappppiinngg ooff aa rreeggiioonn ∆∆, which lies in the plane x x ,, oonnttoo aa rreeggiioonn ooff tthhee ppllaannee y y .
1 2 1 2 TTThhheee rrrooollleee ooofff ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn fffooorrr ttthhheee mmmaaappppppiiinnnggg iiisss lllaaarrrgggeeelllyyy aaannnaaalllooogggooouuusss tttooo ttthhhaaattt ooofff ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee fffooorrr aaa ffuunnccttiioonn ooff aa ssiinnggllee vvaarriiaabbllee.. TThhuuss,, tthhee aabbssoolluuttee vvaalluuee ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann aatt ssoommee ppooiinntt M is eeeqqquuuaaalll tttooo ttthhheee lllooocccaaalll fffaaaccctttooorrr bbbyyy wwwhhhiiiccchhh aaarrreeeaaasss aaattt ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt aaarrreee aaalllttteeerrreeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee mmmaaappppppiiinnnggg;;; ttthhhaaattt iiisss,,, iiittt iiisss eeeqqquuuaaalll tttooo ttthhheee llliiimmmiiittt ooofff ttthhheee rrraaatttiiiooo ooofff ttthhheee aaarrreeeaaa ooofff ttthhheee iiimmmaaagggeee ooofff ttthhheee nnneeeiiiggghhhbbbooorrrhhhooooooddd ooofff M to the area of tthhee nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd aass tthhee ddiimmeennssiioonnss ooff tthhee nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd aapppprrooaacchh zzeerroo.. TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann aatt M is pppooosssiiitttiiivvveee iiifff mmmaaappppppiiinnnggg (((111))) dddoooeeesss nnnooottt ccchhhaaannngggeee ttthhheee ooorrriiieeennntttaaatttiiiooonnn iiinnn ttthhheee nnneeeiiiggghhhbbbooorrrhhhooooooddd ooofff M, and negative otherwise.
OBJECTIVE AAtt tthhee eenndd ooff tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo :: recognise the Jacobian rule how to use rhe Jacobian MAIN CONTENT 231 IIff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddooeess nnoott vvaanniisshh iinn tthhee rreeggiioonn ∆ and if φ(y , y )) iiss aa ffuunnccttiioonn ddeeffiinneedd iinn tthhee 1 2 region ∆ (the image of ∆∆)),, tthheenn 1 (((ttthhheee fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa fffooorrr ccchhhaaannngggeee ooofff vvvaaarrriiiaaabbbllleeesss iiinnn aaa dddooouuubbbllleee iiinnnttteeegggrrraaalll)))... AAAnnn aaannnaaalllooogggooouuusss fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa ooobbbtttaaaiiinnns for mmmuuullltttiiipppllleee iiinnnttteeegggrrraaalllsss... IIIfff ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn ooofff mmmaaappppppiiinnnggg (((111))) dddoooeeesss nnnooottt vvvaaannniiissshhh iiinnn rrreeegggiiiooonnn ∆, then there exists the inverse mapping x = ψ(y , y ) x = ψ (y , y ) 1 1 2 2 2 1 2 and (((aaannn aaannnaaallloooggguuueee ooofff ttthhheee fffooorrrmmmuuulllaaa fffooorrr dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff aaannn iiinnnvvveeerrrssseee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn)))... TTThhhiiisss aaasssssseeerrrtttiiiooonnn fffiiinnndddsss nnuummeerroouuss aapppplliiccaattiioonnss iinn tthhee tthheeoorryy ooff iimmpplliicciitt ffuunnccttiioonnss.. IIInnn ooorrrdddeeerrr fffooorrr ttthhheee eeexxxpppllliiiccciiittt eeexxxppprrreeessssssiiiooonnn,,, iiinnn ttthhheee nnneeeiiiggghhhbbbooorrrhhhooooooddd ooofff ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt , of the functions y , .
.
.
.
y tthhaatt aarree iimmpplliicciittllyy ddeeffiinneedd bbyy tthhee 1 m equations (2) F (x .
.
.
.,x , y .
.
.,y )) == 00 I ≤ k ≤ m k 1 n 1 m ttoo bbee ppoossssiibbllee,, iitt iiss ssuuffffiicciieenntt tthhaatt tthhee ccoooorrddiinnaatteess ooff M ssaattiissffyy eeqquuaattiioonnss ((22)),, tthhaatt tthhee ffuunnccttiioonnss F have continuous partial ddeerriivvaattiivveess,, aanndd tthhaatt tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann k be nonzero at M.. TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann iiss bbeeeenn ccllaassssiiffiieedd iinnttoo ttwwoo :: The JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx aanndd tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt..
Examples 1.Let F:R2 ﬁ R2 bbee tthhee mmaappppiinngg ddeeffiinneedd bbyy x2+ y2 f(x, y)   F(x,y) =    exy g(x, y)   Find the Jacobian matrix J ((p) for p = (1,1) f 232 The Jacobian matrix at an arbitrary point (x,y) is df df     2x 2y  dx dy  =   dy dg   yexy xexy     dx dy  2 2 Hence when x=1 ,y=1 ,we find J ( 1, 1) =     f e e 2.Let F : R2 ﬁ R3 be the mapping defined by  xy    F(x,y) = sin x x2 y   P Find J (P) at the point P = (P , ) .
F 2 The Jacobian matrix at an arbitrary point(x,y) is  y x    J (x, y) =cosx 0  F  2xy x2   P    P  P  2  Hence, J (P , ) = - 1 0  F 2 P 2P 2     CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been able to recognise the Jacobian rule and how to use the formular.
233 SUMMARY IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd ttthhheee bbbaaasssiiiccc cccooonnnccceeepppttt ooofff JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee iiidddeeennntttiiifffiiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee formular below as : be nonzero at M. Tutor – Marked Assignment 1.Define tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx aanndd tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt.. 22..CCoommppuuttee tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx ooff tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg ccaasseess bbeellooww :: a. F(x,y) = (x+y,x2 y) b. F(x,y) = (sinx,cosxy) c. F(x,y,z) = (xyz,x2 z) REFERENCE DD..KK.. AArrrroowwssmmiitthh aanndd CC..MM.. PPllaaccee,, Dynamical Systems,, SSeeccttiioonn 33..33,, CChhaappmmaann && HHaallll,, London, 1992.
ISBN 0-412-3399008800-9.
Taken from http://www.sjcrrrooottthhheeerrrsss...ppplllaaasssmmmaaarrreeesssooouuurrrccceeesss...cccooommm///sssccchhhwwwaaarrrzzzsssccchhhiiilllddd...pppdddfff - On the GGGrrraaavvviiitttaaatttiiiooonnnaaalll FFFiiieeelllddd ooofff aaa MMMaaassssss PPPoooiiinnnttt aaaccccccooorrrdddiiinnnggg tttooo EEEiiinnnsssttteeeiiinnn’’’sss TTThhheeeooorrryyy bbbyyy KKK... SSSccchhhwwwaaarrrzzzsssccchhhiiilllddd - arXiv:physics/9905030 v1 (tteexxtt ooff tthhee oorriiggiinnaall ppaappeerr,, iinn WWiikkiissoouurrccee).
234  UUNNIITT 22 :: JJAACCOOBBIIAANN DDEETTEERRMMIINNAANNTT CONTENTS 1.0 IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MMAAIINN CCOONNTTEENNTT 3.1 aappppllyy tthhee JJaaccoobbeeaann ccoonncceepptt 33..22 kknnooww tthhee JJaaccoobbeeaann mmaattrriixx 33..33 aappppllyy tthhee iinnvveerrssee ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn 33..44 ssoollvvee pprroobblleemmss oonn JJaaccoobbeeaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT 77..00 RREEFFEERREENNCCEESS//FFUURRTTHHEERR RREEAADDIINNGGSS INTRODUCTION The Jacobian of functions ƒƒ(x , x , …, x ), i = 1, 2, …, n,, ooff rreeaall vvaarriiaabblleess x is the i 1 2 n i ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ooff tthhee mmaattrriixx wwhhoossee ith row lists all the first-oorrddeerr ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff tthhee function ƒ(x , x , …, x )).. AAllssoo kknnoowwnn aass JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt.. i 1 2 n In vector calculus, the JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx : is the matrix of all first-order ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess of a vector- or scalar-valued ffuunnccttiioonn wwiitthh rreessppeecctt ttoo aannootthheerr vveeccttoorr.. SSuuppppoossee F : Rn → Rm is a function from Euclidean n-ssppaaccee to Euclidean m-ssppaaccee.. SSuucchh aa ffuunnccttiioonn iiss ggiivveenn bbyy m real- vvaalluueedd ccoommppoonneenntt ffuunnccttiioonnss,, y (x ,...,x ), ..., y (x ,...,x )).. TThhee ppaarrttiiaall ddeerriivvaattiivveess ooff aallll tthheessee 1 1 n m 1 n ffuunnccttiioonnss ((iiff tthheeyy eexxiisstt)) ccaann bbee oorrggaanniizzeedd iinn aann m-by-n mmaattrriixx,, tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx J of F, as follows: TThhiiss mmaattrriixx iiss aallssoo ddeennootteedd bbyy and .. IIff ((x ,...,x ) are the 1 n uussuuaall oorrtthhooggoonnaall CCaarrtteessiiaann ccoooorrddiinnaatteess,, tthhee i th row (i = 1, ..., n)) ooff tthhiiss mmaattrriixx ccoorrrreessppoonnddss ttoo the gradient of the ith compoonneenntt ffuunnccttiioonn y: .. NNoottee tthhaatt ssoommee bbooookkss ddeeffiinnee tthhee i 235 JJaaccoobbiiaann aass tthhee ttrraannssppoossee ooff tthhee mmaattrriixx ggiivveenn aabboovvee..
The Jacobian determinant (often simply called the Jacobian)) iiss tthhee determinant of the Jacobian matrix (if m = n).
TThheessee ccoonncceeppttss aarree nnaammeedd aafftteerr tthhee mathematician CCaarrll GGuussttaavv JJaaccoobb JJaaccoobbii.
OBJECTIVE AAfftteerr rreeaaddiinngg tthhrroouugghh tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd bbee aabbllee ttoo :: i. aappppllyy tthhee jjaaccoobbiiaann ccoonncceepptt ii.
kknnooww tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx iii.
aappppllyy tthhee iinnvveerrssee ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn iv.
ssoollvvee pprroobblleemmss oonn JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt MAIN CONTENT Jacobian matrix TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ooff aa ffuunnccttiioonn ddeessccrriibbeess tthhee orientation of a tangent plane tto the function at a ggiivveenn ppooiinntt.. IInn tthhiiss wwaayy,, tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ggeenneerraalliizzeess tthhee gradient ooff aa ssccaallaarr vvaalluueedd ffuunnccttiioonn ooff mmuullttiippllee vvaarriiaabblleess wwhhiicchh iittsseellff ggeenneerraalliizzeess tthhee ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa ssccaallaarr-vvaalluued function of a ssscccaaalllaaarrr... LLLiiikkkeeewwwiiissseee,,, ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn cccaaannn aaalllsssooo bbbeee ttthhhooouuuggghhhttt ooofff aaasss dddeeessscccrrriiibbbiiinnnggg ttthhheee aaammmooouuunnnttt ooofff """ssstttrrreeetttccchhhiiinnnggg""" tthhaatt aa ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn iimmppoosseess.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, iiff ((x ,y ) = f(x ,y )) iiss uusseedd ttoo ttrraannssffoorrmm aann iimmaaggee,, 2 2 1 1 the Jacobian of f, J(x ,y )) ddeessccrriibbeess hhooww mmuucchh tthhee iimmaaggee iinn tthhee nneeiigghhbboorrhhoooodd ooff ((x ,y ) is 1 1 1 1 stretched in the x and y ddiirreeccttiioonnss.. IIIfff aaa fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn iiisss dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee aaattt aaa pppoooiiinnnttt,,, iiitttsss dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee iiisss gggiiivvveeennn iiinnn cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss bbbyyy ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn,,, bbuutt aa ffuunnccttiioonn ddooeessnn''tt nneeeedd ttoo bbee ddiiffffeerreennttiiaabbllee ffoorr tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ttoo bbee ddeeffiinneedd,, ssiinnccee oonnllyy tthhee partial derivatives aarree rreeqquuiirreedd ttoo eexxiisstt.. TThhee iimmppoorrttaannccee ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann lliieess iinn tthhee ffaacctt tthhaatt iitt rreepprreesseennttss tthhee bbeesstt lliinneeaarr approximation tttooo aaa dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennntttiiiaaabbbllleee fffuuunnnccctttiiiooonnn nnneeeaaarrr aaa gggiiivvveeennn pppoooiiinnnttt... IIInnn ttthhhiiisss ssseeennnssseee,,, ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn iiisss ttthhheee dddeeerrriiivvvaaatttiiivvveee ooofff aaa multivariate function.
If p is a point in Rn and F iiss differentiable at p,, tthheenn iittss ddeerriivvaattiivvee iiss ggiivveenn bbyy J (p).
In this F case, the linear map ddeessccrriibbeedd bbyy J (p) is the best linear approximation ooff F near the point p, F in the sense that for x close to p and where o iiss tthhee little o-notation (for ) and is the distance between x and p. 236 In a sense, both the ggrraaddiieenntt and Jacobian are "first derivatives" — tthhee ffoorrmmeerr tthhee ffiirrsstt derivative of a ssccaallaarr ffuunnccttiioonn of seevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess,, tthhee llaatttteerr tthhee ffiirrsstt ddeerriivvaattiivvee ooff aa vector function ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess.. IInn ggeenneerraall,, tthhee gradient ccaann bbee rreeggaarrddeedd aass aa ssppeecciiaall vveerrssiioonn ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann:: iitt iiss tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann of a scalar function of several variables.
The Jacobian of the gradient has a special name: the Hessian matrix, wwhhiicchh iinn aa sseennssee iiss tthhee "second derivative"" ooff tthhee ssccaallaarr ffuunnccttiioonn ooff sseevveerraall vvaarriiaabblleess iinn qquueessttiioonn.. Inverse According to the iinnvveerrssee ffuunnccttiioonn tthheeoorreemm, the matrix inverse ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx ooff aann invertible function iiss tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx ooff tthhee inverse ffuunnccttiioonn.. TThhaatt iiss,, ffoorr ssoommee ffuunnccttiioonn F : Rn → Rn and a point p in RRn, IItt ffoolllloowwss tthhaatt tthhee ((ssccaallaarr)) iinnvveerrssee ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ooff aa ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn iiss tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ooff tthhee iinnvveerrssee ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn..
Examples Example 1.
TThhee ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn ffrroomm spherical coordinates (r, θ, φ) to CCaarrtteessiiaann ccoooorrddiinnaatteess (x , x , x )) ,, iiss ggiivveenn bbyy tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn F : R+ × [0,π] × [0,2π) → R3 wwiitthh ccoommppoonneennttss:: 1 2 3 The Jacobian matrix for this ccoooorrddiinnaattee cchhaannggee iiss The determinant is r2 sin θ.. AAss aann eexxaammppllee,, ssiinnccee dV = dx dx dx tthhiiss ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt iimmpplliieess 1 2 3 that the ddiiffffeerreennttiiaall vvoolluummee eelleemmeenntt dV = r2 sin θ dr dθ dϕ.. NNeevveerrtthheelleessss tthhiiss ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt varies with coorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss... TTTooo aaavvvoooiiiddd aaannnyyy vvvaaarrriiiaaatttiiiooonnn ttthhheee nnneeewww cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaattteeesss cccaaannn bbbeee dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd aaasss [2] NNooww tthhee ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt eeqquuaallss ttoo 11 aanndd vvoolluummee element becomes .
Example 2.
TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn F : R3 → R4 wwiitthh ccoommppoonneennttss 237  is TThhiiss eexxaammppllee sshhoowwss tthhaatt tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann nneeeedd nnoott bbee aa ssqquuaarree mmaattrriixx..
Example 3.
TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt iiss eeqquuaall ttoo r.. TThhiiss sshhoowwss hhooww aann iinntteeggrraall iinn tthhee Cartesian coordinate system iiss ttrraannssffoorrmmeedd iinnttoo aann iinntteeggrraall iinn tthhee ppoollaarr ccoooorrddiinnaattee ssyysstteemm: .
Example 4.
TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn F : R3 → R3 wwiitthh ccoommppoonneennttss is 238 From this we see that F rreevveerrsseess oorriieennttaattiioonn nneeaarr tthhoossee ppooiinnttss wwhheerree x aanndd x have the same 1 2 sign; the function is locally iiinnnvvveeerrrtttiiibbbllleee eeevvveeerrryyywwwhhheeerrreee eeexxxccceeepppttt nnneeeaaarrr pppoooiiinnntttsss wwwhhheeerrreee x = 0 or x = 0.
1 2 IIInnntttuuuiiitttiiivvveeelllyyy,,, iiifff yyyooouuu ssstttaaarrrttt wwwiiittthhh aaa tttiiinnnyyy ooobbbjjjeeecccttt aaarrrooouuunnnddd ttthhheee pppoooiiinnnttt (((111,,,111,,,111))) aaannnddd aaapppppplllyyy F to that object, you will get an object ssseeettt wwwiiittthhh aaapppppprrroooxxxiiimmmaaattteeelllyyy 444000 tttiiimmmeeesss ttthhheee vvvooollluuummmeee ooofff ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnnaaalll ooonnneee...
CONCLUSION IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee ssstttuuudddiiieeeddd ttthhheee aaappppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn cccooonnnccceeepppttt... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee kkknnnooowwwnnn ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx aaannnddd ttthhheee aaappppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff ttthhheee iiinnnvvveeerrrssseee tttrrraaannnsssfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn determinants.
YYoouu hhaavvee ssoollvveedd pprroobblleemmss oonn JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt.. SUMMARY In this unit ; ii yyoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd aapppplliiccaattiioonn ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ccoonncceepptt iiii yyoouu hhaavvee kknnoowwnn tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx iiiiii yyoouu hhaavvee kknnoowwnn tthhee iinnvveerrssee ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn ooff JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt iv yyoouu hhaavvee ssoollvvee pprroobblleemmss oonn JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ssuucchh aass ;; .
TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn F : R3 → R4 with components is TThhiiss eexxaammppllee sshhoowwss tthhaatt tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann nneeeedd nnoott bbee aa ssqquuaarree mmaattrriixx.. Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.In each of the following cccaaassseeesss,,, cccooommmpppuuuttteee ttthhheee JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx ooofff FFF,,, aaannnddd eeevvvaaallluuuaaattteee aaattt ttthhheee following points; 239 F(x,y) = (sinx,cosxy) at points (1,2) F(x,y,z) = (sinxyz,xz) at points (2,-1,-1) F(x,y,z) =(xz,xy,yz) at points (1,1,-1) 2.
Transform the following from spherical coordinates (r,q ,f ) to Cartesian coordinate ( x ,x ,x ) by the function F:R+· (0,(cid:213) )· (0,2(cid:213) )ﬁ R3 with components : 1 2 3 r =rtanq cosq 1 r = rsinq tanq 2 = q r r sin 1 3.The Jacobian matrix of the function F:R3ﬁ R4 with components y = x 1 2 y = 4 x 2 1 y =5x2- 4x 3 2 3 y = x sin x 4 1 3 4.The Jacobian matrix of the function F:R3ﬁ R3 with components y = 4x2- 3sin x x 1 1 2 3 y = 3x 2 2 y = x 3x 3 2 3 The Jacobian matrix of the function F: R3ﬁ R3 with components x=rtanf y=rcosf REFERENCES 240 Kudriavtsev, L. D. Matematicheskii analiz, 2nd ed., vol.
2.
Moscow, 1973.
Il’in, V. A., and E. G. Pozniak.
Osnovy matematicheskogo analiza, 3rd ed.. part I. Moscow, 1971.
The Great Soviet Encyclopedia, 3rd Edition (1970-1979).
© 2010 The Gale Group, Inc. All rights reserved.
D.K.
Arrowsmith and C.M.
Place, Dynamical Systems, Section 3.3, Chapman & Hall, London, 1992.
UNIT 3 APPLICATION OF JACOBIAN CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 241  3.1 apply the jacobian concept 3.2 know the Jacobian matrix 3.3 apply the inverse transformation 3.4 solve problems on Jacobian determinant 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS INTRODUCTION If m = n, then F is a function from m-space to n-space and the Jacobian matrix is a square matrix.
We can then form its determinant, known as the Jacobian determinant.
The Jacobian determinant is sometimes simply called "the Jacobian."
OBJECTIVE MAIN CONTENT Dynamical systems Consider a dynamical system of the form x' = F(x), where x' is the (component-wise) time derivative of x, and F : Rn → Rn is continuous and differentiable.
If F(x ) = 0, then x is a 0 0 stationary point (also called a fixed point).
The behavior of the system near a stationary point is related to the eigenvalues of J (x ), the Jacobian of F at the stationary point.Specifically, if F 0 the eigenvalues all have a negative real part, then the system is stable in the operating point, if any eigenvalue has a positive real part, then the point is unstable.
.
The Jacobian determinant at a given point gives important information about the behavior of F near that point.
For instance, the continuously differentiable function F is invertible near a point p ∈ Rn if the Jacobian determinant at p is non-zero.
This is the inverse function theorem.
Furthermore if the Jacobian determinant at p is positive, then F preserves orientation near p; if it is negative, F reverses orientation.
The absolute value of the Jacobian determinant at p gives us the factor by which the function F expands or shrinks volumes near p; this is why it occurs in the general substitution rule.
Uses The Jacobian determinant is used when making a change of variables when evaluating a multiple integral of a function over a region within its domain.
To accommodate for the change of coordinates the magnitude of the Jacobian determinant arises as a multiplicative factor within the integral.
Normally it is required that the change of coordinates be done in a manner which maintains an injectivity between the coordinates that determine the domain.
The Jacobian determinant, as a result, is usually well defined.
242 Newton's method AA ssyysstteemm ooff ccoouupplleedd nnoonnlliinneeaarr eeqquuaattiioonnss ccaann bbee ssoollvveedd iitteerraattiivveellyy bbyy NNeewwttoonn''ss mmeetthhoodd.
This mmeetthhoodd uusseess tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx ooff tthhee ssyysstteemm ooff eeqquuaattiioonnss CONCLUSION IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee kknnoowwnn tthhee aapppplliiccaattiioonn ooff JJaaccoobbiiaann ccoonncceepptt.. YYoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd tthhee aaappppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn mmmaaatttrrriiixxx... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee uuussseeeddd JJJaaacccooobbbiiiaaannn iiinnn iiinnn ttthhheee aaappppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnn ooofff iiinnnvvveeerrrssseee ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn aanndd hhaavvee aallssoo ssoollvveedd pprroobblleemmss oonn JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt.. SUMMARY IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee ssttuuddiieedd tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg :: Appliiccaattiioonn ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ccoonncceepptt AApppplliiccaattiioonn ooff JJaaccoobbiiaann oonn tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann mmaattrriixx AApppplliiccaattiioonn ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann oonn tthhee iinnvveerrssee ccoonncceepptt AApppplliiccaattiioonn ooff tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ttoo ssoollvvee pprroobblleemmss oonn JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt TUTOR – MMAARRKK AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTTSS 11..FFiinndd tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ooff tthhee mmaapp bbeellooww,, aanndd ddeetteerrmmiinnee aallll tthhee ppooiinnttss wwhheerree tthhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaannttss iiss eeqquuaall ttoo zzeerroo((00)).. a.F(x,y,z) = (xy,y,xz) b.F(x,y) = (exy,x) c.F(x,y) = (xy,x2) 2.The transformation from sspphheerriiccaall ccoooorrddiinnaatteess (r, θ, φ) to CCaarrtteessiiaann ccoooorrddiinnaatteess (x , x , x ) , 1 2 3 is given by the function F : R++ × [0,π] × [0,2π) → R3 with components: 33..TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn F : R3 → R4 with components 243  44..TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn F : R3 → R4 with components 55..TThhee JJaaccoobbiiaann ddeetteerrmmiinnaanntt ooff tthhee ffuunnccttiioonn F : R3 → R3 with components REFFERENCE Gradshteyn, I. SS.. aanndd RRyyzzhhiikk,, II.. M. "Jacobian Determinant."
§14.313 in TTaabblleess ooff IInntteeggrraallss,, Series, and Products, 6th ed.
SSaann DDiieeggoo,, CCAA:: AAccaaddeemmiicc PPrreessss,, pppp.. 1068-11006699,, 22000000.. Kaplan, W. AAddvvaanncceedd CCaallccuulluuss,, 33rrdd eedd.. Reading, MA: Addison-WWeesslleeyy,, pppp.. 98-99, 123, and 238-245, 1984.
Simon, C. P. and Blume, L. EE..
Mathematics for Economists.
NNeeww YYoorrkk:: WW.. W. Norton, 1994.
DD..KK.. AArrrroowwssmmiitthh aanndd CC..MM.. PPllaaccee,, Dynamical Systems,, SSeeccttiioonn 33..33,, CChhaappmmaann && HHaallll,, London, 1992.
ISBN 0-412-3399008800-9 244
