ELEMENTARY DIFFERENTIAL MTH 232 EQUATION Course GuideMTH 232 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE MTH 232 ELEMENTARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION Course Developer Ajibola Saheed Oluwatoyin National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Course Writer Ajibola Saheed Oluwatoyin National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor Ajibola Saheed Oluwatoyin National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
Programme Leaders Proffessor Adebanjo National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiMTH 232 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-424-2 All Rights Reserved iiiMTH 232 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGES Introduction ………………………………………………… 1 The course…………………………………………………… 1 - 2 Course Aim/Objective……………………………………….
2 Working through the Course………………………………… 2 Course Material……………………………………………… 2 Study Units………………………………………………….. 2 - 3 Texts Books………………………………………………….
4 Assignment………………………………………………….. 4 Tutor Marked Assignment…………………………………... 4 End of Semester Examination……………………………….
4 Summary…………………………………………………….. 4 - 6 ivMTH 232 COURSE GUIDE Introduction The subject of differential equations constitute a part of mathematics that plays an important role in understanding the physical sciences.
In fact, it is the source of most of the ideas and theories which constitute higher analysis.
In physics, engineering, chemistry and many other disciplines it has become necessary to build a mathematical model to represent certain problems.
These mathematical models often evolve the search for an unknown function that satisfies an equation in which derivatives of the unknown functions play an important role.
Such equations are called differential equation.
The primary purpose of differential equation is to serve as a tool for studying change in the physical world.
You may recall if y = f(x) is a given function then its derivative dy/dx can be interpreted as the rate of change of y with respect to x.
Sir Isaac Newton observed that certain important laws of natural sciences can be phrased in terms of equation involving rates of change.
In the 16th century, scientists like Isaac Newton, Leibniz, Bernoulli etc were engaged in solving differential equations.
Many of the methods which other developed are in use today.
In the 18th century, scientists like Euler, Bernoulli, Lagrange and others contributed generously to the development of the subject.
The pioneering work that led to the development of ordinary differential equations as a branch of modern mathematics is due to Cauchy, Riemain, Picard, Poincare, Lyapunou, Birkhoff and others.
The Course As a 2-credit unit course, 9 study units grouped into 4 modules of 3 units – Module 1.
2 units – module 2. while 1 unit in module 3 and 3 units – module 4.
This course guide gives a brief summary of the total contents contained in the course material.
Introduction to the Nature of differential equation; Basic concept, solution of a differential equation, family of curves and differential equation and differential equations arising from physical situation.
Methods of solving equation of first order and first degree was thoroughly dealt with.
Separation of variable, homogenous and Exact equations and integrating factors are however discussed.
We also discussed linear differential equations and differential equation of first order but not of first degree.
Family of course orthogonal and oblique trajectories, and application to mechanics and Electricity respectively.
1MTH 232 COURSE GUIDE Lastly, higher order linear differential equation.
Method of undetermined coefficients and method of variation of parameters were also looked into.
Course Aim/Objectives On the completion of this course, you are expected to: • Know basic concepts and definitions related to differential equations.
• Express some of the problems of physical and engineering interest in terms of differential equation • Distinguish between the order and degree of a differential equation; • Define the solution of an ordinary differential equation • Identify an initial value problem .
• State and use the conditions for existence and uniqueness of first order ordinary differential equations.
• Derive differential equations for some physical problem Working Through The Course This Course involves that you would be required to spend lot of time to read.
The context of this material is very dense and require you spending great time to study it.
This accounts for the great effort put into its development in the attempt to make it very readable and comprehensible.
Nevertheless, the effort required of you is still tremendous.
I would advice that you avail yourself the opportunity of attending the tutorial facilitation where you would have the opportunity of comparing knowledge with your peers.
The Course Material You will be provided with the following materials; Course guide Study units In addition, the course comes with a list of recommended text books, which though are not compulsory for you to acquire or indeed read, are necessary as supplements to the course materials.
Study Units The following are the study units contained in this course.
The units are arranged into four (4) identifiable but readable modules.
Module 1 2MTH 232 COURSE GUIDE Unit 1 Introduction to the Nature of Differential equations This unit is sub-divided into Basic concept • Solution of a differential equation, family of courses and differential equations and • Differential equations arising from physical situations.
Unit 2 Methods of solving Equation of First Order and First Degree The following topics are discussed: Separation of variable.
Homogeneous equation, Exact equation and integrating factor.
Module 2 Unit 1 Linear Differential Equations This unit features: Classification of first order differential Equation.
General solution of linear non-homogenous equation (method of undetermined coefficients, variable of parameters).
Properties of the solution of linear homogeneous differential equation.
Equation reducible to linear equations.
And applications of linear differential equations Unit 2 Differential Equation of first order But not of first Degree This unit takes us through; Equations which can be factorized.
Equations which cannot be factorized (Equation solvable for y and for x, equation in which independent variable or dependent variable is absent, equations homogeneous in x and y and equation of the first degree in x and y – clairant’s, Riccati’s equation and Bernoullis’ equations).
Module 3 Unit 1 Family of Curves Orthogonal and Oblique Trajectories (Application to Mechanics and Electricity) This unit entales, Orthagonal Trajectories.
• Application to Orthogonal Trajectiories • Approximate solution (Direction fields; iteration) i.e.
method of Direct fields and Picards iteration method.
Text Books 3MTH 232 COURSE GUIDE The following text books are recommended for further reading.
Advanced Egineering Mathematics by KREYSZIC.
Genralised functions by R.F.
Hoskires Engneering mathematics by K. A SROUD Qualitative theory of ordinary Differential Equations by Fred Brauer and John A. Nohel Engneering Mathematics by P. d. s verma Generalized Functions in Mathematical physics by V.S Viadimirov.
Mathematical method for science students by G. Stephenson Assessment There are two components of assessment for this course.
The tutor marked Assignment (TMAS) and the end of the course examination.
Tutor Marked Assignments (Tmas) The (TMAS) is the continuous assessmet component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You will be given 4 (TMAS) to answer.
Three of these must be answered before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The (TMAS) would be given to you by your facilitator and returned after you have done the assignments.
End Of Course Examination This examination concludes the assessment for the course.
It constitutes 70% of the whole course.
You will be informed of the time for the examination.
It may or may not coincide with the university semester examinations.
Summary So far – the course we have covered the following points: definition of differential equation, ordinary differential equation as partial differential equations with there derivative.
Order and degree of differential equation.
Linear and non-linear ordinary differential equation.
4MTH 232 COURSE GUIDE dy However, an equation = f(x, y) called separable equation if f(x, y) = dx dy X(x) Y(x).
Hence, we can write a(y) + b(x) = 0 for some a(y) and dx b(x).
Integrating w.r.t.x and equating it to a constant, we get its solution.
A real-valued function h(x, y) of two variables x and y is called homogeneous function of degree n, if h(λx,λy)λn h(x, y), where n is a real number and λ is any constant.
A homogeneous differential equation reduces to separable equation by the substitution y = ux where v = v(x).
An exact differential equation is formed by equating an exact differential to zero.
The differential equation A(x, y) dy + b(x, y) dx = 0 More other.
The general form of the linear equation of the first order is dy x p(x)y = Q(x) where P(x) and Q(x) are continuous real-valued dx functions on some internal.
When Q(x) = 0 is called homogenous linear differential equation of order one.
When Q(x) = 0 is called non-homogenous linear differential equation of order one.
(cid:242) (cid:242) (cid:242) I. F. for this equation is e p(x) dx and Q(x) e p(x) dx as the particular solution of the equation Equation of the type dy f(y) x p(x) f(y) = Q(x) reduces to linear equations by the substitution dx f(y) = v. Clairant’s equation is an equation of first order and of any degree if it can be put in the form y = xp x f(p) the solution is y = c x + f(c) dy Reccati’s equation is an equation of the form = a(x) x b(x)y + c(x) y2 dx where a(x), b(x) and c(x) are given functions an internal I of R. the 5MTH 232 COURSE GUIDE general solution of this equation can be obtained if we know a particular solution y, of the equation and then we determine a function V defined 1 by relation y = y, + , which has y as the solution.
y Lastly let y and y be the linearly independent solutions of the reduced 1 2 equation of a non-homogeneous second order linear differential equation with constants or variable coefficients.
Then on substituting y = y u 1 1 (x) + y u (x) and imposing the necessary conditions, the particular 2 2 integral of the given equation was found.
6
