 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: PAD202 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION  INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION PAD202 MAIN CONTENT Course Writer: Osabiya J. Babatunde (NOUN) Course Developer : Osabiya J. Babatunde (NOUN) Course Coordinator: Osabiya J. Babatunde (NOUN) Programme Leader: Dr.
I. Idrisu (NOUN) Course Editor: Dr A. Eneanya (NOUN)  MODULE 1 UNIT 1; MEANING OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2; CONCEPT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3; Administration and Organization UNIT 4 ; ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 5; EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA MODULE 2 UNIT 1; PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AS AN ARTS OR SCIENCE UNIT 2; GROWTH OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3; IMPORTANCES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 ;SCOPE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT5 ;FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 3 UNIT 1; Private and Public Administration: Differences and Similarities UNIT 2; RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND POLITICS UNIT 3; DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4; SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT THEORY UNIT 5; CLASSICAL THEORY OF ORGANISATIONS UNIT 6; HUMAN RELATIONS THEORY UNIT 7; METHODS OF INQUIRY IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION  MODULE 1 UNIT 1; MEANING OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Public Administration 3.2 Definition of Public Administration 3.3 The Modern Definition of Public Administration 3.4 Characteristics of Public Administration 3.5 Qualities of a Public Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration has come to occupy a central place in the complex and fast changing modern society.
Its actual role consists in the provision of services and regulation of inter-group relations in society.
Maintenance of law and order, defense, welfare of society, application of science and technology, and eradication of poverty in the developing countries engage the attention of public administration in the modern administrative state.
In a word, the security and independence of the state, social and economic welfare of the people depend upon the effective and efficient functioning of public administration.
Public administration is important in our daily life, it is an important aspect of a more generic concept; thus, its study is worth undertaking..
In this unit, therefore, the meaning of public administration will be examined.
Modern definition, characteristics will also be considered.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: define public administration in details state the characteristics of public administration in details.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Meaning of Public Administration The word ‘public’ is used in a variety of ways.
In this course however, it means “governmental.” Public administration simply means governmental administration that operates in a political setting.
Its focus is specifically on public bureaucracy.
The study and practice of public bureaucracy is called public administration.
It encompasses the management of public agencies that carry out public policies in order to fulfill state purposes in the public interest.
Since government provides services for the people in the public interest, the administration of governmental affairs is known as public administration.
Public administration can also be seen as the activities of groups cooperating to accomplish the common goals of government.
Such common goals include defense, safeguarding the frontiers, maintenance of law and order, fire protection, communications, public health, education, etc.
In managing public affairs, public administration focuses principally on the planning, organising, directing, coordinating and controlling of governmental operations.
3.2 Definition of Public Administration The word ‘public’ it simply means the practice of administration in a particular segment of the society, that of the public sector.
Public administration is therefore governmental administration and operates in the particular sphere of government.
It is the machinery for implementing government policy.
Public administration is concerned with the study of how a country’s administration is organized and how it functions.
Since it is the machinery for implementing government policy, it follows that its study must lead to the study of the most efficient ways of organizing the executive branch of government, its institutions and its procedures.
Public administration is the machinery, as well as the integral processes through which the government performs its functions.
It is a network of human relationships and associated activities extending from the government to the lowest paid and powerless individual charged with keeping in daily touch with all resources, natural and human, and all other aspects of the life of the society with which the government is concerned.
It is a system of roles and role relationships that defines in as clear and practicable terms as possible and in as much details as possible the intentions and programmes of government; the means available internally and externally to accomplish them; and finally, it is a system that causes these intentions and programs to be realized in real life.
It is a pattern of routinized activities, involving decision – making, planning, advising, coordination, negotiation, conciliation, arbitration, command and data gathering, through which the government carries out its responsibilities (Nnoli, 2003).
The significant elements in these definitions are: a.
There must be defined goals and objectives b.
There should be public policy c. It distinguishes public administration from the private administration d. Cooperative group effort in public setting e. It involves all the branches of government 3.3 The Modern Definition of Public Administration The definitions quoted below are illustrative of the modern, broader view of public administration.
1.
For Nigro, F.A.
& Nigro, L.G.
public administration can be viewed as follows.
a.
Public administration refers to cooperative group effort in a public setting.
b.
Public administration covers all three branches – executive, legislative, and judicial and their interrelationships.
c. Public administration has an important role in the formulation of policy and is thus a part of the political process.
d. public administration is different in significant ways from private administration, and e. Public administration is closely associated with numerous private groups and individuals in providing services to the community.
2.
Dimock, M.E.
& Dimock, G.O.
states that … “public administration is the area of study and practice where law and policy recommended are carried out.” 3.
Felse, J.W.
is of the view that “public administration is policy execution and also policy formulation.” 3.4 Characteristics of Public Administration The characteristics of public administration include the following in nature.
a.
Public administration is a means to an end and not an end in itself.
It is merely a tool of government to implement its policies and provide various services for the people at the minimum cost in order to attain good life.
In a sense, it is service for the people rendered by government.
b.
Public administration differs significantly from private administration, especially in its emphasis on public good, but it finds partial analogies in private administration.
c. Public administration is interdisciplinary in history; it embraces in its fold several social sciences such as political science, sociology, psychology, economics and management science.
d. Public administration is a practical discipline, be it an art or a science.
It has nexus with political and state activity, which has become all pervasive.
It has an applied nature focusing mainly on the problems of society and polity.
e. Public administration is an ongoing process.
There is no end to it.
If one activity is completed, a new one will crop up.
f. Public administration is a non-political public bureaucracy operating in a political system under the direction of public leadership.
g. Public administration is the monopoly of the state.
As such, it deals with the ends of the state, the sovereign will, the public interests and laws, the coercive element in society.
h. Although public administration tends to concentrate on the executive branch of government alone, it is the whole government in action.
Since government is a “big affair,” public administration is also naturally a big and complex matter.
3.5 Qualities of a Public Administrator An administrator must possess the following qualities: a.
Sense of Judgment: Another quality most essential in an administrator is a fine sense of judgment.
Every moment of the day an administrator is engaged on assignments which require evaluation, weighing of evidence, assessing degrees of urgency on various public issues, and assessing the mood and temper of those sections of the public which are clients of the department, and which the department has to consult or take into consideration before arriving at decisions and formulating policies.
b. Foresight: The Administrator should be able to forecast based on his knowledge and experience, the probable consequences of measures proposed for policy.
He should, in addition, be able to think of likely developments that may arise over the next year or two.
From his knowledge and accumulated experience, he should have the skill to deduce likely developments, given a set of factors and circumstances.
c. Ability to Delegate: Another essential quality necessary in an administrator is the ability to delegate work to his subordinates.
It is a mark of poor administration for a top administrator to seek to handle by himself all the essential assignments in the department.
In the process, he will create a bottleneck which will cause endless delays, and he will ruin his own health.
d. Tact: He must be tactful in dealing with his political bosses.
The President or Governor, Minister or Commissioner, as the case may be.
An administrator must be efficient and brilliant and yet there may be clamor for him to be moved somewhere else on the grounds that he usually puts up the backs of those working with him.
When dealing with political bosses and members of the public, a top administrator should avoid being arrogant, pompous, or pedantic.
This is equally important in minuting, in submission in the file, in correspondence, and in discussion.
e. Modesty: Administrators have a duty to brief their bosses, both when they are alone together and when they are in the public at some meeting or conference.
Such briefing, especially the ones carried out in public, should be done as unobtrusively as possible.
4.0 CONCLUSION The original purpose of the study of public administration was not to cultivate knowledge for its own sake; rather its purpose was explicitly utilitarian.
The study of public administration was directed at the twin pursuits of reforming governmental institution and training civil servants.
Thus, administrative theory grew in the late 19th century and the early 20th century with the primary objective of making government more effective and economical in its working.
.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has thrown light on the meaning of Public Administration, Definition of Public Administration, The Modern Definition of Public Administration, Characteristics of Public Administration, Qualities of a Public Administrator are also discuss at length.
.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the qualities of a public administrator 2.
What are the characteristics of public administration 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, A.
(2000).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria (2nded).
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Eneanya A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Applications, Lagos, Concept Publications.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Polinaidu, S. (2004).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: Galgotia Publications PVT.
Ujo, A.A. (2004).
Understanding Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printer & Publishers Company.
UNIT 2; CONCEPT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 The History of Public Administration 3.2 Conceptual Clarification 3.3 The Environment of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction It is pertinent to understand the meaning of the word ‘administration’.
Administration has a universal application and is present in every human endeavour be it social, cultural, religious group, private or public.
Administration is what is done in an organization.
The essence of any organization is to focus its aspirations into productive relationship in a way that will bring out concise responsibility, coordination and control.
It has a synergic relationship which can be likened to human body where every part performs its function in relation with other parts.
(Eneanya;2010) Having given this background description of the word ‘administration’, we can go ahead to discuss the concept of public administration.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to do : discuss the concept of public administration in details discuss the history of public administration in details 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The History of Public Administration Public administration is not a creation of modern times.
It has its roots in history and dates back to the times of the ancient civilizations.
It is on record that: Dating back to 462 B. C. Pericles, a renowned leader in ancient Greece, introduced a scheme for the compensation of officials, thus facilitating the continued participation in public administration by citizens who had to work daily for their living (Bury, n d).
The ancient Chinese Empire during the Han Dynasty, 202 BC, recognized the need to have a permanent body of officials to implement government decisions.
Again about the year 120BC, the Chinese Prime Minister, Kung – sun Hung, in a memorandum addressed to the throne, observed that the edicts and laws which were written in elegant classical style were often not understood by the officers whose duty it was to explain and interpret them to the people.
He therefore recommended that examinations be  held for the selection of men and that those who had shown the best knowledge should have the first preference in appointments to office requiring the use of the written language.
His recommendation was adopted and marked the beginning of the civil service examination It is also of interest to note that in AD 219 the ancient Chinese had worked out a system of classifying men into nine grades according to their ability, knowledge, experience, and character.
This system was called Chung Cheng, that is, Impartial Judge, a forerunner of our present day civil service commission (Shih, 1941) 3.2 Conceptual Clarification According to Simon (1970), administration refers to the activities of groups cooperating to accomplish goals.
MacRae and Pitt (1980), sees it as the co-ordination of men and materials within organization for the accomplishment of identified purposes.
Administration also connotes such activities as implementation of organizational decisions and goals as well as the systematic study of these activities.
It is generally observed that administration is present in all human organization irrespective of its nature.
It therefore becomes imperative to attempt a definition of the term ‘administration’ before delving into public administration.
Many authorities have tried to define the term ‘administration’ but there is no generally accepted definition yet of that term.
We can now conclude that public administration is that administration which is practiced in the public sector.
It is the means, arrangements, actions and processes by which the policies, programmes, purposes and goals of government are realized, Maduabum (2008).
Woodrow Wilson (1887) perceived Public Administration as the most visible side of government.
While Ezeani (2006) posits that public administration is the management of government activities.
According to him it refers both to the activities of bureaucrats concerned with the management or administration of government organizations and the study of these activities.
It is the machinery for implementing government policies to ensure stability and continuity at all times irrespective of any government in power even during period of crises.
Adebayo (1992) sees Public Administration as a governmental administration that operates in the particular sphere of government as its machinery for implementing governmental policies.
He believes that its study must therefore lead to the most efficient way of organizing the executive branch of the government, its functions and its procedures.
From his assertion, we can deduce that Public Administration is basically concerned with the study of how a country’s administration is organized as well as how it functions.
Akpan (1982) contends that Public Administration is the organ that carries out the programmes and manifestos of politicians in power.
He sees Public Administration as the servant of politics.
He went further to say that Public Administration covers every area and activity related to public policy.
Accordingly it includes the formal processes and operations through which the legislature exercises its power.
The functions of the courts in the administration of justice and the work of the military agencies all form part of the Public Administration.
According to Balogun (1987), Public administration is the fusion of human and material resources in order to achieve the objectives of public policy.
One cardinal issue here which attention must be paid is the issue of policy implementation.
This is a very focal point in the study of public administration.
Public Administration can also be viewed as a body of knowledge which is directed towards the understanding of administration of the government business.
Olodejeet.
al (2007) opines that Public Administration is the study of the development and maintenance of policy by members of governments, public agencies and public sector employees and the practice of implementing the authoritative decisions they have made.
Public Administration concerns itself more with how politicians in government and non-elected public sector employees devise policy, sustain the machinery of government and ensure policies are put into practice.
Nnoli (2000), describes Public Administration as follows: “Public Administration is the machinery as well as the integral process through which the government performs its functions.
It is a network of human relationships and associated activities extending from the government to the lowest paid and powerless individual charged with keeping in daily touch with all resources, natural and human, and all the aspects of life of the society with which government is concerned.
It is a system of roles and role relationships which defines in a clear and practicable terms as possible and in as much detail as possible the intentions and programmes of government; the means available internally and externally to accomplish them; where, when and how they are to be accomplished; who is to benefit from them, and, finally, it is a system that causes these intentions and programmes to be realized in real life.
It is a pattern of routinized activities, involving decision making, planning, advising, co-ordination, negotiation, conciliation, arbitration, command and data gathering, through which the government carries out its responsibilities.” Public Administration is, generally believed to be, a study that deals with the science of getting things done in the most efficient way in the political system.
3.3 The Environment of Public Administration a.
The resources needed by public administration are so diffuse and dispersed that there is a serious problem of coordination.
The spatial division of labour in the system is designed to help out but it creates its own problems of coordination.
b.
Associated with this diffuseness of resources is the diffuseness of roles necessary for public administration.
Unlike a private economic enterprise where there is a single minded focus on one project, the objectives of even the ministries cannot be precisely defined and, therefore, neither can the roles necessary to accomplish them be precisely defined.
c. Public administration takes place in the full glare of the public eye.
It is in a sense everyone’s business, and what is more, some people outside the civil service take this business seriously.
They are ever ready to proffer suggestions on how to perform better, to call for more action, to criticize and identify weaknesses and failures, and to make political capital out of such failures.
Thus public administrators are under constant public pressure; their attention is divided; and they are distracted.
Under such conditions efficiency suffers.
But this is a necessary sacrifice for the values of freedom and democracy.
It is unthinkable that public administration should be a secret affair of the civil servants (Nnoli, 2003).
d. It operates in an intense and pervasive political atmosphere.
This is natural since public administration is part and parcel of the political process.
Although politicians in government tend to absorb much of the political pressures on government, enough still filters through to the public administration to significantly affect its work.
For example, public administrators cannot take account of only the technical and professional factors in their work.
They must integrate them with political considerations that are often unpredictable on a day – to – day basis.
Political considerations may cause an industrial project to be embarked upon against all technical and professional wisdom.
Yet, at the same time the government expects the administrator to use resources judiciously and to apply professional expertise in the solution of national problems.
e. There is a widespread expectation of benefits from public administration at little or no cost to the citizen.
This is particularly the case in the ex – colonial countries of Africa and Asia where there is a strong heritage of government involvement in many welfare functions.
A consequence of this great expectation is that the populace is not eager to calculate or make allowances for the cost of providing these amenities.
Thus, public administrators must walk the tight rope of satisfying these popular demands with little or no resources at their disposal.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit we discuss the concept of Public Administration in details by making references to various scholars and we conclude that public administration deals with the effective and efficient management of human and material resources for the maximum attainment of public goals.
5.0 Summary In this unit we learnt that about the history of public administration, conceptual clarification, the environment of public administration.
Public Administration is the action part or the lifewire of any government in power.
You also learnt how to effectively combine both human and materials resources in order provide goods and services for the common good.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is Public Administration in details?
2.
The History of Public Administration  7.0 References/Further Reading Adebayo, A.
(1981), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan, Spectrum Books Limited.
\ Ademolakun, L. (1983), Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Perspectives.
Lagos: Longman Nigerian Ltd. Akpan, N. U.
(1982), Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Longman Nigeria Ltd. Okigbo, A.C. & Nsiegbunam, C. (2000), Modern Public Administration: Principles and Practice.
Enugu: Best Publishers.
Eneanya A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Applications, Lagos, Concept Publications.
Ezeani, E. O.
(2006), Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu: Snaap Press Limited.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
UNIT 3; Administration and Organization CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
Meaning of Administration 3.2 Meaning of Organization 3.3 Definition of Administration 3.4 Basic characteristic of administration 3.5 How Organization Function 3.6 Administrative Theories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The specific issues that will be examined in this unit include the definition of administration, administrative principles, administrative theories, and how organization fuctions.
In this unit, therefore, the meaning of administration and organization will be examined in details.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: explain administration in details explain organization in details Define and discuss the history of Administration Discuss administrative theories 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Meaning of Administration Administration can be seen as a rational human activity, which is inherent in any organised social life, public or private.
It occurs even in such a simple activity as “when two men cooperate to roll a stone which could not be moved by a man”.
Administration consists of all those operations, which aim at achieving specific purpose shared by two or more people.
To put it differently, administration is a cooperative human effort toward achieving some common goals.
It is thus a goal – oriented, purposive, cooperative, joint activity undertaken by a group of people.
3.2 Meaning of Organization Organization is a social unit or human grouping deliberately constructed to pursue specific goals.
It has three goals which may be either intermeshed or independent ends in themselves, namely; growth, stability and interaction.
To achieve intergration and organizational goals, the organization designs a formal structure that sets for the desired job relationship between people, who provide for the overall coordination of efforts.
Examples of organization are, corporations, armies, schools, mosques, hospitals, churches, prisons and so on.
3.3 Definition of Administration Administration is a universal concept and is also of universal importance.
According to Simon (1950), it is said to commence immediately two people agree to co-operate to undertake a task, for instance, to move a stone which none of them can move alone.
Also Nwosu (1985:3), noted that Administration is inevitable in any given situation where a piece of work has to be done, and this piece of work requires the effort of more than one person to accomplish it.
We are involved in administrative behavior when we co-operate with other people to accomplish such objectives as erecting a community town hall, constructing and managing schools, churches, hospitals, vehicles, assembly plants.
Thus, Onuoha (1999) explains further that administration exists whenever people cooperate to achieve the goals of their groups, and such achievements require planning, organization, command, cooperation and control.
It involves the mobilization, deployment and direction of human and material resources to attain the specified objectives.
When viewed from this perspective, certainly administration is rightly considered a very old and global phenomenon, which exists, even in the most basic human group.
We may therefore define administration as a capacity to coordinate and execute many and often conflicting social demands in a single organism so perfectly that they should all operate as a unit (Fayol, 1949).
Increasingly, those definitions and explanations, among others, point to the fact that administration is both public and private.
Administration has a long history which dates back to the beginning of the history of mankind, with research revealing administrative tasks and practices since recorded history.
Researches carried out by archaeologists and translators have revealed that going back to the time of ancient Egyptian dynasties, the ancient Chinese Empire, the ancient Greek city – states and Roman Empire, there is abundant evidence of impressive analysis with contemporary administrative tasks, merely by way of illustration, also the early Christian Church also played a remarkable role in the emergence of administrative practices.
A Chinese administrative expert writing in 500 BC remarked that:  Whoever pursues a business in this world must have a system.
A business which has attained success without a system does not exist.
From Ministers and Generals down to the hundreds of craftsmen, every one of them has a system.
Now, if we govern the empire or a large state without a system, we are not even less intelligent than a common craft man (Adebayo, 2004).
In our modern societies, various groups of people from all walks of life are woven together in a complicated process to achieve the objectives of the organization.
In both public and private establishments, large numbers of employees have to be supervised, coordinated and controlled.
Thousands of workers have to be brought together and distributed for work among the various departments of which the various organizations are composed.
Workers are graded in different levels of authority, from directors and managers at the top to messengers and laborers at the bottom.
Everyone has to be assigned his specific function and the contribution of each must be towards the objectives of the whole.
.
3.4 Basic characteristic of administration Administrative practice is based on some known characteristics namely: Hierarchy: Organization form a chain of superiors ranging from the highest ranking to the lowest – ranking manager Unity of command: Employees receive orders from one superior Chain of command: organizations are divided into various but functional sections, units, departments etc.
Span of Control: Employees are given authority and responsibility that commensurate with their offices, which should not be more or less.
3.5 HOW ORGANIZATIONS FUNCTION (a) Goals-Organizations are social units which pursue specific goals and this goals provide orientation by depicting a future state of affairs which the organization strive to achieve (b) Human Activity-Organizational behavior results from the interplay of human elements in a group relate to each other in pursuit of the reason for coming together and the climate or environment created in the process.
(c) Interest Group Pressure-Organizations are instrumentals created to serve one or more specific goals.
(d) Environmental Influence- Systems theories have contended that organizations are constructed by their environments.
3.6 Administrative Theories Administrative theories are postulated to establish how resources of organizations can best be managed.
Administrative approaches are broadly divided into Administrative Management, Bureaucratic Management and Human Relations.
Administrative Management This theory was first formulated by Henry Fayol, and later Luther Gulick and Lyndall Urwick.
The theory concentrates on attempts to develop principles of administration which can be applied everywhere.
According to them, any administrative principle once developed, should logically work in any kind of administrative institution.
Gulick and Urwick gave the discipline of public administration, the acronym POSDCORD which means planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
According to Gulick and Urwick, POSDCORD constitutes the key duties and functions of any administrator in an organization.
The acronym is criticized of having over –simplified the work of an administrator.
On their own part, still under Administrative Management theory, James D. Mooney and Allan C. Reilay formulated the four principles of organization which are: the coordinative principle; the scalar principle (hierarchical structure); functional principle (division of labour); and the staff/line principle (Onuaha, 1999).
Bureaucratic Management Bureaucratic theory was one of the earliest theories of organization.
It was formulated by Max Weber, who is fondly referred to as the father of bureaucracy and bureaucratic theory.
According to Weber, bureaucracy is hierarchical, and promotion based on professional merit and skill.
Bureaucracy is characterized by career service, which relies on and adopts rules and regulations for its operations.
The career professionals are guided by impersonal relationship among them, and between them and their clientele.
Weber is interested in learning how bureaucracy functions, why it functions the way it does, and its possible effect on the whole society.
Max Weber’s thesis is that to understand organization one needs to understand the procedures and activities of the bureaucracy, since bureaucracy gives meaning to organization.
Human Relations Human relations theory is another method of studying organizations.
The theory is reputed as being a reaction against person as machine concept of the scientific management school.
The human relations theory of organization examines the informal work group at the assembly, that is, the line level.
It tries to find out what makes these groups of workers work or refuse to work.
The theory tries to establish what relationship exists between motivation and job satisfaction, and how these affect efficiency and productivity in the organization.
The formulation of the theory began with the efforts of Elton Mayo in 1927.
The study focused on relationship between workers and managers, and among workers themselves.
The development of the theory continued with the efforts of Abraham H. Maslow, in what is  today known as Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs.
Maslow perceived human desire to be based first on psychological needs which provide the foundation for the next greatest need, which is security.
These are followed by love or belonginess, self esteem, and finally self actualization.
According to him, all these human needs collectively determine productivity in any organization.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have explained that public administration is a governmental administration or machinery for implementing public policy.
Some basic texts of renowned authorities are used as sources for the exercise.
These sources coupled with ideas of cerebrated administrative theorists have made our discussions much clearer.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have dealt with the meaning of administration, meaning of organization, definition of administration, basic characteristic of administration, how organization function, administrative theories.
We learned that public administration is the machinery as well as the internal process through which the government performs its functions.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What is Administration?
Discuss the history of administration.
2.
Discuss three different approaches to the study of Administration 3.
Explain four basic principles of administration 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, A.
(2000).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria (2nded).
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Adebayo, (2004) Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Eneanya A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Applications, Lagos, Concept Publications.
Fayol, H. (1984) Industrial and General Administration quoted in Adebayo, A.
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Maduabum, C.P.
(2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Nnoli, O.
(2003) Introduction to Politics Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research on Peace andConflict Resolution (PACREP) Nwosu, H.N.
(1983) “The Universality of Administration” In, Nwosu, H. N (ed.)
Problems of Nigerian Government, Enugu: Fourth Dimension Onuaha, B.
(1999) “Public Administration: Basic Principles, Techniques and Process.
In Adebayo, Augustus (ed.)
Elements of Politics, Lagos: Malthouse Press Limited.
Polinaidu, S. (2004).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: Galgotia Publications PVT.
Simon, H. Smithburg, D. and Thompson, V (1950) Public Administration.
In Adebayo, A.
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley.
Ujo, A.A. (2004).
Understanding Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printer & Publishers Company.
UNIT 4 ; ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 MAIN CONTNETS 3.1 Ecology of Public Administration 3.2 The Environmental Factors that have influence on Public Administration in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading I 1.0 ntroduction In this unit which is basically ecology and its influence in Public Administration, we shall make concerted effort to explain in details the relevance of ecology to the study of Public Administration, Though it can be argued that ecology will fit in better in science fields but the study will throw more light and bring to the fore how ecology is just not an interactions between individuals and their environment, but also as interactions between entire populations and the universe It means the influences of all natural, historical, political, economic, socio cultural, religious factors and other significant national experiences that in one way or the other influenced the growth and development of Public Administration in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to: Know the meaning of Ecology as it relates to Public Administration, Describe ecology in relation to the basic types of interactions found between individuals in ecological communities and how these interactions may influence a community over time.
.
30 MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The Oxford dictionary definition of ecology sees it as that branch of science that studies the distribution and abundance of living organisms, and the interactions between organisms and their environment.The general definition of ecology is the relationship that exists between plant and living organisms to each other and to their environment.
Human ecology examines humans and their interactions with their natural environments.
To Public Administration, it means an umbrella term for a variety of projects that involve the origin, importance and impact of Public Administration to the environment in which it operates.
In effect, it means the influence of all natural, historical, political, economic, socio-cultural, religious factors and other major national experiences that influenced the growth and development of Public Administration of any nation.
Ecology of Public Administration is concerned with how the differences in social, cultural and environmental factor coupled with historical experiences affect the way in which public administration is conducted and also how administrative actions affect the society in which it plays a part.
There is a general consensus that the very nature, purpose, activities, structure and behavior of public administration is determined or modified by the social, cultural, economic, political, legal, historical and technological factors in the environment.
Ecology of public administration further means how Public Administration relates with itself internally as well as how it relates with its external environment in terms of politics, social, culture, economy, and technology, legal and so on.
In order words, Public Administration does not exist in vacuum but rather exists within a socio-cultural and political environment.
Consequently, Richardson and Baldwin (1976) collaborates that Public Administrator perceives the problems to be resolved, the alternative possibilities within which choices can be made, the resources to be employed, the support and oppositions to policies and programmes, the client to be served or regulated, the market forces which establishes the cost of goods and services, interest groups that are concerned about what the Public Administrator does, the private and public institutions all form the environment of public administration.
It is within this environment that the consequences of public administration are to be judged ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ … (Ezeani, 2006:52).
Furthermore, MacRae and Pitt (1980) state that ‘the cultural norms and values of society limit the activities of public officials, and the methods which they can adopt to pursue their goals’.
In effect, though the formal structure of Public Administration of different countries may be the same but their informal and behavioural patterns possess considerable diversities that are conditioned by its environment.
Finally and so therefore, public administrators should ensure that environmental factors are taken into account when making decisions and ‘that environmental transformations which are occurring by themselves may be modified’ (Riggs, 1980).
The environment is constantly changing and exerting influences of various types on the organization.
Some of these influences are beneficial while some are detrimental.
It is the duty of the senior administrators to take advantage of the beneficial factors while counteracting the harmful ones, all aimed for the good of the society.
3.2 The Environmental Factors that have influence on Public Administration in Nigeria These factors are not peculiar to the third world states which include Nigeria environment alone as there are also found in other developing countries.
Some of these are discussed below: Social Factor In this situation, the loyalty to family, friends, local, state, and ethnic groups take precedence over loyalty to the nation.
This makes supervision and control difficult to implement.
It breeds corruption and mediocrity as merit is not the yardstick for appointment to public office or the award of contracts.
The Public Service is also viewed as a faceless entity or as ‘national cake’ which should be sliced and eaten by those who are fortunate to get close to it.
The bigger your slice, the smarter you are viewed by the society.
The same society regards those who have been to the corridors of power but have nothing to show for it as very foolish.
They are scorned and despised even by their own families.
The result is looting of the public treasury by public officers, politicians, the military et cetera.
This have impoverished the country and made the Transparency International to rate Nigeria as one of the most corrupt nations in the world despite the acclaimed fight against corruption in Nigeria.
Human Factor The superiors in most cases are very reluctant to delegate responsibilities and authority to their subordinates.
The subordinates, on the other hand, are often reluctant to accept responsibilities from their superiors.
The decision-making is usually concentrated at the topmost levels with the resultant inefficient use of the talents of both the superiors and the subordinates.
Language Factor There is no indigenous acceptable lingua franca for the nation with the result that most people are conducting their business in different languages.
This has adverse effect on productivity as well as on government business because, in most cases, it is hard to communicate or execute instruction effectively.
Educational Factor It was not really meant to educate the indigenes rather to serve the purpose of interpreting their language to the natives, hence the emphasis on reading and writing as against science and technology.
This state of affairs also was responsible for the emphasis on paper qualifications rather than acquisition of skills.
Time Factor Our government is very good in shunning out good policies or projects but find it difficult to define how or when these projects will be completed.
They are always not serious in tagging time to each project and follow it up with strict compliance.
4.0 Conclusion Public Administrators operate in a complex environment.
They affect, and to some extent, influence the environment in which they operate.
In playing advisory roles to the political class and also in policy implementation they must consider the internal and external environment.
Many governments are making serious efforts to establish an environment that is beneficial to the society.
Nigerian government is towing similar line.
5.0 SUMMARY From the discussion on the ecology of public administration we have seen the influence of environmental factors as it impacts on the practice of public administration in Nigeria.
Ecology in Public Administration context is concerned with the differences in social, cultural and environmental factors and how environmental factors and historical experiences affect the way in  which administration is conducted.
It also deals with how administrative actions affect the society in which it plays a part.
We also observed that development strategies and approaches must take into cognizance the very nature of the society involved, drawing at the same time from its human and material resources to achieve social change in the society.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is ecology of public administration?
2.
What are the environmental factors that have influence on public administration in Nigeria 7.0 References/Further Reading Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu.
Snaap Press Ltd. Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry.
NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Okoye, J.C. (1997).
Modern Management Techniques and Development Administration.
Onitsha.
Abbot Communication and Prints Ltd. Okoye, O. M. (2002).
Development Administration: Theories And Applications in Nigeria.
Onitsha.
Abbot Books Ltd. Olojede I., Fajonyomi B.
(2007).
Essentials of Public Administration.
Segeprints@yahoo.com.
Riggs, F.W.
(1964).
Administration in Developing Countries.
Boston: Houghton Muffin.
UNIT 5; EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria 3.2 Factors that Influence Public Administration in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The art of administration connotes the direction, co-ordination and control of man, material and resources to achieve some purposes or objectives.
An administrator is one who exercises that art.
There are administrators in all human activities.
Public Administration is that type of administration that is carried out in any affair that concerns the government.
It has a universal application irrespective of the system of government practiced by the country.
It is the type of administration that is practiced in all levels of government be it in the central, intermediate or local levels.
In this unit, we shall be looking at the evolution of Public Administration and the factors that influenced the growth of public administration in Nigeria.
You are expected to study this unit very well because a proper understanding of the unit will give you a proper footing and a sound foundation to grasp the rudiments of public service administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to do the following:  Trace the evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria,  Explain the influence of colonial masters as well as other influences on the practice of Public Administration in Nigerian,  Compare the modern public administration with the colonial administration in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA It has been posited that the present day public administration has its origin in the amalgamation of the colony and protectorates of the northern and southern Nigeria to form the colony and protectorate of Nigeria in 1914.
He equally informed that the Nigeria’s colonial experience also laid the foundation for economic and political underdevelopment of the country, (Maduabum, 2008).
Before then, the natives formed clusters which were administered on the basis of village or nomadic communities.
Gladden (1972) wrote that some form of administration had existed ever since there had been government.
In such communities, people of the same or mixed kindred found themselves living within common or defined geographical boundaries and interact as individuals or groups for their collective well being.
They had rule and regulations guiding them and established control measures with the arm of authority vested on their traditional rulers.
This was collaborated by Muwanga (1978) who traced the evolution of administration back to pre-government period.
According to him, ‘since man began to live in groups, even as a hunter, he had to subject himself to some form of administration or another’.
Such were the system of administration and social control in many parts of Nigeria until the advent of the British who colonized them.
The emergence of the colonial masters brought a different dimension to the native administration.
The British rule was fashioned to suit the colonial masters at the expense of the native dwellers.
Okigbo (1986) as quoted in Maduabum (ibid) rightly observed that the colonial public service were created and fashioned to suit the peculiar circumstances of ruling the people who were held in contempt by the ruling power, and considered valuable only for what they have to contribute to the metropolitan country.
To ensure a smooth administration of the natives, the colonial masters created two forces: a military force to intimidate their subjects and hold them in perpetual fear; and a small cadre of dedicated loyal servants to maintain law and order and instill that fear in the people.
The whites dominated the upper and middle positions in the administration, leaving the menial jobs in the lowest reaches for the natives irrespective of their educational qualifications and skills.
According to Maduabum (2006) the people were rendered completely passive and highly de-motivated.
This informs the non-challant and indifferent attitude to work by the Nigerian public servants as they regard the job as that of the ‘white-man’ who took all the benefits that accrued from the collective efforts of both of them.
However, the public service had undergone series of changes and reforms but it is yet to divorce itself of the class structure and the colonial mentality which it inherited from the colonial masters.
This mentality has continued to be the bane of the public service in Nigeria.
In the words of Maduabum (ibid), ‘the structural deformities and contradictions inherited in 1960 have continued to militate directly or indirectly against possibilities for growth, stability and development.
Political initiatives and regime initiatives have had to contend with structurally determined and conditioned crises and contradictions while making it possible for new problems  to emerge and fetter.’ In effect, the post colonial alignment and realignment of class forces in Nigeria have operated within the overall deformities and distortions introduced and nurtured by the colonial state and the colonial elite.
3.2 Factors That Influence Public Administration In Nigeria As we mentioned earlier, Public Administration is influenced by the factors that operate within the environment.
Some of the factors that affect Public Administration in Nigeria includes; Colonialism, political, socio-cultural, economic, legal etcetral.
1.
Influence of Colonialism Prior to the advent of the British rule, there was in existence some form of fragmented administration in the colonies before the amalgamation of the Northern and Southern Protectorates of the country in 1914.
The salient features of the evolution of the Nigeria Public Administration as listed by Maduabum (2006:14) are enumerated below: a.
From 1866 to 1874 the central administration for Lagos, Gold Coast, Gambia and Sierra Leone was transferred to Freetown, Sierra Leone.
b.
From 1874 to 1886, Lagos and Colony was administered from gold Coast.
c. In 1886 Moloney was appointed Governor of Lagos.
d. In 1889, the Niger Coast Protectorate was merged with the territories of the Royal Niger Company.
e. On 1 January, 1990, the protectorate of Southern Nigeria was created along with that of st Northern Nigeria.
f. In 1906, Lagos Colony was merged with Southern Nigeria.
g. In 1914, Lagos Colony plus Southern Protectorate were merged with Northern Protectorate to form an amalgamated territory called Nigeria.
Thereafter, a Governor General named Sir Fredrick Lugard was appointed for the amalgamated colony.
He was assisted by exclusively appointed all European Executive Council members.
Nigeria inherited a rigid centralized administrative structure that was designed to serve the interest of the colonial masters.
It was tailored to guarantee law and order, and to collect taxes and fines.
Theirs was mainly materialistic acquisition and not development administration or assimilation as was done by their francophone counterparts.
Adamolekun (2000:33) rightly puts it thus, ‘British colonial rule was an administocracy, a dictatorship, and an authoritarian system of government’.
In the area of personnel, the upper and middle levels were pre-dominantly occupied by the ‘whites’ while the natives were confines to the menial jobs irrespective of their educational background or skills.
The people were highly demoralized and this made many of them to leave the public service.
Those that remained were very passive and alienated with their jobs which they see as ‘the white man’s job’.
This is partly attributed to the fact that the whites took all the benefits that accrued from the job even when they did not work for it, leaving the natives who are the rightful owners as servants and onlookers.
This trend continued even after independence.
More so that even today, many Nigerians still regard the Public Service as ‘white man’s job’.
This is a significant legacy left for Nigerians by their colonial masters.
The foregoing has a lot of implications on the development of Public Administration in Nigeria, some of which are as follows; a.
Native administration system contrasted sharply with the imposed indirect rule system and complex structure of governance.
b.
The creation of a weak, repressive, and non-hegemonic state were strategy by the colonial rulers to further defraud the natives.
c. The Public sector was imposed on the people for the maintenance of law and order.
Rules and regulations were to be observed.
This was quite novel to the people who were used to their local ways and cultural values.
The Public Administration in Nigeria became obsessed with these rules and ensured its compliance but failed to take into consideration the fact that the rules were only to be used as guide to an end.
d. The development of indigenous elites and their marginalization in the internal production and exchange system had a negative impact on the psyche of the indigenous elites and the society in general.
e. The hierarchical organization of offices in terms of control and supervision contrasts with the predominantly form of traditional authority and its power structure.
f. The looting of the resources of Nigeria, discouragement of relevant and comprehensive education, the failure to create useful and democratic institutions, and the failure to build infrastructure that would facilitate mobility and contract amongst people were a huge set back to the development of Nigeria.
g. In area of personnel, the ‘whites’ were the sole occupants of the upper and the middle echelon of the public administration, leaving the menial and lower cadre for the natives irrespective of their academic qualifications and skills.
This had a negative influence on the psyche of the natives who felt marginalized and highly demotivated.
As a result, majority of the people regard the Public Service as a ‘white man’s job’.
2.
Influence of the ‘Nigerianization’ Policy Before the First World War, the colonialists avoided appointing Nigerians to positions of authority based on racial discrimination but by the end of the First World War, the structure of administration had been sufficiently established.
The Second World War gave a great boost to the ‘Nigerianization’ of the Public service.
During this period, Nigerians agitated for more appointments in the senior cadres which were hitherto denied them.
As a way of compensating Nigerians for supporting Britain in their war campaign, the Foot Commission of Inquiry was established in 1948, to ascertain the possibility of indigenizing or ‘Nigrianizing’ the civil service.
The report of this commission paved way for the ‘indigenization’ or rather ‘Nigerianization’ of the public service.
This policy later spread to the Eastern and Western regions of the country.
The Northern regions were later to tow the same  part.
The later introduced nepotism and ethnicity into their administrative system.
Nigeria gained her independence in 1960 and by 1961, the Public service of Nigeria had been fully Nigerianized.
3.
The Political Influence The political environment consists of the attitudes and actions of political and government leaders and legislators, which affect all kinds of organizations and individuals.
The policies the political class made affect virtually every aspect of life so do the implementation of such policies by the Public Administrators.
Nigeria gained independence from British colonial rule in First October, 1960 and since then she had experienced both democratic and military administrations.
Twenty two years out of the Fifty years of independence have been under democratic government, while the rest had been under the military administration.
Nigeria operates a federal system of government with three tiers system of governance; federal government, the State and the Local governments.
The Act of governance is as stipulated in the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
4.
Economic Influence Public Administration of a country is influenced by the Economic policies of the government in power for instance the privatization and commercialization policy of the Federal government which has influenced the prices of goods and weakened the purchasing power of the currency.
Nigeria operates a mixed economy whereby government invests in certain enterprises owned by the state such as PHCN, Nigerian Ports Authority (NPA), Defence etc.
These are known as Statutory Corporations or Parastatals.
The workers who work in these corporations are known as public servants.
The corporations are managed like private organizations except that the management and board members are appointed by the government.
5.
Socio-Cultural Influence The socio-cultural environment also influences the practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
By socio-cultural environment we mean the desires, expectations, attitudes, degrees of intelligence and education, beliefs and customs of the people in a given group or society.
4.0 Conclusion We can authoritatively say that Public Administration has emerged and has come to stay as a discipline.
Unlike before, the course is now being studied in several universities all over the country.
The profession is practiced in all governmental institutions in the three tiers of government and their parastatals.
We noted also that the issue of separating public administration as an art or a science poses some difficulties as we have observed in our discussions above.
Public Administration has traces of Science and Art fused together.
Still it will be quite wrong to view the science element of Public Administration as pure science.
5.0 Summary It is hoped that our discussion above has thrown more light into the debate as to whether public administration should be regarded as an art or a science or as both.
These discussions have lessened the fatigue and the confusion shrouded in the search for the real identity of public administration.
It has equally contributed to a better understanding of the subject matter, their roles and expectations in piloting the business of government for the overall development of the nation.
In the unit you will study the ecology of public administration.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What are the factors that influence public administration in Nigeria 2.
Discuss the EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA 7.0 Reference/Further Reading Adebayo A.
(1992), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan, Spectrum Books Ltd. Ademolekun, L. (1986), Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Experience.
Lagos, Longman Nigeria Limited.
Akpan, N.U.
(1982), Public Administration in Nigeria, Ikeja: Longman Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu: Snap Press.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd.  Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
The Encyclopedia Britannica, (1977), Vol.
2, London: Encyclopedia Britannica Inc. Wilson, W. (1887), “The Study of Public Administration”, Political Science Quarterly Vol.
2, June.
Also vol.
56, December, 1941.
MODULE 2 UNIT 1; PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AS AN ARTS OR SCIENCE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AS AN ACADEMIC DISCIPLINE 3.2 Public Administration As A Science 3.3 Public Administration as an Art 3.4 Reasons for Studying Public Administration 3.5 Challenges to the Study of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall be looking at the evolution of Public Administration and the factors that influenced the growth of public administration in Nigeria.
We will also discuss Public Administration as a discipline.You are expected to study this unit very well because a proper understanding of the unit will give you a proper footing and a sound foundation to grasp the rudiments of public administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to do the following: Trace the evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria, Explain the influence of colonial masters as well as other influenceson the practice of Public Administration in Nigerian, Compare the modern public administration with the colonial administration in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AS AN ACADEMIC DISCIPLINE Public Administration as a course of study emerged as a result of the deficiencies observed byWoodrow Wilson (1887) in the aparatus for performing the numerous tasks of government.
Woodrow highlighted the importance of studying the administrative institution of government.
He opined that the task of public administration was ‘to straighten the paths of government, to make its business less un-business like, to strengthen and purify its organizations, and to crown its duties with dutifulness’.
Other scholars developed interest in the study of public administration and their writings further awakened general interest in the subject.
However, despite the huge awareness generated by these scholars, the subject lacks a universally accepted definition.
While some argue that it should be treated as a separate subject that should stand on its own, other insist that it should be treated as a branch of political science.
Public administration can be viewed as those activities involved in carrying out the programmes and policies of government irrespective of the system of the government in power.
Whether monarchical, totalitarian, socialist, parliamentary or congressional, presidential, all countries of the world require a machinery to put into effect the policies of the government at all levels, that machinery is Public Administration.
As a discipline or body of knowledge, Public Administration is geared towards the understanding of governmental administration.
It is concerned towards the accomplishment of government businesses.
As an academic discipline, it is mostly interested in the structures, finances, materials and personnel and how it can be more proactive.
However, there have been confusions and debates as to the real status of Public Administration.
While some state that it should be regarded as part of Political Science, some say should stand alone.
There are some that say it is a science; some opined that it is an art.
Yet some classify it as both a science and an art.
Let us examine the subject under these three perspectives.
3.2 Public Administration As A Science Some scholars and practitioners of Public Administration are of the opinion that Public Administration should be regarded as a science.
These group contends along with Dahl (1978) that public administration has a universal validity independent not only of moral and political ends, but of the frequently nonconformist personality of the individual and the social and cultural setting too.
Other supporters of public administration as a science argues that public administration is a body of knowledge, which involves systematic thinking and research.
The human activities in organizations are guarded by principles and theories for the purpose of teaching and impacting sound knowledge to the practitioners.
This group attributes public administration as a body of knowledge, whose main concern is to study and learn the purposes of government for the purpose of teaching and assisting practitioners through scientific enquiry on solution to challenges encountered by public administrators.
Other notable scholars like Willoughby, Taylor, Fayol, Gullick and Urwik etc also defended the scientific side of public administration by their principles of administration.
Pfiffner agrees that specialists in Public Administration have achieved a considerable degree of uniformity in the manner of approach to the solution of problems which is characteristics of science.
From the foregoing, Public Administration is a science since it has a well systematized body of knowledge.
It is an applied science because it utilizes the basic principles of sciences.
It is equally a social science since it deals with human beings.
However, we have to note that Public Administration is not a pure science like physics, chemistry and biology which is subjected to a laboratory scientific experiment.
3.3 Public Administration as an Art Many schools of thought which sees the action part of the administration recognizes public administration as an art.
Webster Dictionary defines art as ‘skill acquired by experience, study or observation, the conscious use of such skill’.
Art is an acquired skill used in doing things.
According to Okigbo et al (2000) those who posit that Public Administration is an art has the following arguments to buttress their assertion: a.
That public administration deals with human behavior which can not lend itself to the uniformity of nature, nor can it be easily analyzed in the way that physical objects can.
b.
The administrative behavior is not always completely rational.
c. That no concept of Public Administration can be studied as an absolute constant, that is, something not affected by circumstances of time place and environmental factors d. That since the various factors that influence the application of the policy cannot be measured, Public Administration as a subject becomes inconcrete and flexible.
e. That laws also lack universality e.g administration policy changes from country to country due to differences in political system in various countries.
f. That most principles of Public Administration enunciated by eminent scholars like Willoughby has received serious challenges by Public Administrators who criticized the principles as being logically inconsistent (for instance, principles of centralization and decentralization).
3.4 Reasons for Studying Public Administration a.
Public administration helps student learn the basic concepts, principles and theories of public administration.
b.
It helps explain the purposes, functions, and continuation of government bureaucracy.
c. It provides knowledge of public organizations and the context in which and the methods by which they operate.
c. It promotes a superior understanding of government and its relationship with the society it governs and thus enables us learn more about how our country is governed.
d. It is useful as training for citizenship and for preparing citizens for an active participation in the process of democratic governance.
e. It makes us learn how to promote the public interest more effectively.
f. It promotes among the people an awareness of the importance of the administrative activities in their lives.
g. It is useful to make public policies, which are more responsive to public needs.
h. It as an applied discipline, provides knowledge which is helpful to the policy makers and to those who implement policies, and i.
It prepares student for employment in the government services and makes them aware of the opportunities and challenges of the public service and thus, it is useful as a self serving investment.
j.
It will enlighten you to what government does, or expected to do thereby arming you with a parameter to assess the performing government and the non performers.
k. You will understand the policy needs, its analysis, formulation, implementation and evaluation.
L. It will exposes you to understand the constrains of government in executing certain policies and why some policies succeed and why others policies fail.
m. You will understand who the public administrator is and the role they play in the society.
n. You will understand the minds and doings of government as to budgetary allocations; “who gets what and why”.
o.
You will understand clearly how and why you as a Public Administrator should be more proactive, effective and efficient.
p. You will get to know the relevance of Public administration in the society in general.
q.
You will get to know the government parastatals, ministries, departments, their functions, their characteristics.
3.5 Challenges to the Study of Public Administration There are some challenges and constraints confronting Public Administration in Nigeria and some other developing countries.
These challenges may not be present in the developed countries as they might have outgrown them in terms of development and advanced technology.
Some of these constraints are discussed below: 1.
Lack of knowledge as to the real status of Public Administration.
2.
The scope of Public Administration is wide.
3.
Inaccessibility of the practicing public administrators by the public administration students.
4.
Poor funding for research on the subject.
5.
Few Universities offering the course.
4.0 Conclusion We can authoritatively say that Public Administration has emerged and has come to stay as a discipline.
Unlike before, the course is now being studied in several universities all over the country.
The profession is practiced in all governmental institutions in the three tiers of government and their parastatals.
We noted also that the issue of separating public administration as an art or a science poses some difficulties as we have observed in our discussions above.
Public Administration has traces of Science and Art fused together.
Still it will be quite wrong to view the science element of Public Administration as pure science.
5.0 Summary It is hoped that our discussion above has thrown more light into the debate as to whether public administration should be regarded as an art or a science or as both.
These discussions have lessened the fatigue and the confusion shrouded in the search for the real identity of public administration.
It has equally contributed to a better understanding of the subject matter, their roles and expectations in piloting the business of government for the overall development of the nation.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Why do we perceived public administration as a science 2.
Why do we also perceived public administration as an art 3.
What are the challenges to the study of public administration 7.0 Reference/Further Reading Adebayo A.
(1992), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan, Spectrum Books Ltd. Ademolekun, L. (1986), Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Experience.
Lagos, Longman Nigeria Limited.
Akpan, N.U.
(1982), Public Administration in Nigeria, Ikeja: Longman Eneanya A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Applications, Lagos, Concept Publications.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeria: The Journey So Far.
Badagry: ASCON Press.
Maduabum, C.P.
(2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Concept Publications Limited.
NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
The Encyclopedia Britannica, (1977), Vol.
2, London: Encyclopedia Britannica Inc. Wilson, W. (1887), “The Study of Public Administration”, Political Science Quarterly Vol.
2, June.
Also vol.
56, December, 1941.
UNIT 2; GROWTH OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 GROWTH OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.2 Factors that responsible for the growth of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration has become all – encompassing and affects the lives of the people from the womb to the tomb.
Since the end of the Second World War, governmental activities have increased manifold and became more complex and pervasive.
Public administration has undergone far – reaching changes both in its objectives and in functions.
Consequently, public administrators have centered new functional areas.
They are grappling with new problems in administering public affairs.
It is recognised that public administration plays crucial role in all societies – developed and developing.
In the modern administrative state, public administration has become so significant that our development and progress depend mainly upon the efficient functioning of public administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain public administration as the basis of government  discuss public administration as an instrument for implementing laws and policies  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1GROWTH OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.2 Factors that responsible for the growth of Public Administration A number of factors have contributed to the growth of public administration.
These include the following.
The Scientific and Technological Development The invention of telephone and telegraph has made government and large–scale administration possible.
The introduction of mechanical devices in the office administration such as typewriters, teleprinter and calculators, photocopying machines, personal computers, fax and the electronic mail has brought even more changes that are revolutionary in the ways and methods of administration.
Industrial Revolution It has led to the growth of a very large –scale industries and factory production, overcrowded industrial towns, and urban slums.
The factory system also resulted in such evils as the growth of capitalism, large scale unemployment, exploitation of labour, longer hours of work and lower wages, employment of children in hazardous occupations, health hazards, etc.
Economic Planning Modern governments have resorted to planning as a method of achieving economic development and goals of welfare state.
The Afro–Asian developing nations have undertaken development planning to reshape their economies and societies and in the wake of the new liberalised economic reforms, planning, as a method of economic development and the administrative functions relating to it, are gradually being diminished.
War In times of both first and second world war, public administration through public administrators are entrusted with the responsibility of mobilising necessary manpower and resources for the purpose of war and other activities acquired by public administration during wartime continue and even after the termination of both wars.
Based on this, we can conclude that wars have their impact on the sphere of activities of public administration.
Calamities and Crises In the event of occurrence of such natural calamities, the public administrators have to act quickly and undertake rescue operations to prevent loss of life and property of the affected people.
In the developing countries, very often the public authorities have to manage the recurring crises resulting from social upheavals such as class and caste conflicts, communal riots, tribal and ethnic violence.
Rapid Growth of Population and Problems of Metropolitan Cities Proffering solutions to these problems has placed additional responsibilities upon public bureaucracy and the responsibility for tackling these social and economic problems has become the responsibility of public bureaucracy and increased its sphere of activity.
Emergence of Welfare State In the interest of socio-economic, the positive welfare state acts as a protector, a dispenser of social services, a provider of essential commodities, a manager of key industries and banking services, and a controller and regulator of private economic enterprises and activities.
4.0 CONCLUSION Public administrators participate in policy formulation because the administrative task of public bureaucracy includes formulation of policies and plans, executing and monitoring programmes, laying down laws, rules and regulations, which affect human actions in almost all walks of life.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has thrown light on the factors that responsible for the growth of public administration, which has been identified as the basis of government.
Public administration is also an instrument for implementing laws and policies and participation in policy formulation.
It also provides continuity when there is change in governments and provides a wide variety of services.
Public administration is an instrument of social change and economic development.
The reasons for the growth of public administration are highlighted and discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State and explain the reasons for the growth of public administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu: Snap Press.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Polinaidu, S. (2004).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: Galgotia Publications PVT.
UNIT 3; IMPORTANCES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 IMPORTANCES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration is a distinct field of administration, which is very important for the success of any government.
This peculiarity arises out of the fact that public administration is an action part of government, the means by which the purposes and goals of government are realized.
Specific issues to be covered here are: absorption of the work of government, meeting the challenges of government activities, implementation of government decisions, detaching of political activities from administrative work, negotiation, conciliation and arbitration and communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is intended that by the end of this unit, you should be able to: Explain how public administration absorbs the bulk of work of government that covers various aspects of the society’ life.
Discuss the importance of public administration in meeting the challenges of continuous growth in size and complexity of government activities 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1IMPORTANCES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION a.
Implementation of governmental policies So many processes are involved in the making and implementation of government policies that apart from the problem of high level expertise there is the problem of an intricate division of labour that must be solved.
1.
There is the need for a clerk to file the letters, 2.
Others to gather information, 3.
Still others to ensure that the conditions of work are agreeable to the civil servants, 4.
Some to post letters, keep documents, write memoranda, gather statistics, negotiate with individuals and groups, and so on and so forth.
It is not efficient for one individual to perform many of these functions at the same time.
Experience has shown that more is produced or achieved under conditions of a division of  labor than under conditions where no such division of labor exists.
Therefore, the demands of increased productivity, performance or achievement require a complex division of labor in which many more people are involved than those in government.
b.
Welfare services to the people Government activities have not only grown in size, they have also grown in complexity.
And such a complexity demands different kinds of expertise for various activities.
Therefore, even if individuals in government have the time and energy to carry out all their functions they will not have among themselves alone the necessary expertise to go round their specialized activities.
Thus, they need the variety of experts found in the public administration such as: (cid:0)Teachers for managing educational institutions and impacting knowledge into students and pupil in such institutions (cid:0)Doctors whose responsibilities are to save lives through preventive and curative measures using the equipments in the hospitals and clinics established by the government (cid:0)Industrialists for sustaining the industries established (cid:0)Accountants, whose task is to keep proper records of financial dealings of governments in addition to working out strategies of generating revenue for financing the activities of government (cid:0)Engineers that invent, operate and maintain equipments and machines procured to serve various purposes in all departments of government (cid:0)Soldiers whose responsibility is to maintain both internal and external security etc.
Members of government do not know everything; and they do not necessarily know more than everybody in their own area of expertise.
They need the help of experts and better minds.
c. Management of the economy One of the identified importance of Public Administration is its ability to absorb the work of governments.
There is noticeable increase in the activities of government all over the world.
They deal with: 1.
Foreign governments at the same time as they must oversee internal and external trade.
2.
The industrial and agricultural growth of the country; this involves embarking on measures that will create a conducive environment for both foreign and local investors 3.
The health of the population by establishing specialists and general hospitals as well as clinics for tertiary, secondary and primary health care delivery and maintenance of facilities therein 4.
Educational development through setting up of primary, secondary, and tertiary as well as Universities across the nation, most significant is also the servicing of these institutions.
5.
Provision of power: governments across the world have a demanding task of power generation which is the life wire of all the economic and social activities  6.
Defense: the task of ensuring both internal and external security remains one of the topmost activities of government, security challenges have increased over the years 7.
Management of finance: aware of the vast needs of the public and the lean resources always at the disposal of governments, governments have the responsibilities of employing effective measures for management of state resources 8.
Encouragement of development in science and technology: governments embark on measures aimed at encouraging scientific and technological innovations 9.
Promotion of sporting activities: Various sporting activities are encouraged by the government to keep her citizens healthy and entertain the populace (Nnoli, 2003) d. Serving Public Interests For a government to protect persons and property against violence, to collect taxes, and control traffic and health hazards, it must make regulations.
In order to settle disputes between parties, it must conciliate and negotiate.
In order to arrive at a just decision when faced with conflicting demands from opposing interests and functions in the community, a government must be continually engaged in balancing.
This balancing involves consultations, negotiation, and compromise.
Then, of course, there is the equally important obligation on the part of a government to provide services.
From the foregoing, one can see certain uses and process from the bedrock of the responsibilities of a government.
These include regulating, conciliating, balancing, compromise, service – providing.
Regulatory functions involve the making of rules and regulations and the issuing of policy directives.
For the rational and effective performance of these roles there must be prior planning, and gathering of information and data.
It will also be necessary to hold consultations with representatives of sectional groups and to reconcile conflicting interests and points of view.
All these tasks rest on public administration.
It is after these essential preliminaries have been carried out that rules and regulations, and directives are issued by government.
e. Role as a change agent (Technological change and Communication In public service, administrative officials perform a considerable portion of their task through communication which could either be in oral or in written forms.
One of the hallmarks of an administrator is to develop the habit of communication by discussion – telephone discussion, meetings and conferences, interviews with members of the public and clients of the department.
A good deal is achieved through face – to – face discussion.
In spite of the obvious advantages of oral communication and personal contact, it is inevitable that senior officials have to communicate frequently through the written word.
They have to write minutes in files, prepare memoranda and draft speeches for their chief executives – the President, Governor, Ministers, State Commissioners, and Chairmen of statutory bodies and agencies.
(cid:0)Minutes are views, opinions, advice, information, or directives expressed in writing during the course of day – to – day work in the office.
They are usually enclosed in paper jackets known as files.
Each file bears a reference number by which it is easily identified.
For the purpose of tidy arrangement and easy reference, each file is devoted to a single specific subject.
(cid:0)The decision to prepare the memorandum in a department may originate directly from the Minister/ Commissioners who are the political heads of departments or the permanent secretary.
A matter may have been subject of consideration in the department and on which the Minister and his officials have exchanged minutes in the file, each one expressing his own views as a result of the data and information assembled on the issue.
Matters may reach a stage at which the Minister is convinced that it is necessary to consult, inform or seek approval of the Executive Council.
At this stage, the Minister will direct his permanent secretary to prepare a memo.
Alternatively, the process may be the reverse.
The Permanent Secretary and his subordinates may have been examining a particular issue through the exchange of minutes in the file.
A point may be reached at which an important issue of policy calls for determination and as he may prepare a memo.
(cid:0)Public officials in the civil service, in the universities, local government service, statutory corporations, etc.
very often have to write speeches for their chief executives.
The chief executive may be the President of the nation, the Governor of a state, the Vice Chancellor of a University, a Minister of State, a State Commissioner or the Chairman of a statutory corporation or any governmental agency.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been ascertained that public administration is the hub through which social, political and economic development takes place within a state.
Indications are apt that through professionalism, administrative duties lean more towards national interest than individual interest.
Textbooks are the main source for the exercise; ideas from various scholars have been employed.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit dealt with the importance of public administration in details.
An important role of public administration is sustaining government’s work that is by implementing government policies.
Some of the areas highlighted in this unit include; implementation of governmental policies, role as a change agent, serving public interests, welfare services to the people and management of the economy 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
State and explain the importance of public administration.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu: Snap Press.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP)  UNIT 4 ; SCOPE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 SCOPE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration has evolved over time, it has played a key role in the organization of the structures of government and its usefulness to other disciplines cannot be overemphasized.
This unit attempts to identify the critical areas that are the concern of public administration.
These include; organization of countries’ structure of government, promotion of efficiency in the running of the various structures of government, public administration and politics, the interdisciplinary nature, and its environment.
2.0 Objectives At the successful completion of this unit, you are expected to: Describe the organization of public administrative systems Discuss the concept of efficiency with respect to public administration Examine Public Administration as an interdisciplinary field of study 3.1 SCOPE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION a. Interdisciplinary From public administration as management, the discipline moved to what may be considered the present state of the discipline – the new public administration – 1970 to the present which emphasized that public administration should be studied along with science and society.
The new public administration reflects the new interest in the relationship between knowledge and power, bureaucracy and democracy, technology and management and technology and bureaucracy.
Also the period is witnessing interdisciplinary programmes in science, technology and public policy.
Emphasis has shifted away from the traditional concern for efficiency, effectiveness, budgeting and administrative techniques to a new public administration much aware of normative theory, philosophy and activism; thus the new questions it raises are on ethics, the development of the individual members in the organization, the relation of the client with the bureaucracy, and the broad problem of urban growth, technology and violence (Nicholas, 1986) In sum therefore, political science and management are the major influences on the present stage of development of public administration.
The present stage pays extra attention to areas of organization theory and information science, emphasizing areas like the state, local  government, executive management, administrative law, and all those questions which seek to explain what the public interest is in democracy and under a highly bureaucratic set up that is confronted by high technology.
Accordingly, core areas of the spresent state of the study are: (a) Environment of public administration (ecology) (b) Quantitative methods, public budgeting and financial management; (c) Personnel administration (d) Public policy environment b.
Organization The study of public administration grew out of awareness that the machinery of government especially the executive branch, its institutions and its procedures has to be organized in the most efficient way.
Thus, in the study of public administration, policy and administration go hand in hand.
Policy is concerned with decisions as to what to do; It lays down the broad objectives of what is to be done.
It is concerned with the most efficient way of implementing policy decided by the policy makers At the same time administration is also concerned with serving and assisting the policy – making process.
Policy is concerned with ends while administration is concerned with means.
But very often means do influence ends.
c. Efficiency It is sometimes assumed that public administration is mere conveyor belt which mechanically executes the instructions passed to it by the policy – makers.
This view may have been likely more especially in the early days when the tasks of government were few and the machinery required was simple.
As late as the mid – nineteenth century, Andrew Jackson, President of the United States, asserted that the tasks of government were sufficiently simple that any person of intelligence could perform them without preparation or training.
Even in modern times when the responsibility of government for social and economic development has assumed great magnitude and demands exacting standards of efficiency, the impression still persists that the functions of public administration are not to be taken too seriously.
This erroneous impression is particularly true of countries like Nigeria which, for the most part of their political existence, had been under foreign guidance, the generality of the public regarded work in the public service as hard work in the service of foreign overlords.
Public administration therefore grew out of awareness that the machinery of government was inadequate and sometimes totally unsuitable to perform the functions of modernizing government.
Notable among the policy makers who were quick to notice the deficiencies in the government administration of their day and to urge the need to improve the system was Woodrow Wilson.
In 1887, when he was the Professor of Political Science at Yale in the USA, he stressed the importance of studying the administrative institutions of government.
Woodrow Wilson stressed that the task of public administration was to: 1.
Strengthen the paths of government 2.
Make its business less un –business – like 3.
Strengthen and purify its organization 4.
To crown its duties with dutifulness Since Wilson’s time, many writers on public administration, first in the USA and in recent times in Britain and Europe, have sought to emphasize the importance of the concept of efficiency in the functions and processes of governmental administration (Adebayo, 2004).
4.0 CONCLUSION Attention has been drawn on the scope of public administration where diverse areas have been identified with the concept.
Different views of seasoned administrators and academics in the area have been explored; this provides the major source of information for our discussion on the subject matter.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed in this unit, the organization of public administration, efficiency, the interdisciplinary of public administration so that the students we understand what we mean by the scope of public administration in details.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1 Explain what you understand by the scope of public administration in details 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1984), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Appleby, P. (1949) Policy and Administration, Alabama: University of Alabama Press Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu: Snap Press.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry Nicholas, H. L. (1986), Public Administration and Public Affairs 3rd ed., New Jersey: Prentice – Hall NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP)  UNIT 5; FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sustaining the incumbent government in power 3.2 Provision of Employment 3.3 Identification and Management of Resources 3.4 Provision of social welfare services to the populace 3.5 Conducting Foreign Affairs 3.6 Negotiation, Conciliation, and Arbitration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration performs a variety of functions which complement the activities of the various branches of government.
This unit therefore will discuss the various functions performed by public administration.
Among the roles highlighted in unit are (a) Ensure continuity of government activities (b) provision of employment opportunities for the citizens (c) Identification and management of available resources (d) provision of social welfare services to the masses 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the successful completion of this unit, you will be able to: Describe how public administration sustains the incumbent government in power Explain how public administration provides employment opportunities State the position of public administration in the identification and management of state resources List the responsibilities of public administration in the provision of social welfare services to the populace  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1FUNCTIONS PERFORMED BY PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN ANY GIVEN POLITICAL SYSTEM Ensure continuity of government activities; The most fundamental and important function of public administration is to ensure the continuity of government activities This involves certain measures: Generating goodwill for the government from the majority of the population Maintaining the ruling class in control of state power.
These primary and fundamental functions guide all other functions.
They include: Advising the government on how best to implement programs: On the bases of its long tradition and experiences in handling resources and its store of data on every aspect of life of a society, public administration is in a very good position to advise the government on possible alternative courses of actions and their implications for the government and society.
Public administration also performs the function of informing the public at large about government programs and what progress is being made to realize them.
The goal here is to avoid any conflict between the people and the government arising from the people’s ignorance of what the government is doing, as well as to help generate support and goodwill for the government.
The ministry of information usually performs this function.
A complementary function of public administration is that of informing the government about the attitudes of the people, including various groups in the society, towards government policies and programs.
Such information is often necessary to enable the government to order or reorder its priorities.
The various field agencies of government ministries and departments often provide it.
Provision of employment opportunities for the citizens An important function of public administration is the provision of employment for the population.
This function can be quite crucial in the ex – colonial societies of Asia and Africa where the government is often the largest employer of labor.
Most, if not all, of those thus employed work within the public administration.
Such employment opportunities include: (cid:0)National and Regional Ministries like education, health, science and technology, finance, information, sports, defense, external affairs, interior, agriculture, industry etc.
(cid:0)Public enterprises, such as agro – allied industries, petrochemical companies, power generating companies, transport companies, mining industries, communication companies, etc.
(cid:0)Government agencies which include financial regulatory agencies, import and export promotion bodies, anti graft, agencies, human rights bodies etc.
(cid:0)Educational and health institutions at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels (cid:0)Local government departments etc.
In this way the civil service is a source of the means of livelihood, in the form of wages and salaries, for thousands, if not millions, of the population.
Identification and management of available resources Another function of public administration is that of identifying all the resources available to the government from within its territory, and managing these resources adequately.
It is the government’s bureaucracy that is responsible for conducting or supervising surveys to assess the existence of: _ Various minerals within the country _ The unused agricultural potential of the nation _ Resource endowment with respect to the organization of industrial enterprises _ The availability of the various categories of labor force and _ The various resources that can be procured from external sources, as well as the prices for their procurement.
The government bureaucracy not only identifies all these resources, it also organizes the most profitable and useful way of bringing them into productive activity to the benefit of the ruling class in particular and the population in general.
Such resource management has as its goal the task of ensuring that government programs are tailored to the resources available to the government, and to eliminate all waste in harnessing these resources to the relevant government programs.
Provision of social amenities to the masses Public administration is also very crucial in the organization and provision of social welfare services to the population.
(cid:0)It is responsible in many countries for ensuring constant and adequate supply of water, electricity, health care and educational facilities.
(cid:0)It is responsible for public works such as urban and other road constructions.
(cid:0)The dredging of rivers, the building of port facilities, irrigation facilities, the organization of famine relief when necessary.
(cid:0)sanitation, drainage facilities, the control of erosion and other natural disasters.
(cid:0)the payment of pension and other labor benefits (cid:0)In some countries it organizes the provision of housing, day care facilities for pre – school children and public transportation.
In this way public administration influences directly the standard of living and the life style of the people.
Other functions include (cid:0)The planning of the nation’s economic life in both the short term and the long term, (cid:0)Taking care of the finances of the society, especially the balance – of – payment function or the foreign exchange task.
(cid:0)It must gather and store all possible information on every aspect of national life and preserve important documents for future use and scrutiny.
(cid:0)The practical details and the equitable and fair use of the instrument of justice, as well as law and order, are also the responsibility of public administration.
Public administration must ensure that the courts function smoothly and are not overloaded, that the prisons are not congested or run inhumanly, and that the law enforcement agencies do not act arbitrarily.
(cid:0)In addition, the civil service must co ordinate all the multifarious activities of its various departments and agencies to ensure that they are not working at cross – purposes.
4.0 CONCLUSION Public administration is seen here as a veritable tool for social, political and economic development of a state.
Some important areas are then put in perspective for discussion so as to ascertain the level to which public administration functions.
Public administration has continued to play a critical role in sustaining the government in power and providing essential public goods to the citizenry.
While different countries have different public administration, the basic functions of public administration are performed by all states.
5.0 SUMMARY In summary, this unit has highlighted the various functions performed by public administration in any given society.
Although not exhausted, we have looked at the following functions: Ensure continuity of government activities; Provision of social amenities to the masses, Identification and management of available resources, Provision of employment opportunities for the citizens 6.0TUTOR – MARKED 1.
State and explain the functions of public administration in details.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu: Snap Press.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry  NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP)  MODULE 3 UNIT 1; Private and Public Administration: Differences and Similarities 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1Private and Public Sector Administration: differences and Similarities 3.2 Meaning of Private Administration 3.3 Meaning of Public Administration 3.4 Comparison of Public and Private Organization 3.5 Features of Public Organization 3.6 Differences between Public and Private Administration 3.7 Similarities between Public and Private Organizations or Administration.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked/Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration is a broad discipline that covers a variety of issues which touches on maximizing the use of scarce resources to satisfy human needs.
The various issues that will be examined in this unit include; the distinction between public administration and private administration, similarities between public and private administrations.
This unit treats Public and Private Administration with emphasis on their differences and similarities.
To help us understand this unit better we will examine public and private organizations, their settings, features, goals etc.
It is when we have understood this background information about these organizations that we will be in a better position to appreciate their administration and performance.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit students are required to: State the differences between private and public administration Mention the similarities between private and public administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1Private and Public Sector Administration: differences and Similarities 3.2 Meaning of Private Administration Private administration or organization can be defined as all activities that are concerned with profit making by minimizing cost of productions and maximizing profit.
Sometimes, it may perform dual roles, that is, profit orientation and services rendering e.g communication industries.
Private administration is concerned with the activities of private organizations and institutions that are not owned jointly or principally by the government.
Whatever management decision or policy implemented in private organizations belong in the realm of private organization or administration.
Private administration recruits their personnel in a private manner.
Their training and development can  be internal or external depending on the organizations and the nature of services rendered.
3.3 Meaning of Public Administration Public administration has no generally accepted definition.
The scope of the subject is so great and so debatable that it is easier to explain than define.
But for the purpose of this study we posit that Public administration is a field of study (a discipline) and an occupation.
From the academic perspective, public administration can be viewed as "A program that prepares individuals to serve as managers in the executive arm of local, state, and federal government and that focuses on the systematic study of executive organization and management.
This includes instruction in the roles, development, and principles of public administration.
Public administration studies the implementation of government policies and prepares civil servants for this work.As a "field of inquiry with a diverse scope" its fundamental goal is to advance management and policies so that government can function effectively and efficiently.
Public administration is concerned with the organization of government policies and programmes as well as the behavior of government officialsin the execution of these policies.
Public administrators are regarded as public servants working in public organisations and parastatals at all levels of government.
Public administration could be regarded as both an art and science of managing government affairs, enforcing laws and fulfilling public policies.
It is an art because it concerns the practical management of men and materials for public interest.
It is a science in so far as it concerns the knowledge of the ways and methods for efficient fulfillment of public policy.
It could however not be regarded as pure science as its activities could not be subjected to practical laboratory tests as in physics, chemistry and biology.
3.4 Comparison of Public and Private Organization Public Administration could be seen as a decision making venture.
It’s the formulation and implementation of the governmental goals, objectives, aims, targets and aspiration.
Public administration is also, the planning, assessment, appraising performance by government executive and supervisors.
It is therefore action part of the government.
Public administration can at times be referred to as public management or the two worlds used interchangeably with other concepts like government administration and public sector administration.
It is concerned with how a country’s administration is organized and how it functions.
In Nigeria, there are three levels of public administration, which are: i.
Federal Government Administration ii.
State government Administration iii.
Local Government Administration  3.5 Features of Public Organization The features and processes of administration are much the same for every organization.
The features of public organization assist the organization effectiveness towards the realization of its goals and objectives so do that of the private organization.
These features are as follows: 1.
It acts as a vital link between the government and the people.
Information is passed from the government to the government.
In this way, public administration helps in linking the two segments.
2.
Public administration allows public servants for continuity, in the policies of successive governments despite political instability that has characterized the governments of African states.
3.
Public Servants/Administrators should not take part in partisan politics, so as not to endanger the party in government that comes to power.
On the other hand, the political party that comes to power could victimize the public servants, if only they are involved in politics.
4.
The appointment, discipline, dismissal and promotion of civil/public servants rest with a separate body called the public service commission.
5.
Public/Civil Servants must be impartial.
This means that public administrators must not be influenced by party feelings, thus, and to ensure t his, they have been tarred from participating in politics.
This does not mean however that, they cannot vote in elections.
For instance, if a public/civil servant intends to take part in politics by standing for election, he has to resign from service before contesting for any political post.
6.
The principle of Anonymity.
The detailed work of the administration is done by the public/civil servants.
They do not receive any blame or credit while discharging their duties.
It is however, the ministers of various ministries that do receive the credit or blame.
Thus, while the minster defends him against any mistake, he does not mention the name of any public/civil servant.
7.
Neutrality of Public Administration.
In all the policies of government, they must be seen protecting the image of the governments, without antagonizing the activities of the governments and their organs.
8.
Organizational Structure.
All public organizations or administration must possess internal structure that may be hierarchical structure also contains chain of command, unity of control, etc.
for the smooth running of the organization.
9.
Public organization provides essentially services to the people although; it may be engaged in profit orientation, as established in the government public corporations and parastatals.
10.
Public organization or administration is established through the Act of Parliament, with constitutional provision of their services to the three tiers of government.
It should be noted that all these features and characteristics of public administration can be applied to private administration.
But the principal aim and objective of establishing private organizations is profit maximization alsothere are no central bodies for recruitment of their staff.
3.6 Differences between Public and Private Administrations In order to clearly discuss and understand the subject matter of public administration and the basic issues involved in it, it is important to identify the differences between public administration and business or private administration.
Thus public and private administrations differ concretely in a number of respects.
1.
The goals that both are expected to serve are different.
Since their activities are guided by the nature of these goals the nature and organizational framework of these activities are bound to differ.
Clearly the maximization of profit is the overriding goals of private administration.
All efforts must be channeled in this direction, and all obstacles to its accomplishment must be removed.
The situation is quite different with public administration in which the goal, in concrete terms, is not as clear – cut and single minded.
Profit, social welfare, national prestige and political advantage are all to be accomplished simultaneously.
The public administrator must integrate them with a lot less emphasis going to the profit motive than in private administration.
As a result of this mixing of goals the public administrator must be more cautious and take less risk than his private counterpart.
He must be more diplomatic and less single – minded than the private administrator.
He must conciliate more, negotiate more and consult more than in private administration before arriving at a decision.
2.
Related to this difference in goals is the difference in the assessment of the performance of these two administrations.
In much of the work of public administration, it is difficult, if not impossible, to quantify the output or evaluate precisely the activities of the administrators.
For example, it is difficult to quantify the performance of those engaged in diplomatic activities, and the implementation of educational and health service programs.
The situation is quite different with private administration.
Here all inputs and outputs are evaluated in monetary terms, particularly their relationship to the profit or loss of the enterprise.
This inability to compare performance lies at the heart of the incomparability of public and private administrations.
3.
There is also a difference between the two types of administrations with respect to the span of activities with which they deal.
The activity of the private enterprise is one of a narrow focus, of the concentration of attention and resources on one line of activity.
Such activities are usually economic in character, and concern only one specialized or specific aspect of economic life.
Public administration concerns itself with at once social, economic, cultural and political activities.
The resultant diffuseness of attention adversely affects not only the time that can be devoted to an in – depth examination of the various aspects of the implementation of public programs, it also hampers a clear definition of the programs themselves.
4.
Unlike administrators in private administration, civil servants are accountable to the public for every aspect of their official activities.
They are subjected by the public to a detailed scrutiny of their use of resources and the nature of performance of their jobs.
They face  scrutiny by the press, legislature, taxpayers, the traditional surveillance of the courts, and by interest groups and political parties.
Although private administrators are influenced by their public contacts, are subject to government regulations and maintain a vast public relations activity, their activities are still in general private in character.
Their internal operations are to a large extent their own business, closed to the public gaze.
The demands for public consultation and participation in the activities of public administration are growing all the time due to the increase in the number of pressure groups and agencies that demand attention and the right to be consulted.
All these demands impose constraints on the public administrator in terms of his/her originality, initiative and use of discretion in the exercise of his/her judgment.
They also slow down the process of public administration because of the time involved in these consultations.
Caution becomes an important value.
Risk taking is banished.
And flexibility or adaptability is difficult to attain.
5.
Both administrations differ in their structure of decision – making.
In private administration the ultimate decision – making group is very small, limited to the board of directors of the enterprise.
In addition, members of this group have a direct personal and concrete stake in the output of the business.
Thus, the smallness of size enables decisions to be directed strictly to the output, and for a result – oriented decision to be emphasized.
The ultimate decision – making group in the public administration, the cabinet, is much larger than in the private sector.
It is, therefore, more unwieldy as a machinery for quick action.
Furthermore, its members are not personal owners of the public enterprise and, therefore, can be more easily distracted from the objectives of their decision – process.
6.
The structure for the implementation of decisions in public administration is much more decentralized than in private administration.
It consists of the various ministries of the civil service.
Therefore, much more than in private administration efficiency and effectiveness of the civil service depends to a greater extent on the effectiveness of the mechanism for coordinating the activities of these decentralized units.
This need for coordination is much less compelling in private administration where centralization prevails.
Thus, in public administration, the lateral organization of activities around functions is an important aspect of the overall structure of the system.
In private administration this lateral organization is absent.
All these functions are performed within one and the same structure.
This centralized arrangement encourages unity of command, greater flexibility in the allocation of resources and faster adaptation to changing conditions.
7.
In public administration, officials are employed until retirement, are promoted largely by seniority, and remunerated at standards rates within fixed pay scales and promotion grades.
Such conditions of service sometimes do not bear much relationship to performance since no matter how inefficient the official turns out to be he is already in a particular grade and can hang on until retirement.
In other words, he enjoys job security.
By contrast, in private administration an official can be relieved of his job anytime his performance is deemed inadequate.
The salary and fringe benefits are usually high but job security is absent.
The  consequence of this difference is that the private administrator is under greater pressure to keep his job than the civil servant.
He is, therefore, likely to be more highly motivated than the latter.
Thus, public administration is much slower and more inefficient than private administration because of its poor work habits and ethics.
8.
The hiring and firing of workers in private administration is swift and merciless.
In public administration, it is slow and humane.
Consequently, private administration can move faster in the organization of its activities than public administration.
It can quickly add or drop staff, as it deems necessary to achieve its objectives.
Public administration does not enjoy this kind of flexibility.
9.
Discipline is much harsher in private than in public administration.
This is essentially because the private sector thrives on the exploitation of man by man.
Profit takes precedence over human values.
Although the conditions of work are usually better than in the public they are much more exploitative, considering what the worker produces in relation to what he gets as wages and social security.
Thus, the public administrator is under much less pressure from the enterprise than his private counterpart.
He/she is, therefore, more relaxed with his/her work, and more likely to develop a positive non – mercenary attitude to his/her work.
Public service cultivates feelings of patriotism that are vital for the overall success of the society.
The public servant develops a sense of participation in the history of his people in a very direct way.
This positive attitude is an asset to public administration that is denied to private administration (Nnoli, 2003) 3.7 Similarities between Public and Private Organizations or Administration.
There exist some similarities or comparisons between public and private organizations or administration in term of conditions of service and other operations of these organizations.
1.
Both organizations are guided by government’s circular, gazette, bulletins, constitution etc.
and not necessary control.
But the government regulations enable both organizations to have a healthy environment.
2.
Both organizations have conditions of service in terms of employment, recruitment, promotion, salary, discipline, pension and other welfare incentives offered by these organizations to their employees, individual and collectively.
3.
Both organizations or establishments provides some essentials services like banking services, petroleum and oil supplies, telephone services and educational services.
4.
Both organizations provide satisfaction to the public in respect to their various activities; programmes and products.
5.
Both organizations source for personnel in the labour market, that is, there is always qualification before recruitment into these organizations.
6.
Both organizations are always established based on certain goals, aspirations, objectives and aims.
That is, no organization can be established without solid reasons and things to achieve, either for profit, services, or both.
7.
Both organization, have the ability to establish management-labour relations and settlement of conflict that may arise in the course of such relationship.
8.
Both organizations source their capital, money or fund used in establishing these  organizations from the people or public (either internally or externally).
9.
Both organizations have internal structure of organization, that is, there is always hierarchical mode of operation, chain of command, division of labour, professionalism etc.
These are so because different people perform different works.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the discussion above, on the comparison of public and private organization, we can say that administration which is the organization and direction of human and material resources exist in both public and private organizations.
Public administration as carried out in government owned organizations within the three levels of government (federal, state and local) and with the intension to provide efficient services and not for profit making, that private administration is carried out in private or jointly owned organizations with the intentions to provide essential services and are profit-oriented.
However, both organizations have conditions of services for their personnel in common market.
They both have similar internal structure of organization; satisfy the public with various services, activities, programmes and products, guided by government circular, constitutions, source for capital or fund from the people etc.
5.0 SUMMARY We have learnt in this unit that Public administration is administration as it is practiced in the three tiers of government and its agencies while private administration is that which is practiced in the private sector either by an individual or jointly owned businesses ventures.
We also examined their distinguishing factors as well as those factors they had in common.
Their formation, objectives, goals and settings are features that should be borne in mind.
Also it should be borne in mind that where one is service oriented the other is profit oriented and both of them are guided by these goals.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Distinguish between Public and Private Administration.
2.
Mention the similarities between public and private administrations 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L.(1983), Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Perspective.
New York: Longman Inc. Adamolekun, L. (1985), Nigerian Public Administration 1960 – 1980: Perspectives and Prospects.
Ibadan: Heinemann.
Adebayo, A.
(1992), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd.  Adebayo, (2004), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani,E.O (2006), Fundamental of Public Administration.
Enugu: Ziks-Chuks Publishers.
Hughes, O. E. (1998), Public Administration and Administration: An Introduction.
London: Macmillan Press Ltd. Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP) Weber, M. (1946), Essays in Sociology (Translated by H. H. Gerth and C. W. Mills, New York: Oxford University Press Weber, M. (1947), The Theory of Social and Economic Organization (Translated by A. M. Henderson and T. Parsons, New York: Oxford University Press  UNIT 2; RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND POLITICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Relationship between Public Administration and Politics 3.2 Dichotomy between Public Administration and Politics 3.3 Challenges of Politics and Administration Dichotomy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction This unit will highlight the symbiotic relationship between the two and the importance of their working harmoniously for the common good.
This unit is very interesting and you will benefit very well if you will pay close attention to all the issues discussed therein.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you are expected to have a good knowledge of the topics discussed herein as well as be able to do the following:  Discuss in detail the relationship between politics and public administration.
Differentiate between the administrators and politicians.
be able to discuss in detailed the functions of the two to the society.
Advise on the importance of a harmonious relationship between administration and politics.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POLITICS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The relationship between politics and public administration has always been a case for debate especially at the formative years of public administration.
In those days, public administration had a confused status.
Some argued that it should not stand alone but should be lumped together with political science.
Even in the Political Science department, it was treated with scorn.
Some were of the view that it should be grouped with Management Science but there also it could not find its bearing as it was swallowed up by many management courses.
Finally, it found its bearing when it was accepted as Public Administration and to stand on its own and treated as such.
The relationship between politics and public administration can be viewed from two sides of a coin.
There are some contenders who feel that there is no distinctive relationships between  Politics and Public Administration as both are inter-connected.
They argue that the name public administration itself embraces both politics and administration.
Administrators sometimes make political decisions in the course of executing their duties.
For instance when the politicians formulates policies, the administrators while implementing these policies has to weigh and consider conflicting demands and interests and tries to balance and synthesize them all for the growth and development of the polity.
The other school of thought that sees politics and public administration as different, contend that in all democracies, the politicians who are the executives are vested with the authority of policy formulation.
They set the broad lines of the policies to be pursued while the public administrators merely implements these policies and disposes current governmental businesses as directed by the political class who are their boss.
They execute routine tasks and assignments to achieve the goals and objectives of the government in power, while the politicians apart from formulating policies dictate the pace of governance.
3.2 Dichotomy Between Politics And Public Administration The pioneer scholars and writers on Public Administration notably Woodrow Wilson (1887) stressed that administration lies outside the proper sphere of politics and that administrative question are quite different from political questions.
He further maintained that though politicians set the task to be performed by the administrators, they should not usurp its offices.
This assertion was corroborated by John Pfiffner (1935) as he maintained that politics must be controlled and confined to its proper domain which is determination, crystallization and declaration of the will of the state while Administration should confine itself with the role of seeing to the implementation of this will once it has been clearly defined by the political class.
In other words, politicians should stick to their role of policy determination and stop meddling in the affairs of the administrators as they apply their technical expertise in executing these political wills of the executives.
Frank Goodnow (1914), also corroborated their assertion and made a clear distinction between politics and administration.
His was the classification of politics as the ‘expression of the will of the state’ and administration as ‘the execution of that will’.
It is interesting to note that one of their contemporaries, Willoughby (1920), did not dwell in trying to separate the two but went further to state that administration is the ‘fourth arm’ of government along with the legislature, the executive and the judiciary (Adebayo, 1992:68).
Dichotomy between Public Administration and Politics and the status of Public Administration may be viewed by the classical model theory as postulated by Taylor (1911).
Taylor laid emphasis on the efficiency and productivity in organizations which can be achieved by applying scientific method to guide division of labour, to assign each worker to a specific task which will be accompanied by a good reward for accomplishment, thereby increasing productivity and efficiency.
This Scientific method believes that there is one best way to achieve a set objective.
They also opined that once this objective is defined, the management (administrators) should be given full responsibility and autonomy to achieve the objective in the most efficient way by applying the scientific method to the stated objective or problem.
The study of politics and public administration has shown that their roles are complementary in nature.
Whereas politics refers to the process by which policies of the state or organizations are chosen and allocated, administration deals with the process by which these policies are implemented and executed.
In other words, politics are more concerned with what available resources, right and duties are allocated and to whom and when, administration deals with how wealth, resources, rights and duties are distributed to those concerned.
Most of the functions of politicians and administrators are clearly discernable while some are difficult to distinguish.
For instance, the creation of more local government areas is political while its implementation is administrative.
The chairman of a local government area may be a politician but is not divorced from the administration of the local government.
The Legislatures also exhibit administrative behavior.
Politics and administration are attributes of both the legislature and the executive branch of the government.
In the earlier phase, public administration and politics are regarded as the same study but later on distinction between them began to emerge.
While no clear cut formular may be possible in certain areas, it will suffice to assign politics and politicians to the role of defining the broad objectives of administration and manipulation of political power while administration and administrators be confined to the roles of provision of data, suggestions and criticisms for the formulation of policies and the execution or implementation of the policy once it is made.
3.3 Challenges of Politics and Administration dichotomy Political neutrality of the public administrator stipulates that the public administrators must be politically neutral.
They should put their politicking in their pockets and not meddle with the affairs of the politicians.
In other words, they should not play partisan politics but instead are expected to show allegiance to any political party in power.
However, the major challenge to issue of dichotomy of politics and administration as well as political neutrality came to the fore as a result of the following factors: a.
There is no clear cut distinction between politics and administration in some instances.
An example is the usurpation of policy making power by the administrators.
According to Wu (1978:341), this may be due to increased need for efficiency or increase in the complexity of their duties or professionalization and specialization of the specialists; administrators have increasingly gained political power.
b.
Added to the above is the demand by the political class, social critics and the society in general to make public administration more responsive.
This means that the public administrators should showactive participation and be more responsive to the needs, yearnings and aspirations of the general public.
When they do this they have added to social equity to the classical objective of the political class.
A potential commitment to social equity means their  meddling in politics and policy making and this inevitably means that they are not politically neutral.
c. The Public Administrators these days are keenly involved in both the policy-making and policy implementation of the people directly involved.
The administrators play an active role in policy making.
According to Appleby (1949), there is no such thing as policy making being separate from policy execution.
He opines that public administration is policy making and is part of political process.
Richard (1975:648) shares the same view on this.
According to him, Administrators are involved in every step of the political process from the technical readjustments of previously enacted policies, to the creation and implementation process for a completely new and innovative approach to an immediate problem.
In the same vein Gross (1964), punctured Goodnow’s assertion of policy and administration dichotomy and argued that policy making and its execution are inseparably intertwined.
He argues that purposes are given meaning and content by the people who cooperate in carrying them out.
Purposes, he says, emanate from an entire organization in interactions with its environment.
Chapman (1959:275) summarized it thus, that ‘policy’ is nothing more than the political activity of the civil servant.
From the foregoing, we can deduce that it is becoming increasingly difficult to separatepolicy- making by political actors from policy implementations by the administrators.
4.0 Conclusion There are two contending groups to note here; one group argues that there are dichotomy between the politicians and the administrators while the other group is insisting that there is no such dichotomy.
The true position, as obtains in most developing countries, is close interaction between politics and administration rather than dichotomy.
This is evidenced by the following reasons: Senior public administrators, by virtue of their functions as advisers to the politicians on policy matters, are often involved in policy making.
Public servants are sometimes prejudiced and their personal opinions do affect their official assignments.
Politicians sometimes delegate their duties to senior public administrators especially on matters with policy implications.
Even policy implementation itself has policy implications.
5.0 Summary In this unit we examined the relationship between Public Administration and politics.
The challenges they face were also discussed.
It is hoped that you have acquired a lot of knowledge regarding this topic that will enable you discuss it intelligently at any level.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1 .Explain in details what you understand by Dichotomy Between Politics And Public Administration 7.0 References/Further Reading Adebayo, A.
(1992), Principles and Practices of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Ademolakun, L. (1986), Politics and Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Appleby, P.H.
(1949), Policy and Administration, Alabama: University of Alabama.
Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani,E.O (2006), Fundamental of Public Administration.
Enugu: Ziks-Chuks Publishers.
Hughes, O. E. (1998), Public Administration and Administration: An Introduction.
London: Macmillan Press Ltd. Goodnow, F. J.
(1914), Politics and Administration, New York, Macmillian.
Gross, B.
A.
(1964), The Managing of Organisations, Glencoe.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Pfiffner, J. M. (1935), Public Administration, New York, The Ronald Press Company.
Richardson, I. I. and Baldwin, S. (1976), Public Administration, Columbus: Charles Merrill.
Wilson G. (1887), ‘The Study of Administration’ Political Science Quarterly, vol.2, June.
Willoughby, W. F. (1920), The government of Modern States, New York, Appleton-century Crots Inc.  UNIT 3; DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Political Approach to Public Administration 3.2 Behavioural Approach to Public Administration 3.3 Formal Structural Approach to Public Administration 3.4 System Approach to Public Administration 3.5 Bureaucratic Approach to Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit teaches you the different approaches to public administration.
The bulk of the literature on public administration deals mainly with approaches.
One sees public administration as essentially management, each perspective has a different set of values, offers distinctive organizational approaches for these values, and each considers the individual citizen in different ways.
Realistically, public administration indeed consists of varying mix of these branches.
These approaches to public administration are discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the approaches to public administration in details.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Political Approach to Public Administration Some scholars claim that politics is central to the organisation of public bureaucracies.
The political approach to public administration was perhaps most forcefully stated by Sayre.
Public administration is ultimately a problem in political theory; the fundamental problem in a democracy is responsibility to popular control; the responsibility and responsiveness of the administrative agencies.
Bureaucracies of the elected officials (the chief executives, the legislators) are of central importance in a government-based organisation, which is increasingly on the exercise of discretionary power by the agencies of administration.
Public administration was anything but devoid of politics.
Once public administration is considered a political endeavour, emphasis is invariably placed on a different set of values than those promoted by the managerial approach.
Efficiency in particular becomes highly suspect, because it has little to do with the bigger questions of government.
The political approach to public administration stresses the values of representativeness, official responsiveness, and accountability through elected officials to the citizenry.
These are viewed crucial to constitutional democracy and public administration.
One can find many examples of governmental reforms aimed at maximising the political values of representativeness, responsiveness, and accountability within public administration.
Public administration organised around the political values of representativeness, responsiveness, and accountability tends to be different from the managerial approach to organisation.
Rather than emphasising clear lines of functional specialisation, hierarchy, unity neutral administrative competence, the political approach stresses the extent and advantages of political pluralism within public administration.
Under the political approach, the structure of public administration becomes politicised, with different groups continually seeking representation.
Over lapping missions and programmes become common as the administrative structure comes to resemble a political party platform that promises something to almost everyone without establishing clear priorities for resolving conflicts among them.
Agency becomes adversary of agency and the resolution of conflict is shifted to the legislature, the office of the chief executive, and the courts.
Moreover, the number of government agencies tends to grow over time, partly in response to the political demands of organised interests for representation.
This approach to administrative organisation has been widely denounced as making government unmanageable, costly and inefficient, but as Seidman argues, it persists because administrative organisation is frequently viewed as a political question with stress on political values.
The political approach to public administration does not depersonalize the individual as does the managerial approach rather, it identifies the individual’s interests as being identical to those of others considered to be within the same group or category.
For example, farmers growing the same crops or located in the same state geopolitical subdivisions are considered alike despite individual differences among them.
The same is true in any number of areas of public administration that are engaged in implementing public policies.
This tendency fits the political culture.
The political approaches often base its decisions on the opinions of the public, interest groups and the media.
Elections, public opinion surveys, and news coverage are among the political approach’s prime techniques for gaining the relevant information.
Consequently, the proper approach to serving the public interest through administration is not necessarily a question for resolution by experts or science.
Rather the public or organised segments of it ought to have a large role in determining what is in the collective interest.
Indeed, public administration under political approach reflects public choice and interests.
3.2 The Behavioural Approach to Public Administration This approach focuses on the internal dynamics within the administrative organizational behavior of individual and overall internal environment.
In the behavioural approach, there is strong concern with procedures for collecting and utilizing data, such as, social survey questionnaire and developing knowledge that is verifiable.
3.
3 The Formal Structural Approach to Public Administration This approach identifies the formal structure of governmental administration as a significant feature that could form the focus of study.
When applied to the study of public administration, it is essentially descriptive, which can be extended to include comparison and prescription.
For example, the differences and similarities between the formal structure of governmental administration in two states can be compared.
Some scholars who are also interested in prescription might discuss what constitutes a good structural arrangement.
3.4 The System Approach to Public Administration This approach looks at the entire organization.
According to the systems theorists, a system is made up of interdependent parts, which interact with the environment by importing inputs while exporting outputs in order to maintain a permanent state of equilibrium.
When applied to public administration, it represents inputs from the environment in form of citizens demand for the provision of goods and services.
The administration of these demands in a conversion process is delivered as outputs, such as, orderliness of the society, quantity and quality of goods and services, policies, decisions, programmes, projects, etc.
These outcomes are further looped through feedback within the same cyclical process.
3.5 The Bureaucratic Approach to Public Administration This approach is concerned with the application of the Weberian concept of bureaucracy in the context of government administration.
Weber argues that ideal hierarchical authority, specialization of function, specified sphere of competence, operation on the basis of rules and impersonality.
He contends further that the model is ideal and important, as any organization that is characterized by its features will function both rationally and efficiently.
As a theoretical framework, the bureaucratic model has made a great contribution to the study of both public and private organizations.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that the bulk of the literature on public administration deals mainly with five approaches.
Each of these approaches-political, bureaucratic, system, formal structural, behavioural emphasises different values and procedural and structural arrangements for the operation of public administration.
Each views the individual citizen in a remarkably different way, and each adopts a different perspective on how to develop knowledge.
These approaches are embedded in our political culture.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about different five approaches to public administration in any given political system.
The political, bureaucratic, system, formal structural, behavioural approaches to public administration are highlighted and discussed at length.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT State and explain the different approaches of public administration in details.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekwealor, E.F. (2007).
Fundamental of Public Administration.
Onitsha: Abbot Books Limited.
Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Koontz, H.; et al.
(2008).
Management: A Global and Entrepreneurial Perspective (12th ed.).
New Delhi.
McGraw-Hill.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Sapru, R.K. (2008).
Administrative Theories and Management Thought (2nd ed.).
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited.
UNIT 4; SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT THEORY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Scientific Management Theory 3.
2 Taylor’s Concept of Management 3.3 Principles of Scientific Management 3.
4 Components of Scientific Management 3.5 Aims of Scientific Management 3.6 Impact of Scientific Management 3.7 Relevance of Scientific Management 3.8 Criticisms of Scientific Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are two major sub-groupings of classical approach, they are: the scientific management founded by Frederick W. Taylor and bureaucracy formulated by Max Weber.
The scientific management coined by Louis Brandeis was perceived as a way to achieve greater efficiency in the management of public business.
The best known proponent of the scientific management movement is Frederick Winslow Taylor.
His is generally acknowledged as the father of scientific management.
According to Koontz et al (1983:37) in Ezeani (2006:102).
Probably no other person has had a greater impact on the development of management.
His experiences as an apprentice, a common labourer, a foreman, a master mechanic, and then the chief engineer of a steel company gave Taylor ample opportunity to know at first hand the problems and attitudes of workers, and the great opportunities for improving the quality of management.
The objective of scientific management was to discover the basic principles of motion involved in the performance of physical tasks and then to determine the ‘one best way’ of performing any task.
A major contributor to this approach was Frederick Winslow Taylor, who saw scientific management as a mental revolution in which a scientific approach could be brought to bear not only on the performance of physical tasks but also on all social problems.
In 1911, Frederick W. Taylor published his famous work titled the “Principles of Scientific Management.” This book had three goals, the goals include the followings.
i.
To demonstrate the great losses by the United States of America as a result of the daily inefficiencies practised by its people.
ii.
To suggest that the solution to this problem lay in employing people of ability and in the practice of systematic management.
iii.
To prove that systematic management was based on definite rules, laws and principles.
According to Taylor, scientific management is not an efficiency device, nor does it belong to any group of efficiency devices.
Scientific management is no new scheme for rewarding men, it is no bonus system, no piecework system, no premium system of payment; it is no new method of figuring cost, it is not one of the various elements by which people refer to it.
It is not time study, nor man study; scientific management does exist and cannot exist until there has been a complete mental revolution on the part of the workmen working under it, as to their duties toward themselves and toward their employers, and a complete mental revolution in the outlook for employer, toward their duties toward themselves, and toward their workmen.
In addition, until this great mental change takes place, scientific management does not exist.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should able to:  explain the components of scientific management  describe the aims and impact of scientific management  explain the criticisms and relevance of scientific management.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Scientific Management Theory This theory was propounded by Frederick Taylor.
The key tenet of scientific management is that human beings are adjunct to the machine, thus the workers should be made as efficient as the machine they operated in order to achieve optimum productivity and efficiency.
But human beings as adjunct of the machine can only be applied to the lower echelon of the organization.
The weakness of the technique lies in the fact that human beings are not machine, and do not become activated like machines.
Workers are human beings with values which require that they be differently treated in an organization  Scientific management theory views productivity as the major goal of an organisation.
This school of management thought is strongly influenced by the rational systems of theoretical thinking.
Frederick Winslow Taylor applied scientific methods to develop accurate measurements to determine what constitutes a day’s work for each operation by establishment standards through studying the job to find the best way of doing it in the shortest time required.
3.2.
Taylor’s Concept of Management Taylor views management as a process of getting things done by people operating independently or in groups.
According to George in Sapru (2008:95) Taylor’s approach to the management problem is direct and simple.
Define the problem, analyse the work situation in all its facets, apply measuring devices to all facets capable of being measured, experiment by holding all aspects of the job constant except one which would be varied, development of guide or principle of management from the observations and study, and finally, prove the validity of the principle by subsequent application.
Taylor’s main thesis is that prosperity to the society can come only through the joint endeavour of the management and labour in the application of scientific methods.
He calls for mental revolution on the part of both management and labour so that they might cooperate in the spirit of work harmony with a view to improving their respective lots– attaining high wages for labour and increased output at low costs for managements.
Frederick Winslow Taylor observed that management is neglecting its functions and pushing the burden of methods and output on labour.
He suggested that management must do the work of planning, organising, controlling, determining methods and the like for which it is best suited.
3.3 Principles of Scientific Management Taylor observes that what the employees want from their employers beyond anything else is high wages; and what employers want from their employees most of all is low labour cost of manufacturing.
The existence or absence of these two elements forms the best index to either good or bad management.
Taylor laid down four underlying principles of scientific management as follows.
The Development of True Science: According to Taylor, the development of true science consists of a deliberate gathering together of mass traditional knowledge by the management, using motion study, time study, recoding it, tabulating it, reducing it, in most cases to rules, laws, and in many cases, to mathematical formula, which are applied to the work of the employees.
The principle, therefore, entails the establishment of a large  daily task, classified after scientific investigation as the amount to be done by a suitable, selected and trained person under optimum conditions.
The result of the development of a time science according to Taylor is immense increase in output by both the employer and the employee.
The Scientific Selection and Progressive Development of the Workmen: Taylor avers that the deliberate selection of the employees is the second of the great duties that devolved on the management under scientific management.
The management must take a great deal of trouble in selecting the employees in order to ensure that employee possessed the physical and intellectual qualities necessary to achieve output.
Taylor stated that it is the responsibility of the management to develop the workers by training them to enable them perform better, and then pay them higher wages than ever before.
The scientific selection and progressive development of an employee is the second of the great duties that devolve on the management under scientific management.
The Bringing Together of the Science and the Scientifically Selected and Trained Men: This principle calls for mental revolution on the part of the workers and management.
According to Taylor, select and train your employees to the maximum.
Unless there is someone who will make the men and the science come together, they will stay apart.
He noted that the greatest resistance to scientific management comes from the side of management.
The workers, he noted are willing to cooperate in learning to do a good job for a higher pay.
A Uniform Division of Work and Responsibility between Management and Workers: This is the last principle of scientific management.
Here, the management and workers should share equal responsibility – with each sector performing the work for which it is best suited.
With this intimate cooperation, the opportunities for discord and conflict are almost eliminated since the exercise of this authority is not arbitrary.
Thus, under scientific management, science would replace the rule-ofthumb, harmony would replace discord, cooperation would replace individualism, maximum output would replace restricted output, and each man would be developed to his greatest efficiency and prosperity.
In his quest for a science of management, Taylor discovered or implemented a series of innovations pertaining to the machinery of production, the organisational environment, and the people who use the machines.
Some of these developments include the invention of mechanical devices, the development of cost accounting techniques, machine room layout and design, purchase and store methods, tool standardisation and room reorganisation, and mnemonic classification systems.
3.4 Components of Scientific Management Taylor’s scientific management comprises mainly three components, these are: 1.time and motion studies (ii) wages incentive system (iii) functional organisation.
Time and Motion Studies Taylor attributed more than half of the problem of inefficiency to the management’s ignorance of the proper time required to perform a task.
Accordingly, a primary task for scientific management is to establish appropriate standards based on scientific investigations of tasks performed using optimal methods rather than simple observations of actual performance in the workplace.
The primary tool of analysis is this investigation is time – and – motion studies.
The general procedures employed in time – and – motion studies is to break down physical activities into their component parts, specify the optimal routine for the performance of each component part, and discover the most efficient method for recombining the parts with the more complex task.
For Taylor, the following steps are involved in the time – and – motion studies.
i.
The worker is provided with the best implements.
ii.
The task is divided into elementary units.
iii.
Useless movements are discarded.
iv.
The analyst watches a skilled employee perform the task with the help of a stopwatch.
v. The elementary movements of the task are grouped in a proper sequence to maximise overall efficient task performance.
vi.
The proper method of task performance is recorded and the time required to perform the task is determined.
vii.
An allowance to the extent of 20 to 27 percent should be added to the actual working time to allow for unavoidable delays.
viii.
Allowances should be made for the time it takes a new employee to learn the job.
ix.
Allowance should be made for rest required for a worker to recover from body fatigue.
The intent of time-and-motion study is to establish standards for the performance of a task, accounting for the capacity, speed, and durability of the worker.
Thus, standards established are to be accepted only conditionally.
Those standards are not to be altered, unless a new method of performing the task is discovered.
This is required to prevent arbitrary changes in standards as productivity increases.
In his famous studies at the Bethlehem Steel Corporation, Taylor found that a group of 75 men were loading an average of 12 ½ tons of pig iron per man per day.
On the other hand, a Duch labourer called Schmidt, selected by Taylor, increased his output to 47 ½ tons per day for the three years of the study by following detailed instructions to handling of pig iron.
Men were selected one at a time and trained to handle pig iron at the rate of 47 ½ tons per day and, in return, like Schmidt, they received a 60 percent increase in wages.
Taylor drew attention to the need for the scientific selection of the workers.
Wages Incentive System As stated earlier, Taylor’s incentive system is based on the established standards of work performance through time – and – motion studies.
Under this, the worker is assigned a defined task with detailed instructions and a specified time allowed for performing the task.
When this has been accomplished, the worker is to be paid extraordinary wages for performing the task within the allotted time and ordinary wages if the time allotment is exceeded.
Taylor was against the method of award for day work, piecework, and task work with a bonus or differential piecework.
He also objected to gain-sharing plans, such as those suggested by Towne and Halsey.
In Taylor’s views, factors such as special incentives, higher wages, shorter working hours, better working conditions, and individual reward far overshadow the importance of the specific method of payment.
Fredrick Winslow Taylor based incentives on prior standards of work performance with each worker rewarded on an individual basis and performance linked reward.
Thus, under Taylor’s incentive system, like other pay plans, success is rewarded by higher wages and failure is penalised by financial loss.
3.5 Aims of Scientific Management Frederick Winslow Taylor enunciated the following aims/objectives of scientific management.
They are as follows.
i.
Gauge industrial tendencies and the market in order to regularize operations in a manner which will conserve the investment, sustain the enterprise as an employing agency, and assure continuous operation and employment ii.
Assure the employee not only continuous operating and employment by correct gauging of the market, but also to assure a continuous earning opportunity while on the payroll by planned and balanced operations.
iii.
Earn through a waste-saving management and processing technique, a larger income from a given expenditure of human and material energies, which shall be shared through increased wages and profits by workers and management.
iv.
Make possible a higher standard of living because of increased income to workers.
v. Assure a happier home and social life to workers through removal, by increase of income, of many of the disagreeable and worrying factors in the total situation vi.
Assure healthful as well as individually and socially agreeable conditions of work vii.
Assure the highest opportunity for individual capacity through scientific ways of work analysis and of selection, training, assignment, transfer and promotion of workers.
viii.
Assure by training and instructional foremanship the opportunity for workers to develop new and higher capacities, and eligibility for promotion to higher positions.
ix.
Develop self-confidence and self-respect among workers through opportunity afforded for understanding of one’s own work specifically, and of plans and methods of work generally.
x.
Develop self-expression and self-realisation among worker through the simulative influence of an atmosphere of research and valuation, through understanding of plans and methods, and through the freedom of horizontal as well as vertical contacts afforded by functional organisation.
xi.
Build character through the proper conduct of work xii.
Promote justice through the elimination of discrimination in wage rate and elsewhere.
xiii.
Eliminate factors of the environment, which are irritating, and the causes of frictions, and to promote common understandings, tolerances and the spirit of teamwork.
3.6 Impact of Scientific Management The scientific management has made the following specific impacts or contributions to both management and administration.
i.
It has led to professionalisation of management.
Nwizu rightly observed that the present practice in the modern industry of having a specialised and trained managerial cadre had its origin in Taylor’s view.
ii.
It led to reduction in wastage of human and material resources utility of efforts.
iii.
Scientific management contributed to greater specialisation of activities, with proper design of jobs, specification of methods, and set time and motions studies and establishment of standards of job performance.
All these have contributed to the private  sectors.
iv.
Through scientific management, managers and administrators became aware of the importance of compensation and other incentives to workers in ensuring increased productivity.
v. Scientific management brought about scientific selection of workers to ensure that only the right caliber of staff is selected.
It also led to inception of efforts at formal training of workers in organisations.
vi.
The scientific management has greatly influenced both theory and practice of public administration.
Scientific management elevated management by planned system and design.
It is important to note that the values and methods of scientific management were in tune with the movement for reforms of government and civil service such as centralisation of authority, and accountability, introduction of business methods to public administration and the consequent acceptance of efficiency as a primary goal of administration; establishment of merit systems; freeing public administration from partisan politics, etc.
3.7 Relevance of Scientific Management While Taylor’s work is subjected to a lot of criticism, it should be recognised that he wrote at a time of industrial growth and the emergence of complex organisations with new forms of technology.
His main concern was with the efficiency of both workers and management.
Taylor believed his scientific management techniques would improve management– worker relations, and contribute to improved industrial efficiency and productivity.
Drucker claims that Frederick Winslow Taylor may prove a more useful prophet for our times than we yet recognize… Taylor’s greatest impact may still be ahead… The underdeveloped and developing countries are now reaching the stage where they need Taylor and scientific management.
But the need to study Taylor anew and apply him may be greatest in the developed countries (Sapru, 2008:109).
Drucker argued that the central theme of Taylor’s work was not inefficiency but the need to substitute industrial warfare by industrial harmony.
Taylor sought to do this through higher wages from increased output; and removal of physical strain from doing work the wrong way; development of the workers and the opportunity for them to undertake tasks hey were capable of doing; and elimination of the boss by the duty of management to help the workers.
Taylor, in developing scientific management, made enormous contributions to the understanding and prescription for the management of organisations.
Yet he is probably  better characterised as a synthesizer than an innovator.
In dealing with industrial unrest, scientific management promoted and called for a new look of harmonious an whole–hearted cooperation in place of the old tendency toward rugged individualism.
Further, scientific management, with its emphasis on research, planning, use of standards, and cooperation, encouraged management to take decisions based on the laws of the situation instead of individual guess and intuition.
The scientific management movement spread far beyond the borders of the United States, and gained wide recognition in Germany, England, France, Sweden and other European countries.
In Russia, immediately after the revolution of 1917, Lenin referred to the Taylor system, as a combination of subtle brutality of bourgeois exploitation and a number of its greatest scientific management.
He and Trotsky sponsored a state–led scientific management movement aimed at promoting labour discipline and higher productivity.
3.8 Criticisms of Scientific Management Scientific Management has been criticised on the following grounds.
i.
It lays much emphasis on economy, efficiency and material welfare to the neglect of the emotional and psychological needs of the workers.
ii.
Scientific management dehumanises employees.
It considered the organisation as a machine and the human beings working in the organisation as parts of the machine.
Workers were meant to do the work at a standardised rate.
If they produced below the standardised rate, they were thrown out.
iii.
It encourages authoritarian leadership.
This is because the traditional approach to public administration and management on which scientific management is based does not tolerate composite decision – making.
iv.
Scientific management recommends specialisation, which it assumes as the best way of getting things done.
Yet, specialisation may be boring because of its repetitiveness and monotony.
v. There is no one best way to carry out functions related to values.
For instance, what is the one best way to eliminate corruption in Nigeria?
Or what is the one best way to be president of Nigeria?
vi.
Scientific management wrongly assumes that individuals first look for their own best interests before those of the group.
The Hawthorne experiment shows that workers realise that they are disadvantaged and helpless unless they exist as a group.
vii.
The scientific management techniques have been severely criticised by the Marxists as mere efficient tools to exploit labour.
4.0 CONCLUSION The above discussion showed that, the views and concepts generated by scientific management, though new and radical at that time, are widely applied in today; they are accepted as standards for managerial practice.
This acceptance is itself indicative of the total effect of scientific management.
The principles of Taylor’s scientific approach to management appear to be very relevant today.
Many of Taylor’s ideas are accepted by present – day managers.
We can still see examples of management practices based on the philosophy of his ideas.
Taylor gave a major impetus to the development of modern management thinking.
Although, the Marxists criticised scientific management based on the substantial increase in the profits of the enterprises where Taylor’s experiments were carried out was not matched by corresponding increase in the wages of the workers.
Still Taylor’s scientific management approach is relevant and accepted today.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has thrown light on the scientific theory of management.
The concept and principles of management are considered alongside the component of scientific management.
The aims, impacts, contributions, relevance and criticisms of scientific management were also highlighted and discussed.
In the next unit, you will be taken through the discussion on the classical theory.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the components of scientific management .
2.
State and explain the aims of scientific management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Basu, R. (2004).
Public Administration: Concepts and Theories (4th Ed.).
New Delhi: Sterling Publishers.
Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani,E.O (2006), Fundamental of Public Administration.
Enugu: Ziks-Chuks Publishers.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Ekwealor, E.F. (2007).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Onitsha: Abbot.
Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration.
Enugu: Snaap Press.
Sapru, R.K. (2008).
Administrative Theories and Management Thought (2nd Ed.).
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall.
UNIT 5; CLASSICAL THEORY OF ORGANISATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classical Theory of Organisations 3.2 Basic Themes of Classical Theories 3.3 Main Features of Classical Theory 3.4 Contributions of Fayol 3.5 Criticisms of Classical Theory 3.6 Significance of the Classical Approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Herbert Simon propounded the classical theory of organisation.
Other contributors of early 20th century are administrative practitioners and theorists such as Henri Fayol, Luther Gulick, Lyndall Urwick, J.D.
Mooney and A.C. Reiley.
They were the French and American specialists in different fields who searched for ideal administrative structure.
These early writers are known to belong to the classical school of thought in organisation theory.
The classical administrative theory grew out of Weber’s bureaucratic theory and Taylor’s scientific management approach.
Though classical theory can be traced to Taylor’s concern for functional foremanship and planning cells, it is sometimes considered as an extension of Max Weber’s bureaucratic theory.
In this unit therefore, you will be conversant with some basic themes of classical theories, the main features of classical theory, Fayol’s definition of management and its elements, Fayol’s fourteen principles and then proceed to discuss the evaluation of Fayol’s ideas, criticism of classical theory and the significance of the classical approach to the study of the public administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the basic themes of classical theories  identify the main features of classical theory  state the contributions of Henri Fayol to management studies  explain the significance of the classical approach to organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Classical Theory The classical theory of organisation is also known as the structural theory.
The most important concern of the classical theory is the formulation of certain universal principles of organisation.
It deals primarily with formal organisational structure.
The theory assumes that there are certain fundamental principles on which an organisation can be established to achieve a specific objective.
The watchwords of this approach are efficiency and economy, as it conceives that these principles, if fully adopted, can lead to maximum organizational efficiency and economy.
The structuralists were chiefly concerned with discovering the true basis on which work can be divided in an organisation and devising proper methods of bringing about the effective organisational coordination.
3.2 Characteristics of Classical Theory The basic themes of classical theories include the following.
i.
There are a set of basic principles to every organisation.
These principles are immutable laws to manage an organisation.
ii.
The requisite personnel or workers have to conform to this preconceived plan iii.
The four basic principles of classical theory are impersonality, division of work, hierarchy and efficiency.
iv.
Organisational tasks can be defined based on these principles, and effective methods can be devised for better coordination, delegation and control of personnel.
v. Classical theory advocated the use of authority as a system of controlling personnel.
vi.
The aim of this theory is the maximum organisational economy, efficiency and productivity.
vii.
The theorists had a dogmatic faith in their findings and found them as the only one best way.
3.3 Features of Classical Theory The classical theory of organisation is generally regarded as being covered by the standard works of Henri Fayol, Gulick Urwick, Mooney and Reiley.
Their interest was chiefly concerned with formal organisational structure and the basic management process.
They all believed in the existence of certain universal administrative principles.
They also believed that the application of such principles could make organisations function more efficiently.
The many points about administrative organisations, which the early administrative theorists agreed on, were in use quite for sometimes before the Second World War.
The classical theory of organisation is also known as the “Formal Organisation Theory,” “Principles of Administration Theory”, “Structural Theory”, and the “Administrative Management Theory”.
The main features of the classical theory are briefly noted as follows.
i.
The classical theory emphasises the anatomy of formal organisation.
It views administration as a formal structural arrangement by which work is divided, arranged and coordinated for a definite purpose.
The personnel, who are fitted into the structure, are treated as mere cogs in the organisational machine.
The organisation chart is regarded as the basic tool for monitoring and controlling the entire administrative process.
ii.
Classical writers hold the generic view of administration, Henri Fayol and Lyndall Urwick, for instance, are of the opinion that the distinction between public and private administration does not exist.
Henri Fayol opined, “We are no longer confronted with several administrative sciences, but with one which can be applied equally well to public and private affairs.
In other words, in the opinion of classical writers, administration is administration wherever it is found and whatever kind of work it undertakes.
Therefore, public and private organisations share common administrative principles and processes and the distinction between them tend to minimise.
iii.
The classical writers believe that administration is governed by certain principles, which are said to be of universal applicability of all forms of organisation in all types of environments.
Because of this belief, all the classical administrative theorists engaged themselves in evolving principles of management.
Gulick advocated a set of 10 principles of organisation while Urwick propounded eight principles of organisation.
Later he (Urwick) developed 29 principles by integrating the various principles developed by other classical writers.
The classical writers believed that these common operating principles of administration could guide administrators in creating effective organisation and improving administrative practice.
An organisation built on these principles could achieve  efficiency and economy.
It is also their belief that these principles could be built into a framework from which a general theory of administration would emerge.
iv.
The classical theory views public administration as a nonpolitical, technical, organisation designed to implement public policies with efficiency and economy.
To the classical writers such as Gulick, efficiency is not only the axiom number one in the value scale of administration, but also the ultimate good of all administrative activity.
The objective of administration is to achieve the maximum results with the least expenditure of people and materials.
v. The classical writers upheld the distinction between the line and staff activities.
Line activities are concerned with the fulfillments of the primary purpose of the organisation, while the staff activities are concerned with the provision of specialised advice and assistance to the line agencies.
Thus, in the classical organisation theory, staff members are typically differentiated from line members by their advisory capacity to line personnel.
The line people have considered the decision makers or order givers.
For classical theorists, this distinction between line and staff people is fundamental.
vi.
According to classical thinkers, people are motivated to work by cash rewards such as increase in pay, and fringe benefits and the threat of punishment.
They believed that more of such monetary rewards could keep people happy.
The classical theory manifests four features.
1.
Impersonality 2.
Division of work 3.
Hierarchy, and 4.
Efficiency Further, it is marked by the following six philosophical characteristics.
i.
It is atomistic in the sense that it sees the individual in isolation from fellow men.
ii.
It is mechanistic because it does not explain the dynamics of organisation behaviour.
iii.
It is static because it has a formal declared pattern of relationship established by law iv.
It is voluntary because it rests upon the native belief that the individuals are immune from the control either by the groups or by the social factors.
v. It is rationalistic because tasks are performed according to methods determined by the principles of scientific work performance.
vi.
It does not take any note of non-economic incentives.
3.4 Contributions of Henri Fayol As earlier stated, Henri Fayol is called the father of the management process or the functional management theory.
As a French engineer, he first published his experiences in the book “General and Industrial Management” in 1916.
The book arrived in England only when it was first translated to English in 1929.
He tried to approach organizations through their general principles without making a distinction between industrial and public service organisations.
According to him, management and administration are two sides of the same coin and need not be distinguished.
Fayol’s theory of the scalar chain, which is the synonym for hierarchy, is a kind of photograph of the framework.
Fayol used these principles to explain the organisational behaviour.
He did not consider these principles as immutable or one best way, but maintained that the principle is the light house fixing the bearings, which can only serve those who already know the way to the port.
Fayol divided the industrial activities into six groups.
These are as follows.
i.
The technical activities, which include production, manufacture and adaptation.
ii.
The commercial activities, which include buying, selling and exchange.
iii.
The financial activities that is, search for and optimum use of capital.
iv.
The security activities, which include protection of property and persons.
v. The accounting activities, which include stocktaking, balance sheet, costs, statistics etc.
vi.
The managerial activities, which include planning, organisation, command coordination, control, etc.
Fayol also explained the five elements of administration as follows.
i.
Forecasting: this involves forecasting a plan.
This indicates the need for administration to plan for future, look ahead, and adapt plans for the prospective situations.
He called it previous or purveyance.
ii.
Organising: this involves drawing the structure of the organisation in such manner that would facilitate the performance of basic activities in an optimal manner.
iii.
Commanding: this involves instilling sense of discipline in the subordinates through knowledge of the task and constant contact.
iv.
Coordinating: this involves building, harmonising and uniting all efforts and activities.
Henri Fayol’s Definition of Management and Its Elements This theory was first formulated by Henry Fayol, and later Luther Gulick and Lyndall Urwick.
The theory concentrates on attempts to develop principles of administration which can be applied everywhere.
According to them, any administrative principle once developed, should logically work in any kind of administrative institution.
Gulick and Urwick gave the discipline of public administration, the acronym POSDCORD which means planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
According to Gulick and Urwick, POSDCORD constitutes the key duties and functions of any administrator in an organization.
The acronym is criticized of having over –simplified the work of an administrator.
On their own part, still under Administrative Management theory, James D. Mooney and Allan C. Reilay formulated the four principles of organization which are: the coordinative principle; the scalar principle (hierarchical structure); functional principle (division of labour); and the staff/line principle (Onuaha, 1999).
Henri Fayol was the first to put forward a classic analysis of the nature of managerial activity, based on his own experience of doing the job in the mining and metallurgical combined industry.
He defines management in terms of the following five key functional elements.
1.
Planning: it is the act of forecasting future and drawing up the plan of action.
2.
Organising: it refers to structuring the human resources of the undertaking into jobs, departments and so on to enable them to put the plans into action.
It also involves the use of material resources.
3.
Commanding: it consists of setting the human resources into activity toward the organisation’s objective.
This is what we today call leading.
4.
Coordinating: it involves unifying and harmonising all activities and efforts.
It permeates the other four basic functions.
5.
Controlling: it means, ensuring that everything occurs in conformity with established rule and expressed command.
It serves to make certain that all operations are proceeding according to plan to accomplish the goals.
These five managerial activities are treated by Fayol as universal.
In his opinion, these activities have to be performed by managers of both public and private organisation.
Fayol’s five functional elements have provided a system of concepts with which managers may clarify their thinking about what it is they have to do.
According to Fayol, a successful manager must possess leadership qualities, knowledge of the business and his workers, and the ability to instill sense of mission.
A manager having these qualities can obtain the best performance from his work force.
Knowledge  of necessary administrative powers and functions that have to be performed would empower the manager to organise and run any undertaking.
To Fayol, good administration is a process, which is distinct from the particular management task at hand.
To put it differently, Fayol treated administration as a universal process, which is equally applicable to both public and private organisations.
In Fayol’s theory, the organisation chart graphically depicts the essence of the organisation.
According to him, such charts of managerial staff show each man’s immediate superior and subordinates and are a kind of framework of the organisation at a given moment.
Fayol’s Fourteen Principles i.
Division of Work: It refers to specialisation of work or labour in both managerial and non-managerial jobs.
Division of labour allows individuals to build up skills and increases organization productivity.
ii.
Authority and Responsibility: These refer to the right of a manager to give commands and require conformity to those commands.
Responsibility must go with authority and must match authority.
iii.
Discipline: It implies that employees obey orders of management, if it provides good leadership.
iv.
Unity of command: This specifies that each employee should receive orders from only one superior.
It eliminates conflicting lines of command.
v. Unity of direction: this denotes that people engaged in a group of activities must have the same objectives in a plan.
vi.
Subordination of individual interest to general interest: This implies that the interest of one employee or a group of employees must be subordinated to the overall interest of the organisation.
vii.
Fair remuneration for effort: this principle states that since payment is an important motivator, it should be a matter for manager’s constant attention.
viii.
Centralisation or decentralisation: this principle states that centralisation or decentralisation of an organisation should depend on the condition of the business and the quality or culture of its staff.
ix.
Scalar chain: this refers to the line of authority, from superior to subordinate, running from the top to the bottom of an organisation.
This principle is necessary for unity of direction.
x.
Order: This principle state that both material order and social order are necessary for the proper and efficient working of the organisation.
xi.
Equity: it states that all employees should be treated with fairness, kindness and justice.
xii.
Stability of tenure: stability of tenure among personnel is necessary for the successful running of the undertaking.
xiii.
Initiative: all personnel in an organisation must be allowed to show their initiative in some way.
This represents a great source of strength for business, although it requires the manager to sacrifice some personal vanity.
xiv.
Esprit de corps: This is essential for management to foster the morale of its employees.
Henri Fayol used these principles to explain organisational behaviour.
He did not believe that the principles of organisation and administration were immutable laws.
They may, at best, serve as guidelines for managers in performing their duties.
These principles have to be flexible and adaptable to varying situations because management deals with people in a wide variety of circumstances.
The process of applying them would be more of an art than a science.
Fayol raised general management to the level of science.
Unlike Taylor, he was not focused on the shop floor but found mismanagement or lack of clear principles of management as the reason for low efficiency and productivity.
He defined management in terms of the functions of planning, organising, commanding, coordinating and controlling.
There are two noticeable points in Fayol’s, which is different from the “one best way” theorists.
First, he never insisted that this list of principles is the final one.
He believed that principles can be added and subtracted according to the requirement of the organisation.
Fayol observed that every administrative rule or advice strengthens the human part of an organisation or facilitates its working and has its place among the principles for so long as experience proves it to be worthy of this important position.
Secondly, unlike his contemporaries, Fayol is not rigid about the use of the term “principles”.
He opined that, “for preference I shall adopt the term principles while disassociating it from any suggestion of rigidity, for there is nothing rigid or absolute in management affairs, it is all the question of proportion.” Seldom do we have to apply the same principle twice in identical conditions; allowance must be made for different changing conditions to allow for flexibility in propounding principles, which have made functional management a universally applicable theory.
This has also made Fayol a more acceptable theorist in management practices in contrasts to the classical theorists.
At least his two principles, initiative and the esprit de corps have an important place even in the modern organisation theory based upon psychology and behavioural sciences.
His suggestion for the stability of tenure has also been the launcher for career services in contrast to the ‘hire and fire’ system prevalent in his time.
3.5 Criticisms of Classical Theory The classical approach to public administration is full of contradictions for which it has come under severe criticism.
It has been criticised on many grounds.
The following are some of the major criticisms brought against it.
Classical principles are synonymous with proverbs Herbert Simon, a distinguished behavioural administrative theorist, is one of the critics of the principles of administration developed by the classical administrative thinkers from simple observations.
He observed the classical theory that they are little more than proverbs in disguise.
(A proverb is a popular saying, embodying some familiar truth based on common sense or practical experience.
For example, “look before you leap,” but on the other hand, “he who hesitates is lost”).
Simon argued that, “like proverbs, the principles of administration appear in pairs.
For almost every principle one can find an equally plausible and acceptable contradictory principle”.
Let us consider the principle of unity of command as an example.
Unity of command implies that each person in an organisation should receive orders from one boss to avoid confusion.
However, this principle is incompatible with the principles of specialisation.
The principles of specialisation lead to a situation in which their formal superiors also receive directives from the specialists in the headquarters.
The result is dual chain of command, which violates the principle of unity of command.
In a similar fashion, Taylor’s ‘function of foremanship’ also violates unity of command principle.
These contradictions reveal the unreality of the principle of unity of command.
Simon revealed that other principles of administration are also contradictory.
Some of the classical theorists argued that organizations could improve supervision and productivity, if they kept a low span of control.
In the same way, he argued that organisations would improve their performance, if they minimised the number of layers in the hierarchy, thus reducing communication problems and cutting down on red tape.
Thus, the principle of narrow span of control implying a tall hierarchy comes into conflict with the principle of minimising the number of supervisory levels of implying flat hierarchy.
According to classical theorists, specialisation leads to efficiency of the organisation.
However, the principle of specialisation fails to inform the executive of exactly how to specialise so as to promote efficiency.
They also failed to state whether functional specialisation is better than area of specialisation or vice versa.
For all the reasons stated above, the administrative principles promoted by the classical theorist cannot claim the status of empirically tested scientific principles.
They have little  scientific validity.
They can, at best, be regarded as administrative homilies comparable to folklore or folk wisdom.
Considerable doubt also exists as to their relationship to actual behaviour in real administrative situations.
For this reason, it is said that the so- called principles of administration are of no use as practical guides to the administrator.
Therefore, Simon has characterized the classical administrative theory as narrow and one that lacks realism.
Furthermore, there is no unanimity among the classical theorists as regards the principles of administration.
Thus, the contention of classical administrative theorists that public administration had already developed as a science with universally valid and generally applicable principles was largely discredited by Simon’s attack against the classical approach.
Classical theory ignores the human factor and informal groups The classical theory of Gulick and Urwick ignored the interplay of individual personality and the influence of informal groups in the functioning of an organisation.
It ignored problems stemming from human interactions in organisations.
It did not give adequate attention to the social and psychological factors relating to human behaviour in organisations.
It ignored virtually, all features of organisational life beyond the formal structure.
It ignored the individual employee and his needs.
Mayo’s human relations approach has revealed the human, the interpersonal, and the informal factors are of crucial administrative consequence thus, Mayo’s theory supplied a corrective to the mechanistic approach of Gulick and Urwick Classical theory treats organisations as closed systems The classical theory treats an organisation as a closed system, completely unconnected with and not influenced by its external environment.
In fact, organisations actually engaged in constant contact with their environment.
An organisation and its environment influence each other.
The environment of public or government agencies is complex and the connection between them and the outside world are highly significant.
Government agencies, for example, have to deal with legislative committees, interest groups, the press, the court system, individual citizens and others.
The influence of this complex external environment on the decision making process of public agencies is highly significant.
Therefore, it is said that organisations are considered cybernetic in their behaviour with regard to the external environment Over simplification of Human Motivation The classical approach has over simplified human motivation to work.
The classical theorists, in their naivety, believed that people are motivated only by cash rewards and threats of punishments have been questioned by the human relationists and behaviouralist.
They have argued that group pressures, social incentives, nature of work,  and the attitude of each employee towards it are also as important as pay and fringe benefits.
Other Criticisms The classical theory is accused of a pro management bias, because it attached much importance to the efficiency and greater productivity of the organisation.
It is also said that in today’s large, complex organisations, the distinction between line and staff have lost much of their clarity and significance because superior–subordinate relationships are becoming less authoritarian and more advisory.
3.6 Significance of the Classical Approach Despite its limitations, the classical approach had an impact on the study and practice of public administration, especially in the USA.
Federal Government and many state governments in the USA reformed their administrative studies.
These reforms were based largely on classical tenets.
This theory played a notable role in rationalising administrative structures and even stimulating production.
Thus, the traditional emphasis in public administration stressed in both theory and practices a rationalised view of administration.
The classical approach has some value even today.
Owing to its influence, such management techniques as reporting, accounting and budgeting have come to be used in public administration.
Gulick’s POSDCORB formula serves even today as a handy check list of the functions of managers both in public and private sectors.
Administration of many governments is even at present structured in accord with the classical principles.
Some techniques of personnel administration such as formal job described and position classification are cut from the classical mould.
Therefore, the classical administrative theorists were errant, but important.
Even today, some of their ideas and concepts are relevant.
The idea that administration was a separate activity and was worthy of intellectual investigation was first propounded by the classical writers.
The classical approach formulated a set of concepts of administration that evolved a terminology, which has provided a base for subsequent research in the field of administration.
The limitations of the classical theory stimulated further research in organisational behaviour, thus, becoming an important milestone in the development of organization theories such as human relations, behavioural and social–psychological theories.
In fact, the classical theory is regarded as the foundation of the 20th century administrative thought.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that classical theory has played a notable role in rationalising administrative structures as well as stimulating production.
The classical approach has some value even today.
Owing to its influence, such management techniques as reporting, accounting, and budgeting have come to be used in public administration.
We can also see that Gulick’s POSDCORB formula serves today as a handy checklist in public and private sectors.
There is no doubt that administration of many governments today or at present is structured in accord with the classical principles.
Even today, some of the classical ideas and concepts are still relevant in our organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has thrown light on the classical theory of organisation.
The basic themes of classical theories are considered along with the main features of the classical theory.
The contributions of Henri Fayol, his definitions of management and its elements, Fayol’s 14 principles of management, the significance, and the criticisms of classical theory were also highlighted and discussed.
In the next unit, you will be taken through the human relations theory or school.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.What are the Henri Fayol’s 14 principles of management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Basu, R. (2004).
Public Administration: Concepts and Theories (4th ed.).
New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Private Limited.
Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani,E.O (2006), Fundamental of Public Administration.
Enugu: Ziks-Chuks Publishers.
Hughes, O. E. (1998), Public Administration and Administration: An Introduction.
London: Macmillan Press Ltd. Goodnow, F. J.
(1914), Politics and Administration, New York, Macmillian.
Gross, B.
A.
(1964), The Managing of Organisations, Glencoe.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Polinaidu, S. (2004).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: Galgotia Publications PVT.
Singh, A.
(2005).
Public Administration: Roots and Wings.
New Delhi: Ashok Galgotia for Galgotia Publishing Company.
UNIT 6; HUMAN RELATIONS THEORY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Human Relations Theory 3.1.1 The Hawthorne Experiments/Studies 3.1.2 The Great Illumination Experiment 3.1.3 Relay Assembly Test Room Experiment 3.1.4 Bank Writing Observation Room Experiment 3.1.5 Major Findings of the Hawthorne Studies 3.2 Interview with Workers 3.3 Basic Principles of Human Relations Theory 3.4 Frederick W. Taylor Vs Elton Mayo 3.5 The Human Relations Theory Vs the Classical Theory 3.6 Criticisms of Human Relations Theory 3.7 Significance of Human Relations Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The human relations approach is an attempt to improve some of the defects inherent in the classical management approach.
This approach emerged from the result of the Hawthorne studies, which was conducted by Elton Mayo and his fellow researchers from Harvard University.
The proponents of this school argue that since management involves getting things done with and through people, the study of management should be centered on interpersonal relations.
The scholars of this school have a heavy orientation to social psychology.
They believed that if the management of an organisation showed concern for employees,increased productivity would result.
The main concern of the human relations approach is the study of an individual as a socio-psychological being and what motivates the individual.
In this school, there are scholars who lay emphasis on human relations and why the manager should develop the skill to understand and practice.
The human relations school argued that organisations  could be improved by making it less formal and by permitting more subordinate participation in decision-making.
Elton Mayo is regarded as the founder of the human relations movement.
Some of the major contributors to this group include Robert K. Merton, Argyris, Likert, Alex Balevas, McGregor, and Keith Davis etc.
In this unit, you shall be made aware of the relevance of human relations theory.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the different stages of the Hawthorne experiments or studies  explain the basic principles of the human relations theory  state the differences between the Taylor’s scientific management and Mayo’s theory  discuss the differences between the human relations theory and the classical theory  identify and explain the significance of the human relations theory.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Human Relations Theory Human relations theory is another method of studying organizations.
The theory is reputed as being a reaction against person as machine concept of the scientific management school.
The human relations theory of organization examines the informal work group at the assembly, that is, the line level.
It tries to find out what makes these groups of workers work or refuse to work.
The theory tries to establish what relationship exists between motivation and job satisfaction, and how these affect efficiency and productivity in the organization.
The formulation of the theory began with the efforts of Elton Mayo in 1927.
The study focused on relationship between workers and managers, and among workers themselves.
The development of the theory continued with the efforts of Abraham H. Maslow, in what is today known as Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs.
Maslow perceived human desire to be based first on psychological needs which provide the foundation for the next greatest need, which is security.
These are followed by love or belonginess, self esteem, and finally self actualization.
According to him, all these human needs collectively determine productivity in any organization.
The rise of human relations school may be attributed to the scathing criticism of the mechanical and structuralists for having neglected the psychological and sociological aspects of organisation.
Elton Mayo, who spearheaded this humanistic challenge to the classicists.
Called his approach a clinical one.
He focused upon the social and psychological aspect of an organisation in his Hawthorne experiments.
The Hawthorne Experiments/Studies The Hawthorne experiments were conducted at the Western Electric Company of the Bell Telephone Company at Hawthorne near Chicago.
Elton Mayo, with his two other colleagues of the Harvard Business School , F.J. Roethlisberger and William J. Dickinson, conducted experiments which became the basis of all humanistic studies across the world.
The relevant experiments for the students of public administration are as follows.
The Great Illumination Experiment The famous earlier experiment ran from 1924 to 1927.
The purpose of this experiment was to study the effects of illumination that is, lighting on workers’ efficiency and productivity.
Two teams of workers took part in these tests – the experimental group and the controlled group.
Each group consisted of six women.
The researchers had assumed that an increase in illumination would lead to greater production per worker.
As the amount of lighting was increased for the experimental group, efficiency and productivity improved.
However, to the surprise of the researchers, the workers turned out even more when the lighting was reduced.
In fact, the workers did not stop working until the room became so dark that vision was actually impaired.
The productivity of the controlled group working under a constant illumination also increased.
The research scientists were baffled by the seemingly anomalous results of this experiment.
From a scientific management perspective, this was puzzling indeed.
Eventually, the researchers concluded that to some extent, the workers were responding actually to the experiment itself rather than to the levels of illumination.
This phenomenon gave rise to what is called the Hawthorne effect- the theory that workers perform more efficiently because special attention is being devoted to them.
Relay Assembly Test Room Experiment In 1927, the Harvard Industrial Research team directed by Elton Mayo took over the Hawthorne experiments, which had produced unexpected results in employee performance.
Mayo and his colleagues undertook the Relay Assembly Test Room Experiment at the plant.
Its objective was to determine the effect of changing work conditions on the efficiency and output of the workers as a group.
The researchers also wanted to examine the role of fatigue and monotony on group productivity.
In this experiment, the researchers segregated a group of` six women who were assembling  telephone relays and placed them in a test room.
For two years the researchers studied the response of the women to various changes in their working conditions.
As many as 10 changes such as shorter hours, varied rest pauses, refreshments and a number of incentives where the team spent a great deal of time with the work group discussing the changes before they were put into effect.
Output increased each time a change was made.
Yet, when the women reverted to their original working conditions with a 48-hour week, no refreshments, no rest pauses, and no other incentives, output rose again– indeed to the highest ever recorded at Hawthorne.
Another significant result was a decline in absenteeism of 80 percent.
Either under pleasant or unpleasant working conditions the response of the women in terms of productions moved in only one direction – up.
This fact startled Mayo’s research team.
One conclusion drawn from this experiment was that production did not vary in direct relation to working conditions.
The conclusion eventually drawn from this important experiment was that attention and recognition in and of itself tends to generate a positive response.
According to this study, attention centered on employees raised morale and hence also production, irrespective of what particular form that attention took.
In other words, people responded more favourably to attention than they did to physical factors or to other material inducements.
In this experiment, the women had gained enormously in work satisfaction by the feeling that they were part of the team by the communication between the researchers and workers.
Everyone in the group felt more valued and responsible for her performance and that of the group as a whole.
This sense of cohesiveness and self-esteem was more important to performance than any number of improvements in the working environment.
Another important conclusion of this investigation was that worker– management conflict was the result of the basic emotional attitudes of the workers rather than the objective difficulties in the work situation such as insufficient task specialisation or inadequate wages.
According to Mayo, workers were ruled by the logic of sentiment, whereas managers were activated by the logic of cost and efficiency.
Thus, without understanding and compromise, conflict was inevitable.
Bank Writing Observation Room Experiment In 1931, the Harvard researchers began their most important experiment in the famous bank writing room at the plant.
The purpose of this experiment was to determine the effect of a piece–rate pay system on group productivity.
For the purpose of this experiment, the researchers and the management put a small group of men engaged in making parts of telephone switches on a piece–rate system and observed their activities.
Under this system, the management logically expected the workers to earn higher incomes by turning out more output.
However,most illogically, the men did not  produce as many pieces of work as they could, even though they were being paid in accordance with their output.
They had developed a work culture of their own.
They had become a cohesive and compact group with their own codes, rules and norms.
Among these rules were prohibitions against doing too much or too little work.
They informally established a standard level for daily output and decided not to exceed that fair range of production.
Contrary to the researchers and management’s expectations of a great jump in productivity, the output of the men remained the same as before.
In this experiment, the male workers’ reaction to the wage incentive plan of the management was not at all like that of rational economic men.
Instead, they rationalised that plan as an attempt by the management to eventually cut some jobs or to reduce wage rates.
Though the company assured the workers that such things would not happen, employees remained unconvinced.
Taylor’s scientific management could not explain the irrational behaviour of the employees.
In this experiment, the employees work behaviour was very much influenced by group norms, group pressure and acceptance, and the concomitant security.
One conclusion from his experiment is that people do not work simply to make money.
It also made it clear that economic incentives and material rewards would never be as powerful as social norms and social controls in increasing productivity.
Major Findings of the Hawthorne Studies The following are the major findings and generalisation of the Hawthorne studies.
i.
The output or the amount of work of a worker is not determined by his physical capacity but by his social capacity.
ii.
Non-economic rewards and sanctions significantly affect the worker’s behaviour.
iii.
A worker often does not act or react to management as an individual but as a member of groups.
iv.
Communication, participation, and leadership play a central role in worker’s behaviour Taken as a whole, the relations between workers and their supervisors and among the workers have significant influences on the behaviour of the workers.
The significance of the Hawthorne investigation focused on discovering the informal organisation, which it now felt, exists in all organisations.
It confirmed Mayo’s earlier view that what he calls the ‘rabble hypothesis’ about human behaviour (that is, each individual pursues his own rational self-interest) was false.
Mayo emphasised that management must develop a new concept of authority and foster a new social order based on the individual’s cooperative attitude.
3.2 Interview with Workers Following the seemingly anomalous results of the Hawthorne experiments the Harvard team conducted extensive interview with large numbers of workers to inquire into conditions in the plant.
The researchers were interested in employees’ attitudes about their jobs.
They found themselves hearing about workers’ dreams, their home lives, and other topics, which at first seemed extraneous.
Through these interviews, the researchers understood that people create an impressive variety of interest, backgrounds, and concerns to work situations with them, the interview also programme revealed that the workers derive meaning and motivation from the social situations in work groups.
They can have marked effects on the attitudes and behaviours of organization members.
These interviews brought to light the existence and functioning of the informal organisation with the formal organisation.
Mayo’s generalisation is that work satisfaction depends to a large extent on the informal social pattern of the work.
The Hawthorne experiments discovered the psychological variables that affect workers and revealed the impact of the informal organisation on behaviour of employees in organisations.
These studies also revealed the inadequacy of Taylor’s scientific management and disproved his philosophy of self–interest.
3.3 The Basic Principles of Human Relations Theory The human relations movement was inspired in large part by the Hawthorne studies with which Mayo’s name is forever linked.
The confluence of Mayo’s philosophy and the findings of various studies formed the human relations movement.
This movement advocated more humanism, dignity and democracy in the work place.
The basic principles of human relations theory may be discussed as follows.
i.
Workers are essentially social beings.
They must first be understood as people if they are to be understood as organization members.
Their attitudes and effectiveness are conditioned by social demands from both inside and outside the work plant.
ii.
Work is a group activity.
The work groups enforce a standard level of productivity upon all members through its own codes and norm.
Mayo said that human collaboration in work has always depended upon the evolution of a non-logical social code, which regulates between persons and their attitudes to one another.
The small informal groups are found to be exceedingly significant in the functioning of organisations.
They affect organization members’ perceptions and serves as medium of communications.
Small informal group propagate norms – expected behaviours – about such matters as how groups deal with one another and with superiors, which types of formally prescribed actions will be resisted by employees, and how much will actually be performed.
iii.
Social rewards and sanctions are the strongest motivators on the job.
The workers in the Hawthorne plant responded to the respect, recognition, affection, sense of belonging and security and the appeals to group loyalty provided by their fellow workers.
These social and psychological factors were found to be more powerful as motivators than the management system of economic incentive and material rewards.
Thus, non–economic factors played an important role in determining workers’ morale and motivation.
They are more important than the physical conditions under which the workers operate.
The behaviours of workers cannot be separated from their feelings and sentiments.
The general hypothesis, which main emphasis is on human relations theory, is that, motivation to work, productivity, and quality of work are all related to the nature of the social relations among the workers and between the workers and their boss.
iv.
Mayo and his colleagues found that formal structure by no means described the totality of an actual, functioning organisation.
The formal organisation is always supplemented by an informal organisation, a pattern of social relations that crops up outside of – and sometimes in conflict with- those prescribed by organisation charts or management.
In fact, Mayo’s most important discovery was the existence of informal organization within each formal organisation.
Mayo explained that management could only succeed in leading an organisation’s employees if the workers, in their informal groups, accepted that leadership without reservation.
Organisations are therefore, social as well as technical entities.
v. The human relations theory emphasised the participative style of management or supervision and democratic system of administration.
The Hawthorne experiments made it clear that effectiveness and productivity of the workers will increase if there is effective communication between the management and the workers, and if the management is willing to allow the workers participate in decision making.
This type of management requires every change in the work schedule and should be preceded by manager’s close consultation with the informal work groups and their informal leaders.
The experiments also revealed that workers will do better if allowed to manage their own affairs without being told what to do.
While the participative type of supervision wins the worker’s acceptance of organisational objectives, the democratic system of administration would alienate the workers.
The participative type of supervision coupled with democratic system of administration would lead to the highest level of workers’ effectiveness and the resultant productivity.
The human relations approach is built on socio-psychological findings, theories and applications, which call attention to the fact that work environment cannot function in terms of technical efficiency, profit and wages.
Workers are very much influenced by friendships with colleagues, group pressures and standards, and the social environment.
Thus, the essence of human relations approach was a focus on the organisation as a social system.
3.4 Frederick W. Taylor Vs Elton Mayo Elton Mayo’s human relations theory is frequently presented as somewhat opposite to that of Taylor’s scientific management.
There are certainly some basic differences between the two approaches.
The differences include the following.
i.
In Taylor’s philosophy, productivity depends upon physical factors and monetary incentives, whereas in Mayo’s theory, the informal work group norms could affect productivity in a positive way.
ii.
Taylor looked at workers as self-centered rational economic men.
In contrast, Mayo looked at them as social beings and members of small informal work groups.
iii.
They also differed as regards the sources of conflict between management and workers.
Taylor traced the causes of such conflict to the objective difficulties in the work situation while Mayo thought that such conflict was the result of the basic emotional attitudes of the workers.
From the preceding discussion, one should not conclude that Mayo was against Taylor’s scientific management theory.
Mayo was really not against Taylorism.
What he did was that he debunked Taylor’s rigid application of scientific management.
In a sense, however, Mayo’s human relations theory and Taylor’s scientific management are allied.
Both believed that friendly cooperation between workers and management would eliminate nearly all causes of conflict, dispute and disagreement between them.
However, they suggested different methods to achieve cooperation and harmony.
Taylor felt that high wages would generally suffice to elicit employee’s cooperation and compliance.
Mayo on the contrary, suggests such devices as participative style of supervision from the behavioural side of administration.
He always insisted that the understanding of human factors such as workers morale was important to his system.
In these aspects, Taylor’s philosophy is related to that of Mayo’s human relations.
Both were motivated to improve the productivity of the American industry in the early twentieth century.
3.5 The Human Relations Theory Vs the Classical Theory The human relations theory is called the neo-classical theory because just as the classical theory, it also accepts efficiency, economy, and productivity as the legitimate values of organisation.
However, to achieve these values, the human relations approach relies on techniques that are quite different from those of the classical approach.
The human relation theorists seek to maximise the values of efficiency, economy, and productivity by eliminating the dysfunctions caused by overspecialisation, alienating hierarchical arrangements and general dehumanisation of the classical approach.
Thus, the classical and human relations theories are alike in their objectives but they differ in the methods and techniques adopted to accomplish those objectives.
The human relations theory also differs from the classical theory in the following respects.
i.
The classical theory emphasises the formal organisation structure consisting of jobs and job descriptions as spelled out in organisation charts and manuals.
In contrast, the human relations theory is concerned with the informal organisation, that is, the life or individual workers and workgroup within the organisation.
ii.
The, classical theory takes the atomistic view of man and views workers as various cogs in a machine.
On the contrary, the human relations theory considers workers essentially as social beings who have the tendency to form the informal groups in the work situation.
iii.
In determining workers’ motivation, economic rewards and physical conditions of work are regarded by the classical theorists as important factors.
Contrastingly, the social–psychological, factors and sanctions are considered by the human relationists as important motivators to work.
iv.
The classical theory emphasises the authoritarian style of supervision, while the human relations theory lays emphasis on democratic and participative style of supervision.
The preceding discussion clearly shows that the classical and human relations approaches have taken two different views of organisations.
If the classical  theory viewed organisations as formal structures, the human relations approach emphasised informal relations within organisations.
Neither of the two approaches is wholly right, although each is partially right.
In reality, an organisation is both a formal structure and informal relations.
These aspects of an organisation are not contradictory but allied to each other.
It is good to recognise that informal organisations exist in all formal organisations and are not necessarily harmful, but may facilitate teamwork and collaboration.
Therefore, it would be in the interest of management to develop harmony between the informal social systems and the formal organisation by dealing effectively with the dynamics of informal groups and sentiments of the workers.
3.6 Criticisms of Human Relations Theory Although human relations theory is an improvement over the classical theory, it is also not free from errors and defects.
Mayo’s human relations theory has been subjected to certain criticisms.
These are highlighted below.
i.
The human relations theorists were accused of being preoccupied with increase in material wealth through greater productivity as the classical theorists.
Mayo and his colleagues naively assumed that happy employees would be productive workers.
ii.
Mayo’s Hawthorne studies, from which the human relations theory developed, have been attacked on the procedures adopted, the analysis of the findings and the conclusions drawn.
For instance, Mayo’s assumption that there is a natural community between workers and management has yet to be proved.
In fact, the conflicts between the employers and employees are real, based on real class differences.
One of the frequent attacks leveled against Mayo’s philosophy is that he failed to appreciate the value of competition and conflict in assuring the freedom of workers.
It is said of Mayo that he had a tendency to draw conclusions than the data supported.
In addition, it is said that Mayo had failed to demonstrate any commonality of interest between workers and management.
iii.
Like the scientific management, the human relations theory is also one sided.
If Taylor and his colleagues focused on organisations without people, Mayo and his team of researchers concentrated on people without organisations.
The human relations theorists looked at organisation members, their motivation, satisfaction, and so on but neglected (or rather ignored) the roles of formal structure, technology, and conflict in influencing the behaviour of workers.
Thus, Mayo’s theory lacks capacity to explain the multifaceted organisational behaviour and relationships.
iv.
The human relationists have overdrawn the sweeping contrast between the formal and informal organisations and failed to synthesise these two aspects of organisation in a harmonious way.
This is an important defect of Mayo’s theory of human relations.
v. The Hawthorne experiments of 1927 to 1932, conducted by Mayo and his colleagues, covered the behaviour of small groups only and did not deal with the entire organisation.
The observations made by them about the behaviour of the small experimental groups in the Hawthorne plant may not be valid when applied to the entire organisation, and its behaviour may be at variance with the behaviours of the small informal groups within it.
They lacked a theory that could explain the set of observations they had made about workers’ motivation.
vi.
The Mayo’s group thought that the benevolence of executives towards employees coupled with improved communications with the work groups would raise productivity and make the workers happy.
The critics found this emphasis superficial and irrelevant to the needs of the workers.
The researchers also thought that labour unions were driving management and workers apart, increasing conflicts, and preventing effective communication.
However, the critics pointed out that union, in fact, protected the employees against executive power.
3.7 Significance of Human Relations Theory The Hawthorne studies and Elton Mayo’s philosophy have tremendous impact on both management and academics.
i.
In the first place, despite their defects and limitations, the Hawthorne experiments were significant in stimulating an interest in the human factors.
In the words of Stephen P. Robbins, from a historical perspective, the Hawthorne studies began a new direction – recognition that human beings are a complex and influential input into organisational performance.
The Hawthorne conclusions led to a new emphasis on human beings as key contributors to the organisational efficiency, productivity, and goal attainment.
According to Carol Kennedy, Mayo’s contribution to management thinking was seminal.
It revealed the importance, in hard bottom–line terms, of human emotions, reactions, and respect for the business of managing others.
The Hawthorne studies constituted the first systematic research to expose the human factor in work situations and their impact led to a fuller realisation and understanding of human beings as workers in organisations.
ii.
Central to the understanding of the human factor was the discovery of the informal group as an outlet for the aspirations of the worker.
The informal groups could be encouraged to greater productivity by being led to do it themselves through interest and respect on the part of their managers.
These groups are found to be exceedingly significant in the functioning of organisations.
In the words of F.A.
Nigro and L.G.
Nigro, the Hawthorne studies… established the informal group as a major explanation of behaviour in organisation and extended the conceptual horizons of organisation theory to include a huge range of social psychological variables.
The human relations raised the  status of informal work group equal to that of formal organisation as an administrative and managerial concern.
Obviously, human relations promoted a particular vision of human nature in organisational settings; it urged cooperation over competition and interdependence over individualism.
In fact, the Hawthorne studies allowed Mayo and the others to test social theories that stressed values as the bases of human social action.
iii.
Mayo’s Hawthorne studies pioneered the whole concept of proper management– worker communication.
He emphasised the importance of an adequate communicating system, particular upwards from workers to management.
It is a new idea because of the respect for the individual it required between bosses and workers.
Mayo explained that management could only succeed in leading an organisation’s employees if the workers in their informal groups, accepted it as authority and leader without reservation.
Mayo’s key concept of management-worker communication laid the foundation for the work of later management thinkers and writers such as Peter and Waterman and the 1950s school of sociologists headed by Chris Arguris, Frederick Hertzberg and Abraham Maslow.
These writers and social psychologists like Douglas M.C.
Gregor, and Rensis Likert belong to the humanist school of administration.
The above-mentioned writers accepted wholly the human relations component in administration but carried it still further, arguing for a more humanitarian approach to the whole administrative problem.
The humanistic theory has given importance to the development of human personalities in the organisation.
The writers of this school covered such areas of research as work–group behaviour, need satisfaction, job satisfaction, motivation, leadership, and so on.
They have used psychological and sociological concepts and research in analysing organisations.
Among psychologists, the studies switched the future emphasis from fatigue to group processes.
iv.
Lastly, the human relations approach to organisation theory has made some valuable contributions to administrative thought as well.
It literally created the humanist school of administrative thought, finally convincing the field that social leadership skills for managers were at least as important as technical knowledge.
The new administrator needed to strive toward social consolidation with workers.
According to Nesta Gallas and Laurence J.O.
Toore, Jr., in their human relations approach, attention to the social psychology of bureaucratic life, its discovery of the informal organisation, its development of a more complex and realistic model for human nature and its innovative approach to organisational design, this school of theorists improved markedly on the ideas of its predecessor.
Although, the human relations heyday (1930s to 1950s) was over, the research and theory building continue today on many of the issues first raised in the Hawthorne studies in the late twenties and the early thirties.
The human relations approach has great impact initially on business administration, and later on public administration.
Indeed, it is regarded as a major development in the American administrative through the period 1900–1939.
This approach marked a major turning point in the history of administrative theory and practice.
4.0 CONCLUSION The human relations theory of organisation rejects formal institutionalisation and considers the informal day–to–day functioning of the structure as more revealing than the mechanistic study of structure and principles of organisation.
However, it must be stated that these two approaches are not mutually exclusive but rather supplement each other.
There cannot be informal organisation without a formal one, from where the former can operate.
Informal organisation is a self–evident fact and a functional necessity, which no formal structure can completely choose to ignore.
The formal organisation theory gives only a partial and incomplete picture of Sorganisational dynamics.
The complete picture of an organisation emerges only when the formal theory is supplemented with the informal theory.
Undue emphasis on one will lead to distorted view of organisational reality and undermining of the advantages of both.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has thrown light on the human relations theory of organisation.
The Hawthorne experiments is considered along with the basic principles of human relations theory, interview with workers, Taylor’s scientific management and Mayo’s human relations theory were discussed.
The human relations theory and the classical theory were also evaluated.
The criticisms and the significance of human relations theory of organisation were highlighted and discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State and explain the basic principles of human relations theory.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Basu, R. (2004).
Public Administration:Concepts and Theories (4th ed.).
New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Private Limited.
Eneanya, A. N. (2010) Public Administration in Nigeria; Principle, Techniques and Application.
Lagos, Concept Publication.
Ezeani,E.O (2006), Fundamental of Public Administration.
Enugu: Ziks-Chuks Publishers.
Hughes, O. E. (1998), Public Administration and Administration: An Introduction.
London: Macmillan Press Ltd. Goodnow, F. J.
(1914), Politics and Administration, New York, Macmillian.
Gross, B.
A.
(1964), The Managing of Organisations, Glencoe.
Madaubm, C. (2008).
The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2006).
Reforming Government Bureaucracies in Nigeira.
Lagos.
ASCON Printing Press, Topo-Badagry Ekwealor, E.F. (2007).
Fundamental of Public Administration.
Onitsha: Abbot Books Limited.
Ezeani, E.O.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Public Administration (Revised Edition).
Enugu.
Snaap Press Limited.
NOUN (2012) MPA 740- THEORIES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
NOUN (2012) PSM 803- ECOLOGY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, Noun, Lagos.
Polinaidu, S. (2004).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: Galgotia Publications PVT.
Sapru, R.K. (2008).
Administrative Theories and Management (2nd ed.).
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited.
Singh, A.
(2005).
Public Administration: Roots and Wings.
New Delhi: Galgotia Publishing Company.
UNIT 7; METHODS OF INQUIRY IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Method of inquiry in public administration 3.2 Descriptive Method of inquiry in public administration 3.3 Experimental Method of inquiry in public administration 3.4 Survey Method of inquiry in public administration 3.5 Case study Method of inquiry in public administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration has evolved and developed over time, this has been possible because of relentless investigations into issues bothering on the improvement of the discipline.
Major methods of inquiry into the discipline that will be discussed here are historical method, descriptive method, experimental method, survey method and case study method.
At the successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:0)Explain Historical Method (cid:0)Examine Descriptive Method (cid:0)Describe Experimental Method (cid:0)Discuss Survey Method (cid:0)State Case study Method MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Historical Method of Inquiry in Public Administration  Historical sources may be classified into two major categories, namely, documents and relics.
Documents are usually written whereas relics are generally archaeological or geological remains such as tools and utensils.
Relics are not written.
For instance, a letter written by President Goodluck Jonathan would be a document from the standpoint of the information it contains but would be a relic from the standpoint of spelling errors or other aspects which are not part of what Jonathan intended to transmit.
Among the various documentary sources are: 1.
Official records, minutes of meetings, committee reports and legal documents 2.
Institutional records, attendance rolls, university bulletins 3.
Memoirs, biographies, diaries, personal letters, books on the philosophy of a known scholar, and so on.
Historical sources can further be classified into primary and secondary sources; (cid:0)Primary sources are data provided by actual witness to the incident in question.
(cid:0)Secondary sources of data come from a middleman who acts between the original witness and the present consumer.
Secondary data are subject to an inherent danger of inaccuracy.
Whenever evidence is transmitted form one individual to another, it tends to become distorted.
Occasionally secondary sources have been so carelessly compiled that they are in a category of unverified hearsay or rumor.
For this reason, reliable historians rely as much as possible on primary sources, using secondary sources only as hypotheses to bridge the gaps between the various pieces of primary data, and at times the historian may have to rely on secondary sources.
He must bear in mind the limitations of such data.
In the event that numerous gaps in the primary source cause his over – reliance on secondary source, he should refrain from attempting the study at all.
3.2 Descriptive Method Descriptive method is concerned with the collection of data for the purpose of describing and interpreting existing conditions, prevailing practices, beliefs, attitudes and ongoing process.
Descriptive inquiry is that investigation which specifies the nature of given phenomena.
The specification can be simple or it can be complicated.
The importance of descriptive inquiry in public administration as well as other fields of educational endeavor clearly implies complexity of phenomena.
The need for systematic ways of telling what a situation is, means that the situation is no longer simple.
It can no longer be understood directly and without synthesis.
Descriptive inquiry gives a picture of a situation or a population.
Any consideration of phenomena generally begins with a full understanding of the phenomena.
Accurate descriptions are imperative for making a wide range of policy decisions.
For example the Nigerian department of labour makes detailed surveys of unemployment; these attempt to describe unemployment in the Nigerian economy for the purpose of knowing what the situation is.
Such surveys provide the basis for eliciting possible policies considered and those ultimately accepted as a result of the inquiry, represent value decisions.
While the research findings may have been useful, it cannot be concluded that the policies were determined scientifically.
Descriptive inquiry is basic for all types of research in assessing the situation as a prerequisite to inferences and generalizations.
While descriptive inquiry is a prerequisite for finding answers to questions, it is not in itself sufficiently comprehensive to provide answers.
Descriptive inquiry cannot establish cause and effect relationships.
From description the investigator cannot deduce conclusively the cause of the phenomena or predict what the future phenomena will be.
Descriptive inquiry using the same design done at specified periods of time can, indeed, show trends in description from which hypotheses can be gleaned and later tested under controlled experimental conditions.
3.3 Experimental method The steps of experimental method are essentially those of the scientific method.
They may be outlined as follows: 1.
Selecting and defining the problem: The problems amenable to experimentation generally should be converted into a hypothesis.
This hypothesis can be verified or refuted by the experimental data.
The variables to be investigated should be defined in operational terms.
2.
Reviewing the related literature: This shows how the present research fits into the scheme of things.
It surveys the research previously done on the problem and evaluates what this research has and has not accomplished in solving the problem currently under study.
Thus in this review, the research should point out very carefully the similarities and, more importantly, the differences between that research and his current study.
In order to do this effectively, the researcher must do more than consider the findings as they are reported.
He must examine the findings critically in light of the research methodology, the specific procedure employed, the control, the sampling and the measuring instruments used.
3.
Drawing up the experimental design: This section should place primary emphasis on the question of control, randomization, and replication and should include a clarification of such basic aspects of the design as the place and duration of the experiment.
It is generally advisable to conduct a pilot study because of the complexity of an experiment in order to ensure the adequacy of the design.
4.
Defining the population: It is important to define the population precisely so that there can be no question about the population to which the conclusions are to apply.
5.
Conducting the study: It is important here to insist on close adherence to plans, especially as they relate to the factors of control, randomization, and replication.
The duration of the experiment should be such that the variable under investigation is given adequate time to promote changes that can be evaluated and to insulate the influence of such extraneous factors as novelty.
6.
Assessing the outcomes: Careful consideration must be given to the selection of the criterion on the basis of which the results are to be assessed, for the efficiency of the experiment depends largely on the fairness of the criterion used.
7.
Analyzing and interpreting the results: The researcher is concerned with the operation of the factors under investigation.
He must be especially sensitive to the possibility that the results of his/her study arose through the operation of uncontrolled extraneous factors.
The researcher must further insulate at a given probability level the possibility that the experimental findings are simply the results of chance.
In no other area of research is the need for competence in statistical procedures so clearly indicated as in the analysis of experimental data as the basis for their valid interpretation.
8.
Drawing up conclusions: the conclusions of the study must be based on the findings of the study.
Care must be taken not to over – generalize the results obtained.
The results also pertain only to the conditions under which they were derived, and, since control may have distorted the natural situation, care must be taken to restrict the conclusions to the conditions actually present in the experiment.
9.
Reporting the result: The study must be reported in sufficient detail so that the reader can make an intelligent judgment as to its validity (Fisher, 1957) 3.4 Survey Method The survey method is interested in the accurate assessment of the characteristics of whole populations of people.
Only rarely, however, do survey researchers study whole population; they normally study samples drawn from populations.
From these samples, the researcher infers the characteristics of the defined population or universe.
The study of sample from which inferences about population can be drawn is needed because of the difficulties of attempting to study whole populations.
Random samples often furnish the same information as a census at much less cost, with greater efficiency sometimes, greater accuracy.
Sample surveys attempt to determine the incidence, distribution, and interrelations among sociological and psychological variables.
Survey research focuses on people, the vital facts of people, and their beliefs, opinions, attitudes, motivations and behavior.
Surveys are particularly versatile and practical, especially for the administrator, in that they indentify present conditions and point to present needs.
Surveys do not make the decisions for the administrator, but they can provide him with information on which to base sound decisions.
Surveys can be conveniently classified by the following methods of obtaining information: personal interview, mail questionnaire, panel, telephone and controlled observation.
Of these, the personal interview far overshadows the others as the most powerful and useful tool of social scientific survey research (Osuala, 2005) 3.5 Case Study Method Case study has a long history in social science research and has been used extensively in public administration more especially in the area of motivation.
For example both Freud and Piagnet typically used case studies to develop their theories.
Criticism of their techniques damaged the case study approach, but the increased acceptance of qualitative research and in particular, participant observation has, as corollary, revived the acceptability of the case study.
The case study can either be quantitative or qualitative, or even a combination of both due to the constraints of a sample of one or asingle unit being studied.
With the restrictions that brings for statistical inference, most case studies lie within the realm of qualitative methodology.
Case study is used to gain in – depth understanding replete with meaning for the subject, focusing on process rather than outcome, on discovery rather than confirmation.
Case study must involve the collection of very extensive data to produce an understanding of the entity being studied.
Shallow studies will not make any contribution to administrative knowledge (Osuala, 2005).
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has outlined and discussed the various methods of inquires used in public administration.
The discussions show that the successs in the administrative work depends to a large extent on the efficient method of gathering and applying the information at various levels.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit considered the following approaches for discussion; Historical Method, Descriptive Method, Experimental Method, Survey Method, Case study Method, The Institutional  Approach, and Comparative Approach.
It discussed their theoretical assumptions, usefulness and weaknesses as a mode of inquiry in public administration.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the METHODS OF INQUIRY IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adamolekun, L. (1983) Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Perspective, New York, Longman Ltd. Fisher, R. A (1957) The Designs of Experiments, London: Oliver and Boyd Jones, T. (1971) Conducting Political Research, New York: Harper and Row Publishers NOUN (2012) INR123 Introduction to public administration, Noun, Lagos.
Onah, R. C (2005) Public Administration, Nsukka: Great AP Express Publishers Ltd. Osuala, E. C (2005) Introduction to Research Methodology; The Millennium Edition, Enugu: Cheston Agency Ltd
