 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: PCR 417 COURSE TITLE: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND SECURITY COURSE GUIDE Course Code: PCR 417 Course Title: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND SECURITY Course Developer/Writer: A.J.
Oluwadare Programme Leader: Professor Remi Anifowose Course Editor: Professor Osita Agbu Course Coordinator: Mathias Jarikre  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria First Printed ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria  TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………... 1 What you will learn in this course………………………….
1 Course Aims……………………………………………….. 2 Course Objectives………………………………………….. 2 Working through this course……………………………….. 3 Course Materials…………………………………………..... 3 Study Units………………………………………………….
3-4 Set Textbooks…………………………………………….. 4 Assignment File…………………………………………….. 4 Assessment………………………………………………….
4-5 Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………………….
5 Final Examination and Grading…………………………….
5-6 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………… 6 How to get the most from this course……………………… 6-7 Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….. 8 Summary ............................................................................. 10  1.0 Introduction PCR 417: International Relations and Security, is a one semester course.
It will be available for all students to take towards the core module of the International Studies programme.
This course is suitable for all final year students of Political Science and International Relations.
This course consists of 21 Units that examine in detail the nature of international relations, and the security challenges confronting the international system.
It is therefore concerned about the various character of relationships among states.
In the course of the relationships, compromise, confrontation and cooperation (the three Cs) are brought to bear.
In the states’ efforts at protecting their individual national interests, there have been series of clashes that continue to question the nature of security in existence.
The course is therefore bound to examine the various forms of confrontations that have plagued the system; in this examination, we are also introduced to the measures that have been taken to minimise the incidence of conflicts and ensure that the prospects of maintaining international peace and security are realised.
There are compulsory prerequisites for this course.
The course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you need to use and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also emphasizes the necessity for tutor–marked assignments.
There are also periodic tutorial classes that are linked to this course.
1.1 What You will Learn in this Course The overall objective of PCR 417: International Relations and Security, is to expose the students to the whole gamut of issues surrounding the attainment and maintenance of a secured global environment, where a sense of community and harmony would prevail.
Your understanding of this course will serve to expose you to a very important part of international studies that deals with the probable nature of relationships among states.
1.2 Course Aims The basic aim we intend to achieve in this course is to expose the student to the reality of international relations and the security challenges that are inherent in inter-state relations.
It is important that the student is made aware that the possibilities of conflict is not the only constant element in global interactions, but also that cooperation is a constant variable in inter-state relations.
1.3 Course Objectives Several objectives can be delineated from this course.
In addition, each unit has specific objectives.
The unit objectives can be found at the beginning of each unit.
You may want to refer to them as you study the particular unit to check on the progress you are making.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way, you can be sure that you have covered what is required of you in that unit.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: · identify the structural variants of the international system · understand the basis of international economic relations · understand the systems of international law · be familiar with the origin and processes of international organizations · understand the evolution of modern International law · know the sources of modern international law · understand the various theories of international relations · be acquainted with the nature and character of international security · be conversant with the various international actors and the mode of their interactions · understand the nature of state power · be familiar with the conditions for international conflict · be able to device mechanisms for resolving peculiar international conflicts · be conversant with the workings of peace processes · understand how diplomacy has been useful in maintaining peace · be familiar with the usefulness of collective security mechanisms 1.4 Working through this Course To complete this course you are required to read the study units, read recommended textbooks and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
All the units contain self-assessment exercises, and at points in the course, you are required to submit tutor- marked assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course, is a final examination.
Stated below are the components of the course and what you are expected to do.
1.5 Course Materials 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks and other Reference Sources 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation  It cannot be sufficiently stressed that you must obtain the text materials.
They are provided by the NOUN.
You may also be able to purchase the materials from the bookshops.
Please, contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text materials.
1.6 Study Units There are twenty-one study units in this course, these are as follows: MODULE 1 Unit 1 Understanding the Growth and development of the International System Unit 2 International Economic Relations Unit 3 International Law Unit 4 International Organizations MODULE 2 Unit 1 Integration Theory Unit 2 System Theory Unit 3 Balance of Power Theory Unit 4 Power Theory MODULE 3 Unit 1 State Actors in International Relations Unit 2 Intergovernmental Non-State Actors Unit 3 Non-governmental Non-State Actors Unit 4 International Personalities MODULE 4 Unit 1 Political Power Unit 2 Economic Power Unit 3 Socio-cultural Power Unit 4 Military Power MODULE 5  Unit 1 The Nature and Character of Terrorism Unit 2 Securitization Models Unit 3 Diplomacy Unit 4 Peace Models Unit 5 Collective Security Systems Each unit contains a number of self-tests.
In general, these self-tests are based on the materials you have just covered or require you to apply it in some way.
They are to assist you to gauge your progress as well as reinforce your understanding of the material.
Together with tutor- marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the Course.
1.7 Set Textbooks You may require to purchase these textbooks stated below.
Collins, A.
(Ed.)
(2007).
Contemporary Security Studies.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Spanier, J.
(1987).
Games Nations Play.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Akinboye, S. & Ottoh, F. (2009).
A Systematic Approach to International Relations.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
Finch, G. (2000).
The Sources of Modern International Law.
NY: William Hein and Co. Inc. 1.8 Assignment File There are many assignments for this course, with each unit having at least one assignment.
These assignments are basically meant to assist you to understand the course.
In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignment can be found in the Assignment File itself, and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
1.9 Assessment Schedule There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
First, are the Tutor-Marked Assignments; Second, is the written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and experience acquired during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment accounts for 30 per cent of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final examination of three hours duration.
This examination will account for the other 70 per cent of your total course mark.
1.10 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are a number of tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You only need to submit 28 of them.
The best five (i.e.
the five highest score of the 28 tutor marked assignments) are taken into account.
Each assignment carries 20 marks but on the average when the five assignments are put together, then each assignment will count 10% towards your total course mark.
This implies that the total marks for the best three (3) assignments which would have been 100 marks will now be 30% of your total course mark.
1.11 Final Examination and Grading The final examination for PCR 417: International Relations and Security, will be of three hours’ duration and it accounts for 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the practice exercises and tutor-marked assignments you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between the completion of the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your tutor-marked assignments and comment on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all aspects of the course.
1.12 Course Marking Scheme Table 1: Course marking Scheme ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignments Best four marks of the Assignment @ 10% each (on the average) = 30% of course marks Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks 1.13 How to get the most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lectures.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you what to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in- class exercise.
Each of the study units follow a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or post the question on the web GS OLE’s discussion board.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organise a Study Schedule- Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available from the Web GS OLE.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose, you should decide on and fill in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your textbooks and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Visit your study centre for up-to-date course information which will be available there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), access the Assignment File for your next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
12.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
13.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
1.14 Tutors and Tutorials There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board.
The following might be circumstances in which you will find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if:– - you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
- you have difficulties with the exercises.
- you have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefits from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn quite a lot from participating in the discussions.
1.15 Summary This course guide has introduced you to every aspect of your course on International Relations and Security.
We wish you success in your studies.
Course Code: PCR 417 Course Title: International Relations And Security Course Developer/Writer: A.J.
Oluwadare Programme Leader: Professor Remi Anifowose Course Editor: Professor Osita Agbu Course Coordinator: Mathias Jarikre NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA i  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria First Printed ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii  TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGES Table of Contents iii MODULE 1 1 Unit 1 Understanding the Growth and development of the International System 1-8 Unit 2 International Economic Relations 9-18 Unit 3 International Law 19-27 Unit 4 International Organizations 28-35 MODULE 2 36 Unit 1 Integration Theory 36-44 Unit 2 System Theory 45-52 Unit 3 Balance of Power Theory 53-61 Unit 4 Power Theory 62-70 MODULE 3 71 Unit 1 State Actors in International Relations 71-79 Unit 2 Intergovernmental Non-State Actors 80-88 Unit 3 Non-governmental Non-State Actors 89-97 Unit 4 International Personalities 98-106 MODULE 4 107 Unit 1 Political Power 107-114 Unit 2 Economic Power 115-122 Unit 3 Socio-cultural Power 123-130 Unit 4 Military Power 131-138 MODULE 5 139 Unit 1 The Nature and Character of Terrorism 139-145 Unit 2 Securitization Models 146-153 Unit 3 Diplomacy 154-162 Unit 4 Peace Models 163-171 Unit 5 Collective Security Systems 172-181 iii
