THIRD PARTY INTERVENTION PCR 371 IN CONFLICT RESOLUTION Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE PCR371 COURSE GUIDE PCR371 THIRD PARTY INTERVENTION IN CONFLICT RESOLUTION Course Developer/ Writer Dr. Sampson Ebimaro University of Abuja, (PT) Course Editor Professor Remi Anifowose Department of political science University of Lagos, Akoka Course Co-coordinator Oyedolapo B. Durojaye National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE PCR371 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed in 2008 ISBN: 978-058-700-4 All rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE PCR371 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………….. 1 What you will learn in this Course………………………… 1 Course Aims……………………………………………….
1-2 Course Objectives………………………………………….
2 Working through this Course….………………………….. 2 Course Materials…………………………………………... 3 Study Units………………………………………………… 3-4 Set Textbooks……………………………………………… 4-5 Assignment File…………………………………………… 5 Presentation Schedule……………………………………… 5 Assessment………………………………………………… 5 Tutor Marked Assignment………………………………… 5-6 Final Examination and Grading…………………………… 6 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………… 6 Course Overview………………………………………….. 7 How to Get the Most from this Course……..…………….. 7-9 Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….. 9 Summary…………………………………………………… 9-10 ivCOURSE GUIDE PCR371 Introduction PCR371: Third Party Intervention in Conflict resolution is a semester 3- credit unit course.
It is designed to be taken by all students as a course in the Bachelor’s degree programmes of School of Arts and Social Sciences.
It is suitable not only for students who train as tomorrow’s teachers and instructors, but also for those who will combine theory with practical challenges in third party mediation processes and problem- solving.
The course consists of general and specific explanations of conflict, theories of conflict, the philosophical basis of conflict, the environments of conflict resolution, and the professional and personal qualities required of third party mediator.
The reading materials has been thoughtfully developed and it meets international standards.
There are no compulsory or prerequisites for this course, except otherwise requested by the university authorities in the future.
The course guide describes briefly what the course entails and what students are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will need and how to study or grasp these materials.
It also contains Tutor-Marked Assignments, including information that will be sent to you later.
There are periodic tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
What You Will Learn in this Course Third Party Intervention in Conflict Resolution (PCR371) aims at acquainting students with basic issues in mediation processes, and designed to be studied in its specific approaches.
The area of focus of conflict studies and management is wide, but this course specifically aims at bringing third party intervention in conflict resolution to the basic understanding of students and practitioners.
Notwithstanding its specificity, the general issues about conflict were discussed.
Your understanding of third party intervention and resolution processes will equip you both in explaining and applying basic skills to complex tasks in mediation.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to enable students understand and appreciate fundamental issues and requirements in third party mediation processes.
To attain this, the course will introduce students to: 1.
The general background and basis of third party intervention in conflict resolution 1COURSE GUIDE PCR371 2.
The meaning and philosophical basis of third party conflict resolution.
3.
The nature and environments for effective third party mediation challenges 4.
The process, personal qualities as well as professional expertise a mediator must possess in order to be efficient and result-oriented in third party mediation, and 5.
The behavioural attitude or code of conduct of parties in conflict in negotiation.
Course Objectives The study is designed to equip students with basic understanding of third party intervention in conflict resolution.
Conflict precedes any form of resolution.
As we had already indicated, it is imperative that students grasp the basic concepts, theories, philosophy and processes of third party intervention in conflict resolution.
At the end of the course, students should be able to: • Grasp the concepts and meaning of conflict • Appreciate the imperatives of conflict resolution in general, and Third Party intervention in conflict resolution in particular • Understand the setting and process of Third party intervention in conflict resolution • Appreciate the personal qualities and professional attributes of third party in conflict resolutions.
• Comprehend the interface between research and practical ingenuity in Third Party conflict resolution • Predict, prescribe or recommend ways in third party intervention in conflict resolution, and • Contribute to research and practice in the field of third party intervention in conflict resolution.
Working Through this Course To complete this course, students are expected to read the study units and recommended texts including other relevant materials.
Each unit contains self-assessment text/questions and tutor-marked questions.
Students at the end of this course will take an examination.
The details of the components of the course are set out in subsequent pages.
2COURSE GUIDE PCR371 Course Materials The main components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments file 5.
Presentation Schedule In addition to that, students must obtain copies of the reading materials.
You may contact your facilitator if you have problem obtaining the texts materials.
Modules/Study Units There are 4 modules in the course.
Each module contains 5 units.
The first module is the introduction and general background.
It discusses the nature, causes and theories of conflict: The second examines third party intervention in conflict resolution: The third takes a look at Third party personality, roles, expertise and attributes of third party.
The fourth module presents practical case studies with recommendations.
Study Units There are twenty study units in this course.
Each Module contains 5 units study lessons.
This course guide makes it a total of 21 units.
Module 1 Introduction and General Background Unit 1 Introduction and General Background Unit 2 Conflict Unit 3 Definition and Characteristics Unit 4 Theories of Conflict Unit 5 Status of Public Policy in Third party Conflict Resolution in Nigeria Module 2 Third Party Intervention in Conflict Resolution Unit 1 Concepts, Definitions and Nature of Third party Intervention in Conflict Resolution Unit 2 Environments of Conflict Resolution Unit 3 Methods of Conflict Resolution, Concepts and Philosophical Third party Intervention in Conflict Resolution 3COURSE GUIDE PCR371 Unit 4 Obligations of Parties in Conflict in Third Party Conflict Resolution Unit 5 Processes, Advantages and Disadvantages of Third Party Intervention in Conflict Resolution Module 3 Third Party Personality, Roles, Expertise and Attributes in Third Party Conflict Resolution Unit 1 The Legal and Moral Personality of Third Party in Conflict Mediation Unit 2 Roles of third party in Mediation Process Unit 3 Professional Expertise of Third Party Mediation Process Unit 4 Personal Attributes of Third Party in Conflict Resolution Unit 5 The Importance of Communication in Third Party Conflict Resolution Module 4 Case Studies in Third Party Intervention in Conflict Resolution Unit 1 Kenya and Somalia: Somalia and Ethiopia Unit 2 The Peace Process and Third Party Mediation in Tajikistan (1994-1997) Unit 3 Peace Makers or Spoilers?
: Third Party Mediation in Conflict Over Nagorno-Karabagh Unit 4 Why and where “Power Mediation” Matters in Third Party Conflict Resolution Unit 5 Suggested Methods of Preventing Ethnic/Religious Conflict in Nigeria and General Recommendations Set Textbooks Barseghyan, K. and Karaev, Z “Playing Cat-and-Mouse: Conflict and Third Party Mediation in Post Soviet Space”, Online Journal of Peace and Conflict Resolution (OJPCR) 6-1 Fall, 192- 209 (2004) Best, S. G. (2006) Introduction to Peace and Conflict Studies in West Africa (ed.)
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. Chesterman, S. (2005) Making States Work; State Failure and the Crisis of Governance, Tokyo: United Nations Press.
Fisher, R. and Ury, W. (1991).
Getting To Yes Negotiating Agreement Without Giving I New York: Penguin Books.
4COURSE GUIDE PCR371 Otite, O. and Albert, I. O.
(1999) Community Conflict in Nigeria Management, Resolution and Transformation (eds.
): Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. Rawls, J.
(1971).
Theory of Social Justice, Cambridge: Oxford University Press Wehr, P. Third Party Intervention.
(An Online Conflict Research Consortium) University of California: USA.
Zartman, W. (1989).
Alternative Attempts at Crisis Management: Concepts and Processes Governance, (ed.)
Tokyo: United Nations University Press.
Assignment File The details of the work you must submit to your facilitator for marking will be found in this file.
The marks you will obtain from these assignments will count as part of the cumulative score for this course.
Additional information about PCR371 may be found in the same file Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course file gives you the important dates for completion of tutor-marked assignments and attendance to tutorials.
Don’t forget to submit all your assignments by deadlines.
Avoid falling behind in your work.
Assessments There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First is the tutor- marked assignment and the written examination.
The assignments must be done and submitted to your facilitator on the dates specified/deadlines, and will account for thirty percent (30%) of your total score.
The remaining 70% will be by examination at the end of the course.
Tutor Marked Assignments There are 15 Tutor-Marked Assignments/Questions in this course.
You need to do and submit all the assignments.
All will be marked, but your best three (3) will be counted.
It will account for 30 per cent of your total score.
Each assignment carries 10 marks.
Do all your assignments contained in the assignment file and send it to your tutor at least on deadline.
5COURSE GUIDE PCR371 Utilize the materials and information contained in your set textbooks, readings and study units.
Other references will also be useful in broadening your viewpoint and understanding of the subject matter.
If as a result of reasonable excuse/problem beyond your control, you could not submit on deadline please contact your tutor.
Final Examination and Grading The Final examination on PCR371 will be taken within three hours duration.
The examination will make up the remaining seventy per cent (70%).
The questions will reflect both the tutorial marked assignment (TMA) and self- assessment exercises (SAE) you have come across in the course of reading the text and practice exercises Revise your TMA and SAE before sitting for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your TMA and the tutor’s comments on them before the examinations.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down (Table 1) Assessment Marks Tutorial Marked Do all the assignments for submission, but only your Assignments best 3 will count as much as up to 30% Each assignment carries 10%.
Final There shall be six questions to answer four.
Each Examination Question carries 20 marks.
Total 30 + 70 = 100% of course marks.
Course Overview The table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignment that follow them.
6COURSE GUIDE PCR371 Unit Title of Work Week’s Assignment Activity Course Guide 1 1 Introduction and General 1 Assignment 1 Background 2 Illustration & Principles of social 2 Assignment 2 justice 3 General Aims and Objectives 3 Assignment 3 4 Relevance of Theory to practice and 4 Assignment 4 the advantages and disadvantages of third party intervention 5 Third party intervention; Concepts 5 Assignment 5 and Definitions and processes 6 Levels of third party intervention/ 6 Assignment 6 processes 7 Professional Expertise of a 3rd party 7 Assignment 7 Mediator 8 Personal attributes of 3rd Party 8 Assignment 8 Mediator 9 Neutrality and Openness 9 Assignment 9 10 Appropriate Power and Knowledge 10 Assignment 10 Compared 11 Case Study 1 11 Assignment 11 12 Case Study 2 12 Assignment 12 13 Case Study 3 13 Assignment 13 14 General Summary (Main Book) 14&15 Assignment 14 15 Tool-kits/Recommendation 16 Assignment 16 16 Revision 17 Assignment 17 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning programme, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the merits of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and in a place and time that suits you.
Instead of seeing the lecturer often, you read and think on your own.
And instead of receiving instructions from the tutor in terms of giving you some readings to do, the study units tells you how, when and what to read.
Each study unit provides exercises for you to do or practice at the appropriate point and it follows a common format.
The first item in each unit is introduction to the subject matter and how it links other units and course as a whole.
This is followed by the objectives, which attempt to let you know what you are expected to gain at the end of that unit.
Utilize these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units, you must go back and 7COURSE GUIDE PCR371 check whether you have achieved the objectives.
This makes sense and will help you to pass your assessment tests and examinations.
The main body of the units guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or other sources.
Reading Section Be informed that your tutor’s job is to help you when you need it.
So don’t hesitate to call him/her to provide it.
1.
Read the course guide thoroughly 2.
Organize the study schedule and the course overview for more details.
3.
Take note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever methods you chose to use, decide on and write your own dates for working on each unit.
4.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
Students’ failure is accountable to working behind their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedules, please call you tutor.
5.
Turn to unit 1 and read the introduction and objectives for the unit 6.
Assemble all the study materials you need for each unit.
You will certainly need the study unit you are working on and one of your set books.
7.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you read through the units, references made can also help you if you wish to consult them.
8. Review the objectives of each unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
Contact your tutor if it proved contrary or if you have any fear or doubt.
9.
Start on the next unit if you have achieved the objectives of one unit.
10.
When you had submitted your assignments to your tutor for marking, do not wait for the return before proceeding to the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
Take note of your tutor’s comments when your marked assignment is returned and do not hesitate to contact him if you have any problem on it.
11.
After completing the entire units, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Be sure that you have achieved the objectives listed at the beginning of each unit, including those of the course guide.
8COURSE GUIDE PCR371 Tutors and Tutorials There are twelve hours of tutorials provided.
The location, time and dates of these tutorials including your tutorial group would be made available to you together with names and contacts of the tutor.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignment which must be mailed to him/her well before the due date (at least two working days).
Take note of the comments, progress and other difficulties you encountered and do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail or discussion board created for that purpose.
For the purpose of clarity, please contact your tutor if: • You do not understand the study unit or assigned readings • You have difficulties in self assessment tests or other related matters • You have a question on your tutor’s comments on your assignment or grading.
You should try to attend your tutorials, as it may only be the chance of meeting your tutor face-to-face and ask questions that would be answered instantly.
You will learn a lot by participating in the tutorials, but not compulsory.
Summary Third Party intervention in Conflict Resolution (PCR303) is designed to introduce students to basic theoretical and practical issues in mediation processes.
At the end of the course, students should have been well acquainted with: 1.
The concepts of conflict and causes 2.
Theories of conflict 3.
Concepts and philosophical basis of third party intervention in conflict resolution 4.
Relevance of theory to the practice of third party intervention in conflict resolution 5.
Enabling environments of third party mediation 6.
Process of third party mediation and behavioural expectations on the part of the parties to the conflict 7.
Professional expertise and personal attributes required in third party intervention in conflict resolution, and 8.
Case studies of third party interventions 9COURSE GUIDE PCR371 Certainly, the ideas and questions students should be able to answer are not limited to the above points.
PCR303 is an interesting area of study as much as useful in our contemporary time.
We wish you success.
10
