 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCEINCES COURSE CODE: POL 272 COURSE TITLE: CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING  COURSE GUIDE PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING Course Developer/Writer Monsuru Adegboyega Kasali Course Editor Dr. Rasheed O. Olaniyi Dept of History University of Ibadan Programme Leader Dr. G. I. Oyakhiromen National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Coordinator Oyedolapo B. Durojaye National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA None PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-879-5 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………….. 1 What you will learn in this Course……………………....... 1-2 Course Aim………………………………………………... 2 Course Objectives………………………………………….
2-3 Working through this Course……………………………… 3 Course Materials…………………………………………... 3-4 Study Units………………………………………………… 4-5 Set Textbooks……..……………………………………….
5-6 Assignment File…………………………………………… 6 Presentation Schedule……………………………………... 6 Assessment………………………………………………… 6 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs)……………………….
7 Final Examination and Grading…………………………… 7 Course marking Scheme…………………………………… 7 Course Overview………………………………………….. 8-9 How to get the most out of this course…………………….
9-10 Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….. 11 Summary…………………………………………………… 11-12 iii   PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING Introduction PCR272: Concepts and Practice of Peacebuilding is a 3-credit unit course.
It is a compulsory course for all undergraduate students of Peace and Conflict Resolution of the University.
Post Graduate Students may also be mandated by the school to register for the course especially those in PGD class.
The course is recommended for any other student(s) particularly those in the School of Arts and Social Sciences, who have interest in the study of Peace and Conflict Resolution.
The course can also be taken as elective or required course by other students whose main field(s) of discipline is not Peace and Conflict Resolution.
The Course shall consist of 20 units, which include the meaning of peacebuilding, tasks and elements of peacebuilding, restorative justice, gender justice and women participation in peacebuilding, disarmament, demobilization, non proliferation of arms and arms control.
It also includes the roles of donors, international institutions as well traditional institutions to post conflict reconstruction or peacebuilding, among others.
The course material draws its major case studies from the Continent of Africa with particular reference to Nigeria with the aim of ejaculating the students’ desire towards developing viable analytical and conceptual framework for addressing the conflict problems in Nigeria in particular and Africa in general.
The course has no compulsory pre-requisites for it to be registered for.
The course guide informs us on what this course is all about, what student should appreciate in each unit, what text materials we shall be using and how we can make best use of these materials.
The course guide also discerns the need for taking tutored marked assignments so seriously by students.
However, necessary information on tutored marked assignments shall be made known to students in a separate file, which will be sent to each student.
This course is also supported with periodic tutorial classes.
What you will learn in this course The overall aim of PCR202: Concepts and Practice of Peacebuilding is to introduce you to the meaning of peacebuilding and salient issues in peacebuilding including the tasks and elements of peacebuilding, restorative justice, gender justice and women participation in peacebuilding, disarmament, demobilization, non proliferation of arms and arms control.
It also includes the roles of donors, international institutions as well traditional institutions to post conflict reconstruction or peacebuilding, among others.
1  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING Your understanding of Concepts and Practice of Peacebuilding will enable you to explain some fundamental concepts-basic ideas of peacebuilding.
It will also expose you to various peacebuilding techniques and philosophy of conflict transformation.
PCR272 is a very interesting course as it stimulates our understanding of peace practice and philosophy for rebuilding communication, harmony, and creating opportunities for healing and positive peace.
Course Aims The main aim of this course is to expose you to the basic ideas and efforts or undertakings in peacebuilding.
The course is also aimed to: • Describe Peace building and discuss its categories; • Distinguish the concepts of peace making, peacekeeping and peacebuilding; • Explain various dimensions of peacebuilding; • Discuss various tasks of peacebuilding; • State various elements of peacebuilding; • Examine relevance of restorative to peacebuilding; • Analyze the gender justice and mainstreaming gender in peacebuilding; • Evaluate the efforts and activities as well institutions of post reconstruction and peacebuilding; and • Appreciate the importance of independent judiciary, judicial accountability, rule of law and constitutionalism in peacebuilding.
Course Objectives With utmost desire to achieve the aims set out above, the course has some set of objectives as demonstrated in all the units of the course.
Each unit has its objectives.
Objectives are always included at the beginning of every unit to assist the student in the appreciation of what he or she will come across in the study of each unit to facilitate his or her better understanding of the course-PCR272.
Student is therefore advised to read these objectives before studying the entire unit(s).
Thus, it is helpful to do so.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way, you can be sure that you have done what was required of you by the unit.
Stated below are the wider objectives of this course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
2  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING At the end of the course, you should be able to: • Define the meaning of Peacebuilding and discuss its categories; • Explain Peace building and some of its basic concepts; • Discuss various dimensions of peacebuilding; • Describe various tasks of peacebuilding; • State various elements of peacebuilding; • Describe restorative justice; • Define Gender Justice; • Examine the relevance of Mainstreaming Gender in Peacebuilding; • Evaluate the importance of demobilization, demobilization and trauma management in post conflict peacebuilding; • Discuss a number of international disarmament instruments; • Analyze Arms Proliferation, Production and Distribution Pattern; • Explain the roles of donors, international organizations, and traditional institutions in post conflict reconstruction; • Explain human rights and refugees (and IDPs); • Describe the relevance of independent judiciary, crime responsibility and accountability • Evaluate the relevance of constitutionalism in peacebuilding.
Working through this course In completing this course, student is required to study the whole units, and try to read all (or substantial number of) the recommended textbooks, journals and other reading materials including electronic resources.
Each unit contains self assessment exercise(s) and student is required to submit his or her assignment for the purpose of assessment.
At the end of the course, student(s) shall be examined as the time of the final examination and venue shall be communicated to all the registered students in due course by relevant school authorities—study centre management.
Below are the components of the course and what you are required to do.
Course Materials Major components of the course include: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule 3  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING It is incumbent on every student to get his or her own copy of the course material.
You are also advised to contact your tutorial facilitator if you have any difficulty in getting any of the text materials recommended for your further reading.
Study Units In this course there are twenty units, which include: Module 1 Unit 1 Meaning of Peacebuilding Unit2 Tasks and Elements of Peace Building Unit3 Restorative Justice as a peacebuilding Mechanism Unit4 Gender Justice and Mainstreaming Gender in Peacebuilding I Unit5 Gender Justice and Mainstreaming Gender in Peacebuilding II Module 2 Unit 1 The Pattern of Arms Proliferation, Production and Distribution Unit 2 International Instruments of Disarmament Unit 3 Disarmament Unit 4 Demobilization Unit 5 Trauma Management Module 3 Unit 1 The Post Conflict Environment and the Phase of the Peace Process Unit 2 Roles of Donor in Post conflict Peacebuilding Unit 3 Roles of International Organizations in Post conflict Peacebuilding Unit 4 Roles of Traditional Institutions in Post conflict Peacebuilding Unit 5 Local Capacity Building Coordination Module 4 Unit 1 Repatriation of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons Unit 2 Human Rights Protection for Refugees and IDPs Unit 3 Reckoning with War Crime and Past Abuses Unit 4 Independent Judiciary and post conflict Reconstruction Unit 5 Constitution: Making and Amendment Process(es) 4  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING The first five units describe peacebuilding and discuss various concepts and dimensions of peacebuilding.
It also examines the impact of gender justice and women participation in peacebuilding as well as the effects of restorative justice on reconciliation and peacebuilding.
The following set of five units evaluates the global demilitarization processes, the international state of armament, the relevance of demobilization, disarmament and trauma management in post conflict reconstruction.
The next set of five units discusses the roles of donors, international organizations, traditional institutions in post conflict reconstruction and the relevance of building local capacity for post conflict peacebuilding.
The last five units explain the rights of refugees and IDPs, and examine the importance of criminal accountability, independent judiciary and constitutionalism on peacebuilding.
In each of the unit you have at least one self assessment exercise, which helps you to know how far you have progressed in understanding the content of each unit.
These self assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignments create a great opportunity for student to achieve the overall objectives of the course.
Set Textbooks The following textbooks are recommended to each student taking the course.
The first three textbooks are compulsory for your study of this course.
Albert, I.O.
(2001), Introduction to Third Party Intervention in Community Conflict (Ibadan: PETRAF/John Archers).
Bassiouni, M.C.
(1992), Crime Against Humanity in International Criminal Law, Kluwer Academic Publishers Boutros-Ghali, B.
(1992), An Agenda for Peace (New York: United Nations).
Bush, K (1998), “A Measure of Peace: Peace and Conflict Impact Assessment of Development Projects in War Zones”, The Peace- Building and Reconstruction Programme Initiative, working paper, IDRC, Ottawa.
Goodhart, A.L.
(1953), “English Law and the Moral Law”, (London: Stevens).
Mansson, Katarina (2005), “Integrating Human Rights in United Nations Peace Building Activities: Developing Gender Justice Best Practices” in Gender Justice in Post Conflict Countries in 5  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING East, Central and Southern Africa, Advocacy Magazine, Centre for Human Rights, University of Pretoria/UNIFEM, September.
Pirouet, M. Louise (1995), “The Effects of Conflict, I: Human Rights and Refugees” in Oliver Furley (ed), Conflict in Africa, Tauris Academic Studies.
Publishers, Inc.).
Reychler, Luc (2001), "From Conflict to Sustainable Peacebuilding: Concepts and Analytical Tools," in Peacebuilding: A Field Guide, Luc Reychler and Thania Paffenholz, eds.
(Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner UNHCR, Collection of International Instruments Concerning Refugees, (1979), Geneva.
Assignment File In this file, you will find the necessary details of the assignments you must submit to your tutor for assessment.
The marks you get from these assignments will form part of your final assessment in this course.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the tutor- marked assignments; second, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
6  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING Tutor Marked Assignments There are twenty tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit four assignments out which the best three will be used for your assessment.
These three assignments shall be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with TMA (tutor-marked assignment) file to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment gets to your tutor on or before the deadline.
However, in case of being unable to complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is done to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of PCR272 will be of three hours’ duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination shall consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your tutor-marked assignments and the comments of your tutor on them before the final examination.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 4 Four Assignments to be submitted out of which the three best shall be considered at 10% each, making 30% of the overall scores Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Marking Scheme 7  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING Course Overview This table brings together the entire units contained in this course, the number of weeks you should take to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
Unit l Week’s Assessment Activity (end of Unit) Course Guide 1 Module 1 1 Meaning of Peacebuilding 1 Assignment 1 2 Tasks and Elements of Peace 2 Assignment 2 Building 3 Restorative Justice as a 2 Assignment 3 peacebuilding Mechanism 4 Gender Justice and 3 Assignment 4 Gender Mainstreaming in Peace building I 5 Gender Justice and Gender 4 Assignment 5 Mainstreaming in Peace building II Module 2 1 The Pattern of Arms 5 Assignment 6 Proliferation, Production and Distribution 2 International Instruments of 6 Assignment 7 Disarmament 3 Disarmament 6 Assignment 8 4 Demobilization 7 Assignment 9 5 Trauma Management 7 Assignment 10 Module 3 1 The Post Conflict 8 Assignment 11 Environment and the Phase of the Peace Process 2 Roles of Donor in Post 9 Assignment 12 conflict Peacebuilding 3 Roles of International 10 Assignment 13 Organizations in Post conflict Peacebuilding 4 Roles of Traditional 11 Assignment 14 Institutions in Post conflict Peacebuilding 5 Local Capacity Building 11 Assignment 15 Coordination 8  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING Module 4 1 Repatriation of Refugees and 12 Assignment 16 Internally Displaced Persons 2 Human Rights Protection for 13 Assignment 17 Refugees and IDPs 3 Reckoning with War Crime 14 Assignment 18 and Past Abuses 4 Independent Judiciary and 15 Assignment 19 post conflict Reconstruction 5 Constitution: Making and 16 Assignment 20 Amendment Process(es) 21 Revision 17 22 Examination 18 Table 2: Course Overview How to get the best from this Course In distance learning the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through especially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In this same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set books or other material.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for your to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading Section Remember that your tutor’s job is to assist you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
9  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments related to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unity) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
10  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING Tutors and Tutorials There are between eight and 12 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
The dates, time and venue of these tutorials shall be communicated to you.
The name and phone number of your tutor will be made known to you immediately you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
You will definitely benefit a lot by doing that.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, • you have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, • you have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should make an effort to attend the tutorials.
Thus, it is the only opportunity you have to enjoy face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary PCR272 aims to expose you to basic ideas, philosophy, practice and efforts in peacebuilding.
As you complete this course, you should be able to answer the following questions: • What is peacebuilding?
• What are the dimensions of peacebuilding?
• What is the tasks and elements of peacebuilding?
• How does restorative justice contribute to peacebuilding?
• Examine the impact of women participation in peace process?
• What are the roles of traditional institutions in post conflict reconstruction in Africa?
11  PCR272 CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE OF PEACEBUILDING • What are the challenges posed by arms proliferation to post conflict peacebuilding in Africa?
• How does independent judiciary promote peacebuilding?
• How does international law protect the fundamental rights of Refugees?
• Who is crime offender?
• What is the impact of constitutionalism on peacebuilding and good governance?
Finally, you are advised to read the course material appreciably well in order to prepare fully and not to be caught pants down by the final examination questions.
So, we sincerely wish you best of success in your academic career as you will find this course (PCR272) very interesting.
You should always avoid examination malpractices!
12
