PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY PED 110 EDUCATION Course GuidePED 110 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Course Developer Dr. Osuji, U.S.A Lagos School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Writer Mr. Uhie, H. C. Abia State University Uturu- Abia Course Editor Prof. Omatseye, J. N. Faculty of Education UNIBEN, Benin-City Course Coordinator Dr. Osuji, U.S.A Lagos School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. Alhassan, A.
B.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiPED 110 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-820-5 All Rights Reserved iiiPED 110 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGES Introduction.
……………………………………………….
1 What you will Learn in this Course ………………………… 1 Course Aims.……………………………………………….
1 Course objectives…………………………………………… 2 Working through this Course……………………………….
3 Course Materials…………………………………………… 3 Study Units ………………………………………………… 3 Assignment File …………………………………………… 3 Assessment………………………………………………….
4 Tutor-Marked Assignment.………………………………… 4 Final Examination and Grading…………………………….
4 Course Marking Scheme.
………………………………….
4 How to Get the Most from this Course ……………………... 5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials…………………………….
6 Summary…………………………………………………….
6 ivPED 110 COURSE GUIDE Introduction The course PED 110: philosophy of Primary education is a semester course.
It is a two credit unit course designed for the 200 level, undergraduate programmes in education.
In order words, it is meant for B. ed, B. sc (Ed.
), B.A.
(Ed) and PGDE programmes of the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
There are no compulsory prerequisites for this course, although before this time it is expected that you have gone through some courses like foundations of education which will introduce you to the peripheral details.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, the course materials you will need and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also gives you hints on your tutor-marked assignments; the details will be given to you at your study centre.
There are tutorial sessions that are linked to the course.
You are advised to attend these tutorial classes.
The time and venue ill be made available at the centre.
What you will Learn from this Course The overall aim of this course PED 110: Philosophy of Primary Education is not to take make you a philosopher but to introduce you to the basic fundamental elements of educational philosophy so as to appreciate and place value for education.
During this course, you will learn about very interesting concepts such as freedom, education the ideal man etc.
These concepts and many more will make you have sufficient knowledge to appreciate the need for educational philosophy, which should provide you with the necessary basis for further study.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to introduce you to the basic fundamentals of philosophy of education.
This will be achieved by aiming to: • Introduce you to the basic concept of education, goals and objectives of education.
• Discuses philosophy and its functions.
• Explain philosophical foundations of primary education • Discuss the role expected of the primary school teacher • Explain the relevance of the philosophy of education to the primary school teacher 1PED 110 COURSE GUIDE Course Objectives There are overall objectives set out in order to achieve the aims set out for this course.
In addition, each unit of this course has some performance objectives.
These are included at the beginning of every unit.
You may wish to refer to them as you study the unit in order to help you check your progress.
You should also look at the unit objectives at the end after completing the unit.
This will help you ensure that you have done what you are required to do by the unit.
The wider objectives of this course, which if met, should have helped you to achieve the aims of the course as a whole as set out below.
On successful completion of this course, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the meaning and enumerate the goals and objectives of education; 2.
Describe the concept of philosophy and specify the scope and function; 3.
Describe the approaches of philosophy in education; 4.
Give the importance of philosophy to the primary school teacher 5.
Discuss the philosophical foundations of childhood or primary education 6 Explain the Roles expected of the primary school teacher 7 Described the characteristics of primary school children.
8.
Explain the meaning and purpose of primary school education 9.
Discus the Origin of Primary School in Nigeria 10.
Describe the basic outlines of the National policy on Primary education 11.
Define the concept of the Universal Basic Education 12.
Discus the contribution of Plato to primary Education 13.
Explain the contributions of Jean Jacques Rousseau and John Amos Communions to primary Education 14.
Describe the contribution of John Heinrich Petalozzi and Maria Montessori to Primary Education 15.
Discus the contribution of John Dawery to primary education 16.
Explain the Relevance of Philosophy of Education to the primary school teacher.
17.
Discuss Philosophical Foundations of Childhood or primary Education.
18.
Enumerate the role expected of the primary school teacher 19.
Explain the meaning and Purpose of primary education 20.
Describe the Basic Outlines of the National Policy on primary education 21.
Discuss the contributions of Great Philosophers to Primary Education 2PED 110 COURSE GUIDE Working through this Course To complete this course, you are expected to read the study units, and other relevant books and materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria.
Each unit contains self assessment exercises and at certain points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purpose.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
This course is expected to last for a period of one semester.
Below, you will find listed, all the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order that you may complete the course successfully and on time.
Course Materials National Open University of Nigeria will provide you with the following: The Course Guide, also at the end of each unit are list of books and references and further readings.
While you may not procure or read all of them, they are essential supplements to the course materials.
Remember also that you must submit answers to the TMAs as at when due.
Study Unit The course consists of 15 units.
These are made up of the concept of education, the aim of education, philosophy and its functions, philosophical foundation of primary education, the role expected of the primary school teacher, characteristics of primary school children, the contribution of philosophers to primary school education and the relevance of philosophy of education to primary school teacher This material has been developed to suit students in Nigeria.
Assignment File There are fifteen (15) Tutor Marked Assignments in this course, covering all the units studied.
This file will be available at your study centre.
You are expected to submit completed assignment in them.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and also in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
3PED 110 COURSE GUIDE Assessment There are three aspects of the assessments.
First self-Assessment exercises, Second is the Tutor- Marked Assignments and the third is the final examination.
You are advised to be sincere in attending to the exercises.
You are expected to apply knowledge, information and skills that you have acquired during the course.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline sated in your schedule of presentation.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are fifteen Tutor Marked Assignments in this course, and you are advised to attempt all.
Apart from your course material provided, you are advised to read and research widely using other references which will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Ensure all completed assignments are submitted on schedule before each deadline.
If for any reasons, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor to discuss the possibility of an extension before the assignment is due.
Except in exceptional circumstances contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension, extensions may not be granted after due date.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for this course will be of three hours duration and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
All areas of the course will be assessed and the examination will consist of questions which reflect the type self-testing, practice exercise and tutor marked assignments previously encountered.
Utilize the time between the conclusion of the last study unit and the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your self - assessment exercise, tutor marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The work you submit will count for 40% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course however, you will be required to sit for a final examination, which will also count for 60% of your total marks.
4PED 110 COURSE GUIDE How to get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study materials are specially developed and designed to replace the lecturer.
Hence, you can work through these materials at your place, and at a time and pace that suit you best.
Visualize it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Each of the study unit follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
Use these objectives to guide your study.
On completion of a unit, go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If made a habit, this will further enhance your chances of completing the course successfully.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course: • Read this course guide thoroughly.
• Organize a study schedule, which you must adhere to religiously.
The major reason students fail is that they get behind in their course work.
If you encounter difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know promptly.
• Turn to each unit and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
• Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
• Review the objectives of each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult with your tutor.
• When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
• After submitting an assignment to your tutor for grading, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments.
• After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives listed in this course guide.
5PED 110 COURSE GUIDE Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There will be specific time made available for tutorial session, in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignment, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you may encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor marked assignment to your tutor well before the due date.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail or your discussion group (board) if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any of the study units or the assigned readings.
• You have difficulty with the self - tests or exercises.
• You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutors comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary This course is desired to give to you some teaching skills that would help you improve your teaching techniques and thus produce pupils who pass through primary school with ease.
We, therefore, sincerely wish you the best and that you enjoy the course.
6
