 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: PED 412 COURSE TITLE: ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 1 COURSE GUIDE PED 412 ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Course Developer: Dr.
I. O. Nwangu Faculty of Education, Enugu State University of Technology, Enugu.
Course Writer: Dr.
I. O. Nwangu Faculty of Education, Enugu State University of Technology, Enugu.
Course Editor: Prof. E. A. O. Ajayi Olabisi Onabanjo University Ago Iwoye Programme Leader: Dr. L A Lawani School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Dr. L A Lawani School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos 2 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria.
It is a two credit unit course offered by fourth year students of undergraduate degree programme in Education.
We have fifteen study units in this course.
This Course Guide is for distance learners enrolled in the B.Ed programme of the National Open University of Nigeria.
This Guide is one of the many resource tools available to you to assist you successfully complete this course and by extension your programme.
In this Guide, you will find useful information about this course: aims, objectives, what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using, information on assignments and examination.
It also provides you with the guidelines on how to plan your time for study, the amount of time you are likely to spend on each study unit, your tutor-marked assignments.
I recommend that you go through this course guide before you begin your study of the course.
2.0 COURSE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES Here is the course aim for PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria.
This course aims at equipping you with the broad knowledge of the organization and administration of primary education in Nigeria.
This course stretches from primary education in historical perspective, the concept of administration, personnel administration, and decision-making to educational planning in Nigeria, financing education in Nigeria and finally the organization and administration of the Universal Basic Education Programme.
At the end of this course you will be very knowledgeable about issues that affect primary education in Nigeria.
Course Objectives The course objectives for PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary Education are stated below.
It is expected that on completion of this course, you should be able to: • Discuss the development of primary education in the three regions of Nigeria before 1960.
• Explain the concept of administration.
• Discussion educational planning in Nigeria.
• Discuss how education is financed in Nigeria.
• Discuss the organization and administration of Universal Basic Education.
3 3.0 COURSE MATERIALS AND STRUCTURE Study Units The table below is a presentation of the course and how long it should take you to complete each study unit and the accompanying assignments.
Unit Title Study Unit Weeks/Activities Assignment Course Guide Course Guide Form Module 1 Organization and Administration of Primary School 1 Meaning of School 1 Assignment 2 Nigerian Primary Education in Historical Perspective 2 Assignment 3 The National Policy on Education and TMA 1 to be submitted Primary Education in Nigeria 3 Module 2 The Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria 1 The Concept of Administration.
4 Assignment 2 Personnel Administration in Education 5 Assignment 3 Decision-Making in Education 6 TMA 2 to be submitted Module 3 Educational Planning in Nigeria 1 Educational Planning in Perspective 7 Assignment 2 Theories in Educational Planning 8 Assignment 3 Approaches to Educational Planning 9 TMA3 to be submitted Module 4 Financing Education in Nigeria 1 Overview of Financing Education in Nigeria 10 Assignment 2 School Budget 11 Assignment 4 3 Sources of Finance in Education in Nigeria 12 TMA 4 to be submitted Module 5 Organization and Administration of Universal Basic Education 1 What is Basic Education?
13 Assignment 2 The Evolution of UBE 14 Assignment 3 Functions of UBE Commission 15 TMA 5 to be submitted Revision 16 Examination 17 Total 17 Course Summary Module 1 introduces you to primary education sector, its history and the place of primary education in the National Policy on Education.
Module 2 examines the administration of primary education in Nigeria.
Module 3 deals with educational planning.
Module 4 discusses education finance, while Module 5 discusses organization and administration of universal basic education.
There are fifteen study units in this course.
Each study unit consists of one week(cid:8217)s work and should take you about three hours to complete.
It includes specific objectives, guidance for study, reading materials and tutor- marked assignment exercises.
Along with tutor-marked assignments, the course materials exercises will help you in realizing the stated learning objectives of the individual study units and of the course.
3.1 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the Study Units replace the conventional university lecturer.
The major advantage of distance learning programme is that you can read and work through the course material at your own pace, time and place that suits you best.
You should condition your mind in reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
Your tutor-marked assignments replace the in-class assignments that conventional lecturers give.
They are exercises meant for you and they are to be done at appropriate times.
5  Each of the Study Units have identical features that are designed to assist your learning.
The first feature is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a given unit is integrated with other units and the course as a whole.
This is followed by a set of learning objectives.
These objectives help you in knowing what you are able to do on completion of the unit.
Endeavour to use these objectives to guide your study.
On completion of the unit, go back and check whether you have realized the stated objectives.
The tutor-marked assignments are designed to help you recall what you have learnt and to evaluate your learning by yourself.
You are advised to do each of them as you come across it in the study unit.
The summary at the end of each unit also helps you to recall all the major issues discussed in the main content of each unit.
It should take you about three hours to complete a study unit, and the tutor-marked assignments.
When you have completed the first study unit take note on how long it took you and use this information to draw up a time-table to guide your study for the rest of your course.
The wide margins on the left and right sides of the pages of your course book are meant for you to make notes of main ideas or key points which you can use when revising the course.
If you make use of all these features, you will greatly enhance your chances of passing the course.
3.2 Tutorial Sessions • There should be a total number of ten hour tutorial sessions.
In other words, each module should have two hours tutorial sessions.
• The learners are expected to gain from tutorial sessions definitions/explanations of various concepts, theories and educational processes.
• Tutorial sessions are optional.
However, you can not quantify the benefits you will derive by participating in them.
They provide you the forum for interaction and peer group discussions.
These activities will reduce the isolation you may experience as a distance learner.
3.3 Facilitation Facilitation is learning that occurs both within and outside of tutorial sessions.
You tutorial facilitator guides your learning by: • providing answers to your questions during tutorial questions, on phone or by e-mail; 6 • co-ordinating group discussion; • providing feedback on your assignments; • posing questions to confirm learning outcomes; • co-ordinating, marking and recording your assignment/examination score, and • monitoring your progress.
The language of instruction for this course is English.
The course material is available in print.
You are, therefore, expected to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant Study Units, and writing your questions so as to gain maximum benefit from facilitation.
Information about the location and time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Time for facilitation is a flexible arrangement between you and your tutorial facilitator.
You are advised to contact your facilitator if: • you do not understand any part of the Study Units.
• you have difficulty with the Tutor-Marked Assignments.
• you have a question or a problem with an assignment, or with your tutorial facilitators(cid:8217) comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
Counselling Counselling forms part of your learning because it is offered to enhance your learning experience.
Counselling is available to you at two levels, academic and personal counselling.
Students(cid:8217) counsellors are available at the study centre to provide guidance for personal issues that may affect your studies.
Your study centre manager and tutorial facilitators can help you with questions on academic matters such as course materials, facilitation, grades etc.
Endeavour to have the phone numbers and e-mail addresses of your study centre and the various individuals.
Assessment There are two components of assessment for this course.
These are Tutor-Marked Assignments and a written examination.
In doing the Tutor-Marked Assignments, you are expected to use the information gathered during your study of the course.
Below are detailed explanations on how to do the Tutor-Marked Assignments.
7 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAS) There are four Tutor-Marked Assignments for this course.
The assignments are designed to cover all areas treated in the course.
You will be given your assignments and the dates for submission at your study centre.
You are required to attempt all the four Tutor-Marked Assignments.
You will be assessed on all four, but the best three performances will be used for your continuous assessment.
Each assignment carriers 10% and together will count for 30% of your total score for the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator for formal assessment on or before the stipulated dates for submission.
The work that you submit to your tutorial facilitator for assessment will count for 30% of your total course score.
Guidelines for Writing Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
On the cover page of your assignment, write the course code and title, assignment number (TMAI, TMA2) and date of submission, your name and matriculation number.
It should look like this: Course Title: Tutor-Marked Assignment: Date of Submission: School and Programme: Matriculation Number: 2.
Try as much as possible to be concise and to the point in your answers and adhere to word limit where applicable.
Your answer should be based on your course material, further readings and experience.
However, you are advised not to copy from any of these materials for you will be penalized if you do so.
Remember to provide relevant examples and illustrations where necessary.
3.
Use ruled foolscap sized paper for writing answers.
Make and keep copies of your assignment.
4.
Your answers should be hand-written by you.
Leave a margin of about 38.5metres of the left side and about 5 lines before the answer to the next question for your tutorial facilitator(cid:8217)s comments.
8 5.
When you have completed each assignment, make sure that it reaches your tutorial facilitator on or before the deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your study centre manager and tutorial facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for PED 412 will be of two hours duration, and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the kinds of Tutor-Marked Assignments which you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
You will find it useful to review your answers to Tutor-Marked Assignments before the examination.
For you to be eligible to sit for the final examinations, you must have done the following: 1.
You should have submitted all the four Tutor-Marked Assignments for the course.
2.
You should have registered to sit for the examination.
The deadline for examination registration will be available at your study centre.
Failure to submit your assignments or to register for the examination (even if you sit for the examination) means that you will not have a score for the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out that marks that constitute the total course score.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1-4 (four submitted, but the best three of all the Three assignments, each carrying 10%, assignments selected) totaling 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score 9 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, all the features of this Course Guide have been designed to facilitate and enhance your learning so as to enable you realize the aims and objectives of this course.
These features include the course aims and objectives, course summary course overview, and study questions.
You are advised to make use of them in your study to attain maximum results.
5.0 SUMMARY PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria provides you the theoretical foundation of education in Nigeria.
Primary education is the base on which )other levels of education rest.
It is aimed at equipping you with the basic knowledge on the development of primary education in Nigeria, its administration, planning and financing.
The course also provides you the background of the nascent policy on primary education which is the Universal Basic Education programme.
Upon completion of this course, you should be able to discuss confidently the development of primary education in Nigeria, how primary education is planned, organized, administered and financed.
You should also be able to discuss what basic education is also about, its evolution and `the functions of the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC).
I wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and rewarding.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Your course material is the main text for this course.
However, you are encouraged to consult other sources as provided for you in the list of references and further reading below.
References Adamu, A.U.
(2005).
Education: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow.
Leadership.
October 23.
Abuja Free Press.
Adamu, A.U.
(2007).
Financing Education Delivery in Nigeria: The Rhetoric and Realities.
In, Elizabeth Eke & Raphael, O. Olarinoye (eds.)
Politics of Nigerian Education.
The Nigerian Academy of Education.
Adesina, S. (1990).
Education Management.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co. Ltd. 10 Adesina, S. (1992).
Foreword and Keynote.
In Ndu, A.
(ed.)
Educational Policy and Implementation in Nigeria.
Awka: Mekslink Publishers (Nig.).
Adeyemi, K. (2004).
Stages in Educational Planning.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Agabi, O.G.
(2004).
Educational Planning: An Overview.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Aghenta, J.A.
(1993).
Principles and Practices of Educational Planning: Focus on the Developing Countries.
Benin City: Nigerian Society for Educational Planning.
Aina, W.A.
(1999, September 13).
So Far, So Silent.
Newswatch 22-24.
Akpan, S.W.
(1979).
Nigerian Chronicle, September 2.
Akubue, A.
(2006).
Managing, Funding and Supervising Mission Schools.
In, G.U.
Dine, A.C. Adani, L.O.
Ugwu (eds.)
Catholic Education in Nigeria within the 21st Century.
Enugu: Ndubest Production.
Akubue, F.N.
& Okolo, A.N.
(2008).
Sociology of Education.
Nsukka: Great AP Express Publishers Ltd. Alu, B.E., Eya, L.O., Odo, C.O., Ede, F.E., (2001).
Fundamentals of Educational Administration.
Nsukka: Chuka Educational Publishers.
Arieh, L.
(ed.)
(1977).
B. Paris: UNESCO.
Atuma, E.T.
& Peretomode, O.
(2004).
The Organization and Control of Education in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press.
Awowede, O.
(2000, February 21).
The President and His Enemies.
TellMagazine.
Ayeni, A.O.
(2003).
Educational Cost.
In, Joel B. Babalola (ed.)
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: The Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Babalola, J.B.
(ed.)
(2003).
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: The Department of Educational Management.
Bolton, D.L.
(1973).
Selection and Evaluation of Teachers.
California: McCutcham Publishing Corporation.
Bozimo, G.O.
& Sanda, Y.Y.
(2007).
The Politics of Funding and Fiscal Management in Nigerian Education: An Assessment of the Implementation of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) Programme in Plateau State.
In Elizabeth Eke & Raphael O. Olarinonye (eds.)
Politics of Nigerian Education.
The Nigerian Academy of Education.
11 Dreeben, R. (1979).
The Contribution of Schooling to the Learning of Norms.
In, Jerome Karabel & A.H. Halsey (eds.)
Power and Ideology in Education.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Dunkin, M.J. (1997).
Assessing Teachers(cid:8217) Effectiveness.
Issues in Educational Research 7(1).
Durkhein, E. (1995).
Educational Sociology.
International Review of Education.
Ekeocha, P.C.
& Fonta, W.M.
(2007).
Optimizing Primary Education Service Delivery in Nigeria: a Contingent Valuation Approach.
In, B.G.
Nworgu (ed.)
Optimization of Service Delivery in the Education Sector: Issues and Strategies.
Nsukka: University Trust Publishers.
Fafunwa, A.B.
(1994).
History of Education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000).
Implementation Guidelines for Universal Basic Education Programme.
Abuja: Government Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000).
The 1999 Constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Abuja: Government Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
Universal Basic Education Programme: a Flagship Programme of the Federal Government of Nigeria.
Abuja: Universal Basic Education Commission.
Hoy, W.K.
& Miskel, C.G.
(1982).
Educational Administration, Theory, Research and Practice (2nd ed.)
New York: Random House.
Hu, X., Korllos, T.S (1995).
Development of Moral Character in the Peoples Republic of China: Some Implications For Education.
International Review of Education 41/95.
Ifedili, C.J.
(2004).
Theories and Process of Administration.
In, N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Igbo, R. (2002).
Fundamentals of School Management.
Enugu: Rainbow Paper Mill Ltd. Ikediugwu, N.P.
(2000).
Budgeting: a Tool for Educational Success.
Enugu: Rainbow Paper Mill Ltd. Isma(cid:8217)il, T. (2001).
The Financing of Primary Education in Nigeria.
In, Ebele J. Maduewesi (ed.)
Financing of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: XIM Technologies Press Ltd. Iyede, R.O.O.
(2004).
Managing Human Resources in Education.
In, V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Koontz, H.O., Daniel, C., Weihrich, N. (1980).
Management (7th ed.)
Japan: McGraw-Hill, Inc. Longe, R.S.
(2003).
Introduction to Educational Planning.
In, Joel B. Babalola (ed.
), Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: The Department of Educational Management.
12 McIntyre, B.
(1981).
Are They in Roses?
Teachers and Staff Development.
Journal of Education.
3/2.
National Teachers(cid:8217) Institute (n.d.) NCE/DLS Course Book on Education: Cycle 4.
Kaduna: National Teachers(cid:8217) Institute.
Nwachukwu, C.C.
(1988).
Management Theory and Practice.
Onitsha: Africana-FEP Publishers Limited.
Nwadiani, M. (2004).
Issues and Problems in Educational Planning and Implementation in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos, Joja Press Limited.
Nwagwu, C.C.
(2004).
Decision-Making in Organizations.
In N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press.
Nwangwu, I.O.
(2003).
Educational Policies in Nigeria: Trends and Implementation.
Nsukka: Jobus International Press.
Nwangwu, I.O.
(2005).
Personnel Management in Education: Human Resources Administration and Development.
Enugu: His Glory Publications.
Nwangwu, I.O., Aguba, R.C., Mba, G.C.E., Eya, P.E.
(2005) (eds).
Issues and Concerns in Education and Life.
Enugu: Institute for Development Studies.
Ofegbu, F.I.
(2004).
Supervision and Inspection of Education.
In, N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Obanya, P. (2000).
Sustainability, Stability and Continuity: The UBE Response.
Paper presented at the Conference/Workshop on the UBE held at University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Ocho, L.O.
(2003).
Educational Policy Making, Implementation and Analysis (2nd ed.)
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Ogbodo, C.M.
(2004).
Financing Education in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Ogbonnaya, N.O.
(2005).
Foundations of Education Finance.
(2nd ed.)
Nsukka: Hallman Publishers.
Okunamiri, P.O.
(2002).
Resourcing and Guidelines for Educational Finance in Tertiary Institutions in Nigeria.
Owerri: Fasmen Communications.
Olowolabi, Y.
(2000, November 27).
Education Tax: Not ASUU Idea.
Tell Magazine 48/55.
Olubor, B.O.
(2004).
Planning in Education Systems.
In, N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. 13 Ozigi, A.O.
(1982).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
Ibadan: Macmillan Nigerian Publishers Limited.
Peretomode, V.F.
(2004).
General Principles of School Administration.
In, V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Prewitt, K. (1971).
Education and Political Values: An East African Case Study.
Kenya: East African Publishing House.
Ross, V.J.
(1981).
Here Is How Teachers Should Be Evaluated.
The American School Board Journal.
168/8.
Seldin, P. (1982).
Issues and Trends in American Education: Improving Faculty Education.
Peabody Journal of Education.
59/2 January.
Sergiovanni, J.J. & Starrat, R.J. (1979).
Supervision: Human Perspectives (2nd edition) New York: McGraw- Hill Book Company.
Swift, D.F.
(1970).
The Sociology of Education.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd. Taiwo, C.O.
(1982).
The Nigerian Educational System: Past, Present and Future.
Lagos: Thomas Nelson (Nig.)
Limited.
Thurstone, L.L.
(1938).
Primary Mental Abilities.
In, Nduka Oko (ed.)
Professional Education: A Book of Readings.
Benin City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Udeze, J.O.
(2000).
Human Resources in Nigeria.
Enugu: Joebest Books.
Ugwu, L.I & Onyeneje, E.C.
(2002).
Foundations of Industrial and Consumer Psychology.
Enugu: Our Saviour Press.
Ukeje, B.O., Akabogu, G.C.
& Ndu, A.
(1992).
Educational Administration.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co. Ltd. Ukeje, B.O.
(1992).
Problems of Planning Educational Policies in Nigeria.
In, Ndu, A.
(ed.).
Educational Policy and Implementation in Nigeria.
Awka: Meslink Publishers (Nig.).
14
