 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: PED 322 COURSE TITLE: METHODS OF TEACHING READING IN THE PRIMARY SCHOOL 1 COURSE GUIDE: PED 322 METHODS OF TEACHING READING IN THE PRIMARY SCHOOL Course Developer - U.M .Okonkwo PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Writers - F.E.
Oniemayin PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
- F.F.
Fatimayin PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Editor - U.M.
Okonkwo PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Programme Leader - U.M.
Okonkwo PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator - F.F.
Fatimayin PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Content 2 Introduction…………………………………….
About the Course……………………………… Course Aims…………………………………………………………..
Course Objectives…………………………………………………..
Working Through This Course………………………………….
Course Materials…………………………………………………….. Study Units…………………………………………………………….
Assignment File……………………………………………………….
Presentation Schedule…………………………………………….. Assessment………………………………………………….
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA )…………………… Course Marking Scheme………………………………….
How to Derive Maximum Benefit from This Course Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….
Course Overview…………………………………………… SUMMARY………………………………………… PED 322 COURSE GUIDE 1.
INTRODUCTION The course PED 322: Methods of Teaching Reading in the Primary School is a two credit unit course designed for 300 Level undergraduates running the 3 B.A.
(Ed)/Primary Education programme, and students running the PGDE programme of the National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, the course materials you will need, and how you can derive maximum benefit from the course.
It also provides information on your Tutor-Marked Assignments, details of which will be given to you at your study centre.
Tutorial sessions, where you can seek clarifications on the course material will be arranged for you at your centre.
It is in your own interest to attend the sessions!
The time and venue will be made known to you at your centre.
2.
The COURSE The two-module course is designed to teach you the methods, approaches, strategies and instructional resources you would need to teach reading skills effectively in primary schools.
The first module introduces you to the four language skills and their interrelatedness, the nature of reading and reading experiences in the primary school, the concept of reading readiness , reading approaches, methods, strategies, and types of reading.
The second module deals with the goals and objectives of teaching reading and the development of specialised reading skills.
The module also deals with how to source materials for teaching reading, and how to evaluate reading skills.
The ability to read is universally acknowledged as a valuable asset for purposeful living.
The foundation to reading has to be solidly laid at the rudimentary stage if pupils must be equipped for future personal and academic challenges.
This course is therefore designed to equip you with the knowledge, strategies and methods for successfully teaching reading at the primary school level.
At the end of this course, you are expected to be able to identify the strengths and weaknesses of each of the reading methods treated , and be able to select an appropriate method or a combination of methods that will help you attain the goals of reading at the primary school level.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to prepare you to be able to face squarely the challenges of teaching reading in primary schools.
This task can be easily 4 accomplished via the methods, strategies that the course will put you through.
` Course Objectives By the end of the course, you should be able to: • Use your knowledge of the concept/notion of reading readiness to determine relevant reading experiences to engage your pupils at any given reading level; • Master the different methods and approaches to teaching reading; • Select appropriate method(s) and strategies that will meet the individual and group reading needs of your pupils; • Teach effectively the specialised reading skills needed to interpret, infer, and seek information from reading materials; • Select appropriate resources to teach reading to all grades at the primary level.
• Select appropriate strategies and reading materials for evaluating pupils’ attainment of reading skills.
3.
WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE You are required to spend a lot of time and commitment to studying this course.
The content of this self-instructional material is comprehensive, well illustrated and thus, easy to read.
We advise that you avail yourself of the opportunity of the tutorial sessions at the study centres where you benefit from clarifications from your course facilitators, and the interaction with your colleagues.
Course Materials You will be provided with the following materials: a.
Course Guide, b.
Study Units.
Study Units 5 MODULE 1: NATURE OF READING, READING READINESS, READING APPROACHES, METHODS, STRATEGIES, AND TYPES OF READING.
UNIT 1: Language Skills and their Interrelatedness UNIT 2: Nature of Reading and Important Reading Experiences in the Primary School UNIT 3: The concept of Reading Readiness UNIT 4: Approaches and Methods of Teaching Reading : Phonics, Structural, Look-and Say, Word Form Clues, Picture Clues and Context Clues UNIT 5: Strategies and Techniques of Teaching Reading : Language Experience, Whole Language, Literature Based, Oral, Silent and Individualized.
UNIT 6: Types of Reading: Oral and Silent, Skimming and Scanning, Intensive and Extensive.
MODULE II: GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF TEACHING READING, DEVELOPMENT OF READING SKILLS.
Unit 1: Goals and objectives of Teaching Reading Unit 2: Development of Word Perception Skills: • Development of sight vocabulary • Development of ability to use phonetic, picture, context clues to identify and recall printed words • Development of ability to use dictionary skills.
Unit 3 : Development of Interpretation Skills: Development of ability to: • Identify main ideas • Identify related ideas • Locate information.
Unit 4 : Development of Ability to: • Draw conclusions • Arrange ideas, events in sequence • Follow instructions.
6 Unit 5 : Development of skills for reading in content areas: • Social studies • Mathematics • Literature.
Unit 6 : Resources for Teaching Reading Unit 7: Evaluation of Reading Skills.
Presentation Schedule Dates for prompt completion and submission of your TMAs and attendance of tutorials will be reflected in your course materials.
You should remember to submit all assignments at the stipulated date and time.
You should work as scheduled, and do not lag behind in your work!
Assignment File You will find details of works you are to submit to your tutor for marking in your assignment file.
The marks you obtain for your assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain in this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and in the assessment section of this Course Guide.
Each unit of this course has at least one assignment.
These assignments are meant to help you understand the course and assess your progress.
4.
ASSESSMENT There are three aspects to the assessment for this course.
The first is the Self- Assessment Exercises in each unit.
The second is made up of the Tutor-Marked Assignments you submit to your course facilitator, and the third is the end of course examination.You are advised to do all the self-assessment exercises with all sincerity as that will assist you greatly.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply the information, and techniques gathered from the course.
The Tutor-Marked Assignments must be submitted to your tutor/facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will account for 30% of the total course score.
At the end of the course, you will sit for a final or end of course examination of about two hours duration.
This examination will form 70% of the total score for the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs ) 7 The TMA is a continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You are required to submit at least four (4) TMAs before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The TMAs would be given to you by your facilitator, and would be returned to you after they have been graded.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your study units and references.
However, it is desirable to demonstrate that you have read and researched into other references; this will give you a wider view point and a deeper understanding of the course.
Ensure that each assignment reaches your facilitator before the deadline in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is due, to discuss the possibility of extension.
Extension sought after the due date, will not be granted.
End of Course Examination and Grading The end of course examination for this course will be one and half hours, and will account for 70% of the total course score.
The questions will be fashioned after the self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked assignments that you have previously encountered during your course.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Utilise the time between the last unit and the commencement of your examination to revise the whole course.
You might find it useful to review your self-test, TMAs, and comments on them before the examination.
The end of course examination covers information from all parts of the course material.
The time for the examination is not fixed, but you will be given adequate notice of the examination.
Course Marking Scheme 8 Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 The best three (3) of the four assignments will be rated based on 10% each, making a total of 30% of the course marks.
End of course examination 70% of overall course marks.
Total 100%.
How to Derive Maximum Benefit from this Course 1) In distance learning, the study units replace the university lectures.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you.
Realise the fact that you are reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way, a lecturer may assign you some reading materials, while the study units will suggest additional materials and books for your further reading.
You are provided exercises to attempt at appropriate points in each unit, just as a lecturer might give feedback questions/exercises in a classroom situation.
2) Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first part is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, which tells you the content of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with other units, and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives state the tasks you should be able to accomplish by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are therefore, meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
3)The main body of the unit treats the topic of the unit.
It is here you will learn the ideas, concepts and skills that make up the topic.
4)The following is a practical strategy for working through the course: If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or visit the study centre nearest to you.
Remember, your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to ask your tutor to provide it.
9  1) Read this Course Guide thoroughly; this is your first assignment!
2) Organise a Study Schedule; Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available at the centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Decide on whatever method you choose, and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they lag behind in their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4) Turn to unit 1, and read the instruction and the objectives of the unit.
5) Assemble the study materials.
You will need your references and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6) As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7) Visit your study centre whenever you need up-to- date information.
8) Before the relevant due dates ( about 4 weeks before due dates ), visit your study centre for your next required assignment .
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore , will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments as at when due 9) Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you are not sure about any of the objectives, , you can move to the next unit.
Study unit by unit through the course, and try to space your study so that you can keep to the schedule.
1010) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit), and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
5.
TUTOR and TUTORIALS There are 14 hours of tutorial provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and venue of these tutorials, as well as the name, and phone number of your facilitator, as soon as you are fixed in a tutorial group.
Your tutor or facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments.
He/She keeps a close watch on your progress, so as to render necessary assistance when required.
You submit your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor before the scheduled date.
They will be marked by your tutor, and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e-mail, and discuss your problems for necessary assistance.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your facilitator if: • You do not understand any part of the study units of the assigned readings.
• You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
• You have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance for a face-to-face contact with your course facilitator, and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problems encountered in the course of your study.
To derive maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a list of questions before the tutorial session.
You will learn a lot by your active participation in the discussion.
116.
COURSE OVERVIEW The table below brings the units, number of weeks you should take to complete them, and the assignments that will follow them.
Unit Title of work Weekly NO OF activity ASSESSMENT AT THE END OF THE COURSE 1 Course Guide 1 - Language Skills and their 2 Assessment-1 Interrelatedness 2 The Nature of Reading and 2 Assessment-2 Important Reading Experiences in the primary school 3 The concept of Readiness 1 Assessment-3 4 Approaches and Methods of 6 Assessment-4 Teaching Reading: Phonics, Structural, Look and Say, Word Form Clues, Picture Clues, &Context Clues.
5 Strategies and Techniques of 6 Assessment-5 Teaching Reading: Language Experience, Whole Language, Literature Based, Oral, Silent and Individualized.
126 Types of Reading: Oral and Silent, 5 Assessment-6 Skimming and Scanning, Intensive and Extensive.
7 Goals and Objectives of teaching 1 Assessment-7 reading 8 Development of word perception 2 Assessment-8 skills.
9 Development of interpretation 2 Assessment-9 skills 1 10 Development of interpretation 2 Assessment-10 skills 2 11 Development of skills for reading 4 Assessment-11 in the content areas 12 Resources for teaching reading 2 Assessment-12 13 Evaluation of reading skills 3 Assessment-13 7.
SUMMARY This course intends to teach you the methods, strategies and resources for teaching reading at the primary school level.
By the time you complete this course, you will be able to: • Learn why the goals and objectives of teaching reading are important guidelines for setting up a meaningful reading programme.
• Discuss the steps you would take to develop in the children, the ability to comprehend and infer.
• Suggest ways by which children can develop interpretation skills.
• List and explain methods and strategies by which word perception skills can be developed in children.
13• Discuss the kinds of evaluation technique a teacher can use to judge pupils’ reading growth.
• Select methods, strategies and materials for attaining the goals of reading in a class of pupils with varying reading abilities?
• Design school programmes that will facilitate the teaching of the reading skill.
• Select appropriate method(s) that can be used to teach reading to the learning impaired pupils.
• Appraise reading materials for any class in the primary school.
8.
CONCLUSION We wish you success in this course!
We also hope you will be able to appreciate the fact that reading is a key to continued success in school, and in the larger society.
It is our hope that this course will challenge you to contribute positively to making children able to read efficiently.
9.
REFERENCES FOR FURTHER READING Aboderin, Y & Orisawuyi,D (1980) Guide to the Teaching of Reading & Comprehension in English.
Ado- Ekiti: Omolayo Press.
Betts, E (1954) Foundations of Reading Instructions.
New York: American Books Co. Bright,J.A, MacGregor (1970) Teaching English as a Second Language .
London: Longman.
Burns, Paul.C & Roe Betty,D (1980) Teaching Reading in Today’s Elementary Schools (Second Edition).Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company Coats,N (2009) Premier English for Nigerian Primary School, Book 5 Oxford: Macmillan.
Fry,E.
(1963) teaching Faster Reading.
London: Pan Books Ltd. Gipe, Joan.P (1995) Corrective Reading Techniques for Classroom Teachers (Third Edition).Arizona: Gorsuch Scarisbrick , Publishers.
Snow, C.E, Burns, M.S & Griffin p (Eds) , (1998) Preventing Reading Difficulties in Young Children.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
14PED 322 METHODS OF TEACHING READING IN THE PRIMARY SCHOOL Course Developer - U.M .Okonkwo PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Writers - F.E.
Oniemayin PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
- F.F.
Fatimayin PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Editor - U.M.
Okonkwo PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Programme Leader - U.M.
Okonkwo PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator - F.F.
Fatimayin PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
15PED 322: METHODS OF TEACHING READING IN THE PRIMARY SCHOOL MODULE 1: NATURE OF READING, READING READINESS, READING APPROACHES, METHODS, STRATEGIES, AND TYPES OF READING.
INTRODUCTION In this module, you will learn about the reading readiness skills, major approaches, methods and strategies for the teaching of the reading skills, and the types of reading.
The module is divided into the following units: UNIT 1: LANGUAGE SKILLS AND THEIR INTERRELATEDNESS.
UNIT 2: THE NATURE OF READING AND IMPORTANT READING EXPERIENCES IN THE PRIMARY SCHOOL.
UNIT 3: READING READINESS SKILLS.
UNIT 4: APPROACHES, METHODS AND STATEGIES OF TEACHING READING I: PHONICS, STRUCTURAL, LOOK-AND SAY, WORD FORM CLUES, PICTURE CLUES AND CONTEXT CLUES.
UNIT 5: APPROACHES, METHODS AND STRATEGIES OF TEACHING READING II: LANGUAGE EXPERIENCE, WHOLE LANGUAGE, And LITERATURE BASED, ORAL, SILENT AND INDIVIDUALIZED.
UNIT 6: TYPES OF READING: ORAL AND SILENT, SKIMMING AND SCANNING, INTENSIVE AND EXTENSIVE.
16UNIT1: LANGUAGE SKILLS AND THEIR INTERRELATEDNESS.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Listening 3.2 Speaking 3.3 Reading 3.4 Writing 3.5 The interrelatedness of the Skills.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION This course is about teaching reading, but we find it necessary to devote the first unit to the four language skills and their interrelatedness.
An understanding of the relationship of these skills would facilitate the teaching of reading, which is the focus of this course.
Additionally, the content of this unit will remind you of what you have read and learnt about the four language skills.
We have chosen to treat the skills individually, so as to focus attention on specific aspects of each.
Thereafter, we will illustrate how these skills are interrelated, and how knowing about this relationship will aid you the teacher, and your pupils in teaching and learning respectively, any or all of these skills.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • recall the basic language skills ; • distinguish between the receptive and the productive skills; • explain the relationship among the four language skills; • explain how the knowledge of the interrelatedness of these skills, can aid the teaching and learning of the skills.
173.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
The Listening Skill Listening is one of the four language skills.
The others are speaking, reading and writing.
Listening and reading are called the receptive skills, while speaking and writing are the productive skills.
Listening and speaking skills are acquired naturally in a first language situation (through the maturational process), and not consciously learnt like reading and writing.
All the four are interrelated, and when put together, form the basis for sound language ability.
Listening is the most fundamental of the four skills because, it precedes the others.
We listen to others in both formal and informal speech events if we must understand, and make meaningful responses in oral or written forms.
It is a skill which enables one to hear and decode the utterance of the speaker.
Listening has been defined variously: ‘giving attention in hearing’ ; ‘an active and conscious process of paying attention to sound sequences’ ; ‘ a means of getting meaning from a speech act’ .
In summary, Listening requires that you hear, think and be interested in the speech event (Joiner,1986).
Listening accounts for a significant percentage of our daily communication activities.
It is disheartening however, to note that, it is the least taught of the four skills.
This trend should be corrected as the neglect of this skill inhibits the mastery of the others!
Teachers should endeavour to teach listening skill and build in activities and speech events, which will help the learners in their practical application of the skill.
Self-Assessment Exercise Why is listening a fundamental skill?
3.2.
The Speaking Skill Speaking is a productive skill which is acquired through the maturational process; a child who does not suffer a speech defect will eventually speak.
The basis of the spoken form of a language is effective communication, which can be aided by the mastery of the sound system of the target language.
The normal child is able to speak at least in his mother tongue before he starts school.
The English language teacher at the primary school is expected to build on the child’s speech ability, through the provision of appropriate practical language activities.
The teaching of the speaking skill is technical and requires both pedagogical and content competence.
Teachers and trainee teachers must have 18both have both of these competences in order to effectively teach and evaluate speaking ability of their pupils.
Listening and Speaking are interrelated, as one depends on the other.
Speech production is facilitated or aided by the listening skill, hence, children listen and speak the sounds they hear ; this is the beginning of speech production!
Speaking is a complex skill that requires the speaker to have some micro-skills such as the ability to: (cid:1) pronounce clearly, the distinctive sounds of the language; (cid:1) Use the stress, rhythmic and intonation patterns clearly; (cid:1) Observe the rules of grammatical agreement; (cid:1) Put words together in correct word order; (cid:1) Use appropriate vocabulary; (cid:1) Use appropriate register; (cid:1) make the sentence constituents clear enough; (cid:1) distinguish between main and supportive ideas or information; (cid:1) ensure unity in discourse.
Source: slightly modified Micro-Skills from an extract from the Lingual Links Library-retrieved on 25/7/2010 from http://www.sil.org/lingualinks/languagelearning//speakingskill.htm.
Self-Assessment Exercise How do the micro-skills of speaking impact on the listener’s ability to comprehend a speaker?
3.3.
The Reading Skill Reading is a receptive skill which involves the ability to interpret or decode printed symbols.
The learning of reading starts from the mastery of the alphabet of the language (Okwilagwe, 1988).
The skill should be effectively taught as it is a valuable asset to any one who desires to explore the universe for gainful living.
193.4.
The Writing Skill The skill of writing is formally taught.
Writing is not handwriting, nor filling in words in the blank spaces in pupils’ work books.
Writing is creating meaningful texts such as stories, descriptions or informative pieces.
The Writing skill is the ability to present ideas and views in a graphic form.
Writing is very technical and requires a lot of efforts to come up with pieces of writing that can be adjudged to be good.
It is a skill that does not come naturally, but has to be learnt.
The teaching of writing starts with the knowledge of the individual letters of the alphabet.
If teaching at this level is faulty, it has a negative effect on the pupils, as their inadequacies will be reflected in their subsequent education.
Writing should be effectively taught as it plays a critical role in the child’s literacy development.
The teaching of the mechanics of writing at the primary level should therefore, be entrusted to teachers who are competent enough to affect the pupils positively.
Materials for teaching should be graded and pupils must be guided in their practice.
Self-Assessment Exercise What is the relevance of the alphabet to writing?
3.5.
The Interrelatedness of the Language Skills A purposeful instruction in language must embody the four skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing.
The pupils need all of these to be able to understand and express themselves in various communication contexts.
There is an apparent closeness among the four skills as illustrated by Crow et al (1969 ) thus ‘…when we listen, we perceive, identify, and sense the impact of language meaning; and when we speak and write, we express ideas.
These interrelationships should have direct implications for the development of language activities (p.6).
Below are a few examples of interrelationship from their collection: 20LISTENING SPEAKING READING WRITING -Perceives the -Expresses through -Perceives the sounds of -Expresses through sounds of language sounds language language symbol language -Creates emotions- -Senses and identifies -Creates emotions- -Senses and moods through emotions-moods mood through writing identifies speaking emotions- moods -Identifies speaker’s -Develops viewpoint purpose and viewpoint and purpose -Develops -Identifies viewpoint and speaker’s clarifies purpose purpose and viewpoint -Makes judgments - -Summarises -Makes judgments - -Summarises draws clarification draws inferences and clarification inferences and logical conclusions logical conclusions Reading skills can be effectively developed through writing, listening and speaking, for example, learning to write and spell aid young children in the recognition and development of forms, letters, words and sentences.
In this way, writing and reading are related.
The connection between oral and written language is also established through writing because what is said orally can be expressed in writing, while what is written can also be expressed orally.
As a teacher, you must teach your pupils to recognize interrelationship of the language skills by giving them language activities that will lead them to use different skills to attain similar objectives as illustrated in the above table.
21Practical Application The child’s listening skill must be developed to facilitate speaking.
The teacher must incorporate speech events like short story telling, dialogues in his lessons.
As the pupils listen to the teacher read these, they improve their listening skill, and as themselves read these, they improve their speaking skill.
What the children have listened to, and read about could be used as materials for speaking and writing.
The teacher exposes the child to objects, materials and ideas, and through this, the child builds up his vocabulary, associates the sounds he hears with the objects he sees and plays with, and then begins to talk about his exposure.
The class environment should therefore, provide a variety of pictures, objects, and a shopping corner with items that will engage pupils’ interest, and increase their urge to speak on what they see.
Children need to be guided to talk about or report what they have observed.
For example, pupils should be made to recount their experiences after visits to the zoo, market etc.
The teacher guides the child to express his ideas and thoughts orally, while the teacher writes such expressions on the chalkboard.
The teacher guides the child to read the symbols on the chalkboard, by associating them with meanings which he has acquired through his listening and speaking experiences.
As soon as the child is able to distinguish the symbols and their meanings, then he is prepared to venture into writing.
The above exposition must have given you an idea of the nature of the unity that exists among the four skills.
You have seen how the listening skill helps to develop the speaking skill; the speaking in turn aids the reading, while the reading and writing compliments each other!
Below is the conceptual frame work of the interrelationship: 22 Figure 1: A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK OF THE INTERRELATEDNESS OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS.
Listening Writing Speaking Reading Self-Assessment Exercise Describe how you would teach the language skills to illustrate their interrelatedness.
4.0.
CONCLUSSION Teachers of English must appreciate the language skills as means of developing effective communication.
You, as teacher trainees, need to be knowledgeable in the mechanics of the interrelationship of the skills, as that will enable you 23see the wisdom in giving each of the skills the pedagogical attention it requires.
You are once again reminded that the neglect of one impairs the mastery of the others.
5.0.
SUMMARY In this unit, you have been exposed to the four basic language skills, in the order of Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing.
You have also learnt that the four skills are interrelated, and none of them should be neglected by the language teacher.
This unit has prepared you for the next unit, where you will learn about the nature of reading and the various reading experiences which will enhance reading in the primary school.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why is it important not to teach each of the language skills in isolation?
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Crow, L.D, W.I.
Murray and I. Bloom (1969) Teaching Language Arts in Elementary School.
New York: David McKay Co. David Bartholomae.
Anthony Petrosky (2002) Ways of Reading.
New York: Bedford/ST.
MARTINS.
Joiner, E. (1986) Listening in the Foreign Language.
New York: Harper Collins.
Okwilagwe,O.A.
(1998) A new Approach to Teaching Comprehension and Summary for Schools and Colleges.
Ibadan: Sterling Horden Publishers Nig .Ltd.
A Brochure of The International Academy of Education .
Retrieved 7/28/2010 from http://www.ibe.unesco.org/publications/Educational International Reading Association (1999 Brochure) retrieved 7/28/2010 from http://www.reading.org A slightly modified Micro-Skills from an extract from the Lingual Links Library-retrieved on 25/7/2010 from http://www.sil.org/lingualinks/languagelearning//speakingskill.htm.
24UNIT 2: THE NATURE OF READING AND IMPORTANT READING EXPERIENCES AT THE PRIMARY SCHOOL CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
The Definition and Nature of Reading 3.2.
Important Reading Experiences at the Primary School 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor -Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Reading.
1.0.
INTRODUCTION Reading is the key to a meaningful and purposeful life.
A person who cannot read is like the blind man who has to be guided, and who could also be wrongly guided!
It can however, be argued that our forefathers were not literate, yet survived, and some at present are successful despite their inability to read.
This could be true, but their survival must have been by providence.
Since reading is a means to knowledge, it becomes imperative to equip our primary school pupils with the skill early in life.
This unit sets out to teach the reading skill, and the vital reading experiences that you must expose the pupils in your care to.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define reading, with illustrations ; • outline the important factors in the development of the reading skill; • apply the micro-skills to the teaching of reading; • design a well balanced reading programme for a primary 2 class.
2.0.
Main Content 3.1.
The Definition and Nature of Reading 25 Reading is the process of making meaning out of the 26 squiggles We call the alphabet.
It is more than just knowing how to say words Reading is the active thinking process of understanding an author’s Ideas, connecting those ideas to what you already know, and Organizing all the ideas so you can remember and use them (Jane L.McGrath, 1995:xiii).
The above definition aptly defines what reading is.
Burns & Roe, (1980:18-22) outlined important factors that a teacher of reading must be aware of, concerning the nature and development of the reading skill.
The awareness of these notions will guide the teacher in having a successful reading programme.
These factors are paraphrased below: .
1.
Reading is a complex act with many factors that must be considered e.g.
sensory aspects, perceptual aspects and sequential aspects.
Other important factors to be considered are the relationship between reading and thinking, the relationship of reading to learning, reading as an associational process and affective aspects of the reading process; 2.
Reading is the interpretation of the meaning of printed symbols (words); 3.
There is no one correct way to teach reading; 4.
Learning to read is a continuing process; 5.
Children/Students should be taught word-recognition skills that will allow them to unlock the pronunciations and meanings of unfamiliar words independently; 6.
The teacher should diagnose each student’s reading problems and use the diagnoses as a basis for planning instruction; 7.
Reading and the other language arts are closely interrelated; 8.
Reading is an integral part of all content area instruction within the educational program; 9.
The Child/Student needs to see why reading is important; 10.
Enjoyment of reading should be considered of prime importance; 11.
Readiness for reading should be considered at all levels of instruction; 12.
Reading should be taught in a way that allows each child to experience success.
Self-Assessment Exercise How can the knowledge of the nature of reading aid you in planning and developing a meaningful reading programme?
263.2 Important Reading Experiences at the Primary School A balanced reading programme for the elementary school should consist of four types of reading experiences or exposures that can help learners develop reading skills for different purposes.
These reading experiences according to Crow et al (1968:40-41) are: Developmental Reading, Functional Reading, Recreational Reading and Enrichment Reading.
(a) Developmental Reading Experiences: These are reading experiences you expose your pupils to at the beginning reading instruction.
They form the basis of growth in reading.
They focus on the development and enhancement of children’s reading abilities through a sequential and systematic group and individual instruction.
In order to have a meaningful developmental reading programme, you must have an organised plan of instruction that shold include: a variety of reading activities; logical organization of reading experiences and valuable culture based ideas.
Useful activities to use in ensuring developmental reading experiences should include the following: reading the letters of the alphabet with pictures of objects and real objects , dramatization, rhymes, story reading by individuals and groups.
Since these experiences are school based, you must ensure that the school environment is child-reading friendly.
The classroom should be adorned with beautiful pictures of objects, charts of events and activities, as these attract pupils to want to stay in class, and be involved( Betts,1954).
Pupils can be guided to draw and paint objects of interest which can be displayed in the class, notice boards, etc.
The following experiences are useful for developing and enhancing reading skills: Mastery of the Alphabet Reading in any language is based on the knowledge and mastery of the letters of the alphabet.
The teacher’s task starts with teaching his pupils how to read the alphabet.
This experience is made exciting when it comes in form of rhymes and songs.
Matching of letters with objects is also accompanied with appropriate songs, which children can sing outside the school environment.
You should display alphabet charts in the class so that pupils can practise reading at their leisure.
Rhymes This is a common reading activity.
Teaching through rhymes makes learning interesting and exciting, as children learn and catch some fun in the process.
Rhymes which are accompanied with pictures help pupils read with comprehension.
They are also help them to recall what they read.
Below is an example of a popular nursery rhyme: Twinkle, twinkle little stars 27 How I wonder what you are Up above the world so high Like a diamond in the sky.
Picture Reading This is a reading experience which requires the pupils to match language with vision.
The pupils have to be guided as they sometimes misinterpret the pictures!
Constant exposure of children to this increases their reading abilities.
You can bring together pictures of a girl brushing her teeth, sweeping the floor, eating on the table, and then moving out of the house with a school bag, to help your pupils read about the activities the girl performs before she goes to school.
Story Telling Encouraging pupils to tell short stories based on their experiences propels them to read.
The teacher can write down the stories to form part of the reading materials; this excites the pupils, and increases their desire to read.
Dramatisation Participation in short drama pieces is an experience which aids the pupils in their effort to read.
Playing roles is fun to children, and will make learning enjoyable.
(b) Functional Reading Experiences: This highlights understanding and abilities needed to read subjects like social studies, science and arithmetic, health, arts, and music.
The teacher can engage his pupils in simple practical activities in these subject areas.
Part of these activities can form reading materials for the pupils.
(c) Recreational Reading Experiences: Readers derive personal pleasure and enjoyment from this programme.
Children derive recreational values from stories and books selected, based on their ability level which eventually relate to their personal interests and experience.
The teacher should ensure that the selected reading materials are those that would be found enjoyable and exciting by the pupils.
(d) Enrichment Reading Experiences: This requires the involvement of interest groups to expand language experiences, serve research needs and create vivid experiences.
The teacher may need to collaborate with individuals or groups that will integrate meaningful materials and experiences needed by the pupils to enhance their reading abilities.
28 ADDITIONAL TIPS FOR ENHANCING PUPILS’ READING SKILLS • Motivation & Purpose- You must stress the purpose of reading to your pupils.
Children will be motivated to learn to read if they are aware of the many advantages of reading.
They should know that they can access the whole universe of knowledge, and at the same time derive pleasure/ entertainment from reading.
• Fluency- This is the ability to read fast, putting in the right feelings, emotion or emphasis, and yet derive full understanding.
You should ensure young readers are fluent as this is vital to reading comprehension.
A fluent reader is accurate and fast because he has the ability to recognise words and construct meaning with ease.
Fluency is built through guided oral reading.
You must be a model for your class.
• Adoption of appropriate reading rate- Learners and readers in general are exposed to a variety of reading materials, e.g.
text books, reference materials, periodicals, manuals, on-line reading, newspapers etc.
All these materials are not read the same way.
An efficient reader has the ability to adjust his reading rate to suit the type of material he is reading.
The way and speed he reads a newspaper will differ from the way and speed he studies his poetry/physics books.
The former requires a superficial and casual reading, while the latter calls for an in-dept and serious reading.
• Practice- Practice, it is said, makes perfection.
You should employ this valuable strategy to achieve your objective.
You have to engage your pupils in exercises that would help them master the subject matter taught them (Fry,1963; Snow et al, 1998).
Self –Assessment Exercise How can you develop a balanced reading programme for the primary school?
4.0 CONCLUSION Effective teaching of reading can be accomplished if the teachers of reading at the primary school can incorporate useful reading experiences in their reading programmes.
You as teacher trainees should employ appropriate reading experiences to stimulate the interest of your pupils to read .
5.0 SUMMARY 29In this unit, you learnt more about the meaning of reading, its nature, and how this can guide you to have a meaningful reading instruction.
You also learnt about the four different reading experiences that children in primary schools should be exposed to, and the activities that will help your pupils acquire the experiences.
6.0 TEACHER-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss with ample illustrations, useful reading experiences that can enhance the teaching of reading in the primary school.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Betts, E.A.
(1954), Foundation of Reading Instruction.
New York: Americana Book Company.
Crow, L.D, W.I.
Murray and I. Bloom (1969) Teaching Language Arts in Elementary School.
New York: David McKay Co. Fry, E. (1963) Teaching Faster Reading.
London: Pan Books Ltd. Jane L. McGrath.
(1995) Building Strategies for College Reading.
A Text with Thematic Reader.
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, inc.
Snow, C.E, Burns , M.S & Griffin p (Eds) , (1998) Preventing Reading Difficulties in Young Children.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
30 UNIT 3: THE CONCEPT OF READING READINESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Reading Readiness?
3.2.1 Reading Readiness and Disadvantaged Children 3.2.2 Reading Readiness and Gifted Children 3.3 Pre – Reading Activities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION The state of readiness is crucial in the attainment of any task.
In a complex task such as reading, readiness must be attained before success can be assured.
The state of readiness in reading can be likened to the process of child birth.
No 31matter how desirous or anxious the mother- to be is, she must go through the process of labour to have her baby !
The language teacher must therefore ensure that his pupils are physically and psychological prepared to face the task of reading.
This unit will highlight the imperativeness of reading readiness, and guide you teacher in carrying out basic reading readiness tests before you commence the teaching of reading.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • define clearly the concept of reading readiness; • state the mental, physical, emotional factors that influence reading readiness; • explain the differences between the disadvantaged and the gifted children in their performances in pre-reading activities; • select appropriate pre-reading activities to develop pre-reading skills for a primary 3 class.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Reading Readiness Reading readiness is a state of development which prepares the child mentally and emotionally for reading experiences.
The child becomes ready, willing and capable of reading (Craw et al, 1969).
32Readiness is vital in learning.
The teacher should not be anxious to teach the child how to read, if he/she is not mentally, physically and psychological ready for it.
Reading should be taught only when the child has attained a mental maturity , adequate oral language (listening & speaking) capability , interest and desire to read .
Reading readiness is influenced by a group of interrelated factors which can be broadly classified as, physical, mental, social and emotional.
Physical Readiness For a child to be ready for reading, he must: • Hear and see properly; • Possess functional speech organs; • Demonstrate evidence of word recognition and perception Mental Readiness Mental readiness has to do with the child’s intellectual ability to demonstrate his being able to : • Demonstrate evidence of word recognition, for example, recognizing a word as the name of an object, person, place etc.
; • Pronounce words properly by accurately producing the sounds; • Speak in complete sentences; • Recite rhymes and short poems; • Tell simple stories; • Listen to stories and poems; 33• Participate in conversation and discussion; • Give oral reports of activities/errands carried out; • Use a variety of vocabulary items in oral communication.
This is enhanced by you the teacher , providing many situations for the children to listen to others and speak to others.
Old words learnt are reinforced and new ones are learnt by the pupils; • Listen to, and carry out oral instructions e.g.
for errands; • Engage in simple dialogues with the teacher, classmates, friends etc.
; • Recognise and name pictures and shapes; • Demonstrate oral capability ( listening & speaking); • Make auditory and visual discriminations; • Eagerness to read; • To differentiate word and sentence forms by distinguishing differences and similarities.
Social-Emotional Readiness • Children should show good emotional adjustment to the school; • Should possess satisfactory social traits; • Should have adequate experiential and conceptual background; • Should have a keen interest and desire to read.
(Aboderin, & Orisawayi, 1980; Betts, 1954) The Teachers’ Role in Facilitating Reading Readiness 34The concept of pre-reading activities is borne out of the belief that children need to go through some learning experiences before they begin to read.
Pre- reading activities are therefore, the experiences which prepare children for the actual reading tasks.
These activities are mainly speech based.
The role of the teacher is to provide the learners, especially during initial reading instruction, the experiences and activities that will make them demonstrate the above abilities.
3.2.1 Reading Readiness and Disadvantaged Children It is important to stress that the state of reading readiness varies even amongst normal children within the same age bracket or within the same class.
Some children are exposed to reading before they start school, while some are introduced to reading at school.
It is obvious that the later group of children would experience some disadvantages, compared with those children that learnt to read before starting formal school.
The incidence of disadvantaged children in our primary schools is a serious challenge to language teachers.
Some could be mentally retarded, while some could be experiencing some social, emotional, speech, or hearing impediments.
35All these children must be assisted to learn too, but not to the detriment of the normal and exceptional children within the same class.
Such children need special assistance to boost their state of readiness.
For example , the teacher can show love to these children by being friendly, he can give them individual attention, and even visit their homes to discuss possible means of reducing the effect of the children’s challenges with their parents.
The teacher must manage the disparities well, so that no group suffers undue setback.
The normal child or the already exposed child must not be made to go at the same pace with the disadvantaged child.
The teacher must bear in mind the background abilities and disabilities of each child, if he is really desirous of an effective readiness programme.
The teacher must be conversant with the strengths and weaknesses of each child, so that he can generate a programme that will be beneficial to him/her.
3.2.2 Reading Readiness and Gifted Children Gifted children are exceptional in character, personality traits, emotional stability, and adjustment to school.
They exhibit their superior abilities at an early age.
These are children who are endowed with high intellectual capabilities.
They are said to be exceptional because they are superior to their mates/ peers in their mental abilities.
In terms of reading, they are often two or more years ahead of their class , because they perceive relationships and meanings with relative ease, acquire a large pool of reading and speaking vocabulary.
They are endowed with the ability to solve problems and respond to questions through their wide reading.
36The gifted or exceptional child must not be held back as that can get him frustrated.
However, a teacher that is resourceful can manage this situation appropriately; he has to be committed enough to give individual attention when required ( Crow et al , 1969) .
The teacher should provide a variety of reading materials to meet the needs of individual children, and also make their learning quite exciting, and a conducive reading environment (adequate lighting, seats, attractive pictures to encourage pupils to learn).
To all groups of children, the teacher should be considerate, sympathetic, friendly, and willing to give them an assurance of security.
Self-Assessment Exercise Describe three activities you could use to develop reading readiness skills of disadvantaged pupils in Nigerian primary schools.
4.0 CONCLUSION Reading this unit must have taught you the importance of developing pre- reading skills in primary school children, preparatory to meaningful reading experiences.
A child that is not fully prepared encounters problems in the various reading tasks.
It is therefore, your responsibility as teachers, to facilitate the acquisition of these skills by your pupils.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that children should be mentally, physically and emotionally ready before they begin to read.
You also learnt that while some 37children might not be ready to start reading because of their disadvantaged educational background, others come to school already reading because of their enriched educational homes or because they are gifted.
Teachers need to expose children to varied pre-reading activities before actual reading begins.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and describe four skills that a primary school child should exhibit before embarking on formal reading.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READING Aboderin,Y & Orisawayi, D.(1980) Guide to the Teaching of Reading & Comprehension in English.
Ado-Ekiti: Omolayo Press Ltd. Crow, L.D, W.I.
Murray and I. Bloom (1969) Teaching Language Arts in Elementary School.
New York: David McKay Co.
Okebukola,F.O.
(2002) Children Emergent Reading in English: From Theory to Practice.
A Journal of Reading Association of Nigeria Vol.
10.1 UNIT 4: APPROACHES , METHODS AND STRATEGIES OF TEACHING READING 1.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Reading Methods 3.1.1 Phonics Method 383.1.2 Structural Analysis Method 3.1.3 Look and Say Method 3.2 Reading Strategies 3.2.1 Word Form Clues 3.2.2 Picture Clues 3.2.3 Context Clues 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked- Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The first three units of this course taught you some important notions such as the interrelatedness of the four language skills, the nature of reading and the concept of reading readiness.
What you learnt in these units serves as introduction to what you will learn in the rest of the course material.
The present unit and the next, that is units 4 and 5 will dwell on the main subject of this course, namely, methods of teaching reading.
We will discuss the various methods of teaching reading, their philosophical bases, and the strategies/techniques each method employs to teach reading.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • distinguish between discreet and whole language approaches to reading; 39• name and describe phonics, structural, look and say methods and the strategies for executing these methods; • state the basic principles of the phonics, structural and look and say methods, and use them to prepare reading materials; • state the shortcoming(s) of the phonics, structural and look and say methods; • teach pupils how to read and pronounce words using sound-spelling relationship; • teach your pupils how to recognize words by their forms/structure; • Select and use appropriate pictures to teach meaning of vocabulary, information and sequence of events; • teach your pupils how to use context clues to comprehend information in a text.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT Effective teaching of reading at the primary school level has remained an area of concern to stakeholders of early childhood education.
Teachers at this level need to be resourceful enough to acquaint themselves with emerging approaches and methods that will make the teaching and learning of reading a rewarding experience.
You should be guided by the fact that: there is no single method or single combination of methods that can successfully teach all children to read.
Therefore , teachers must have a strong knowledge of multiple methods for teaching reading, and a strong knowledge of the children in their care so they can create the appropriate balance of methods needed for the children they teach (International Reading Association,1999) .
3.1.
Discrete Language and Whole Language Approaches 40 Methods of teaching reading are based on two main approaches according to some philosophies or points of view.
These are : discreet language and whole language approaches.
Discreet Language Approach: This is based on the point of view that learning to read is facilitated when learners are taught to understand and apply some basic principles of how a language operates at the word level.
For example, learners are taught to read words by understanding: • the relationship between how a word is pronounced and how it is written-sound spelling relationship.
• The structural components of a word, that is to read a word by the syllables that make it up.
The discreet approach is the foundation of the phonics, structural analysis and look and say methods which employ teaching strategies that emphasise phonemic and structural awareness at the word level.
These methods will be discussed in this unit with illustrations of how you would employ them.
Whole Language Approach: This is based on the philosophy that learning to read is facilitated by teaching the learner to read in a holistic or global manner.
The proponents of this approach criticize the discreet approach as too simplistic and not patterned to the natural way that language is used.
With the whole language approach: …teachers are expected to provide a literacy rich environment for their Students and to combine speaking ,listening, reading and writing.
Whole Language teachers emphasize the meaning of texts over the sounds of Letters, and phonics instruction becomes just one component of the whole language classroom ( Reyhner,2008).
You will learn more about this approach in the next unit.
3.1.1 The Phonics This is a widely used method of teaching reading.
It is based on the alphabetical principle of letter- sound association , and spelling-sound association , that is , written letters are read the way they sound, and words are pronounced the way they are spelt.
Simply put, children are to learn to read words according to the way they are pronounced orally.
The advocates of 41phonics method emphasise the importance of learners having a phonemic awareness, that is , an understanding of the alphabetic principle that the spelling of words relates to how they sound when spoken ( Reyhner,2008).
The phonic instruction encourages a teaching strategy that deliberately provides reading tasks that teach learners to read words the way they are spelt.
The English alphabet consists of 26 letters, called the letters of the alphabet with about 44 sounds called phonemes.
The phoneme is the smallest unit of sound in English.
The teacher must therefore teach the children the ability to recognise the distinct sounds (phonemes) in words before reading commences.
The knowledge of phonics enables learners interpret the meaning of texts/passages.
Learners who are privileged to have been exposed to a wide range of vocabularies before school, take advantage of phonics to access and read widely a variety of children’s literature.
The phonics method would have been a perfect means of teaching reading, but for the inconsistency in the sounds of the letters of the English language.
In an ideal alphabetic system, every letter represents a phonetic symbol, ONE SOUND ONLY.
Going by this yardstick, the English alphabet is defective because, there are some letters that have different sounds in different words.
In a word like Carry, ‘ C’ stands like ’K’ but sounds like ‘S’ in the word city.
Although the letter ‘A’ is in each of these words, in may, can, care, and car, its sound in each is different.
Further more, some clusters of letters may be 42written differently but sound alike e.g.
receive, leave, and peeve.
In words like island, debt, often and receipt, the underlined letters are silent.
The absence of a one-on-one sound - symbol relationship as illustrated above in many instances in English language sometimes creates reading difficulty for children learning to read.
In spite of the above, the pronunciation of most English words follows the phonics principle.
The phonics is a popular method of teaching reading in Nigerian primary schools.
Generations of people have successfully learnt reading through the phonics method.
The relatively few exceptions to the rules of phonics should not imply that it should be thrown off.
As the teacher of English teaches the rules, he must also stress the fact that there are exceptions to the rules , by giving as many examples as possible to illustrate these.
Tips For Teachers • Ensure that pupils in your class are able to recognise and read the letters of the alphabet; • Expose your learners to a wide range of vocabulary and phrases through oral activities; • You should use graded reading materials with pictures, and vocabulary at learners’ level.
Teaching should be in stages, that is, step by step.
Graded materials are texts about events and experiences with words, phrases, and sentences selected according to the language levels of learners.
Examples are the basal reading series used in teaching reading in elementary schools.
• There is no fast rule about what form of letters (capital or lower case/small letters) to teach first.
Lower case is often commonly used, and so could be taught before the Upper case ; 43• ‘Alliteration’ (repetition of the first letter sound in a word or phrase) is an effective way of teaching the alphabet.
It is better achieved using nursery rhymes.
For instance, the teacher trainee can teach sound ‘B’ with the rhyme below , noting the words we have underlined: Baa –baa- black sheep Have you any wool?
Yes sir, yes sir, three bags full One for the master, one for the dame And one for the little boy who lives down the lane.
• It is important to note that there is a relationship between written letters and their sounds like in -C-A-T ,M-A-N , B-A-G, T-A-K-E etc.
; • Children learn better if fun is introduced.
The alphabet can be taught using rhymes, songs and games.
We believe that you know many of such; • Learning will take place if you use words and names of objects and places children are familiar with.
Cultural objects, names and experiences are better than foreign ones; • Teaching should be patiently done, while sustained practice is necessary.
Practical Application Stage 1: Using a chart on a blackboard or cardboard with letters of the alphabet, you teach while the children repeat after you.
This is followed by making children to take turns in identifying the letters, and pronouncing the sound of each letter as it appears in different words.
44 Stage 2: You teach the sounds in word context using pictures of objects or real objects e.g.
A for Apple; B for Ball; C for Cap; D for Dog.
Stage 3: You teach consonant sounds with the letters that match them, e.g.
/ c/ as in cup; /p/ as in pan /f/ as in fat; /h/ as in hot /g/ as in bag; /t/ as in cat.
Stage 4: You teach vowel sounds and stress that each vowel letter represents more than one sound e.g.
/a/ as in gate; /a/ as in ball; /e/ as in pen; /e / as in we.
Stage 5: You build simple words of 2-3 letters e.g.
O-N (ON), A-S (as); D-O-G (dog), C-A-P (cap).
This can be taught using an alphabet table (see figure 3 below).
Stage 6: You proceed to teaching reading simple sentences by bringing in words already learnt e.g.
That is a ball.
The ball is big.
The big ball is at the gate.
*Each stage goes with intensive practice and questions.
* Pictures , or/and chalkboard drawings will aid reading.
Self-Assessment Exercise Describe and illustrate the alphabetical principle of letter- sound association and spelling-sound association of the phonics method.
45 A B C D E F G H I ANT BALL CAT DOG EGG FISH GOAT HOUSE ICE J K L M N O P Q R JUG KING LIME MAT NURSE OX PAN QUEEN ROPE S T U V W X Y Z SNAKE TANK UMBRELLA VEIL WIG XYLOPH ONE YAM ZIP Figure 3: AN ALPHABET TABLE 46 3.1.2 Structural Analysis Method In contrast to the Phonics method which teaches reading of words on a letter-sound relationship, the structural method is based on the structure or form of a word, made of one, two, three or even five or more syllables .
By recognising the syllables in a word, a child is able to read the word with ease.
For children to use structural analysis to learn to read, you should teach them oral communication activities to recognise words of one, two, three syllables, before words of more syllables.
Making pupils recognise that words are pronounced by syllables when they are learning to speak and listen, will facilitate teaching this principle when they begin to read.
The teaching strategy you should employ is give reading tasks that contain familiar words of various syllables to learners.
Other ways of teaching primary school pupils to use structural analysis of words when they are reading, are through the processes of inflection and affixation using base words.
Base word or root word is the smallest meaningful unit.
Examples are mat, come ,cat, dance, eat .
A word can give rise to many other words by the process of inflection e.g.
from the word “Bake”,we can form- he bakes cakes; he baked cakes yesterday; Musa has a bakery.
Learners should be taught how to inflect words and read these.
Inflection is the process of forming a new word by adding “s” “es” “ed” etc., to the base word.
This process can change the word class of the base word to either the plural form or the verb form.
Look at this illustration: book—books, pen—pens; the verbs, to ride, to write can take the “s” inflection to take this form-She rides a bicycle and Uchenna writes well.
Affixation is the process whereby new words are derived from the base word by adding syllables either at the beginning, or after the base word.
When the syllable comes at the beginning , it is called a prefix and when it comes after the base word it is called a suffix.
Here is an illustration: The word “new” + the prefix re= renew + the suffix al =renewal.
Note that “new” is an adjective, “renew” is a verb , while “renewal” is a noun.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION • You write a list of simple and familiar words e.g verbs, nouns on the 47 chalkboard; • You write on the chalkboard, the “s” “es” and the “ies” inflections; • You ask pupils to give the plural forms of the words by matching each of them with the appropriate inflection.
You use the same strategy to teach verbs with the “s” inflection; • You provide in a similar way, prefixes, suffixes, base words and ask pupils to fill in gaps in sentences with the appropriate prefix or suffix; • With time and practice, pupils will be able to tell base words and the appropriate inflections, Prefixes and suffixes to use with them.
Self-Assessment Exercise Make a list of six base words, and show how you will use them to teach inflection and affixation.
.
3.1.3 LOOK AND SAY METHOD This method is based on the belief that the child will read with ease if, she is able to identify/recognise a word through its features by looking at the written form.
The Look and Say method aims at teaching words, phrases and short sentences as a whole , not in parts as the structural and phonics methods.
The teaching strategy is to guide the child to look at the word , phrase or sentence in order to recognise and memorise its forms and features.
This is at variance with the phonics method where the child learns the letters and the sounds that match them to aid his reading.
48According to the proponents of this method, when a child looks at a written word, or phrase or sentence, on a chart/blackboard, he/she can perceive and memorise the features, and will be able to recall the word or phrase when she comes across it again.
The Look and Say method could be used to teach words that do not follow the phonics principle , that is words that do not follow the regular letter-sound relationship such as, cite, two, too, their, tough, know etc.
The Look and Say method is effective for teaching the reading of sight words, that is, words which pupils have orally learnt, and are familiar with, through listening and speaking activities.
Words in this group include verbs like, come, go , went ; verb parts like, is, am, was, are; auxiliary/helping verbs like, has, will, do, shall; nouns like, dog, goat, cup, food, mother, brother; pronouns like, I, you, she, he, it, they, our ; and prepositions like, in, on, from .
The Look and Say method is especially useful when you have taught your pupils how to identify the similarities and differences between pairs of printed words.
Recall that visual and auditory discrimination was one of the reading readiness skills that we discussed in unit 3 of this course.
It is important to tell you that this method can only be effective if you make use of flash cards , labeled pictures of objects, places and matching cards .
These will help the child recognise, memorise and eventually remember the whole word, whole phrase or whole sentence.
The defect of this method is the fact that it requires rote memorisation.
It is therefore suggested that it is merged with the phonics method for effective teaching of reading at the foundation stage.
Practical Application 49• You write on the chalkboard the words to be read, pronounce them while the children listen and repeat after you; • You teach them to read each word , using flash cards with related pictures; • You write short sentences about the pictures; • You read the sentences by pointing and looking at each word, while the children repeat after you.
It is important that children look at the targeted words carefully as they are pronounced by you.
This will help them identify and remember them when they come across them again; • You need to repeatedly form sentences using many word cards.
You do this by laying the word cards together to form sentences.
NOTE: You can find many examples of materials using Look and Say method in elementary basal reading series.
Self-Assessment Exercise Enumerate the steps you will take to successfully teach reading using the Look and Say method.
3.2 Other Strategies for Teaching Reading 3.2.1 Word Form Clues A technique for enabling beginning readers recognise words and their meanings, requires that the teacher guides them to see the forms/shapes of words and their similarities and differences.
At the initial reading instruction, you need to guide the children to carefully observe and identify the written form/shape of 50words they have come across in listening and speaking.
Let them see that words, such as cup and cap; fan and can share some similarities that make them rhyme, while words such as sleep, eat, take and write do not have such similarities.
Teach the children how to recognise words that differ in form before those that are similar.
Use the technique of rhyming to get learners to note similarities and differences as illustrated below: • Words that are similar in form e.g.
fan-pan; can-ran; boy-toy; hat-cat; sun-gun; etc.
• Words that differ in form e.g.
sleep-eat; take-write; stop-go; come-go; house-horse; home- hand etc.
NOTE: Teach the recognition of word forms first in isolation, and quickly follow up using them in sentences.
Practical Application • Teacher selects words that are clearly different in form, and guides children to recognise them by explaining the differences in the shapes and sounds of the letters of the words, e.g.
sing, get, walk, and come; • Teacher proceeds to words with similar form e.g.
leg and let; lead and leaf; • Teacher uses charts and experience stories that contain words with similar and different forms to teach pupils to recognise similarities and differences in forms/shapes of words in sentences.
Self-Assessment Exercise (1) Make a list of five pairs of words that have similarities in form.
Make sentences with them to teach your pupils the notion of rhyming.
(2) Make a list of five pairs of words that differ.s 3.2.2 Picture Clues 51 Reading materials at the basic level are mostly in pictorial form.
The attractive pictures are not just put there for fun, as they tell some stories.
The children will deduce that a hunter is on a hunting expedition with his son and dog, by mere seeing the picture of a man carrying a gun, a small boy, and a dog along a bush part.
Children develop their vocabulary through such exposures.
The teacher can achieve a lot by engaging the children in group and individual discussions that will help them identify meaning of words from the pictures to enrich their basic vocabulary.
Practical Application • Teacher presents pictures of objects, persons, buildings etc depicting some activities to the class; • Teacher guides children to form stories from the pictures.
These are written on the chalkboard or displayed in charts; • Teacher reads the stories to the class, while they are asked to role play the stories; • Children go further to create picture books and picture dictionaries based on their acquired vocabulary from the stories.
Self-Assessment Exercise Make and Select relevant and attractive pictures that tell a story, or describe an event/activity.
Guide your pupils to tell the story or describe the activity while you write this on the chalkboard for the class to read.
3.
2.3.
Context Clues This is another strategy for teaching learners to comprehend a reading text.
This is introduced after the child is able to identify individual words in sentences.
This technique enables the child guess correctly the meaning of unknown words , using known and familiar words in the story.
Simply put, it helps the child access the meanings of difficult words by analysing the words, phrases and sentences within the reading material.
Meanings of words are deduced based on the child’s previous or present information.
For instance, in a sentence like this , ”Daddy , Mummy and I always visit aunty Bosede after Sunday Mass” .
The child/reader can easily guess correctly what the word visit, means, through the notion of ‘going’ which he/she comes across in oral language.
52There will be more discussion in the next unit on how you can teach primary school learners to use context clues in reading.
Practical Application • You select a reading text of interest to your pupils; • You explain new words before pupils begin to read the story; • You teach pupils how words they already know can help them understand new words; • You finally guide the pupils to comprehend through appropriate questions.
Self-Assessment Exercise Discuss briefly two of the strategies of teaching reading.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt the main approaches of teaching reading at the primary school level ,and the limitations of each of them.
It is expected that you would have the ability to combine useful features in each of them to teach reading effectively.
This is because there is no perfect method!
An eclectic approach to teaching reading where a combination of these methods is used, would be more profitable than using one single 53method.
What should guide you in your choice of method(s) will be the purpose you wish to achieve , and the individual and group needs of learners.
5.0 SUMMARY You learnt in this unit, that reading methods are based on discreet and whole language approaches.
You also learnt that the Phonics, Structural and Look and Say methods are based on the discreet language approach which teaches reading at the word level.
The unit further discussed the teaching strategies associated with each method .You also learnt that materials for teaching , based on each of these methods , can be found in basal reading series used in elementary schools.
You also learnt how you can use Word Form Clues, Picture Clues and Context Clues as strategies for guiding and teaching your pupils to decode difficult/new words that could impair their understanding of reading materials.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the shortcomings of the Phonics, Structural and Look and Say methods, and how you can overcome them in order to have an effective reading programme.
2.
With ample illustrations, describe how you can teach effectively difficult/new words using the word form, picture and context clues.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Burns, Paul.C & Roe Betty,D (1980) Teaching Reading in Today’s Elementary Schools 54 (Second Edition).Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Crow, L.D, W.I.
Murray and I. Bloom (1969) Teaching Language Arts in Elementary School.
New York: David McKay Co. Gipe, Joan.P (1995) Corrective Reading Techniques for Classroom Teachers (Third Edition).Arizona: Gorsuch Scarisbrick, Publishers.
Reyhner ,Jon ( 2008) The Reading Wars: Phonics versus Whole Language.
Retrieved 4/10/2008.
Savignon, S. J.
(1981) Communicative Competence: Theory and Classroom Practice.
Reading-Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.
Using Multiples Methods of Beginning Reading: A Position of Statement of the International Reading Association (1999).
From http://www.jan.ucc.nau.edu/~jar/Reading_Wars.
Phonics…Retrieved 8/2/2010 from http://www.teaching treasures.com Phonics….Retrieved 8/2/2010 from http://www.atozphonics.com Structural …Retrieved 8/2/2010 from http://www.abeflorida.org Literature Based..Retrieved 8/2/2010 from http://www.celtlink.org UNIT 5: APPROACHES, METHODS and STRATEGIES OF TEACHING READING-2 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Whole/Global Language Approach 3.2 Language Experience Method 55 3.3 Basal Reading Method 3.4 Literature Based Method 3.5 Strategies for Teaching Reading 3.5.1 Oral Reading 3.5.2 Silent Reading 3.5.3 Individualised Reading 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION 1.
In unit 4, you learnt about the two main approaches to teaching namely , the discreet language and whole language approaches, their distinguishing features and methods associated with each.
The unit also treated in depth each of the methods associated with the discreet language approach and the strategies for executing these.
In this unit, we will treat in greater detail the whole language approach and the methods associated with this, namely Language Experience , Literature Based ,and Basal Reading methods.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define whole language approach and compare it with discreet approach to teaching reading; • define and use the language experience method to teach lower primary classes how to read; 56• define the basal reader method and use it to teach reading to lower and higher primary classes; • define the literature based method, and use it to teach reading at lower and higher primary school levels; • select appropriate reading materials and methods to attain specific reading objectives; • discuss the differences between oral and silent reading strategies; • explain two advantages of silent reading over oral reading strategies; • define individualized reading strategy; • conduct a silent reading class using the procedure you learnt in this unit.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Whole/Global Language Approach The approach is derived from the Constructivist learning theory that says that children learn when what they are learning is linked to their previous experience.
This makes learning meaningful.
In learning to read, a child who is given a written text/passage which is based on what he is familiar with in oral language will, with teacher’s guidance be able to read the passage.
This is because he is reading what he is able to talk about and associating words/phrases learnt orally with these words in the written form.
The philosophy of the whole language approach is that someone learns to read best when he/she is taught with natural and meaningful reading texts/materiasl.
What this means is that the reading material must be based on the language that the learners have used or come across in oral language activities (listening and speaking).
57 The Whole Language Approach, acknowledges the interrelatedness of the language skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing, and encourages pupils to learn to use all these together, when learning a language.
The approach emphasises the meaning of texts over the sounds of letters, but adopts the phonics and structural methods whenever necessary.
The teacher guides the learners to derive meaning from texts, by using their previous knowledge and experiences to interpret the printed material.
The method of teaching based on this approach is one where the teacher uses teaching/learning materials, that are based on themes familiar to the learners e.g.
the family, games, sports.
Practical Application Below are features of the Whole/Global Language approach: • It recognizes that learning to read is facilitated when learners read natural and meaningful texts familiar to them; • It recognises the interrelatedness of the language skills, and encourages combining these when teaching a language; • It is a child-centered instructional approach which bases reading instruction on learners’ needs and background experiences; • It encourages teachers to build literacy rich environments by providing 58 a varied array of interesting reading materials at the children’s developmental level; • It emphasises meaning of written texts over forms and sounds of letters; • It uses the phonics and structural methods whenever it is necessary; • It encourages pupils to use prior language experiences to decode meanings from reading materials/texts.
Self-Assessment Exercise Explain the basic principle of the whole language approach.
3.2 Language Experience Method Learning is effective, when derived from learners’ involved activities and experiences.
The language experience approach advocates the teaching of reading using children’s activities and stories that are based on their personal experiences over time.
The method of teaching based on this approach uses teaching/learning activities and materials based on learners’ experiences.
Children’s unedited utterances/speeches as they tell stories based on their personal experiences are written on charts or chalkboards by the teacher.
Under the guidance of the teacher, the children read the stories repeatedly until they can associate the written utterances with the spoken.
This teaching approach, focuses on meaning based on the experiences of the pupils, and has been found productive in teaching reading to students with severe learning disabilities (Ward, 2005) .
59This approach puts a lot of responsibility on the teacher, as he is actively involved in giving individual attention to pupils.
The learners benefit greatly because they are reading what they have experienced and talked about.
McCormick (1988) has put the benefits of this approach as follows: • It brings together the four language skills of listening, speaking , reading and writing; • It extends the learners’ creativity in story telling through speaking and writing; • It helps learners understand that what they think and say can be written; • It is learner-centred and demonstrates that learners’ thoughts and language are valued.
NOTE: If you have a large class you can break it into smaller groups.
Each group will present a common story which is told by the group leader, while the teacher writes on the chart or chalkboard.
Practical Application: • You seek information from the children about events and experiences they have had as in individuals and/or small groups; • You listen to the children as they narrate their experiences; • Children can also express their thoughts/experiences in drawings, while you convert these to writing.
This helps them remember what is written; • You write the children’s experiences as they narrate them on charts or blackboard; 60• Children copy what you have written; • You read along with learners, who gradually identify the relationship between their oral presentation and the teacher’s written version; • Learners’ aim is achieved and they progress in their reading ability.
Advantages of Language Experience Approach Pupils are motivated to learn to read when learning materials generated from their own personal experiences are used by the teacher.
A child for instance, dictates his experience to the teacher who, in turn forms a story from it.
The child reads about his own experiences and is excited and fulfilled.
Language experience stories can be drawn from visits to places of interest to the children, like the zoo the air port, farms, parks, trips etc.
In order to make it more interesting, the teacher can, after class excursions, divide the class into discussion groups.
A member of each group is made the secretary, to pull together the experiences of members of the group.
In addition to the skill of reading, children are able to develop their listening and speaking skills.
This would later help them to develop their writing skill.
Self-Assessment Exercise How can pupils’ life experiences help you accomplish the teaching of reading?
3.3 Basal Reader Method This method teaches reading using graded basal reader series.
61Basal reader series are texts/materials specifically designed to teach reading.
They aid reading readiness in children and develop their reading skills.
The series come along with workbooks meant to reinforce skills taught in class.
Basal readers commonly contain folk tales and literature of high quality and appropriate language/vocabulary level.
Some series incorporate pictures and/or drawings , while some do not( Burns & Roe,1980).
You should ensure that you select series that suit the individual and group needs of your pupils.
You should also be conversant with the advantages and disadvantages of this method, so that you can make necessary adjustments in order to come up with a balanced reading programme for your pupils.
The major advantages and disadvantages as adapted from ( Burns & Roe, 1980: 196-199) are given below: Advantages • The books are generally graded in terms of terms of difficulty level ( grammar, vocabulary and structure).
• The teacher is meaningfully guided by the manuals that accompany the series.
• Most of the series incorporate all aspects of the reading programme e.g.
word recognition, comprehension,, oral reading, silent reading, reading for information, and reading for enjoyment.
This helps the teacher to provide a balanced teaching.
• The series ensures systematic teaching and review of the reading skills.
Disadvantages • The deliberate control of vocabulary often make the stories lack literary merit.
• The language structure is formal and thus, differs from that of a normal conversation that children/readers are used to.
62• Settings and characterization are white ‘middle- class surburban’ biased and therefore unfamiliar to children of other racial and socio-economic groups or those from rural backgrounds.
• The basal programme is not a total reading programme as it is often advertised.
There is the tendency for teachers not to incorporate appropriate experiences that can provide a balanced reading programme for his pupils.
• There is often strict reliance on the teaching manuals without adequate consideration for the special needs of the pupils.
3.4 Literature Based Method This approach is useful in teaching pupils who have mastered the rudiments of reading.
It could be used for individualised and group instruction.
Literature based method uses simply written literary texts that are often based on a theme.
Examples are: Eze goes to school, Chike and the river, Stories my mother told me and others.
Literature texts are read not only for literary values and enjoyment, but to teach pupils reading comprehension strategies.
They are for example used in teaching pupils how to answer comprehension questions: main ideas, implied ideas, ability to express opinion, evaluate e.t.c.
Teaching Reading using literature Texts A literature based method allows children to choose and read a variety of books by identified authors as selected by the teacher.
These books, which cut across topics, are graded to meet different levels of difficulty.
Children are free to choose between picture –telling texts and the more difficult ones.
63 Practical Application • You provide a variety of books within the interest and reading level of the class.
You can source for books and keep such in a reading corner for class use; • You give individual attention to pupils so as to listen to their individual readings, in order to identify areas of difficulty; • Children discuss their reading with you , and ask questions to test their comprehension; • You encourage sustained reading by ensuring availability of texts and monitoring learners’ progress; • You ensure guided reading by giving learners comprehension questions on some chosen literary texts.
Self-Assessment Exercise What is the role of the teacher in a Literature Based Method?
3.5 Strategies for Teaching Reading Based on Whole Language Approach 3.5.1 Oral Reading Oral reading is commonly called ‘reading aloud ‘.
It requires the voicing of the words in the printed material.
Put differently, the lips and the vocal organs are involved in oral reading.
The child has the 64opportunity of listening to his own reading.
You can ask pupils to read individually or in small groups.
Oral reading has the following advantages: • It increases comprehension; • It promotes literary appreciation through pupils’ identification of the pronunciation of words in the reading material; • It brings out speech disorders for possible correction; • It trains pupils in the art of speaking, because as they read , they improve their pronunciation, Intonation etc; • Oral reading develops pupils’ fluency; • It provides beginners opportunity to read to others and thus, overcome shyness in speaking.
TIPS ON SELECTION OF TEXTS FOR ORAL READING Before we proceed to the practical teaching, we shall give you some tips on how you will select reading texts/materials for learners at the primary level: • Select texts that will meet pupils’ reading abilities; if the reading materials are above their level, they will find it difficult to learn; • Select texts that are of interest to them, so that they can derive pleasure and satisfaction from what they read; • Select texts that are related to pupils’ culture/ environment so that their personal experience can assist them understand the textual concepts; • Texts at the junior primary level should be pictorial ,colourful and well illustrated; 65• Texts for the senior primary should have relevant illustrations; • Text format should be appropriate, while the print ( font size) should be bold enough for easy reading.
Practical Application • You motivate your class using songs, rhymes or any other means; • As a model, you read the text/passage to get your pupils’ attention, and stir their interest; • You provide examples of voice quality , such as tone, pitch and inflection in order to help your pupils develop the right voice quality when reading; • You identify new words, write them on the chalkboard or on charts and explain their meanings in the context of the passage; • You give room for questions, if any; • You call on individual pupils to read, while others listen attentively; • You correct wrong pronunciation in the course of reading, to allow for fluency, which is one of the aims of oral reading; • You guide pupils through the questions that follow, to test their level of comprehension.
Self-Assessment Exercise List and describe with illustrations, five measures you will consider in setting up a meaningful oral reading programme.
3.5.2 Silent Reading This is a type of reading that is personal to the child, unlike oral reading where the child reads aloud.
However, the two share the common aim of reading for comprehension.
Silent reading is a strategy that aids life long learning.
Adults and efficient readers often read silently because it enhances both their comprehension and speed of reading.
It also allows for personal enjoyment of the content being read.
Newspapers, magazines, letters, text messages etc are read silently.
66In the school, silent reading is encouraged for academic purposes e.g.
reading for assignments and study for examinations.
NOTE-The tips for selection of reading materials for Oral Reading are also applicable here.
You should remember that the aim of Silent Reading is to read fast and understand the message that is contained in a text/passage, so your strategy and technique should aim at achieving that goal.
Practical Application • You start your lesson by introducing motivating rhymes or a recall of your last lesson; • You may as a model, read the passage depending on the length and the difficulty of the words/phrases in the text; • You write new words on the chalkboard and explain their meanings in the context of the passage; • You give room for questions , if any; • You guide pupils to read silently , answer the questions that follow either orally or in writing; • You give pupils more reading passages for practice; • Pupils read the passages, answer questions orally or in writing.
Below is a sample passage for Silent Reading: Polite Tortoise Pre-reading Question: What stories do you know about the Tortoise?
What tricks does he play?
The Passage Once upon a time, Tortoise was walking along when he got a thorn in his foot.
“Ouch!” he cried.
“Now I can’t walk.
What shall I do?
After a while, an old woman passed by.
Tortoise politely asked her for help.
“Excuse me, Madam.
Could you help me please?
Could you pull a thorn out of my foot?” The old woman smiled and bent down.
She found the thorn and quickly pulled it out.
Tortoise thanked her and they both went their way.
However a minute later, Tortoise had an idea.
He called after the old woman, “Excuse me, where is my thorn, Madam?” “I don’t know”, answered the woman.
“I threw it in the bush.” 67Tortoise began to cry, “Oh no!
My thorn is lost.
What am I going to do?” The old woman felt sorry for Tortoise and said, “Please don’t cry.
Here’s an egg for you.” Tortoise was very pleased.
He took the egg and walked on to a village.
He knocked on the door of a house and a man answered it.
“Please Sir, ” said Tortoise politely, “may I stay the night with you?
It’s late and cold.” “Yes of course you may.
Please come in,” said the man.
Comprehension Questions 1.
Why couldn’t Tortoise walk?
2. Who helped him?
3.
What did she do?
4.
What did Tortoise ask the old woman to give him?
5.
Did Tortoise really want the thorn?
6.
Why did Tortoise cry?
7.
What did the old woman give Tortoise?
8.
What did Tortoise want from the man in the village?
Source: PREMIER ENGLISH for Nigerian Primary Schools PUPIL’S BOOK5 3.5.3 Individualized Reading This kind of reading is child –centered because , the focus is on the individual child.
Children read simple texts/ stories on their own, and seek the teacher’s aid if they have any problems with understanding the ideas in the texts.
The child selects what to read from the list of books in the class.
He reads this silently on his own or orally to the teacher where the class size is not large.
CHARACTERISTICS OF INDIVIDUALIZED READING Burns & Roe, (1980) give the following as tips for organizing individualized reading instruction: 1.
Self-selection: Children are allowed to choose reading texts of interest.
It thus, has a built-in motivation since they read what they choose to read; 68 2.
Self-pacing: Children can read at their individual pace.
It respects the principle of individual differences; 3.
Skills instruction: The teacher helps the children develop the word recognition and comprehension skills as and when needed.
Skills instruction occurs either on individual or group basis; 4.
Record keeping: The teacher keeps records on the progress made by the individual child.
He is guided by the child’s reading performance in the recommendation of books that can be read independently by the child.
5.
Student-teacher conferences ( meeting): The teacher schedules a meeting with each child one or two times a week.
The conference will vary from three to fifteen minutes in length, depending on the purpose ( mainly to assess progress made) .
6.
Sharing activities: The teacher plans some time each week for the children to share books they have read individually with one another .
7.
Independent work : The children are involved in much independent work, rather than spending most of the assigned reading period in a group with the teacher.
8.
The children are also given an opportunity for individual oral reading of their texts.
The teacher listens and asks individual questions to test their understanding of the texts.
This approach to teaching reading is not commonly practiced in the Nigerian primary schools, especially the public ones.
This could be partly due to the burden it puts on the teacher, such as establishing children’s reading levels and interests through assessment tests, the need for the teacher to have read books available to the children for comprehension testing, devotion of individual attention to children, and provision of a variety of books, magazines, and other useful reading materials in large quantities.
As demanding as this strategy of teaching reading is, you are encouraged to use individualized instruction for helping pupils who are lagging behind in your class.
THE ECLECTIC APPROACH TO TEACHING READING Elementary school children will be able to read when appropriate reading methods are used by the teacher to teach them.
However, the ECLECTIC approach, a combination of positive features of all methods is 69suggested for optimal reading success.
This implies that you should possess a strong grasp of all methods, so that you can select a method or a combination of methods that suit the needs of your pupils at any point in time.
In addition to the application of the eclectic approach, it is important to stress that you should be able to employ the strategy that is most effective to teach each method of reading.
The language experience approach for instance is suitable for the phonics and structural methods.
Self-Assessment Exercise Explain how you can adapt the individualized reading strategy to teach reading in Nigerian primary school.
4.0 CONCLUSION Units 4 & 5 have dealt extensively with the major approaches, methods, strategies and techniques of teaching reading at the primary school level.
We are reiterating the fact that there is no method that can be adjudged to be the best, and thus successfully make all children read.
We believe you have been adequately prepared to face the challenges of teaching reading to your primary school pupils.
Since you may not find a method that will teach reading successfully to ALL that desire to read, you have to be discretional in your choice of method(s).
5.0 SUMMARY 702.
In this unit, you have been taught the whole/global language approach and the methods associated with it, namely Language Experience, Literature Based ,and Basal Reader.
The strategies for teaching oral, silent and individualized types of reading have also been dealt with.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.Compare and contrast Language Experience, Whole Language and Literature based methods of teaching reading.
2.
Discuss in full, the benefits of oral and silent reading.
3.
How can you attain the goals of reading through the individualized strategy?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Crow, L.D, W.I.
Murray and I. Bloom (1969) Teaching Language Arts in Elementary School.
New York: David McKay Co. Reyhner Jon ,2008)-The Reading Wars: Phonics versus Whole Language.
Retrieved 4/10/2008.
from http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~jar/Reading_War.html Ward, H.C. (2005) The Reading Matrix.
Vol.5.1.
Retrieved 7/27/2010 from http://www.readingmatrix.com/articles/ward/article.
McCormick (1988) An extract from LinguaLinks Library.
1999 SIL International.
Retrieved 4/10/2008 from http://www.sil.org/lingualinks/literacy/ReferenceMaterials/GlossaryOfLiteracyTerms/WHA... 71 UNIT 6: TYPES OF READING: ORAL AND SILENT, SKIMMING AND SCANNING, INTENSIVE AND EXTENSIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Oral and Silent Reading 3.2 Skimming and Scanning 3.3 Intensive and Extensive Reading 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are six main types of reading, each used for a specific purpose.
At any given time of reading, a reader could use one or a combination of these , depending on one’s purpose(s) for reading.
Here are different types of reading: 1.
Oral and Silent 2.
Skimming and Scanning 72 3.
Intensive and Extensive.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • define each of the six types of reading presented in this unit; • explain when to employ each reading type; • distinguish between oral and silent reading , skimming and scanning, intensive and extensive reading; • skim and scan a given material for information ; • teach the uses of each type of reading to learners; • select material for teaching each type of reading.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.1 Oral Reading Oral reading is also referred to as ‘reading aloud ‘.
Children should be taught to read aloud sometimes.
This helps them to learn the right pitch and stress in the spoken language.
Teachers and adult listeners can guide learners when they read to effect necessary corrections.
Oral reading is also used to teach pronunciation.
As your pupils read aloud , you listen and correct poor pronunciation.
Reading for comprehension is either oral or silent.
You can give a passage from the class reader and call different children to read it orally.
You correct for pronunciation and fluency.
You ask the class questions based on the passage.
73It is important to stress that reading fluency is attained through oral reading , if the teacher himself is a good model , and guides the children to acquire and develop appropriate pronunciation, stress and intonation patterns.
Reading materials for oral reading include: nursery rhymes, short plays, short stories, passages, dialogues and whole literature books for primary schools.
Tips for Classroom Practice • Teacher selects a reading material e.g.
a passage, based on pupils’ reading abilities; • Teacher ensures that every child has a copy of the passage ; • Teacher calls different pupils to read orally; • Teacher listens and corrects poor pronunciation , to facilitate fluency; • Teacher lists difficult words on the chalkboard and explains them to aid comprehension; • Teacher may pose some questions before reading begins to aid comprehension or ask such questions after reading; • Teacher should ensure that a passage is read by more than one child.
A difficult passage should be read by more children; • Teacher motivates and makes necessary correction.
Self-Assessment Exercise Is oral reading an effective method of teaching reading?
743.1.2 Silent Reading This is a type of reading that is internalised, unlike the oral reading where the reader reads aloud.
However, the two share the common aim of comprehension.
Efficient readers read silently because it enhances both their comprehension and speed of reading.
Silent reading skill is desired for learning and knowledge, as it facilitates the development of a critical mind needed to be able to derive maximum benefits from the content of reading.
Silent reading may be used in the senior primary classes, but may not be appropriate for beginning reading instruction, where pupils need to be properly guided to ensure comprehension.
The selection of reading materials for these young learners should be carefully done by the teacher, if the aim of silent reading must be achieved.
The selection should be based on some considerations: • Texts or passages must be of right difficulty level; • Texts must be of interest for maximum comprehension; • Texts should be colourful and illustrated with relevant pictures; • Texts , stories or passages should not be too long; • Reading materials should be based on children’s background; • Reading materials should contain practice exercises, since ‘practice makes perfection’.
Self-Assessment Exercise With ample illustrations, distinguish between oral and silent reading.
3.2.1 Skimming 75When you read some materials, your aim may not be to achieve complete comprehension.
You may need to skim or scan depending on the type of information you want to access.
It saves time to skim or scan.
Skimming is when you read selectively to obtain a general idea in a reading material.
Skimming technique is suitable if you do not require complete information, but the most important ideas.
It is common to skim- -- a book, article, newspapers, magazines, weekly reader etc.
If you have a reading material which you must read within a given time, you are left with the option of skimming it, by reading some parts, and leaving out some.
In skimming a material, you may have to focus on the following: • The title; • The sub-title or introductory paragraph; • The headings; • The topic sentence of each paragraph; • Key words; • The title of any maps, graphs, or diagrams; • The last paragraph or conclusion of the text.
To teach the art of skimming, you assign your pupils a reading text that is within their comprehension level.
You will ask them questions which will not require their having to read intensively the whole passage.
They should be able to respond to the questions promptly.
Below is a passage for illustration: The Seashell 76Once upon a time, four sisters lived in a village near the sea.
They loved the beach and the sea.
They spent many days playing happily there.
They collected shells, built sandcastles and ran in and out of the sea shouting with joy.
Sometimes they swan where the water was shallow.
They dived to the bottom and then jumped out with a scream.
However, they were careful not to go where the water was deep.
Their father always said, “Don’t go into the deep water because the sea is dangerous.” One day they were collecting shells.
Each of the four girls made a pile of beautiful shells which they wanted to take home to give their mother.
On the way home, Oluchi, the youngest girl, suddenly remembered that her most beautiful shell was still on a rock at the beach.
She wanted to go back to fetch it.
Her sisters didn’t want to.
It was getting dark and they were tired.
They didn’t want to go all the way back for one shell.
However, Oluchi insisted that she had to go back to get it.
So she went back to the beach alone.
( Source: PREMIER ENGLISH for Nigerian Primary Schools PUPIL’S BOOK5).
Questions: (1) Who is Oluchi?
3.2.2 Scanning This is when you read a material in search of a specific information.
This is likened to a situation when you have to search for a friend at a political rally ground, or search for a particular book on a shelf of a university library.
Scanning is quickly looking for specific information so as to save time.
Easy as it looks, it can be frustrating if not done in an effective and systematic way.
The following items can be scanned: advert for job placement in newspapers, telephone numbers in telephone directory, a particular name on an admission list, dates, and names of persons, places, and events etc.in written passages.
At the primary school level, pupils do not engage in complex materials.
They may be required to scan short story books or read passages for specific details.
** Below is a question to test your pupils ‘ ability to scan, using the passage used for the skimming exercise above: (2) Why did Oluchi go back to the beach alone?
77(3) Did the sisters go back to the beach with her?
Self-Assessment Exercise Why do readers need the skills of scanning and skimming?
3.3.1 Intensive Reading Intensive reading is also called ‘in-depth reading’.
The intensive reading skill is needed to access information in subject areas by pupils.
Content or subject areas such as Social Studies, Mathematics, and Integrated Science in primary schools require intensive reading skill.
This is a very important skill that must be developed right from the rudimentary stage.
Intensive reading is aimed at gaining detailed understanding of the text.
The reader reads for accuracy, hence he must pay maximum attention to the various aspects of the text such as, the title, the main and detailed information in the paragraphs and linkage of paragraphs.
Intensive reading skill equips readers with the ability to: • read and obtain literal or stated facts/information • interpret the thoughts or views of the writer, and be able to arrive at conclusions; • generalise , based on certain facts or information contained in the text; • apply the writer’s experiences in handling personal circumstances.
Practical Application In teaching intensive reading at the primary school, the teacher must accept important responsibilities like: • introducing the text by relating it to children’s experiences; 78• showing relevant objects or pictures to arouse discussion on the topic; • presenting and explaining new words; • giving questions to guide pupils’ reading; • guiding group and class discussions of questions and answers; • creating opportunities for further practice.
*Remember to always select reading materials that are appropriate to the interest and language level of your pupils.
A COMPREHENSION PASSAGE TO TEACH INTENSIVE READING Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow: Favourite foods Pre-reading: What is your favourite food?
Why is it your favourite?
It is Sunday tomorrow.
Atinuke is getting very excited.
She loves to shop with her mother on Saturdays.
She also loves Sunday because of the special lunch that they usually have at home.
“ Shall we do our shopping now?
“ she asked her mother.
“ I haven’t got enough money at home.
Let’s wait for your daddy to come home.
He’s gone to the bank, “said Mother “What do you children want to eat tomorrow?
“ “ Rice and chicken, “ shouted Atinuke.
“Why rice?
I prefer pounded yam,” said Tunji, Atinuke’s younger brother.
“Rice is better,” said Atinuke firmly.
“What do you know?
I’m older than you!
“ Atinuke said angrily.
“ What has our age got to do with pounded yam and rice?
“ asked Tunji.
Atinuke thought for a second before replying, “Nothing, but I know that all my friends prefer rice to pounded yam.” 79“Then they don’t know what they’re missing Pounded yam is simply the best in my own opinion, especially when eaten with egusi soup, “said Tunji.
“I don’t agree, “argued Atinuke.
“You can make rice in different ways.
There is jollof rice, fried rice, coconut rice and rice pudding but you can only make pounded yam as pounded yam.
“s “Pounded yam is very stiff and very filling.
You can have it with any soup of your choice like ewedu,egusi, spinach and ogbono, “ said Tunji.
“Children,” laughed Mother, “ Stop this argument now.” Questions: 1.
Why is Sunday a special day to Atinuke?
2.
What is Tunji’s favourite food?
3.
Which of the foods come in different ways?
Name the varieties.
4.
What is Mother’s reaction to the argument about rice and pounded yam?
Source: Adapted from PREMIER ENGLISH for Nigerian Primary Schools PUPIL’S BOOK5.
Self-Assessment Exercise Select an appropriate passage from a Primary Five Reader, and explain how you will use it to teach intensive reading to your pupils.
3.3.2 Extensive Reading Extensive reading is also called ‘wide reading’.
This skill is required to enable a reader complete a large volume of reading within a short time.
Extensive reading skill is very useful in reading widely to acquire subject and general knowledge.
A reader using this skill is able to combine speed with comprehension.
The language teacher at the primary school should select/ provide his pupils with reading materials that suit his pupils’ level of reading ability.
80 Appropriate reading materials include: novels, short stories, newspapers, magazines, manuals, etc.
The benefits of training primary school pupils in this skill include: • Increased vocabulary; • Fast and fluent reading; • Stimulation of reading interest;.
• Language development; • Access to information and general knowledge; • Provision of pleasure reading; • Promotion of comprehension.
Though extensive reading goes beyond class reading, you should be able to effectively monitor the progress of your pupils especially in the following key areas: • exhibition of desirable reading traits, even in the absence of the teacher; • evidence of enhanced vocabulary and interest in the texts; • participation in post-reading activities in both oral and written forms.
Self-Assessment Exercise Why is Extensive Reading a necessity in a literate society?
4.0 CONCLUSION 81Reading is done for different purposes.
Some read for study, some for information , while some for pleasure.
The purpose of reading determines the technique to employ; this explains why this unit has treated extensively six types of reading.
You are expected to help your pupils identify their purposes for reading , so that they can apply appropriate strategies.
4.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught you the six types of reading, and how you can teach them successfully at the primary school.
If you employ the techniques along with appropriate reading materials, your pupils will be able to achieve their reading purposes .
8.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Select suitable reading materials, and give a detailed procedure of how you would teach each of the six skills.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Benson O.A et al (2008) Intensive English for Senior Secondary Schools 3, Second Edition .
Africana First Publishers Limited.
McWHORTER, Kathleen T (2002) Efficient & Flexible Reading.
(6th edition) Longman.
New York: OLATEJU, M.A.
(2002) Oral Reading Fluency of Primary School Pupils in Nigeria.Literacy and Reading in Nigeria.
A Journal of Reading Association of Nigeria.
V OL.
10.1 82PED 322 METHODS OF TEACHING READING IN THE PRIMARY SCHOOL MODULE 11 Introduction Module 1 of this course defined reading, described the pre-requisite reading skills and the various methods of teaching reading.
This module would build on what you have learnt in module 1 with focus on teaching you what to teach and how to teach primary school pupils skills for different purposes of reading.
Specifically, you will learn how to teach your pupils to recognize written forms of words they had learnt orally, teach them to develop skills for comprehending and interpreting written texts and skills for reading in the content areas.
You will also learn how and where to source materials for teaching reading as well as techniques for assessing reading skills.
This module is made up of the following units: Unit 1 Goals and Objectives of teaching reading.
Unit 2 Development of word recognition skills.
Unit 3 Development of interpretation skills 1.
Unit 4 Development of interpretation skills 2.
Unit 5 Development of skills for reading in the content areas.
Unit 6 Resources for teaching reading.
Unit 7 Evaluation of reading skills.
UNIT 1 GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF TEACHING READING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Goals of Teaching Reading 3.2 Development of word recognition skills 3.3 Development of interpretation skills 3.4 Creation of a desire to read 3.5 Appreciation of Literature 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 836.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Reading is a complex activity which is more than mere looking at words on a printed page.
It is a means of making meaning out of printed or written symbols.
To help children read and understand, the school should have a set of goals and objectives to guide the teacher and the learners.
Goals and objectives are the roadmaps that guide teachers on what to teach, how to teach and assess learning.
This is important for the teachers to know and understand because knowing them will lead to the desired outcomes of teaching children to learn to read as well as read to learn.
In this unit, the goals and objectives of teaching reading will be discussed as well as the methods and techniques a teacher can employ to achieve them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: .
List and describe the goals of teaching reading in primary school under each of the broad goals.
.
Identify obstacles to attaining reading objectives at the primary school level.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Goals of Teaching Reading Reading programmes are formulated based on specific goals a teacher should follow to attain desired teaching/ learning outcomes.
Generally, the goals of learning to read are to: .
help pupils cultivate basic reading habits.
.
help children acquire basic reading skills.
.
expose children to all kinds of reading for different purposes .
help children read, comprehend and interpret texts.
.
inculcate in children the interest and desire to read.
.
guide children to recognize and understand lexical items/words by their forms and by contextual clues.
We are going to merge the above into four broad goals with specific objectives.
The four broad goals and the related objectives are: 843.2.
Development of Word Recognition Skills.
This can be broken down into achievable objectives as in the following: a.
To help children develop a sight vocabulary.
b.
To develop in children the ability to use picture, context and phonetic clues to identify or recall printed words.
c. To help children develop and use dictionary skills.
3.3.
Development of Interpretation Skills.
This will require you teaching your pupils skills to enable them to: a. identify main ideas.
b. locate specific information.
c. draw conclusions.
d. arrange events and ideas in sequence.
3.4.
Creation of a Desire to Read.
This will involve guiding your pupils to develop the desire and interest to read.
Children are by nature inquisitive.
They want to know about everything they see or experience.
In their formative years, children like people to talk with them, show them and answer their questions.
They like to communicate.
When these things that interest them are represented in the printed word or in pictures, their imagination is fired as well as the desire to read to discover the unknown.
They want to read and the teacher needs to take advantage of this to create a desire in them to read anything and everything they come in contact with.
You need to also make them realize that reading is fun and a source of pleasure.
Make them realize that reading is like travelling, an excursion into other places, worlds or cultures.
3.5.
Appreciation of Literature This will require that you teach your pupils techniques for literary appreciation.
There are two stages in a child’s development of literary sensitivity.
The first is purely emotional.
Here, a child derives great emotional satisfaction/enjoyment from a story which appeals to his feelings of excitement, adventure, happiness or sadness.
The second is the intellectual stage when the child learns to analyse and evaluate the story he listens to or reads.
The enjoyment of literature is not complete until a child can move from the first stage to the second stage of intellectual appreciation.
Introducing appreciation to children is not easy.
It needs proper methodology and sound knowledge on teacher’s part.
This will be dealt with in the course of this study.
Self Assessment Exercise.
1.
Identify one specific objective from each of the four broad goals and describe the activity you will use to achieve it in a primary four reading class.
854.0 CONCLUSION The success of any enterprise is largely dependent on the goals and objectives the entrepreneur set out to achieve.
The same is true for a reading programme.
Setting out the goals and objectives to attain in the programme will guide you in selecting what to teach, methods, strategies and materials to employ in attaining the stated goals and objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt about- .
the goals of teaching reading in the primary school.
.
the objectives for teaching reading.
.
how goals and objectives act as roadmaps in guiding in the attainment of desired learning outcomes.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Select and discuss two objectives for developing word recognition and discuss the reasons why they are important for teaching children to read.
2.
Select three objectives for developing interpretative skills and explain why primary school pupils should be taught these.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS .
Betts, E.A.
(1954).
Foundations of Reading Instruction.
N.Y. American Book Co. p375 .
Burns, C.P., Roe, B.D.
(1980).
Teaching Reading in today’s Elementary School.
USA.
Houghton Mifflin Co. pp.18 -22 .
Crow, L.D.
Murray, W.I.
Bloom, I.
(1968).
Teaching Language Arts in the Elementary School.
N. Y. David Mckay Co. pp.
42 - 47 UNIT 11 DEVELOPMENT OF WORD RECOGNITION SKILLS.
CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Development of sight/basic vocabulary 3.2 Strategies for teaching word recognition.
3.3 Development of the ability to use dictionary skills.
864.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the very important skills needed by pupils learning to read is the word recognition skill.
This is the skill that enables learners to comprehend the meanings of words they come across when reading.
In this unit, you will learn the strategies to employ to teach your pupils to learn words and their meaning.
These strategies have been dealt with in unit 4 of Module 1.
Can you recall them?
The purpose of mentioning these strategies in this unit is to build further on what you learnt in module 1.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: .
Define sight vocabulary giving examples.
.
Teach vocabulary development effectively using picture clues.
.
Explain briefly the first step in dictionary skills development.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Development of sight vocabulary A child’s sight vocabulary is made up of words that s/he had learnt during oral language activities.
Such words because of their familiarity are recognized immediately at the initial reading level without having to resort to analysis.
The larger the store of basic words a child has, the more rapidly and fluently s/he can read.
The comprehension of a reading passage is marred if the learner has to pause too often to analyse unfamiliar words.
(Crow et all, 1968) Based on the above, a teacher should help the child during oral language instruction to develop a basic vocabulary large enough to enable him recognize the majority of the words in the materials which he reads at the initial reading instruction.
At the initial reading instruction, you must carefully choose the words to teach as basic words.
The first sight words introduced should be meaningful and useful words.
A child’s name should be one of the first sight words learnt.
Days of the week, months of the year, names of school subjects, things around the home and school are good beginning for acquiring sight words.
As mentioned earlier in this section, vocabulary items learnt in listening and speaking activities are excellent for teaching word recognition in initial reading instruction.
An important skill that you must teach your pupils during oral activities is 87auditory discrimination skill.
Pupils must be able to distinguish aurally, the likenesses and differences in sounds of words.
You begin the task by having the children listen so as to be able to distinguish the sounds of different words as he pronounces them.
When the child begins to read, he is able to associate meaning to printed words.
You can assist children in the development of a sight vocabulary by using several techniques.
These include- word form clue, picture clues, context clues and phonetic clues.
3.2.
Strategies for teaching word recognition Recall that in unit 4 of module 1, we discussed some strategies for teaching pupils to recognize words at initial reading instruction.
These strategies were: word form, picture, context and phonetic clues.
Some illustrations of how you could use these to teach were given.
In this unit, we are going to remind you of what you learnt in unit of module 1 with some more illustrations.
1.
The Word Form Clues.
Word form clue is used when new words are learned by memory as the learner sees them written and with picture clues.
It is the technique which enables beginning readers recognize words and their meanings.
Here the teacher guides children to see and know the forms and shapes of words.
It is the process of” guiding children to look at words carefully so that they will be able to recognize them through their forms” (Crow et al,1968).
Word form clues should be used to teach pupils the similarities and otherwise of words as for example - go, so, no: cap, tap, map, nap: can, ran, man, etc.
Rhyming pairs and dramatization can be used to effectively teach word form e.g.
man, ran, can.
The word ‘jump’ for example can be taught by means of dramatizing the action, e.g.
–the teacher says the word and carries out the act of jumping.
The pupils see, hear, or repeat after teacher and jump.
Teach recognition of words first in isolated bits before using them in short simple sentences e.g.
I go up, this is my cap, this is a man.
(2) Picture Clues.
These are reading materials in pictorial form which give clues to what the word under the pictures mean, their spelling and how to write them.
Examples A for apple B for ball 88 C for cat D for duck Pictures of objects, places, people, etc.
are very useful in teaching primary school children especially at the initial reading instruction.
Repeated exposure to pictures and what they depict may result in children recognizing and connecting them instantly.
That is, the word may be used to get the names of what is in the picture as for example- A. is for Apple: B. is for Boy: C. is for Cat, etc.
Crow et al (1968) assert that children should be encouraged to examine pictures closely for clues of information.
The teacher can sensitize the child to pictures clues by labelling objects in the classroom.
Picture clues may be useful in the initial stages of instruction, but can be left aside as the child begins to recognize and read words.
Here are useful ways of using pictures to teach reading - (1) Children look at pictures and tell stories about them, (2)draw pictures of events or stories they tell or were told,(3) make picture books, scrap books and dictionaries.
This would help them develop the ability to recall details, associate and connect letters and pictures, detect relationship and note correct order of events.
For example, a picture of a boy going to the door can be practicalised by asking a boy in the class to go to the door and asking the class what the boy is doing.
Note that if you teach a child a word in isolation, he may not remember it.
Instead you should use the word in a sentence to describe a picture the child had drawn.
It will then be easy for him to remember, because it will have a meaning for him.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Describe two ways you can use to help children develop sight vocabulary.
2.
Explain with illustrations how you would use picture clues and context clues to teach reading.
(3).Context Clues.
Context clues can be used as aids to getting the meaning of words.
Context clues are ways of finding the meaning of difficult words by using clues from the passage read.
That is, a child recalls what he has read and relates it to how meaning was developed and connected to arrive at a possible meaning of the unknown/difficult word(s).
In beginning reading, a child may have difficulty in identifying strange unfamiliar words.
This may be caused by a number of facts.
For example, (1) he may be unable to recall a word form which is familiar to him, (2) he may know the meaning but is unfamiliar with the form or (3) he may be unfamiliar with both the form and the meaning.
Keeping the above in mind, children should be taught to use words they already know to help them understand the unknown.
That is, teach pupils to 89employ context clues to understand the strange the words, phrases and sentences in the material being read.
This is a form of educated guessing about the meaning of unfamiliar words.
Crow et al (1968) are of the opinion that a teacher could use the following to develop children’s ability to use context clues: a.
Present new words in the story before children begin to read it.
b.
Use questions to guide the reading.
Out of context, many words cannot be pronounced with certainty, for example - live, read, record, desert, etc.
(note the importance of context as used in these sentences): A.
The wind is blowing through the windows-Did you wind the clock?
B.
Will you record these figures for me?
– I bought a new record for her.
C. We drove for miles through the desert.
– How can you desert him when he needs you?
(Burns & Roe, 1980) You can use the above examples to teach context clues.
Make the pupils know that the word wind as used in these sentences have different meanings which can be known by the way they are used in the sentences (context).
Other methods you can use include prefix e.g.
pin, un - pin: happy, un – happy: suffix, e.g.
tooth, tooth – less: sad, sad – ness: illustrated word as for example pretty with a picture of a pretty dress: through identifying and discussing unfamiliar/unknown words before reading the passage and through definition as in – Folu and Funmi lived next door.
They were neighbours.
(Here children can deduce the meaning of neighbours because they lived next door).
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Explain why children need to develop a sight vocabulary at the initial stage of reading.
3.2 Development of the ability to use phonetic clues.
Using phonetic clues is a technique for working out word pronunciation by identifying and combining sound elements in words.
As a teacher, you should note that when a child uses phonetic analysis as a means of getting the sound of printed words, he must associate the written word with the spoken word in order to derive its meaning.
According to Crow et al (1968), phonics is one of the valuable aids to word recognition.
It should be used with other word recognition skills so as to facilitate learning of words and their meaning.
It teaches the relationship between the sound and the symbol.
Before using the phonics skill, a child must be able to distinguish forms and sounds of words so that he would be able to later associate words with their sounds.
To get children recognize individual letter/sound, you should teach the sounds associated with individual letters first.
Next, teach how these sounds are blended together to form words.
Below are a few examples – 90 letter -- sound A - aah P - pi N - ng C - k. To concretise what has been learnt, present sight words and then teach the sounds of the letters of those words e.g.
word - sound bag - b +aa+ gi cat - k +aa +ti fan - f +aa +n.
Sight word approach is when new words are learned by sight (memory) as the learner sees them written and with picture clues.
For your pupils who have learnt sight vocabulary, you can write some words on the board and ask them to listen as you pronounce.
( For example- letter d- dog, did, Dan, do, daddy, donkey, etc).
After that you can ask them if any of the words sound alike.
If the answer is yes, you can ask them for the part that sounds the same.
The likely response should be letter ‘d’ (Burns & Roe).
Here you can teach the letter‘d’ as well as the sound.
You can teach this extensively in the lower primary and in the upper primary where pupils are not proficient in letter-word recognition.
Self Assessment Test 1.
Explain briefly with examples how you would use -1.
Picture clues.
2.
Phonetic clues 3. context clues to teach reading.
3.3 Development of the ability to use the Dictionary Dictionaries are valuable tools to use when reading.
It can help a reader to get correct meaning and pronunciation of words.
When using other word attack skills has produced no useful results, the child should turn to the dictionary for help.
Before a child can use the dictionary well, he must be able to locate words with some ease.
That is, such a child must know the letters and alphabetical order.
He must have the ability to use guide words as well as be able to locate word roots and their variants.
Skills in the use of the dictionary can be developed in the primary school.
A dictionary provides different meanings according to the different usages of a word.
It also gives information on parts of speech, various word forms, pronunciation, idiomatic expressions and phonetic symbols.
91A program for the development of such skills must be gradual, systematic and adapted to the level at which particular groups or individual children are operating.
It can be developed in exceptionally intelligent children in the primaries 3 and 4 but must be developed in upper primary pupils.
That is, the dictionary as a source for acquiring basic word recognition skill can be introduced during the early stages of learning to read.
The program of instruction in the use of the dictionary in the primary school should be designed to assist the pupils develop: a. an understanding that a word may have more than one meaning.
b. skill in recognizing alphabetical sequence in the arrangement of words.
c. ability to identify root words.
d. ability to use guide words.
Each of these is explained below – a.
Multiple meaning of words: Children are to be led to understand that different meanings may be associated with a given word form.
They are to be made to understand that a dictionary is a compilation of meanings of given word forms.
Picture dictionaries made by the children can be used effectively to show variant meanings.
For example, the word ‘band’ can be illustrated by having children draw a picture of a band around a hat s Hat band - band of musicians - the pupils may draw or bring a picture of a band of musicians.
A sentence/phrase which illustrates the particular use of a picture should be placed at the bottom of each picture.
Teacher can also write sentences on the chalkboard to illustrate that a simple word form may have different meanings.
For example: 1.
This is my right hand.
2.
He gave the right answers.
3.
You have a right to do it.
(Crow et al, 1968) b.
The Recognition of Alphabetical Sequence.
To be able to use a dictionary, children need to learn the meaning of alphabetical sequence.
They also need to learn how to use this sequence.
This is because the words in a dictionary are arranged in alphabetical order.
To locate information in a dictionary, the pupils need to be able to open it at the page needed or the one nearest to the first letter of the word they seek.
This knowledge will enable them know that the letter ‘A’ will be located at the beginning of the dictionary while letter ‘Z’ would be found towards the last pages.
This also applies to words.
For example, the word – 92add-will come before the word – any, and the word – cab will come before the word – can.
The following activities can help pupils master the skills: .
Teacher say and have the children repeat the letter names until they learn them e.g.
A a, B b, C c, D d, etc.
.
Write letters in alphabetical order and ask children questions that will require them to know order relations e.g.
which letter comes before J, F, C?
which one comes after N, D,W?
.
Write letters in non alphabetical order on chalkboard and have the child- ren arrange them alphabetically.
e. g. b, m, e, a, I, o, y.
The teacher can teach pupils alphabetical order as in the above samples.
This will make it easier for them to locate words in the dictionary.
To illustrate this, the teacher can write two words on the board for the pupils.
For example- Cab, Cabin.
The teacher now leads the pupils to open the dictionary to the page where letter C begins.
Start by explaining that alphabetically letter a is followed by b.
Therefore in locating the words - cab, cabin, the pupils should look for c, then work out which should come first among the two.
c. Identification of Root Words.
Root words are the base words from which variants and derivations are obtained e.g.
donate (root word)-donating, donations (derivations).
A root word forms a meaningful unit to which suffixes and prefixes can be added.
For example - boy+s = boys, jump+ing = jumping, slow+ly = slowly, etc.
This skill can be taught at the mid and upper primary classes and is very useful in aiding pupils locate words and their derivatives in the dictionary.
d. The Use of Guide Words.
The dictionary provides guide words at the top of its pages.
This enables the pupils to easily locate the required word either close to the top or towards the bottom of the page.
Note that when you open the pages of the dictionary, the guide word at the top of the left page is the word that comes first on that page while the guide word at the top of the right page is the last word at the bottom of that page.
Knowing this enables the pupils find where the word they are trying to locate may be found within the range of these guide words.
Knowledge of the location of guide words reduces stress, frustration and time a pupil would have otherwise expended in searching for words in the dictionary.
Mid and upper primary pupils should be taught to use guide words.
3.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to the various methods by which you can develop word perception skills in your pupils to enable them comprehend better when reading.
Reading with 93understanding is the cornerstone of success in school and in the larger society.
The development of these word recognition skills as discussed in this unit will serve as the basis for the ability to read well and enjoy it.
4.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the: .
development of sight vocabulary .
development of the ability to use phonetic, picture and context clues to identify and recall printed words.
.
development of the ability to use dictionary skills to facilitate learning to read by children.
5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain briefly three sources from which a teacher can select words for a child’s sight vocabulary.
2.
Pick out five words with corresponding pictures and explain how you would teach primary 2 pupils the recognition of these words.
3.
Select three words with multiple meanings and ask your primary 6 pupils to illustrate their meaning by using them in context.
Write out the meaning you expect for each of these words.
4.
React to this statement: “I do not believe in teaching children to use context clues, it only produces a group of guessers” 5.
Name with appropriate referencing two standard dictionaries that you will recommend for primary school pupils.
6.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Burns, C.P., Roe, B.D.
(1980).
Teaching Reading in Today’s Elementary Schools.
U.S.A. Houghton Mifflin Co. pp.77 - 82 Crow, L.D., Murray, W.I., Bloom, I.
(1968).
Teaching Language Arts in the Elementary School.
N.Y. David Mckay co. pp.56 – 57, 77-78 94 UNIT 3 DEVELOPMENT OF INTERPRETATION SKILLS - 1.
CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Developing ability to identify main ideas 3.2 Developing ability to identify related ideas 3.3 Developing ability to locate specific information 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn the methods and strategies for teaching your pupils interpretative skills.
These are skills that enable the reader to comprehend not just words and symbols but the information the writer is communicating in the text.
This is the ultimate purpose for reading.
Comprehension of a text/written material by learners is made possible only through systematic instruction.
The skills to be treated include – identifying main ideas, identifying related ideas and locating information.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is expected that at the end of this unit, you would be able to .
select an appropriate short passage to teach children main and detailed ideas.
.
teach pupils to differentiate between main ideas and related ideas .
list and describe activities you can use to teach pupils to identify the main ideas in a reading matter.
.
ask questions that will lead pupils to locate specific information in the text.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Developing the Ability to Identify Main Ideas 95You should teach children that every written selection contains a main idea and that the main idea in a text could be in the title of a story.
Teach them also that the main idea(s) in a story could be found in the first paragraph or any other paragraph in the text depending on the writer’s style.
Explain to pupils that identifying main ideas requires that one reads a given passage carefully to understand what it is about and that when asked about what they have read, they are not to relate all they have read cover to cover.
What is needed most times are the main idea(s) or main points.
When teaching pupils to get main ideas from passages read, you can help them by asking questions as shown below – - What is the passage about?
- Can you suggest a title for this passage?
- What is the writer of the passage trying to point out?
- What do all the facts have in common?
- What does the passage centre on/ what is the central message of this text?
Impress upon your pupils that when they read, they do so to get the general impression, outstanding points, central theme/topic, writer’s message, etc.
All passages are usually built around some subject matter, i.e.
the topic or the main idea which the passage is talking about.
For example, this excerpt about the decision of Atinuke’s mother- Atinuke’s mother is unhappy.
She has two parties to attend on the same day.
One is her brother’s wedding and the other is her sister in-law’s birthday.
She planned to buy them presents but she cannot make up her mind about which party to attend.
(Note that the topic sentence is the unhappiness of Atinuke’s mother) A useful technique for locating main idea(s) is to look for the topic sentence.
The topic sentence states the main point.
Other sentences are used to expand the topic sentence i.e.
these point to and make allusions/references to the main idea.
These other sentences revolve round the main idea by making illustrations, parallel statements and allusions.
Through this, one can detect the main idea.
In addition to the above strategies, the readers’ purpose of reading a particular text and the heading of a text could also lead to the detection of main ideas.
Here are some activities you can use to develop children’s skills for finding main ideas.
a.
Have the children read an entire story and either selects the best title from a list of possible titles or give of a title on their own.
b.
Give the children copies of newspaper articles without titles.
Write the titles on the board and let them match articles with titles.
Take the passage below as a case study for teaching identification of main ideas.
ADIRE 96Teacher to class: Before reading, look at the photograph.
What can you see?
Can you tell what the material in the picture is called?
Adire is a traditional cloth made by Yoruba women in western Nigeria.
An indigo dye is used which gives the cloth its special blue color.
A number of different ways of creating the designs are used- one of which is the tie and dye.
(Premier English for Nigerian Primary Schools, bk 5 p 4) Using appropriate questions, lead pupils to note that the main idea of this paragraph is the making of Adire cloth.
Explain to them that it is the main idea because all the sentences in the paragraph centre on the making of Adire.
Questions that would elicit correct answers and help pupils identify the main idea should be framed in such a way to focus attention on the main idea of the story.
For example, you can ask these questions about Adire to help them get the main idea – Give the passage a title.
What is the passage about?
How is Adire made?
In what colour is Adire usually made?
Using a variety of short questions such as the above ask the children questions and guide them to give answers in one or two sentences.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Select a reading passage of about two paragraphs from a primary 3 course book and ask four questions to teach pupils how to locate main ideas.
2.
Ask pupils in primary five to read four literature books and give the main ideas in each.
3.2 Developing the ability to Identify Related Ideas Stories are made whole by ideas and information that are connected.
Children should receive assistance in identifying ideas that are related to the topic/theme in the story.
You do this by asking questions which will require the children to discover related information to the main ideas of the story.
These are supporting 97details built around the main idea.
The pupils have to connect information or ideas between sentences and between paragraphs.
Teach this by asking questions in which the answer is the result of seeing the relationship between parts of the passage.
These parts may be close together or far apart.
After pupils have answered the questions, discuss them in the class to facilitate their understanding of how the connections were made.
Below are examples of such questions based on the passage on Adire.
1.
Where is Adire cloth traditionally made?
2.
What type of dye is used in making it?
3.
Are there other methods of making Adire apart from the tie and dye method?
(Coates, N. Premier English for Nigerian Primary Schools, Book 5).
Another example.
IN TROUBLE AGAIN It was Akon’s day to wash the plates.
She took out all the plates, cups, glasses and pots.
While doing the washing up, a fly came buzzing in her ear.
As she tried to hit it with one hand, a plate in the other hand dropped and crashed.
It broke into many pieces.
Mrs Bassey, Akon’s mother, came running out of the kitchen.
She shouted at Akon, saying, “You bad girl, you have broken a plate again.”Akon ran off so that her mother would not beat her.
Akon tried to tell her it was an accident but her mother wouldn’t listen.
Mrs Bassey sent Akon to bed without supper.
What was Akon to do on that day?
What caused Akon to drop the plate?
Why did she run away when her mother came from the kitchen?
What was Akon’s punishment?
Had Akon broken something before?
How do you know?
(Odejide et al, Macmillan New Primary English bk 3, p.73).
Note that the above questions would lead the pupils to see the connection or the relationship of ideas in the passage.
Here the connection of a buzzing fly in the ear which caused Akon to drop the plate is made.
The relationship of Mrs Bassey’s anger and the fact that Akon is known for breaking plates is also apparent.
This explains why Akon ran when her mother came out of the kitchen and her being punished.
Akon ran away because this was not her first time of breaking plates and knew she would be punished.
Self Assessment Exercise 981.
Select a one paragraph passage from a primary 5 course book and ask 3 questions that would teach pupils how to discover related information/supporting details to the main idea.
3.3 Developing the ability to Locate Information Children in the primary schools are to be taught to learn to read and also read to learn.
They should develop the ability to locate information as early as possible.
Recall that one of the purposes of reading discussed in module 1 is to look for specific information to add to one’s knowledge.
This is called scanning.
As soon as pupils can read, they should be taught how to use parts of a book such as the index, table of contents and how to read abbreviations.
Where there is a classroom library, you should guide pupils to make extensive use of the library resources.
Get the library stocked by the school, the PTA and donor agencies such as UNICEF, UNESCO and others with special materials such as dictionaries, encyclopedias, atlases.
All the above are sources of information available to the pupils.
These should be utilized in developing children’s ability to locate information.
You should explain to the children the functions of prefaces, tables of content, indexes, appendixes, glossaries and bibliographies.
Other materials that could be used to teach scanning information include newspapers, magazines, catalogs, dictionaries and brochures.
Skills for locating are important study skills.
To make effective use of dictionaries, would require you teach pupils the way words are arranged in alphabetical order and how to locate the second and third letters of a word, how to locate a word without page to page opening of the dictionary, how to check for spellings they do not know and the meaning of new unfamiliar words.
In addition, you should teach pupils aids for locating information which exist in textbooks, storybooks and reference books.
Most books offer features that are helpful for locating needed information.
These include introduction/prefaces, table of content, indexes, appendices, glossaries and summaries.
Again, teach children how to locate information in books by looking at its major features and parts through the following – Title Author’s name Publisher and date of publication Table of content Index The blurb.
99Teach the children that these parts are provided in a book to give useful information as well as guide the reader.
For example, the blurb gives information about the author at a glance.
This is usually found at the back cover of a book.
Table of content: this can be examined on the first day the book is to be used.
Teach your pupils that the table of contents tells readers the topics discussed in the book and the pages where they can be found.
This saves readers the effort of going through the entire book before locating the needed section/chapter.
Below is an outline by Burns and Roe (1980) on what you can do to teach pupils how to use the table of contents to locate vital information – Teacher: Class, open your books at page I (table of contents), the topics covered in the book are in how many chapters/headings?
Class: Seven chapters.
Teacher: what is the topic of the first chapter and the topic of the fifth chapter?
Teacher: On what page do we have the topic on ‘Family ties?’ and so on.
Doing the above, will teach them how to locate information they are searching.
Information from encyclopedia An encyclopedia gives and explains facts.
It gives information about various subjects, objects, people, places, events, animals and phenomena.
It is usually published in volumes, having several books dealing with same subject.
An encyclopedia is like a dictionary in that the words, names of events or objects are arranged in alphabetical order.
Information from Newspapers For locating information in newspapers, teach pupils the importance/functions of headlines, how to use newspaper index and journalistic terms such as news stories, editorials, features, etc.
You can use these questions to sensitise them to locating information from newspapers.
The following is based on the Punch Newspaper of 7th January, 2011.
What is the headline of today’s newspaper?
– Bomb Scare in Lagos Where in the paper would you find information on education?
– page 38 On what pages do you have obituaries?
–Pages 59- 61, etc.
Self Assessment Exercise.
1.
List three materials you can use to teach children to locate information and design an activity to lead children to locate information in each material.
100 4.0 CONCLUSION You have been taught the skills your pupils need to identify main.
You were taught the comprehension skills your pupils should master.
These include identifying main ideas, relating details and locating specific information.
These are important reading skills which form part of their study skills which are needed for studying all school subjects.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught you the strategies to use to develop in your pupils the ability to - .
identify main ideas .
identify related ideas .
locate information.
In the next unit, you will learn ways of teaching primary school pupils other forms of interpretative skills.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Take a passage from a primary 5 literature book, read it and give the purpose of the writer and the main idea in one or two sentences.
2 .
State three kinds of information pupils can locate in a dictionary.
3.
List 5 features that can aid someone locate information in a book.
4.
Explain the procedure you would need to teach pupils to locate information in a dictionary.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Betts, E. A.
(1954).
Foundation of Reading Instruction.
N.Y. American Book Co. pp.445-454 Burns, C.P., Roe, B. D. (1980).
Teaching Reading in today’s Elementary School.
USA.
Houghton Mifflin Co. pp.
120 – 133, 241 - 246 Coates, N. (2009).
Premier English for Nigerian Primary Schools, book 5.
Oxford.
Macmillan.
pp.
4,13 Odejide, Osisanwo, Bajah (2010).
Macmillan New Primary English Book 3.
Lagos.
Macmillan Nigeria Publishers.
p.73 UNIT 4 DEVELOPMENT OF INTERPRETATIVE SKILLS 2 CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 101 3.1 Developing the ability to draw conclusions 3.2 Developing the ability to arrange ideas, events in sequence 3.3 Developing the ability to follow instructions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The previous unit taught you how to develop certain interpretative skills for reading.
This unit will teach you more of such skills and these are the ability to – a. draw conclusions b. arrange ideas c. follow instructions and infer information.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to .
state the skills a reader needs to be able to draw conclusions .
guide pupils to arrange ideas/events in a sequence .
teach pupils how to read and follow instructions.
.
teach pupils how to read between the lines to infer information.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Developing the ability to draw conclusions The ability to draw conclusions depends upon how well a child can relate significant details of a story with his experiential background.
Children should be taught to draw conclusion from information gathered.
To have children draw correct conclusions from reading materials, the teacher should devise ample opportunities and exercises for their training.
Below are some examples.
Example 1.
Sadia is fat because she eats a lot.
Her siblings always tease her whenever they go shopping for clothes.
CONCLUSION: Sadia may not find shopping enjoyable.
2.We need water to live.
We use it for so many things like drinking, cooking, washing and watering crops.
Water is also a source of power used to make electricity.
CONCLUSION: Water is a. everywhere 102 b. important to us c. source of electricity.
(adapted from Premier English for Nigerian schools by Coates, N. pupil’s book 5).
Example 2.
You may write a short story on the chalkboard and ask questions, e.g.
– a.
“The old man stood at the street corner shivering in his threadbare old clothes selling kola nuts.” To teach pupils how to draw conclusions, you may ask them – why is the man dressed the way he did?
ANSWER: because he was - a. old b. poor c. cold.
b.
In the lower primary school, riddles may help children draw conclusions.
E.g.
I have a face, two hands and I go tick-tock.
What am I?
ANSWER: a clock.
(Burns &Roe, 1980).
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Write out three reading exercises you can give primary 4 pupils to train them to draw conclusions.
3.2 Developing the ability to arrange ideas, events sequentially As soon as children in your class can read stories with life like incidents, they should be taught to relate incidents sequentially.
That is, teach them how to accurately relate the order in which events occurred.
You can help the children by asking questions such as “what happened first?” “what happened next?
Another method a teacher can use to develop this ability in pupils is oral discussion and group planning of things to be done.
This often requires activities to be arranged in sequential order.
That is, give the children the opportunity to arrange their own experience reports in logical and chronological order.
This will help them develop a sense of sequence.
You can also use the following to develop a sense of sequence in the pupils.
This involves giving them directions that require step by step implementation as shown below: a. i. give simple directions for playing familiar games ii.
give directions to travel to certain parts of the school building.
iii.
give directions for making simple toys, pots – e.g to make a pot, get your clay and water.
Mix the clay and water to a consistency that is neither too soft nor too hard.
Then mould the pot to your design starting with the base (bottom) and work up to the neck and cover.
Then you will leave it to dry before baking it in a fire.
b.
Give directions on how to tie and dye cloth e.g.
i.buy a piece of white cloth and the dyes you need ii.
wash the cloth and let it dry iii.
tie the string tightly around the cloth to stop the dye coloring the tied areas 103 iv.
prepare the workspace by covering the floor and work surface with old newspapers v. wear rubber gloves when using dye and ask an adult to heat water and mix the dye in bowls vi.
put the tied cloth in the light dye for 5-8 minutes.
Stir from time to time with a stick, etc.
The above is a practical step by step arrangement of how to tie and dye cloth.
It shows what to do first, what follows next and so on.
c. Another useful exercise for teaching sequencing of events/actions is to ask pupils to make order out of a jumble of ideas.
INSTRUCTION: Rearrange the following sentences by putting them in the order they should follow to help you write about the topic “My Best Friend”.
a .
s h e i s ten years old b .
Ngozi’s father is a doctor c .
m y best friend’s name is Ngozi d .
s h e has short braided hair e .
s h e has three brothers and two sisters f .
s h e lives in Enugu g .
h e r mother is a nurse h .
Ngozi is tall and dark with beautiful eyes i .
s h e likes to wear colorful clothes (Coates, N., Premier English for Primary Schools, Book 5).
3.3 Developing the ability to follow instructions The ability to carry out instructions is a very important interpretative skill.
This skill should be inculcated in children during oral language activities long before they begin to read.
The teacher should ensure that children are able to execute simple, oral instructions.
Note that children vary in their abilities to carry out instructions which contain one or more steps.
In such a case, the teacher proceeds gradually and makes the instruction as simple as possible.
Examples of such simple oral instructions are – “close the door”, “sit down next to Yemi”, “bring your lunch box”, “write letter C”, “draw a cat”, etc.
When the children have learnt to carry out simple oral instructions and progress is made, you proceed to presenting them first with simple written instructions.
The ability to follow printed or written directions depends upon the extensiveness of the child’s ability to read connected texts made up of simple complete sentences.
He must be able to comprehend the words as well as the instructions they transmit.
For the teacher to help children develop this ability, instructions given to them during initial reading stage should be simple and clear.
It should contain only words, phrases and ideas they come across in oral language activities.
3.4.
Developing the ability to infer 104 Teaching pupils to infer is an important reading strategy.
A lot of times, the author may not say all he needs to in plain language.
That is, implied meaning is when one gets meanings which go beyond the words/sentences in a text.
This means that as a reader, you arrived at some meaning of the passage through inference or working out implications.
This is sometimes called reading between/beyond the lines.
This is a handy tool necessary for pupils to know so that they can discover hidden or implied meaning.
As a teacher, you should teach the children to see the implication behind words and sentences.
Ask questions in which the answer is not to be found literally in the passage, but where the answers can only come out plainly by the children interpreting the meaning of what is said in the passage.
Also, teach learners not to use their personal opinion in arriving at the answer.
It should be based on the content and context even when such answers are not immediately apparent.
To help pupils and to develop their ability to infer, you should give them ample practice with simple exercises such as the example below.
Example.
Adjou is in primary 6.He spends his time watching TV and playing video games.
One day, his examination result arrived.
His father was angry with him because-- a. Adjou did badly in his examination b. Adjou was going to college from primary 6. c. Adjou came first in his class.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Select a paragraph of about a page which contains implied information.
Ask two questions to test your pupils’ ability to identify implied meaning.
4.0.
CONCLUSION The main purpose of reading is to understand and add to knowledge.
The various interpretative skills needed to be developed in pupils to enable them function well in their academics and in the larger society as well as enjoy reading were highlighted.
These skills include the ability to follow instructions, arrange words/events in sequence, infer, etc.
To train your pupils to be proficient readers, they should be taught these skills as early as effectively as possible.
4.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt strategies for teaching three more important comprehension skills.
These include strategies for 105 .
drawing conclusions .
arranging ideas/events in sequence .
following and carrying out instructions.
.
implied information/idea.
5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What activities would you use to teach children to organize ideas/events sequentially?
2.
Write out the directions you would give a primary 5 pupil on how to go from the market in town to your school.
3.
Write instructions you would give primary 6 pupils on how a composition titled: My Last Holidays.
6.0 REFERENCS/FURTHER READINGS Burns, C.P., Roe, B.D.
(1980).
Teaching Reading in Today’s Elementary School.
USA.
Houghton Mifflin Co. p. 245 Coates, N. (2009).
Premier English for Nigerian Primary Schools, Book 5.
Oxford.
Macmillan.
p.13 UNIT 5 DEVELOPMENT OF SKILLS FOR READING IN THE CONTENT AREAS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Developing skills required for reading Social Studies 3.2 Developing skills required for reading Mathematics 3.3 Developing skills required for reading Literature 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 106 One of the ultimate purposes of learning to read is to read to learn.
Primary school pupils need to read well so they can apply their reading skills and abilities to reading to learn in the content areas such as science, mathematics, social studies and the arts.
Being able to read well in the subject matter areas will enable primary school children identify and solve problems in the respective subject areas.
Crow et al (1968) posit that “every child needs to learn the techniques required for the effective reading of the content subjects.
In the content areas, there is a progressive increase in difficulty of subject matter”.
The content area subjects also have specialized/peculiar registers.
This calls for a corresponding demand for improved reading skills.
Because of the uniqueness and peculiarity of each subject matter area, different reading approach is required for each subject.
As a primary school teacher, you must learn the appropriate strategies and techniques to use to teach your pupils how to read in the different school subjects.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to be equipped with the knowledge and skills that would enable you- .
teach pupils the skills for reading Social Studies, Mathematics and Literature.
.
teach your pupils skills and techniques for recognizing and using the special vocabulary and structures in a given subject area.
.
teach your pupils skills and techniques for recognizing and using the organizational patterns of a given subject.
.
select appropriate materials for teaching the reading of Mathematics, Social studies and Literature.
.
design exercises that would test pupils skills for reading Literature, Mathematics and Social Studies.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Developing skills required for reading Social Studies Social Studies is the study of the interactions between man and his physical environment.
Pupils should be taught Social Studies so that they understand what is involved as man interacts with his environment.
Since much of what is learnt in Social Studies is through reading printed materials, schools should equip primary pupils with skills that will enable them read and understand Social Study texts.
While reading Social Studies materials for instance, children can encounter technical terms as democracy, decade, century, politics, local government council, etc.
They may come across many words whose meanings in social studies material may be different from their meanings in general English usage.
For example, the word run, to run for political office means a different thing from to run a race.
When children first hear that a candidate is going to run for political office, they may picture a foot race or athletics meet.
This illusion may be furthered if they read that a candidate has decided to enter the race for chairman/ governor/ 107 president.
If the pupils can read well and are conversant with social studies register, they will know that the race to be run would not be on the athletics field.
Another important skill that pupils should be taught is organizational style of writing social studies materials.
They must be that social studies materials are usually organized by features such as cause and effect, temporal order of events, comparison, and/ or contrast, question and answer, main ideas and supporting derails and peculiar registers.
Major skills needed for reading social studies materials are - a. read and interpret maps, graphs, and other pictorial materials b. distinguish facts from opinions and propaganda, e.g.
in newspapers c. compare and contrast d. follow the sequence of events e. read for critical evaluation f. locate information g. analyze problems of organizations h. read to get the main ideas.
(Crow, Murray and Bloom,1968.
P. 117).
An important source of social studies material is the newspapers.
They allow children read about events as they happen.
Before using the newspaper to teach social studies guide children to locate information in them.
Children also need to be able to read maps as they appear with greater frequency in social studies.
Teach pupils to first examine the title of the map e.g Annual Rainfall in Nigeria.
Next, pupils can be taught how to determine directions on a map as well as the use of the four cardinal points which point to the East, West, North and South.
Interpretation of the map legend/key is also necessary as it contains an explanation of each of the symbol used on the map.
Unless a reader can interpret the legend/key, he or she will be unable to understand the information conveyed by the map.
For example, a legend may have a thick black line to indicate a major road on the map, a thin, blue meandering line to show a river and green plants to indicate vegetation.
See the example below- 108  The legend/key above gives useful information and guidance to anyone who needs to study the map for desired information about the town.
Self Assessment Test 1.
Draw the map of your town/village showing all the landmarks and make a legend/key which can be of assistance to a visitor studying the map to locate places in the town.
3.2 Developing skills required for reading Mathematics Mathematics is one of the core subjects needed by learners.
It is basic to studying science and technology and is a requirement for admission into higher institutions.
This is why primary school pupils should be taught how to read and understand mathematics symbols and problems.
According to Collier and Redmond (1974), mathematics material is very concise and abstract in nature and involves complex relationships.
There is a great deal of information per page and understanding each word is very important.
This is because one word may be the key to understanding an entire section.
Therefore, you should know that both computational and language skills are important in making mathematics lessons more comprehensible.
Young children have to learn terms and symbols like plus, minus, sum, subtraction, ft, lxb, <, >, +, -, x.
Older ones encounter terms such as diameter, perimeter, planes, etc.
To effectively read materials from Mathematics, a child must develop competence in the following skills.
109 .
ability to organize and classify facts .
ability to interpret data .
ability to read numbers, tables, graphs and other concise data .
ability to read to follow instructions .
ability to read to follow a sequence of steps in the solution of problems.
( Crow et al,1968) To help children read materials in mathematics, teach them the ability to organize and classify facts.
For example, ask them to organize, classify and sort a jumble of items such as balls, pencils, bottle tops, colours into sets.
Teach them also to read numbers and interpret tables, graphs and follow directions.
Use real life samples to teach mathematics symbols.
For example, squares can be taught with man-made objects such as window panes, boxes, pictures of boxes, etc.
Self Assessment Test 1.
List and explain four reading problems that primary school pupils may have learning Mathematics 2.
List and describe one reading activity you could use in dealing with each of the problem listed above.
3.3 Developing skills required for reading Literature In Literature, as is typical in all content areas, specialized phrases and vocabulary are used.
Examples of these include simile, metaphor, theme, characterization.
All these must be learnt before pupils can meaningfully participate in literary lessons.
Literature presents children with different meanings for words they use daily.
An example is the word plot.
In casual conversation, children may discuss a plot of land.
The meaning associated with this word will be of little help to students when discussing the plot of a short story.
Figurative language is used very much in Literature materials and could therefore be a barrier to understanding in literature.
Here are some examples of figures of speech: Simile (comparison using as or like) –She is as black as charcoal, the star twinkles like a diamond.
Metaphor (direct comparison without the use of like or as) – Tobi is a hare.
Hyperbole (extreme exaggeration) – his teeth are sharper than a razor.
Below is an example of an activity you can use to teach children figurative usage – a.
Ask pupils to choose from the options listed below the one that best explains this sentence – ‘The sun smiled down at the flowers’ 110  i. the sun was pleased with the flowers ii.
The sun shone on the flowers iii.
The sun smiled with his mouth.
b.
You can also give them poems which have figures of speech and ask them to write out the figures of speech e.g.
Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star How I wonder what you are, Up above the world so high, Like a diamond in the sky.
Here, you can use line 4 to teach them about simile.
Apart from teaching pupils special literary terminologies as described above, you should teach them that Literature can be in narrative form (prose), in lines and stanzas (poetry), in dialogues (drama).Teach them also the following skills - .
the ability to identify the purpose of the author .
the ability to form and react to sensory images .
the ability to interpret figurative, idiomatic and picturesque language .
the ability to identify a mood or tone in written discourse .
the ability to evaluate ideas .
the ability to anticipate outcomes.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Pick out a poem suitable for primary 6 pupils.
Ask them to read the poem and write out the figures of speech found in the poem.
2.
List some words that can be used in other settings as well as in Social Studies, and Literature.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has exposed you to the skills needed by primary school pupils for reading in different content areas such as Social Studies, Mathematics, and Literature.
These skills are needed by children to be able to read and understand terminologies and registers and organizational patterns in these subjects.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about- .
how to develop skills required for reading Social Studies .
.
how to develop skills needed for reading Mathematics .
how to develop skills required for reading Literature 111 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain why it is important that each child be taught the skills required for effective reading of content subjects.
2.
Select a passage from primary 5 social studies textbook and use it to teach three social studies terminologies.
3.
Select a poem from a primary 6 literature text and use it to teach two literary terminologies.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Burns, C.P., Roe, B.D.
(1980).
Teaching Reading in today’s Elementary School.
USA.
Houghton Mifflin Co. pp.276 - 290 Collier,C.
C. & Redmond, L.A.(1974).
‘Are You Teaching Kids to Read Mathematics?
The Reading Teacher.
pp 804-808 Crow, L.D., Murray, W.I., Bloom, I.
(1968).Teaching Language Arts in the Elementary School.
New York.
David Mackay Co. p. 126 UNIT 6 RESOURCES FOR TEACHING READING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 1.0 Objectives 2.0 Main Body 3.1 Developmental Reading Materials 3.2 Functional Reading Materials 3.3 Reading Materials for Recreation and Extension of Interest 3.0 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 6.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you were taught how to teach children to read the content subjects so as to derive maximum understanding and success in their school work.
This unit will teach you the resources you can 112 use to teach pupils how to read depending on the purpose of the reading.
In the primary school, children are engaged in four kinds of interrelated reading activities.
These are (1) Developmental reading (2).
Functional reading (3).
Recreational and (4) Research reading.
You will be taught the resources to use in teaching each of these four purposes of reading.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This unit will enable you to: .
Identify resources which can be used to teach children to read.
.
Select appropriate resources to teach reading at all levels of primary school.
.
List resources of teaching: developmental reading, functional reading, recreational reading and reading for research purposes.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1.
Developmental Reading Materials Developmental reading materials are those specially written and packaged for teaching reading skills.
One of the most commonly used developmental reading materials is the basal reading series.
In Nigeria, these are the primary school English learners textbooks.
The basal readers provide for continuous and sequential growth in reading skills, habits and attitudes.
The contents of basal readers include among others, stories about family life, food, shelter, communication, transportation and sports.
In addition, basal readers provide teachers’ manuals.
These contain teaching procedures, activities, suggestions, lists of materials and evaluation techniques.
Workbooks are also available.
If properly used, the workbook is a valuable teaching aid.
It also helps the child immensely in retention and doing follow-up of work done in the class.
It reinforces skills previously learnt in class.
The teacher should have at least two basal series for his classroom.
In Nigeria, examples include – Premier English for Nigerian Primary Schools, by Nick Coates (2009), Macmillan Primary English by Odejide, Osisanwo, Bajah,(2010).
Basal Readers have some advantages.
Topics covered are carefully graded in difficulty and the vocabulary is controlled with a planned repetition of words to enable children fix them in their memories.
Most basal readers deal with all phases of the reading programme.
These include – word study, comprehension, oral and silent reading, reading for information and for enjoyment, etc.
There is also systematic teaching of skills and systematic review of concepts and skills already taught.
There are also supplementary basal readers designed to provide materials for independent use by the children.
These readers are especially designed for children so as to help sustain and improve their reading interests.
3.2 FUNCTIONAL READING MATERIALS 113 Functional reading materials include varied materials of the content areas of the curriculum such as science and social studies.
These materials are designed to provide children with valuable resources which will enable them find information about different areas of life.
For example, if children want to find information about rivers and lakes in Nigeria, they can get this from maps of Nigeria and the legend on the maps.
Information about animals could be found from the encyclopedia of animals.
The information got from these materials can be used to answer questions and solve problems in social studies and other subjects.
The following materials are useful for developing children’s functional reading: a.
Magazines b. Encyclopedias c. Newspapers d. Pamphlets e. Maps f. Charts g. Graphs Self Assessment Exercise 1.
List 3 advantages of using basal readers and explain how you can use them to teach pupils in primary 5 how to read.
2.
List three resources you can use in teaching children functional reading.
3.3 Reading Materials for Recreation and Extension of Interest To help children develop a reading culture as well as enjoy reading as a recreational activity, the teacher should provide a stock of recreational reading materials.
This will help prepare the children for pleasure reading as well as satisfy their avid curiosity and interest.
In the primary school, there should be an abundance of different interesting materials for recreational reading.
These can be kept in the class or school library as supplementary readers.
Examples of these include literary texts such as – Chike and the River, No Supper for Eze, Eze Goes to School, the Greedy Nanny Goat, Lebari and the Wise Old Man.
Others are newspapers, magazines, cartoons, etc.
After ensuring there is enough reading materials available, the teacher should allow the children the freedom to select materials for recreational reading.
The reading materials should cover areas, such as poetry, drama, prose/stories, biography, information and current affairs.
When children are encouraged to read such materials, their literary tastes are developed.
Other useful materials a teacher can use in teaching children to read are: Word cards charts picture dictionaries 114 cross-word puzzles jig-saw puzzles calendars content radio and television programmes.
(Crow et al, 1968) 3.4 Materials for reading for research purposes Skills in doing research should be taught in primary school as a necessary skill for survival.
Reading for research is important.
Research reading is the careful reading/study of a subject/topic so as to discover new facts or information.
Materials for research reading include school text, dictionary, newspapers and journals, maps, encyclopedias, directories, biographies, etc.
Research reading can be done in the upper primary school classes.
Directories can be used to research and find out about industries, companies, street names or telephone numbers in a particular location.
They can also use the encyclopedia.
For general information, they can use the Encyclopedia Britannica and for particular information, the specialized Encyclopedia of say animal, honey, flowers, etc.
can be used.
You can ask pupils to research a given topic e.g.
honey.
Here they would need information on definition of honey, bees, production and process of honey, financial and nutritional gains of honey, etc.
To get all these, they need to search the dictionary, the encyclopedia and other relevant journals, newspapers for information with the teacher’s assistance.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Explain briefly the steps you would take to help children develop research reading skills.
4.0 CONCLUSION As a teacher you need to encourage a child’s reading.
This is seen as a catalyst to a child’s overall success in school.
The four kinds of reading which children should engage in to facilitate their reading to learn were treated and the materials to be used for inculcating these skills were discussed bringing to the forefront their importance and advantage to the reader.
5.0 SUMMARY We can summarize what we have learnt as follows: .
In the primary school, children engage in four kinds of reading.
.
Resources for teaching reading include: basal readers for developmental reading, those for functional and recreational reading and those for reading for research.
.
Supplementary readers are good for sustaining and improving children’s reading interests.
.
The materials suited for specific activities and which can facilitate children’s reading was highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT .
Explain how you would use the pupils’ workbook to do follow up and retention of work done in the class.
115 .
List with examples, three useful materials you can use to teach children how to read.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Burns, C.P., Roe, B.D.
(1980).
Teaching Reading in today’s Elementary School.
USA.
Houghton Mifflin Co. pp.
299 - 308 Crow, C.P.
Murray, W. I. Bloom, I.
(1968).
Teaching Language Arts in the Elementary School.
N.Y. David Mackay Co. pp.
84 -99 UNIT 7 EVALUATION OF READING SKILLS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Observation Techniques 3.2 Teacher Judgment 3.3 Standardized Tests 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Evaluation is forming an opinion about the value, quality or worth of something.
It is an assessment of how well a programme or enterprise is doing.
In the education system, evaluation is important.
This is because we need to know whether the goals and objectives of teaching are being achieved.
This information is needed by all stakeholders in the education sector.
Evaluation is used to monitor the progress of children and how well they have learnt or not.
It is usually carried out at the beginning, middle and end of programme.
Evaluation can be formal or informal.
It can be done through test, examination, observation or all.
It is for summative or formative purposes.
Tests are used mainly for formative purposes i.e.
to find out how well learners are doing during teaching.
Examinations are for summative purposes.
They are given at the end of term, semester or programme.
In this unit, we will talk about evaluation and types of evaluation in a reading programme.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to be able to: 116 .
explain briefly the concept of evaluation in reading .
mention the major forms of reading evaluation .
state the reasons for evaluating the reading growth of children.
3.0 MAIN BODY To carry out evaluation, teacher can use data from a lot of sources.
Some sources for evaluating reading progress in the primary schools are: (a) teacher assessment of children’s performance during instruction, and (b) observation of changes in appreciation, attitudes, interests and tastes.
Each of these is discussed below.
3.1 Teacher observation of changes in pupils’ reading.
A skilful teacher can utilize observational techniques which will disclose those behaviour traits that are considered important to the development of broad and wholesome reading interests in the child.
For example, when you make reading materials available and in abundance in your class, then you can observe and note the extent to which the children show interest in reading.
You can also observe each child to see if there are changes in his attitude, interests, tastes, etc.
as a result of what he has read.
You should also observe and note any difficulties pupils encounter while reading aloud.
For example, rate of comprehension and accuracy of reading.
You get information about these as it affects each pupil by asking relevant questions on the reading passage.
Pupils’ answers are indicators of difficulties encountered or otherwise, and the ratio of how well the children have comprehended.
Using oral reading technique, you can evaluate pupils’ reading ability in recognizing sight vocabulary and using strategies of unlocking unfamiliar words.
This kind of evaluation should be done more with beginning readers.
This is because it will afford the teacher clues to areas of instructional needs and also be an ego booster to beginning readers.
A competent teacher after working with a class for some months can identify the pupils who are high achievers.
Every day numerous clues related to reading performance levels are given the teacher.
For example, in the upper classes when a child gives an oral report or reads orally, the teacher has the opportunity to observe reading skills through asking oral questions and leading discussions.
The teacher can check pupils’ achievement by seeking answers to these questions - a. does the pupil grasp the main and supporting ideas of a selection?
b. can the pupil follow precise directions given in print?
c. can he relate ideas from various sources?, etc.
When informal evaluation procedures are continuous, (i.e when a teacher makes it a point of duty to always observe his pupils), patterns of strengths and weaknesses become more obvious.
Something can be learned each time the child reads aloud, use the workbook, reads silently for a given purpose, etc.
Though the information gathered in daily observation may not be easy to record, a 117 certain amount of record keeping is desirable.
Keep a folder for each pupil to file pupil’s performance and achievement.
(Burns and Roe, 1980 ) Self Assessment Test.
1.
Observation is a means of evaluation.
Observe your pupils in primary 4 during a reading lesson.
Identify three pupils with reading difficulties.
State their problems and explain how you would rectify the problems.
3.2 Teacher Assessment of pupils during instruction During reading instruction, you can assess pupils’ progress.
This can be done by asking each child to read a sentence or paragraph in passages in basal readers.
.
Then, the teacher asks questions the child is expected to answer.
This will reveal whether or not he understands what he has read.
At beginning instruction, you should assess learner’s comprehension by posing oral questions to which pupils respond.. As children acquire more reading skills, written questions should be used to appraise their level of comprehension.
To evaluate a child’s reading, the teacher should be aware of the levels of reading comprehension at which a child may be operating.
According to Betts (1954), a child may be reading at a basal, instructional, frustration or capacity level.
These are explained below: a. Basal level: this means that a child is able to read without any assistance.
He comprehends about 90% of the selection read and is able to pronounce practically every word in the selection.
b. Instructional level: In a reading selection, a child can comprehend approximately 75% of it.
c. Frustration level: At this level, a child is not ready to read.
He reads slowly and is unable to comprehend even one-half of the selection and fails to recognize words which he knows.
He displays tension and withdrawal tendencies.
d. The capacity level: This is the highest level at which a child is able to get meaning from a selection read to him.
(Betts, 1954) A knowledge of these levels makes it easier for the teacher to judge the reading growth and attainment of each child.
He can also identify the poor, average and good readers.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
What are the ways you can evaluate the reading growth of children?
4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 For any undertaking to be a success, it needs to be periodically analysed and reviewed.
In the primary school system which is mainly concerned with dealing with children, there is the need to 118 evaluate programmes so as to ascertain whether set goals and objectives are being met, gray areas detected and corrected with instructional methods/materials tailored to suit the class.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that: .
Evaluation is necessary in the educational system for determining the worth of programme as well as detecting problems.
.
There is formal and informal assessment.
.
To evaluate, a teacher can use observation technique as well as assessment of pupils during instruction.
.
Observation technique of assessment allow teacher note difficulties, problems and progress pupils make.
.
In beginning reading, oral questions can also be used to know pupils level of comprehension.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT .
List two kinds of evaluation you would use to test pupils’ progress in a Nigerian classroom.
.
State two forms of informal assessment and explain how you would use them in assessing your primary 2 pupils’ reading ability.
7.0 REFERENCS/ FURTHER READINGS Betts, E.A.
(1954).
Foundations of Reading Instruction.
N.Y. American Book Co. p375 Burns, C.P.
& Roe, B.D.
(1980).
Teaching Reading in today’s Elementary School.
USA.
Houghton Mifflin Co. pp.
341 - 385 Crow, L.D., Murray, W. I.
& Bloom, I.
(1968).
Teaching Language Arts in Elementary Schsool.
N.Y. David Macka 119
