UNDERSTANDING TOURISTS TSM 241 AND HOSTS Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE TSM241 COURSE GUIDE TSM241 UNDERSTANDING TOURISTS AND HOSTS Course Developer/Writer Dr. G. O. Falade National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Course Coordinator Mr. M. A. Gana National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE TSM241 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office National Open University of Nigeria 5, Dar Es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse 11 Abuja, Nigeria.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-041-7 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE TSM241 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction…………………………………………….
1 What You Will Learn in This Course…………………….
1 Course Aims…………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives……………………………………… 2 Working Through This Course………………………….. 2-3 Study Units…………………………………………….. 3 Assignment File………………………………………... 3-4 Final Examination and Grading……………………….. 4 Final Advice ……...…………………………………….
4 ivCOURSE GUIDE TSM241 Introduction TSM241: Understanding Tourists and Hosts is a first semester 200 level, two-credit course.
It is a required course for students doing the B.Sc.
Tourism Studies.
It may also e taken by any one who does not intend to do this programme but is interested in learning about the relationship between the host and the guests referred to respectively as the communities of the destination and the visitors they receive (tourists).
This course will give you an introduction to what usually transpires between the people of any community where visitors visits and the visitors themselves.
The course will consist of 11 units.
These will cover: Profiling Foreign Tourists, Domestic and International Tourists: Profile and Flow, Guests/Host relationships, Sociology and Anthropology of Tourism, Discovering a Town etc.
This Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, the course materials you will be using and how to work your way through the materials.
It suggests some general guide lines on the length of time you are likely to spend on each of the units in order to complete it successfully.
It also guides you on your Tutor-Marked Assignments.
It tells you about the Tutorial Classes which are linked to the course.
What You Will Learn in This Course In this course you will learn what is meant by profiling of tourists, the reasons behind profiling of tourists, you will learn about the specific characteristics analysed in profiling foreign tourists, you will know about international tourists flow and world tourist arrivals, the city tour, all about a museum and tourism development and operations.
Course Aims The aim of the course is to acquaint you with all necessary information about behavioural aspects of tourists generally.
This will be achieved by: * Introducing you to how tourism information is collected * Tourist flows * Guest – host interactions * Sociology and anthropology of tourism 1COURSE GUIDE TSM241 Course Objectives In order to achieve the aims set out above, the course has specific objectives.
If you can meet these objectives, then you have successfully completed the course.
The objectives of the course are its learning outcomes.
They are things you should be able to do by the time you complete the course.
By the time you complete the course, you should be able to: (a) know what is meant by meant by profiling of tourists (b) understand the reasons behind profiling of tourists (c) familiarise yourself with the needs of domestic tourists (d) understand the relevance of guest-host relationships (e) know the different situations in this regard (f) learn about the tension areas (g) understand what is meant by sociology of tourism (h) define the anthropology of tourism (i) appreciate the relevance in planning of tourism (j) details of conducting a city tour In addition, each of the units making up the course has specific objectives by which you can measure your own progress.
These are always set out at the beginning of the unit.
You are expected to read them carefully before moving on to the rest of the unit.
You are also expected to refer to them again after you have completed the unit.
In this way, you can be sure that you have done what is required of you in the unit.
Working Through This Course In order to complete this course, you are required to read all the study units as well as other available materials, which may be recommended by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
At the end of each unit, there is a list of further readings and other materials.
While it is not absolutely necessary for you to read them in order to complete the course successfully, it will be to your advantage if you can.
They are recommended for learners who wish to have a deeper understanding of the subject matter.
Each unit contains one or two self-assessment exercise(s)/question(s) by which you can assess your own progress.
At various points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
These are called Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs).
At the end of the course, there will be a final examination.
You will be expected to spend between one week and three weeks on each of the units.
However, you may find out that you have to spend more or less time on particular units because of their volume or level of 2COURSE GUIDE TSM241 difficulty or your own level of preparedness.
So do not be discouraged if you have to spend more time on any particular unit.
Study Units This course is made up of 11 units as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Profiling Foreign Tourists Unit 2 Domestic and International Tourists: Profile and Flow Unit 3 Guest- Host Relationships Unit 4 Sociology, Anthropology and Tourism Unit 5 Discovering a Town: Guide and the City tour Module 2 Unit 1 The National Theatre Unit 2 Development: Product and Operations Unit 3 Tourism Development: Products & Operations contd.
Unit 4 Tourism development: Products and Operations contd.
Unit 5 Tourism Development: Products and Operations contd.
Unit 6 Tourism Development: Products and Operations contd.
Assignment File The assignment file will be made available to you, there you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marks.
The marks you obtain for this assignment will count towards the final mark you will obtain for this course.
Any further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file.
Assignments will normally attract 40%.
Addition of the assignment and the final examination adds up to 100%.
The assignment policy of the university as stated in the student hand book should be observed.
Application for extension (if need be) should be submitted to the tutor.
If the assignment is posted to the tutor, it is the responsibility of the student to check with his/her tutor to confirm the receipt of such assignment so posted.
As a precaution, you are advised to keep a copy of each assignment you submit.
Below are some salient points that could be of help to you, while working through this course.
(1) Read the course guide thoroughly (2) Organize a study schedule.
Note the time you are expected or should end on each unit and how the assignment relate to the units.
3COURSE GUIDE TSM241 (3) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that student fail is that they get behind with their course work.
(4) Review the objectives for each study to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
(5) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of tourism will be question papers of 2-3 hours duration and has a value of 60%.
All areas of the course will be examined.
As a result, it is very important you read through and through the whole course material as many times as possible as mere permutation may disappoint you.
Final Advice Organize how to manage your time.
Do everything to stick to it.
The major reason a lot of students fail is that they take things for granted, only to be rushing unnecessarily towards examination period.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, do not waste time to let your tutor know before it will be too late to help you.
When you are confident and satisfied that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then move on to the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course, pacing your studies and making the whole exercises easy for yourself.
Good Luck.
Enjoy your reading.
4
