COMMERCIAL RECREATION TSM 347 MANAGEMENT Course GuideCOURSE CODE TSM347 COURSE GUIDE TSM347 COMMERCIAL RECREATION MANAGEMENT Course Developer/ Writer Dr. G. O. Falade National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator Abdullahi S. Araga National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos iiCOURSE CODE TSM347 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Office NOUN Building 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse 11 Abuja, Nigeria.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-029-8 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE CODE TSM347 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………… 1 Assignment File…………………………………….
1 Course Material …………………………………… 1-2 Working through this Course……………………….
2 Tutor-Marked Assignment ………………………….
2 Final Exam and Grading…………………………… 3 Summary ………………………………………….. 3 ivCOURSE CODE TSM347 Introduction Commercial Recreation Management discusses all issues concerning recreation and leisure.
Some of the units discuss children’s play, play and its effects on individual’s life, as well as the importance of play for the children of today.
You will also come across debate regarding people’s needs and leisure and factors that influence leisure participation like an individual’s, lifestyle, his economic capability, age and family commitment.
Assignment File The assignment file will be made available in the file; you will find the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final score you obtain for this course.
Any further information on assignment will be found in the assignment file.
Assignment will normally attract 40% of the final grade, while the final exam also attracts 60%.
Addition of the assignments and final exam add up to 100%.
The assignment policy of the University as stated in the student’s handbook should be observed.
Application for extension should be submitted to the tutor.
If the assignment is posted to the tutor, it is the responsibility of the student to cheek with his/her tutor to confirm the receipt of such assignment.
As a precaution you are advised to keep a copy of each assignment you submit.
At the end of every 4 units, i.e., at the end of module 1 units 4, module 2 unit 4, etc, you should turn in answers of the assignment in order to be very systematic in following the instruction as stated in the course material.
Course Material Module 1 Unit 1 Recreation and Leisure Unit 2 Children play: Foundation of Leisure.
Unit 3 Play and the Meaning of Life.
Unit 4 The Importance of Play for Children Today.
Module 2 Unit 1 People’s Needs and Leisure Unit 2 Factors that Influence Leisure Participation Unit 3 The ‘Pleasure Principle’ Content Unit 4 Government, the Public Sector and Leisure 1COURSE CODE TSM347 Module 3 Unit1 Leisure Provision in the Voluntary Sector Unit 2 Leisure provision in the Commercial Sector Working Through this Course Before you can be satisfied that indeed you have completed the course, you ought to have read through all the study units contained therein.
In addition, read the set books and other materials provided by the University – The National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at certain points in the course, you are supposed to submit assignment for assessment purpose, especially the Tutor-Marked Assignment TMA.
At the end of the course there will be final examination to test your mastery of the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs) There are Tutor–Marked Assignments in this course.
You are strongly advised to attempt and submit all assignments.
Each assignment counts towards your total course mark.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a TMA form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment you turn in reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given.
If for any genuine reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension for you.
Extension will not be granted after the due date unless in exceptional circumstances backed up with good reason.
Below are some salient points that could be of help to you, while working through this course: 1.
Read the Course Guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Note the time you are expected or should spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
4. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
5.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
2COURSE CODE TSM347 Final Exam and Grading The final examination of Commercial Recreation Management will be a paper of 2½ -3 hour’s duration and has a value of 60% as formerly stated of the total course grade.
All areas of the course will be examined.
As a result, it is very important you read through and through the whole course material as thoroughly as possible as mere permutation may disappoint you.
You might find it useful to review all the self- assessment tests, TMA assignments and comments on them before the exam period.
Summary Organize how to manage your time.
Do every thing to stick to it.
The major reason a lot of students fail is that they take things for granted and procrastinate, only to be rushing unnecessarily during exam period.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, do not waste time to let your tutor know before it will be too late to help you.
When you are confident and satisfied that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then move on to the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course, pacing your studies and making the whole exercise easy for yourself.
Good luck as you enjoy your reading.
3
