 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: JLS 842 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO WEB PUBLISHING 1 MAIN WORK JLS 842 INTRODUCTION TO WEB PUBLISHING COURSE TEAM COURSE WRITER Ezekiel S. Asemah Department of Mass Communication Kogi State University Anyigba Kogi State.
+234-803-5053-713 asemahezekiel@yahoo.com CONTENT EDITOR Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria Victoria island, Lagos +234-806-9395-473 aliedej@yahoo.com HEAD OF UNIT Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria Victoria island, Lagos +234-806-9395-473 aliedej@yahoo.com 2 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.5 Dares Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria, 2013 First Printed 2013 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by 3 CONTENTS PAGE MODULE 1: GENERAL INTRODUCTION 1 Unit 1: The Meaning and Definitions of Publishing/ Web 1 Unit 2: The Internet and the Web 7 Unit 3: Understanding Web Publishing 15 MODULE 2: MATERIALS PUBLISHED ON WORLD WIDE WEB 23 Unit 1: E-Books 23 Unit 2: E-Journals 39 Unit 3: Online Newspapers/Magazines 50 Unit 4: Functions of Online Publications 56 MODULE 3: LAWS OF WEB PUBLISHING 66 Unit 1: Understanding the Meaning of Law 66 Unit 2: .
Various Web Publishing Laws 71 MODULE 4: ETHICS OF WEB PUBLISHING 92 Unit 1: Understanding the Concept of Ethics 92 Unit 2: Ethical Principles 97 Unit 3: Ethical Values 101 4 JLS 842: MODULE 1 MODULE 1 GENERAL INTRODUCTION Unit 1: The Meaning and Definitions of Publishing/ Web Unit 2: Internet and the Web Unit 3: Understanding Web Publishing UNIT 1 MEANING AND DEFINITIONS OF PUBLISHING/ WEB CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of publishing.
3.2 Understanding Web as a Concept 3.3 History of Web Publishing 3.4 Characteristics of Web 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The term “publishing” in the broadest sense means making something publicly known.
Historically, it came to refer to the issuing of printed materials, such as books, magazines, periodicals, and the like; it now also encompasses issuing such materials in an electronic form.
There is, however, great latitude of meaning, because publishing has never emerged, and cannot emerge, as a profession completely separate from printing on the one hand and the retailing of printed matter on the other.
Publishing has become mandatory because knowledge has to disseminated to people across boundaries and frontiers.
Through publishing, knowledge is created and transferred to several persons.Through publishing, people are educated, informed, socialised and entertained.
In this unit therefore, we are going to examine publishing and web.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Understand the meaning of publishing 5  Understand the meaning of Web  Trace the history of web  Identify the characteristics of web 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1.
The Meaning of Publishing Publishing is simply referred to as the business or profession of the commercial production and issuance of literature, information, musical scores or sometimes, recordings or art; it is the process of production and dissemination of literature, music or information.
The foregoing implies that publishing is the activity of making information available to the general public.
In some cases, authors may be their own publishers, meaning, originators and developers of content also provide media to deliver and display the content for the same.
Traditionally, the term refers to the distribution of printed works such as books and newspapers.
With the advent of digital information systems and the Internet, the scope of publishing has expanded to include electronic resources, such as the electronic versions of books and periodicals, as well as micropublishing, websites, blogs, video game publisher and the like.
Thus, publishing includes the stages of the development, acquisition, copy editing, graphic design, production – printing and its electronic equivalent and marketing and distribution of newspapers, magazines, books, literary works, musical works, software and other works dealing with information, including the electronic media.
The foregoing implies that publishing is any means of making information available to the public.
The publishing industry encompasses book, magazine, newspaper and digital publishing, 3.2.
Understanding Web as a Concept The World Wide Web, commonly referred to as web or website,is a system of interlinked hypertext documents accessed via the Internet.
With a web browser, one can view web pages that may contain text, images, videos and other multimedia and navigate between them via hyperlinks.A Website is a set of related web pages served from a single web domain.
A website is hosted on at least one web server, accessible via a network, such as the Internet or a private local area network through an Internet address known as a Uniform resource locator.
All publicly accessible websites collectively constitute the World Wide Web.As noted by Mitchel (n.d), the World Wide Web consists of all the public Websites connected to the Internet worldwide, including the client devices, such as computers and cell phones, that access Web content.
The WWW is just one of many applications of the Internet and computer networks.
WEBOPEDIA (n.d) states that a web is a system of Internet servers that support specially formatted documents.
The documents are formatted in a markup language 6 called HTML (HyperText Markup Language) that supports links to other documents, as well as graphics, audio and video files.
3.3.
History of Web In 1980, Tim Berners-Lee, an independent contractor at the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN), Switzerland, built ENQUIRE, as a personal database of people and software models, but also as a way to play with hypertext; each new page of information in ENQUIRE had to be linked to an existing page.In 1984 Berners-Lee returned to CERN, and considered its problems of information presentation: physicists from around the world needed to share data, and with no common machines and no common presentation software.
He wrote a proposal in March 1989 for "a large hypertext database with typed links", but it generated little interest.
His boss, Mike Sendall, encouraged Berners-Lee to begin implementing his system on a newly acquired NeXT workstation.He considered several names, including Information Mesh, The Information Mine (turned down as it abbreviates to TIM, the WWW's creator's name) or Mine of Information (turned down because it abbreviates to MOI which is "Me" in French), but settled on World Wide Web(Wikipedia, n.d).
He found an enthusiastic collaborator in Robert Cailliau, who rewrote the proposal (published on November 12, 1990) and sought resources within CERN.
Berners-Lee and Cailliau pitched their ideas to the European Conference on Hypertext Technology in September 1990, but found no vendors who could appreciate their vision of marrying hypertext with the Internet (Wikipedia, n.d).
By Christmas 1990, Berners-Lee had built all the tools necessary for a working Web: the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 0.9, the HyperText Markup Language (HTML), the first Web browser (named WorldWideWeb, which was also a Web editor), the first HTTP server software (later known as CERN httpd), the first web server (http://info.cern.ch), and the first Web pages that described the project itself.
The browser could access Usenet newsgroups and FTP files as well.
However, it could run only on the NeXT; Nicola Pellow therefore created a simple text browser that could run on almost any computer called the Line Mode Browser.
To encourage use within CERN, Bernd Pollermann put the CERN telephone directory on the web — previously users had to log onto the mainframe in order to look up phone numbers.
According to Tim Berners-Lee, the Web was mainly invented in the Building 31 at CERN ( 46.2325°N 6.0450°E ) but also at home, in the two houses he lived in during that time (one in France, one in Switzerland).
In January 1991 the first Web servers outside CERN itself were switched on (Wikipedia, n.d).
The first web page may be lost, but Paul Jones of UNC-Chapel Hill in North Carolina revealed in May 2013 that he has a copy of a page sent to him in 1991 by Berners-Lee which is the oldest known web page.
Jones stored the plain-text page, with hyperlinks, on a floppy disk and on his NeXT computer.
7 On August 6, 1991, Berners-Lee posted a short summary of the World Wide Web project on the alt.hypertext newsgroup.
This date also marked the debut of the Web as a publicly available service on the Internet, although new users only access it after August 23.
For this reason this is considered the internaut's day.The WorldWideWeb (WWW) project aims to allow all links to be made to any information anywhere.
The WWW project was started to allow high energy physicists to share data, news, and documentation.
We are very interested in spreading the web to other areas, and having gateway servers for other data (Wikipedia, n.d).
Paul Kunz from the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center visited CERN in September 1991, and was captivated by the Web.
He brought the NeXT software back to SLAC, where librarian Louise Addis adapted it for the VM/CMS operating system on the IBM mainframe as a way to display SLAC’s catalog of online documents; this was the first web server outside of Europe and the first in North America.
The www-talk mailing list was started in the same month.An early CERN-related contribution to the Web was the parody band Les Horribles Cernettes, whose promotional image is believed to be among the Web's first five pictures (Wikipedia, n.d).
3.4 Characteristics of Web The World Wide Web has inherent properties that characterise its expressive possibilities.
The characteristics of World Wide Web as identified by VITODIBARI.COM (n.d) are: 1.
Unbound in space/time: Information provided on the Internet is available every day, around the clock, and around the world, pending network operation.
2.
Bound in use of Context: Web-based hypertext fosters associations among works through links, giving rise to networks of meaning and association among many information sources that may be scattered across the globe and writtenby many authors.
3.
Distributed, non-hierarchical: The Web's technical organisation as an application using the Internet for a client/server model influences the disintegration of user focus on a single outlet for experiencing content.
4.
The Web is a platform:We have gone from installable software on our PC, to software-services that are accessible online.
All data and software is now available online.
5 The Web is functionality:The Web aids in the transfer of information and services from websites.
6.
The Web is simple: It facilitates the access and usage of web services using user- friendly interfaces.
8  7.
The Web is light:The models of development, the processes and the models of business become light.
The lightness is associated with the ability to share of information and services with ease and made possible through the implementation of intuitive modular elements.
8.
The Web is social:People create the Web, “populate the Web”, by socialising and gradually moving members from the physical world to the online world.
9.
The Web is flow: The users are seen as co-developers, while Web 2.0 remains in “perpetual beta”, where it remains at the beta development stage for an indefinite period of time.
10.
The Web is flexible:The software is on a more advanced level because it enables access to previously unavailable digital content.
This idea is similar to the Long Tail concept, which focuses on the less popular content that couldn’t previously be accessed.
11.
The Web is mixable:The expansion of codes in order to modify web applications allows individuals who are not necessarily computer professionals to mix different applications in order to create new ones.
12.
The Web is participatory:Web 2.0 has adopted a structure of participation that encourages users to enhance the application while they use it, instead of keeping it rigid and controlled.
13 The Web is in our hands:Its increased organisation and characterisation of information emphasises its user-friendly interaction through deep linking.Thanks to phenomena such as social tagging, information is always more and more easily available (VITODIBARI.COM, n.d).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a.
Publishing has to do with passing messages to a large audience.
Discuss b.
The web is unbound in space and time; what are the other characteristics of web?
4.0 Conclusion Publishing is a means through messages are carried to a large audience.
Books, newspapers, magazines and journals are often published thereby, passing information across to the audience-members.
As the popularity of the Internet increases, people become more aware of its colossal potential.
The World-Wide Web (WWW) is a product of the continuous search for innovative ways of sharing information resources.
People have dreamt of a universal information database since late nineteen forties.
In this database, not only would the data be accessible to people around the world, but it would 9 also easily link to other pieces of information, so that only the most important data would be quickly found by a user.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we examined publishing as a concept, looking at several definitions; Publishing is seen as the communication of information through newspapers, magazines, books, journals, and through digital means.
The unit also examines web as a concept.
The unit also appraises the historical genesis of web and the characteristics of web.
It is therefore imperative for readers to be able to understand the concept of publishing, web and history of publishing 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assessment a.
Briefly explain the meaning of publishing b.
What do you understand by the concept “web”?
c. Trace the history of web d. Elaborately discuss the characteristics of web 7.0 References/ Further Reading VITODIBARI.COM (n.d).
The characteristic of web: The Internet has changed, have you?.http://www.vitodibari.com/en/ten-characteristics-web-20-internet- changed.html WEBOPEDIA (n.d).
World Wide Web http://www.webopedia.com/TERM/W/ World_Wide_Web.html Wikipedia (n.d).
History of the World Wide Web.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_ of_the_World_Wide_Web.
10 JLS 842: MODULE 1 UNIT 2 INTERNET AND THE WEB CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Internet 3.2 What does the Internet do?
3.3 How the Internet moves Data 3.4.
Differences between the Internet and the Web 3.5.
How the World Wide Web shows Information from the Internet 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The two terms “Internet” and “World Wide Web” have been used interchangeably ever since the Internet itself became a household “utility” as common as electricity or cable TV.
People talk about “surfing the web” and “searching the Internet” like the two terms are one and the same.
The World Wide Web and the Internet are not the same thing.
You might be shocked, but that is the fact.
The Internet and the World Wide Web have become integral parts of our lives.
For some, going online is the first thing you do when you wake up and the last thing you do before going to bed.
But how they are different and how they work together is the focus of this unit.
The World Wide Web is the information, in the form of websites that is found on the Internet.
This therefore introduces one of the most significant innovations of the past half century – the Internet.
The Internet is defined, and the history of the Internet is detailed.
It discusses the differences between the Internet and World Wide Web.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Understand the meaning of Internet 11  Understand what the Internet does  Explain how the Internet moves data  Differentiate between the Internet and World Wide Web  Understand how World Wide Web shows information from the Internet 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Meaning of Internet The Internet is a global computer network providing a variety of information and communication facilities, consisting of interconnected networks, using standardised communication protocols.
The Internet, according to Agba (2002:253) is the most technologically advanced medium of communication.
It is a multimedia information superhighway that facilitates business, sports, politics, entertainment and other endeavours across international boundaries.
It is a technological revolution of monumental capabilities.
In fact, it is the information revolution that has turned the world into a “global village”.
It is man’s most ambitious attempt to miniaturise the physical planet, earth.
Internet, according to Asemah (2011) is an electronic medium, which today is connecting the whole world with the help of the computers.
Internet consists of large amount of data that can be accessed by the various users and because of this, it is also referred to as the ‘Information Superhighway’ of the world.
With the help of the internet one can easily be in touch with anyone in the whole world by sending electronic mail, by chatting etc., travel bookings can be made very easily, one can order books or buy anything online – in simple terms it can be said that internet provides a very strong connection or network between computers globally, bringing people and their working close to each other (Information Technology, 2013).
The Internet is not a personal property of any one i.e.
it is not owned by anyone, which allows individuals and the various organisations to get connected to any other server or any other user.
Internet has become such an important and defining tool in today’s competitive and market oriented environment that it helps a lot in getting business and making money (Information Technology, 2013).
The Internet has become a world-wide tool of information dissemination and communication.
It has had profound impact on academic, social and business communication.
It has destroyed time, space and geography.
One of the features of the Internet that readily advertises its democratic potential is its openness.
Anybody with a computer connected to the information superhighway is a potential creator and disseminator of information, and can obtain information from other sources without any barrier.
It allows equal opportunity for all participants to share information.
The Internet is a vast library holding vast amount of materials from diverse sources- government, corporate bodies, non-governmental organisations, academic institutions, individual on almost all subjects, issues and interests.
All these materials are accessible theoretically by anybody.
It is established more or less as cooperative, non-hierarchical and uncontrollable system of communication.
It is designed to facilitate the sharing of information between individuals and among groups.
It is an interactive medium.
The 12 complex and multifarious nature of the Internet is described by Morris and Ogan (1996:42), cited in Asemah (2011) thus: Internet communication takes many forms; from World Wide Web pages operated by major news organisations to Usenet groups discussing folk or music to E-mail messages among colleagues and friends.
The Internet’s communication forms can be understood as a continuum.
Each point in the traditional model of communication process can, in fact, vary from one to a few-many on the Internet.
Sources of the messages can range from one person in E-mail communication, to a social group in a Listserv or Usenet group to a group of professional journalists in World Wide Web page.
The messages themselves can be traditional journalistic news stories created by a reporter and editor, stories created over a long period of time by many people, or simply conversations, such as in an internet Relay Chat group.
The receivers, or audiences, of these messages can also number from one to potentially millions, and may or may not move fluidly from their role as audience-members to producers of messages.
With its multifarious features and uses, the Internet provides a unique forum for anybody to be both a producer and consumer of information.
It allows for the ‘free’ flow of information without any form of barrier currently suffered by the ‘old’ media.
The Internet, sometimes called simply "the Net," is a worldwide system of computer networks - a network of networks in which users at any one computer can, if they have permission, get information from any other computer and sometimes, talk directly to users at other computers.
It was conceived by the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the U.S. government in 1969 and was first known as the ARPANet.
The original aim was to create a network that would allow users of a research computer at one university to be able to "talk to" research computers at other universities.
A side benefit of ARPANet's design was that, because messages could be routed or rerouted in more than one direction, the network could continue to function even if parts of it were destroyed in the event of a military attack or other disaster (Rouse, 2008).
Today, the Internet is a public, cooperative, and self-sustaining facility accessible to hundreds of millions of people worldwide.
Physically, the Internet uses a portion of the total resources of the currently existing public telecommunication networks.
3.2 What Does the Internet Do?
The Internet has one very simple job; to move computerised information known as data, from one place to another.
The machines that make up the Internet treats all the information they handle in exactly the same way.
In this respect, the Internet works a bit like the postal service.
Letters are simply passed from one place to another, no matter who they are from or what messages they contain.
The job of the mail service is to move 13 letters from place to place, not to worry about why people are writing letters in the first place; the same applies to the Internet ( Woodford, 2013).
Just like the mail service, the Internet's simplicity means it can handle many different kinds of information helping people to do many different jobs.
It is not specialised to handle emails, Web pages, chat messages, or anything else: all information is handled equally and passed on in exactly the same way.
Because the Internet is so simply designed, people can easily use it to run new applications; new things that run on top of the basic computer network.
That is why, when two European inventors developed Skype, a way of making telephone calls over the Net, they just had to write a programmeme that could turn speech into Internet data and back again.
No-one had to rebuild the entire Internet to make Skype possible ( Woodford, 2013).
3.3 How the Internet Moves Data There are two basic ways through which the Internet can move data.
The two basic ways as identified by Woodford (2013) are: 1.
Circuit Switching: Much of the Internet runs on the ordinary public telephone network, but there is a big difference between how a telephone call works and how the Internet carries data.
If you ring a friend, your telephone opens a direct connection or circuit between your home and theirs.
If you had a big map of the worldwide telephone system and it would be a reallybig map, you could theoretically mark a direct line, running along lots of miles of cable, all the way from your phone to the phone in your friend's house.
For as long as you are on the phone, that circuit stays permanently open between your two phones.
If you think about it, circuit switching is a really inefficient way to use a network.
All the time you are connected to your friend’s house, no-one else can get through to either of you by phone.
2.
Packet Switching:The Internet could, theoretically, work by circuit switchingand some parts of it still do.
If you have a traditional "dialup" connection to the Net, you are using circuit switching to go online.
You will know how maddeningly inefficient this can be.
No-one can phone you while you are online; you will be billed for every second you stay on the Net; and your Net connection will work relatively slowly.Packet switching is much more efficient than circuit switching.
You do not have to have a permanent connection between the two places that are communicating, for a start, so you are not blocking an entire chunk of the network each time you send a message.
Many people can use the network at the same time and since the packets can flow by many different routes, depending on which ones are quietest or busiest, the whole network is used more evenly, which makes for quicker and more efficient communication all round.
3.4.
Differences between WWW and Internet Many people use the terms Internet and World Wide Web, or just the Web, interchangeably, but the two terms are not synonymous.
The World Wide Web is a global 14 set of documents, images and other resources, logically interrelated by hyperlinks and referenced with Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs).
URIs symbolically identifies services, servers, and other databases and the documents and resources that they can provide.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the main access protocol of the World Wide Web, but it is only one of the hundreds of communication protocols used on the Internet.
Web services also use HTTP to allow software systems to communicate in order to share and exchange business logic and data.
The Internet is a global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP) to serve several billion users worldwide.
It is a network of networks that consists of millions of private, public, academic, business, and government networks, of local to global scope, that are linked by a broad array of electronic, wireless and optical networking technologies.
The Internet carries an extensive range of information resources and services, such as the inter-linked hypertext documents of the World Wide Web (WWW), the infrastructure to support email, and peer-to-peer networks.
Most traditional communications media including telephone, music, film, and television are being reshaped or redefined by the Internet, giving birth to new services such as voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and Internet Protocol television (IPTV).
Newspaper, book and other print publishing are adapting to website technology, or are reshaped into blogging and web feeds.
The Internet has enabled and accelerated new forms of human interactions through instant messaging, Internet forums, and social networking.
Online shopping has boomed both for major retail outlets and small artisans and traders.
Business-to-business and financial services on the Internet affect supply chains across entire industries.
The Internet’s precursor as noted by Arrindell and Lyster (2013) began as a U.S. military project in the 1950’s.
It was called ARPAnet and eventually came online when it connected four university computers in 1969.
Arrindell and Lyster (2013) further noted that by 1984, it linked 1000 computers and was renamed the Internet, for interconnected network.
And by 2012, the Internet had grown to 8.7 billion connected devices.
While the Internet is the hardware made up of computers, servers, switches, and routers that contain data and allow it to travel, it’s also the software and communication protocols that allows different computers and networks to communicate.
That makes it a “network of networks.” The Internet is named for "interconnection of computer networks".
It is a massive hardware combination of millions of personal, business, and governmental computers, all connected like roads and highways.
The Internet started in the 1960s under the original name "ARPAnet".
ARPAnet was originally an experiment in how the US military could maintain communications in case of a possible nuclear strike.
With time, ARPAnet became a civilian experiment, connecting university mainframe computers for academic purposes.
As personal computers became more mainstream in the 1980s and 1990s, the Internet grew exponentially as more users plugged their computers into the massive network.
Today, the Internet has grown into a public spiderweb of millions of personal, 15 government, and commercial computers, all connected by cables and by wireless signals.
No single person owns the Internet.
No single government has authority over its operations.
Some technical rules and hardware/software standards enforce how people plug into the Internet, but for the most part, the Internet is a free and open broadcast medium of hardware networking.
The World Wide Web, or "Web" on the other hand, is a massive collection of digital pages: that large software subset of the Internet dedicated to broadcasting content in the form of HTML pages.
The Web is viewed by using free software called web browsers.
Born in 1989, the Web is based on hypertext transfer protocol, the language which allows you and me to "jump" (hyperlink) to any other public web page.
There are over 65 billion public web pages on the Web today (Gil, n.d).
This perhaps explains why Boswell (n.d) the World Wide Web is a part of the Internet "designed to allow easier navigation through the use of graphical user interfaces and hypertext links between different addresses.
The World Wide Web allows users to access the information on the Internet by displaying web pages on a browser.
Tim Berners-Lee created the Web in 1989, and in 1991 the first web page went live.
There are now almost 650 million websites in the world.
Thus, the Web is just one type of traffic on the Internet.
Email, video chat, gaming, and many other types of data are like different kinds of vehicles that travel and rely on the infrastructure of that superhighway called the Internet.
The foregoing implies that the World Wide Web (WWW) is just one of the features of the internet.
WWW involves a graphical-hypertext based multimedia medium.
This implies that it allows still and motion pictures and text presentations which can be made to suite various dimensions.
The World Wide Web is a location on the Internet.
There are lot of information on WWW thus, researchers can get lot of materials on WWW.
The researchers use the search tool or the search engine.
These messages may be in form of text, graphics, video, journals etc.
Each person has a designated mailbox that stores messages sent by other users (Asemah, 2011).
The most widely used part of the Internet is the World Wide Web, often abbreviated as "WWW" or called "the Web".
Its outstanding feature is hypertext, a method of instant cross-referencing.
In most Web sites, certain words or phrases appear in text of a different color than the rest; often this text is also underlined.
When you select one of these words or phrases, you will be transferred to the site or page that is relevant to this word or phrase.
Sometimes there are buttons, images, or portions of images that are "clickable."
If you move the pointer over a spot on a Web site and the pointer changes into a hand, this indicates that you can click and be transferred to another site (Rouse, 2008).Using the Web, you have access to millions of pages of information.
Web browsing is done with a Web browser, the most popular of which are Microsoft Internet Explorer and Netscape Navigator.
The appearance of a particular Web site may vary slightly, depending on the browser you use.
Also, later versions of a particular browser are able to render more "bells and whistles" such as animation, virtual reality, sound, and music files, than earlier versions (Rouse, 2008).
16 3.5.
How the World Wide Web shows information from the Internet To get to a website, you type in its web address or uniform resource locator, better known as a URL, into a web browser.
Entering the URL sends a request to a domain name server, or DNS, to access that website’s server.
Like a translator, the DNS converts the URL into an IP address.
Every server and computer connected to the Internet has an IP or Internet protocol, address.
You could type an IP address into your browser, but IP addresses can change, and it is much easier to remember an address like yahoo.com.
After the DNS tells your computer the website’s correct IP address, your computer can then directly contact the website’s server.
The website’s server responds to the request and sends the information back to your computer.
Your computer’s web browser converts the information into a readable form.
That is the website you see on your computer screen.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What do you understand by the term Internet?
2.
Mention at least five importance of the Internet 3.
Show how the Internet moves data.
4.0.
CONCLUSION Global communication is easy now thanks to an intricately linked worldwide computer network that we call the Internet.
In less than 20 years, the Internet has expanded to link up around 210 different nations.
Even some of the world’s poorest developing nations are now connected.
This development has been facilitated by the Internet; the Internet is however different from the WWW.
5.0.
SUMMARY In this unit, we examine the relationship between the Internet and the web.
The Internet is a collection of standalone computers and computer networks in companies, schools and colleges, all loosely linked together, mostly using the telephone network.
The Internet and the World Wide Web have a whole-to-part relationship.
The Internet is the large container and the Web is a part within the container.
To be technically precise, the Net is the restaurant, and the Web is the most popular dish on the menu.
The Internet and the Web work together, but they are not the same thing.
The Internet provides the underlying structure, and the Web utilises that structure to offer content, documents, multimedia, etc.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSESSMENT a.
The Internet and World Wide Web are not the same.
Do you agree?
17 b.
The World Wide Web is independent on the Internet.
Take a position on the assertion.
c. Briefly discuss how the World Wide Web shows information from the Internet 7.0 REFERENCES/FUTHER READING Agba, P.C.(2002).
International communication principles, concepts and issues.
In Okunna,C.S.(Ed).
Teaching mass communication: A multi-dimensional approach.
Enugu: New Generations Books.
Arrindell, D. and Lyster, L. (2013).
Just explain it: The Internet and the World Wide Web.
http://news.yahoo.com/just-explain-it--the-internet-vs--the-world-wide- web-184050708.html Asemah, E.S.
(2011).
Principles and practice of mass communication (2nd ed.).
Jos: University Press.
Boswell, W. (n.d).
The World Wide Web and the Internet: What is the difference between the Internet and the World Wide Web?
http://websearch.about.com/od/whatistheinternet/a/worldwideweb.htm.
Accessed 11/11/2013 .
Gil, P. (n.d).
What is the difference between the Internet and the Web?
http://netforbeginners.about.com/od/internet101/f/the_difference_between _internet_and_web.htm.
Accessed 10/11/2013 Information Technology (2013).
Briefly explain the Internet.
http://www.mbaofficial.com/mba-courses/information-technology/briefly- explain-about-internet/.
Accessed 12/12/2013.
Rose, M. (2008).
The Internet.
http://searchwindevelopment.techtarget.com/definition/ Internet.
Accessed 12/12/2013 Woodford, C. (2013).
The Internet.
http://www.explainthatstuff.com/internet.html.Accessed 12/12/2013 18  JLS 842: MODULE 1 UNIT 3: Understanding Web Publishing CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main content 3.1 What is Web Publishing?
3.2 Advantages Web Publishing 3.3 Disadvantages of Web Publishing 3.4 Web Design and Development Process 4.0.Conclusion 5.0.Summary 6.0.Tutor-marked assessment 7.0.References/further reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION In the days of information society, traditional books, magazines, newspapers and journals are not the only sources of information any more.
Electronic publications, which came with new technologies, create basis for fast and high quality information.
Convenient storage, search and copying possibilities decide the strength of this new media.
Web publishing has become common in scientific publishing, where it has been argued that materials like books, journals, magazines, journals, etc, are in the process of being replaced by electronic publishing.
It is also becoming common to distribute books, magazines, and newspapers to consumers through the Internet, a market that is growing by millions each year(Tech Terms.Com, n.d).
Market research suggests that half of all magazine and newspaper circulation will be via digital delivery by the end of 2015 and that half of all reading in the in most part of the world will be done without paper by 2015.
Web or electronic publishing is increasingly popular in works of fiction, as well as with scientific articles.
Electronic publishers are able to provide quick gratification for late-night readers, books that customers might not be able to find in standard book retailers and so on and so forth.
While the term "electronic publishing or web publishing" is primarily used today to refer to the current offerings of online and web-based publishers, the term has a history of being used to describe the development of new forms of production, distribution and user interaction in regard to computer-based production of text and other interactive media(Tech Terms.Com, n.d).
In this unit, we are going to have an overview of web publishing.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES 19 At the end of this unit you should be able to: - Understand the concept of web publishing - Trace the history of web publishing - Identify the advantages and disadvantages of web publishing.
- Understand the Web Design and Development Process 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
What is Web Publishing?
Web publishing is also called online publishing.It is simply the process of publishing content on the Internet.
It includes creating and uploading websites, updating webpages and posting blogs online (Tech Terms.Com, n.d).
The published content may include text, images, videos and other types of media.
It may be seen as the process of posting or publishing information on the Internet.
It involves creating and uploading websites, restoring websites posting and commenting on blogs.
All these may include videos, images, scripts, documentaries and other categories of media content.Web publishing is therefore, seen as the act of creating a web domain in which information is shared with others that access the site.
This can be done by creating a web page and putting the desired information, ranging from books, newspapers, magazines, journal articles, etc.
Web publication is arranged computer information.
In web publishing, material is produced and stored electronically, rather than in print.
Whenever users display, present or “post” any written, auditory or visual media on to the World Wide Web, it can be said they are “publishing” electronic content.
Most traditional newspapers and magazines today publish in an electronic form on the Web where access is typically “free” or available through a free membership.Frequently electronic publishing is referring to production of electronic books.
It is however worthy to note that posting updates on social networking websites like Facebook and Twitter is generally not considered web publishing.
Instead, web publishing generally refers to uploading content to unique websites.
Then electronic publishing can mean: a.
Production and distribution of new works, which are appearing for the first time in electronic format.
b.
Providing electronic text versions of previously published works (such as classic literature, non-copyrighted material, or works that have entered the public domain), either online or on CD-ROM, or offering an electronic version of a book that is simultaneously being produced in print.
Electronic publications should have several important features: a.
Convenient navigation; b.
Information control; c. Search possibilities; 20  d. Identification number (ISSN, ISBN, DOI, etc.)
Electronic publications are being registered in ISSN and ISBN agencies, just as in the traditional publications.
They have to be registered independently from their “traditionally” published analogue.
3.2.
Advantages of Web Publishing There are several advantages of web publishing; among them are: 1.
Editing: Editing is a plus involved in online publishing.
For the most part, editing should and does occur before the new issue goes online.
However, we have all come across several typos in print documents of any kind that werenot caught before the publication was sent off to the printer.
In online publishing, there is no "final" product.
Errors can be corrected in a matter of minutes or seconds even.
This implies that even when the publication is already online, there is room for editing.
2.
Traffic: Online publishing through blogs, lenses and article marketing are well known as tools for bringing traffic to your landing pages and/or home pages.
This traffic is your viewing audience.
The more traffic you get, the greater the opportunity you have to gain new members for your mailing lists, new subscribers for your blogs and lenses.
The ultimate goal, of course, is to make more sales.
These are just methods that often lead to sales.
3.
It is Easy:It is quite easy to learn to publish electronically and necessary equipment can be obtained without difficulties; 4.
It is much Faster: It can take months to publish traditional “paper” book; it is possible to publish electronically in days or even hours; 5.
It is Less Expensive: Once you have software and knowledge necessary for work, you can publish lots of various materials without almost any additional costs.
6.
It can use Multimedia and Varying Format Options:An electronic book or e- journal can have a variety of multimedia elements to add to the experience.
Such elements might include music, graphics, animation, audio, or interactivity-clickable features.
Downloadable formats for hand readers often include different fonts, a highlighter, post-it notes, a "clickable" table of contents, and bookmarking capabilities.
7.
It will be Available Internationally: Electronic editions can be accesses from any part of the world and read from any computer connected to the Internet(Tech Terms.Com, n.d).
21  3.3.
Disadvantages of Web Publishing It has the following disadvantages: 1.
Profits: It remains difficult to make any money off of online publishing.
Most publications online right now are free to readers and are merely charging for ad.
space.
However, some are attempting to require subscriptions.
Much still seems up in the air in terms of what standard might come out of online publishing.
It is a new medium and people using it are still in the stages of trial and error.
2.
Marketing: Although there are no or few distribution costs for online publishing, it does take a bit of marketing to get people to your site.
You must register your publication with as many search engines as possible and often, this entails a cost.
However, if this is not done, no one will be able to find your site.
This process needs to be given regular attention as your description or focus changes and as new search engines are introduced.
Also, other sites that have agreed to link to yours need to be regularly contacted to make sure that link will remain on their site.
3.
Audience: Audience is a category that can be considered both a pro and a con for online publishing.
While your audience is not limited to only those hit in your distribution efforts, it is also not the dedicated group of readers that most print publications can count on.
So, while your publication may be more widely available, that does not mean that people are reading it.
It is more difficult to determine your readership in online publications.
First, you cannot know the demographics of your readers as easily as you might with print.
Some people have attempted to stick with the subscription method to alleviate some of this problem, but then readership often goes down because readers can often get the same information elsewhere for free on the Internet.
4.
Consumer Reluctance to Read Online:While the popularity of e-books and e- journals is growing steadily, many consumers are still reluctant to read onscreen or to add the cost of printing a book on one’s own paper and with one’s own toner.
Regardless of age, gender or experience, almost everyone finds it more difficult to read from a screen than from paper(Tech Terms.Com, n.d).
3.4 The Web Design and Development Process Web development follows some stages; let us quickly examine the stages: 1.
Information Gathering: The first step in designing a successful web site is to gather information.
Many things need to be taken into consideration when the look and feel of your site is created.
This first step is actually the most important one, as it involves a solid understanding of the company it is created for.It involves a good understanding of you.
What your business goals and dreams are and how the web can be utilised to help 22 you achieve those goals.
It is important that your web designer start off by asking a lot of questions to help him understand your business and your needs in a web site (Bolby, 2008).
Certain things to consider are:  What is the purpose of the site?
 What do you hope to accomplish by building this web site?
Two of the more common goals are either to make money or share information.
 Is there a specific group of people that will help you reach your goals?
It is helpful to picture the “ideal” person you want to visit your web site.
Consider their age, sex or interests; this will later help determine the best design style for your site.
 What kind of information will the target audience be looking for on your site?
2.
Planning: Using the information gathered from phase one, it is time to put together a plan for your web site.
This is the point where a site map is developed.
The site map is a list of all main topic areas of the site, as well as sub-topics, if applicable.
This serves as a guide as to what content will be on the site, and is essential to developing a consistent, easy to understand navigational system.
The end-user of the web site ( customers) must be kept in mind when designing your site.
These are, after all, the people who will be learning about your service or buying your product.
A good user interface creates an easy to navigate web site and is the basis for this(Bolby, 2008).
During the planning phase, your web designer will also help you decide what technologies should be implemented.
Elements such as interactive forms, ecommerce, flash, etc.
are discussed when planning your web site.
3.
Design: Drawing from the information gathered up to this point, it is time to determine the look and feel of your site.
Target audience is one of the key factors taken into consideration.
A site aimed at teenagers, for example, will look much different from the one meant for a financial institution.
As part of the design phase, it is also important to incorporate elements such as the company’s logo or colours to help strengthen the identity of your company on the web site.
Your web designer will create one or more prototype designs for your web site.
This is typically a .jpg image of what the final design will look like.
Often times, you will be sent an email with the mock-ups for your web site, while other designers take it a step further by giving you access to a secure area of their web site meant for customers to view work in progress(Bolby, 2008).
Either way, your designer should allow you to view your project throughout the design and development stages.
The most important reason for this is that it gives you the opportunity to express your likes and dislikes on the site design.
In this phase, communication between both you and your designer is crucial to ensure that the final web site will match your needs and taste.
It is important that you work closely with your designer, exchanging ideas, until you arrive at the final design for your web site.
Then development can begin 4.
Development: The developmental stage is the point where the web site itself is created.
At this time, your web designer will take all of the individual graphic elements from the prototype and use them to create the actual, functional site.
This is typically done by first developing the home page, followed by a “shell” for the interior pages.
The 23 shell serves as a template for the content pages of your site, as it contains the main navigational structure for the web site.
Once the shell has been created, your designer will take your content and distribute it throughout the site, in the appropriate areas.
Elements such as interactive contact forms, flash animations or ecommerce shopping carts are implemented and made functional during this phase, as well.
This entire time, your designer should continue to make your in-progress web site available to you for viewing, so that you can suggest any additional changes or corrections you would like to have done.
On the technical front, a successful web site requires an understanding of front-end web development.
This involves writing valid XHTML / CSS code that complies to current web standards, maximising functionality, as well as accessibility for as large an audience as possible(Bolby, 2008).
5.
Testing and Delivery: At this point, your web designer will attend to the final details and test your web site.
They will test things such as the complete functionality of forms or other scripts, as well last testing for last minute compatibility issues (viewing differences between different web browsers), ensuring that your web site is optimised to be viewed properly in the most recent browser versions.
A good web designer is one who is well versed in current standards for web site design and development.
The basic technologies currently used are XHTML and CSS (Cascading Style Sheets).
As part of testing, your designer should check to be sure that all of the code written for your web site validates.
Valid code means that your site meets the current web development standards – this is helpful when checking for issues such as cross-browser compatibility as mentioned above(Bolby, 2008).Once you give your web designer final approval, it is time to deliver the site.
An FTP (File Transfer Protocol) programme is used to upload the web site files to your server.
Most web designers offer domain name registration and web hosting services as well.
Once these accounts have been setup, and your web site uploaded to the server, the site should be put through one last run-through.
This is just precautionary, to confirm that all files have been uploaded correctly, and that the site continues to be fully functional(Bolby, 2008).
6.
Maintenance: The development of your web site is not necessarily over, though.
One way to bring repeat visitors to your site is to offer new contenton a regular basis.
Most web designers will be more than happy to continue working together with you, to update the information on your web site.
Many designers offer maintenance packages at reduced rates, based on how often you anticipate making changes or additions to your web site(Bolby, 2008).
If you prefer to be more hands on, and update your own content, there is something called a CMS (Content Management System) that can be implemented to your web site.
This is something that would be decided upon during the planning stage.
With a CMS, your designer will utilise online software to develop a database driven site for you (Bolby, 2008).
A web site driven by a CMS gives you the ability to edit the content areas of the web site yourself.
You are given access to a back-end administrative area, where you can use an online text editor (similar to a mini version of Microsoft Word).
You will be able to edit existing content this way or if you are feeling more adventurous, you can even add new pages and content yourself.
The possibilities are endless.
It is really up to you as far as how comfortable you feel as far as updating your own web site.
Some people prefer to have all the control so that they can make updates to 24 their own web site the minute they decide to do so.
Others prefer to hand off the web site entirely, as they have enough tasks on-hand that are more important for them to handle directly.
That is where the help of a your web designer comes in, once again, as they can take over the web site maintenance for you.
One less thing for you to do is always a good thing in these busy times(Bolby, 2008).
Other maintenance type items include SEO (Search Engine Optimisation) and SES (Search Engine Submission).
This is the optimisation of your web site with elements such as title, description and keyword tags which help your web site achieve higher rankings in the search engines.
The previously mentioned code validation is something that plays a vital role in SEO, as well(Bolby, 2008).
There are a lot of details involved in optimising and submitting your web site to the search engines.
This is a very important step, because even though you now have a web site, you need to make sure that people can find it (Bolby, 2008).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Explain the concept “web publishing” 2.
What are the advantages of web publishing?
3.
What are the disadvantages of web publishing?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we haveconceptualiseb web publishing.
Web publishing is also known as online publishing.
In the unit, the advantages and disadvantages of web publishing were also delved into.
As well, we delved into the process of web publishing.
Thus, the reader is equipped with additional knowledge of web publishing process and the advantages/ disadvantages of web publishing.
5.0.
SUMMARY Web publishing entails the publication of materials on the Internet.
It has to do with an individual or an organisation publishing books, newspapers, magazines or journals on the Internet.
Posting up dates on social networking cites is not web publishing.
There are certain advantages and disadvantages of web publishing; one of the advantages of web publishing is that the work can be edited at any point in time.
However, one of the advantages is that it is difficult to make profit through web publishing.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT a.
Posting updates on social networking cites like facebook, 2go, twitter, etc is not web publishing.
Discuss.
b.
Identify and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of web publishing c. Elaborately discuss the web design and development process 25  7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Alexander, B.
(2013).
Web Site development process - The life-cycle steps – Benny.
http://www.macronimous.com/resources/web_development_life_cycle.asp.
Accessed 12/12/2013 Bowlby, S.M.
(2008).
6 phases of the Web Site design and development process.
http://www.idesignstudios.com/blog/web-design/phases-web-design- development- process/#.Ur6qns4xjIU.
Accessed 11/11/2013 Tech Terms.Com (n.d).
Web publishing.
http://www.techterms.com/definition/web_publishing.
Accessed 14/12/2013.
26  JLS 842: MODULE 2 MODULE 2: MATERIALS PUBLISHED ON WORLD WIDE WEB Unit 1: E-Books Unit 2: E-Journals Unit 3: Online Newspapers Unit 4: Online Magazines Unit 5: Functions of Online Publications UNIT 1 E-Books CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
Meaning and Definitions of E-Books 3.2 History of E-Books 3.3 Advantages of E-Books 3.4.
Disadvantages of E-Books 3.5.
Categories of Electronic Books 3.6.
Types of E-Books 3.7 Formats of E-Books 3.8.
General Characteristics of E-Books 3.9.
Creating an E-Book 3.10.
Tips for Creating an E-Book 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Reading 27 1.0 Introduction E-books are becoming more popular as technology advances.
While the younger generations are learning the ways of the e-book quicker than others, some members of older generations would rather stick to printed books.
And while some authors are embracing the new technological world of authorship, others are repelled by it, refusing to publish electronically.
Despite the opinions shared by some authors, e-books are a popular phenomenon, not only for readers, but for writers as well.
The meaning of e- book, history of e-book and types of e-book are what we are going to discuss in this unit.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: - Understand the nature of E-Books - Explain the advantages and disadvantages of E-Books - Identify the categories of E-Books.
- Identify the type of E-Books - Understand the formats of E-Books - Understand how to create an E-Book 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Definitions of E-Books There are quite a lot of discussions about what exactly can be called the E-Books, which is also called electronic book, online book or ebook, but for the purpose of this course, let us define electronic book as any book, which can be downloaded and read on a computer or special reader.
The publishing world is in a state of flux at the moment concerning the future of books, although there is an almost universal agreement that the future of books involves the electronic format in one way or another.
An E-book is an abbreviation for electronic book, also often called a digital book.
The text that forms the e-book is a digital version of a printed book and can be read on a computer, a handheld device such as an e-reader or an e-book device and can sometimes, be read on cell phones, depending on the brand or make.
It is common, however, that people who invest in e-books use an e- reader or personal computer to read their electronic books (Jane, 2013).
An E-Book is therefore a book composed in or converted to digital format for display on a computer screen or handheld device.
An electronic book is an electronic version of a traditional print book that can be read by using a personal computer or by using an eBook reader.
An eBook reader can be a software application for use on a computer, such as Microsoft's free Reader application or a book-sized computer that is used solely as a reading device, such as Nuvomedia's Rocket eBook.
Users can purchase an eBook on diskette or CD, but the most popular 28 method of getting an eBook is to purchase a downloadable file of the eBook or other reading material from a Web site to be read from the user’s computer or reading device.
Generally, an eBook can be downloaded in five minutes or less (Rouse, 2005).
An E book, as noted by Nomeh (2012) can be described as any book publication in digital formor any electronic or digital version of a written work like a book, document, pamphlet, etc.
E books or online books are written works like books or documents that can be readable on e-book readers,computer or any other electronic enable devices that can read digital version of a book.
Thus, an E-Book is seen as a text and image-based publication in digital form produced on, published by and readable on computers or other digital devices.
E-books are presented visually or aurally, with the audio book as a precursor to, and limited exemplum of, electronic publishing’s potential.
The foregoing implies that an E-Book is the electronic counterpart of a printed book, which can be viewed on a desktop computer, laptop, smartphone or e-book reader.
When traveling, a large number of e-books can be stored in portable units, dramatically eliminating weight and volume compared to paper.
Electronic bookmarks make referencing easier, and e-book readers may allow the user to annotate pages.
Although fiction and non-fiction books come in e-book formats, technical material is especially suited for e-book delivery because it can be searched (Encyclopedia, n.d).
The major problem with e-books is the many formats competing for prime time, including Adobe PDF, Microsoft Reader, eReader, Mobipocket Reader, EPUB, Kindle and iPad (Encyclopedia, n.d).Although it is not necessary to use a reader application or device in order to read an Ebook, most books can be read as PDF files, they are popular because they enable options similar to those of a paper book.Readers can bookmark pages, make notes, highlight passages and save selected text.
In addition to these familiar possibilities, eBook readers also include built-in dictionaries, and alterable font sizes and styles (Rouse, 2005).
Some eBooks can be downloaded for free or at reduced cost, however, prices for many eBooks, especially bestsellers are similar to those of hardcover books, and are sometimes higher (Rouse, 2005).
3.2.
History of E-Books Historically, Van Dam is generally referred to have coined the term “electronic book.” However,the first e-book can be traced day back to 1940s with the index Thomisticus, a heavily annotated electronic index to the works of Thomas Aquinas and it was prepared by Roberto Busa (Nomeh, 2012).
However, some writers had argued that electronic books started in the early 1960s and 1970s.
Still, some claimed that e-books or electronic was born with the first steps of project Gutenberg, a digital library for books from public domain.
According to the research done by E booksworldblog, history has it according to Wikipedia that early e-books were generally written for specialty areas and a limited audience, meant to be read only by small and devoted interested group.
The scope of the subject matter of these e-books included technical manual for hardware, manufacturing techniques and other subjects (Nomeh, 2012).
Jane (2013) avers that the e- book was first developed in 1971 by Michael Hart.
He was the founder of the Gutenberg of Illinois University, a public library of digital books.
The first e-book conference took 29 place in Gaithersburg, Maryland, in 1998, in which a series of regulations were addressed in terms of standardising e-books.
It was not until 2001, however, when Stephen King published "Riding the Bullet" as an e-book that the phenomenon became a success.
He sold numerous copies for a small fee and it was then that publishers and authors saw the potential of e-books (Jane (2013).
With the quick wide spread of the internet worldwide,booksellers began selling books online within and outside their home country, offering excerpts on their websites.
Libraries began creating websites as a virtual window as well as digital libraries stemming from their print collections (Nomeh, 2012).Marie Lebert reported that other publications like the newspapers and magazines being available online, as well as their archives.
According to him, some journals became only electronic to skip the cost of print publishing, while offering print on demand.
Some newsletters, magazines and journals started online from scratch, skipping a print version.
Many Authors began to create websites to self-publish their or post it while waiting to find a publisher.
One early e-book implementation was the desktop prototype for a proposed notebook computer, the Dynabook, in the 1970s at PARC: a general-purpose portable personal computer capable of displaying books for reading.In 1992, Sony launched the Data Discman, an electronic book reader that could read e-books that were stored on CDs.
One of the electronic publications that could be played on the Data Discman was called The Library of the Future (Wikipedia, n.d).
Early e-books were generally written for specialty areas and a limited audience, meant to be read only by small and devoted interest groups.
The scope of the subject matter of these e-books included technical manuals for hardware, manufacturing techniques and other subjects.
In the 1990s, the general availability of the Internet made transferring electronic files much easier, including e- books (Wikipedia, n.d).
3.3.
ADVANTAGE OF E-BOOKS E-Books have the following advantages: 1.
Spatial Benefits: There are millionsof e- booksavailable on the Internet today.
Mobile availability of e-books may be provided for users with a mobile data connection, so that these e-books need not be stored on the device.
An e-book can be offered indefinitely, without ever going "out of print".
In the space that a comparably sized print book takes up, an e-reader can potentially contain thousands of e-books, limited only by its memory capacity.
If space is at a premium, such as in a backpack or at home, it can be an advantage that an e-book collection takes up little room and weight.
2.
Mechanical and Multimedia Benefits: E-book websites can include the ability to translate books into many different languages, making the works available to speakers of languages not covered by printed translations.Depending on the device, an e-book may be readable in low light or even total darkness.
Many newer readers have the ability to display motion, enlarge or change fonts, use Text-to-speech software to read the text 30 aloud for visually impaired, partially sighted, elderly or dyslectic people or just for convenience, search for key terms, find definitions or allow highlighting bookmarking and annotation.
Additionally, e-books allow for readers to look up words or find more information about the topic immediately.
Material can be organised however the author prefers and is not limited to a linear path through the book as hyper-text can allow a number of paths through the material.Printed books use 3 times more raw materials and 78 times more water to produce than e-books.
3.
Distributive and Access Benefits:While an e-book reader costs much more than one book, the electronic texts are at times cheaper.
Moreover, a great share of e-books are available online for free, minus the minimal costs of the electronics required.
For example, all fiction from before the year 1900 is in the public domain.
Also, libraries lend more current e-book titles for limited times, free samples are available of many publications and there are other lending models being piloted as well.
E-books can be printed for less than the price of traditional new books using new on-demand book printers.An e-book can be purchased, downloaded and used immediately, whereas when one buys or borrows a book, one must go to a bookshop, a home library or public library during limited hours or wait for a delivery.
4.
Control: The editor of electronic books has total control over his work; person can be publisher, distributor and bookshop owner at the same time; and this is hardly possible with traditional book publishing.
5.
Delivery Cost: There are no delivery costs; no mailing, no postage, no handling, no printing costs, etc.
Since the work is available on the net, the publisher does not spend any money supplying the work to the readers as the readers can easily access the work online.
3.4 Disadvantages of E-Books Below are some of the advantages of E-Books, as identified by Scott (2013): 1.
Screen glare and eyestrain are a severe concern for numerous possible customers of e- book technologies.
A major concern of reading from a good e-book readers could harm the eyes.
The show resolution of computer screens and electronic devices is even less than the print quality produced by a publishing push.
2.
Reading from a computer lacks the knowledge and comfort of reading from a book.
A paper book can be opened and turned via, while a good electronic text is much more difficult to navigate.
3.
E-books have unreliable life span.
Paper has a much longer life span compared to most digital forms of storage space.
Simply because of the rapid development of new computer systems it is difficult to assess whether the software or even hardware will become out-of-date.
As new hardware is actually developed buildings should be put into location to permit for the migration of existing materials to the new platforms so that they can be utilised.
Techniques of preserving the electronic documents should 31  also end up being created.
A high degree of dependability of the gear should be component of the electronic devices that manage the replacements for printed books.
4.
It can end up being hard to distinguish yourself from “almost anyone.’ for just about anyone can help to make a good e-book.
To make your book equivalent to a “real” book, you should find and assess several e-book publishers prior to making a deal.
A fancy website doesn’t guarantee a excellent publisher.
Look from their e-books and see in the event that your own suits in with that mix.
3.5 Categories of electronic book publishing The electronic publishing industry, as noted by UNESCO (2010) can be divided into three basic categories: commercial, subsidy, and self-publishing: 1.
Commercial e-publishing: Commercial e-publishers function like commercial print publishers.
Manuscripts are accepted on the basis of quality and marketability and go through a process of review, editing and proofreading before publication.
Most commercial e-publishers accept fewer than 10% of submissions.
Writers pay no fee for publication and receive royalties.
Commercially published e-books are sold primarily through the publisher's Website, but are also available on most online bookstores, including Amazon.com and Barnes and Noble.
Distribution in traditional bookstores, however, is still limited.
However, as all e-books have ISBNs, they can be ordered through any bookstore.
2.
Subsidy e-publishing: Subsidy e-publishers produce and distribute books for a fee.
Authors receive a royalty, which is usually comparable to that offered by commercial e- publishers.
Unlike commercial e-publishers, subsidy publishers provide little screening, except for offensive content such as pornography or hate material and usually accept any manuscript, regardless of quality.
Most subsidy publishers provide no editorial services or proofreading (though some offer such services for an extra fee); books are posted exactly as submitted.
Subsidy publishers also offer few promotional services; the responsibility for promoting a book rests primarily with the author.
Like commercially published e-books, subsidy-published e-books are available through most online bookstores, but very rarely found in traditional bookstores.
However, like commercially published e-books, they have ISBNs and can be ordered from any bookstore.
3.
Self-publishing: Self-publishing is a process in which the author is entirely responsible for producing his/her own book, from development to publication, to marketing.
Most often, a self-published ebook will be posted upon the author’s own site.
In self-publishing, the author formats the text or arranges for formatting and is responsible for obtaining the ISBN and copyright registration.
The author is directly responsible for publishing expenses and receives all revenues from book sales.
32 3.6.
Types of E-Books Nomeh (2012) however classifies e-books into the following: 1 Flat e-book; 2 Embedded media books; 3 Interactive books.
1.
Flat E books: Flat E books include e-books that have quite increase in colour and come with annotation features such as high lighten and text note taking.Common vendors that can do this include Amazon, Inkling, and Kno; although each of thisis creeping into the next class of eBook.
Vendors usually will do conversion for free and then charge a slice of the proceeds.
This can be a drawback, as can the fact that reading is done via a proprietary systems and most vendor do not share product analytics.
But if you want to get started simply and quickly, flat eBooks are a cost efficient way to get started (Gammon’s blog, 2012).
2.
Embedded Media Books: Embedded media books include the features of the flat e-books with audio, video and animations.
This type, however, is referred to as semi- interactive.
This class of eBook augments flat books with audio, video and animations.
They are semi-interactive (Gammon’s blog, 2012).
There is a pretty wide range of vendors in this space.
You can go into apps, for example with vendors like Hurix and YuDu.
Terms vary across the gamut of work for hire and royalty agreements.
In this class too, you need not necessarily expect a lot of upfront cost on software builds (Gammon’s blog, 2012).
3.
Interactive Books: Interactive books as the name connotes, is the type of e-book that is a 2-way performance, such as viewing a video and responding to it and the system should remember and often react to those responses.
This class is what people really mean when they think of next generation textbooks.
True interactivity is 2-way and persistent.
Viewing video isnot interactive, unless you can respond to it and the system should remember and often react to those responses.
Of course, this is most important for disciplines like education (Gammon’s blog, 2012).
Jaebi (2013) classifies E-Books into the following: 1.
Amazon Kindle: As of March 2011, the most popular type of ebook is the one used by Amazon’s Kindle.
The file format used by Kindle is .azw, and is proprietary software created specifically for use on Amazon's e-reader.
The Kindle ebook uses Digital Rights Management (DRM), which prevents unauthorized copying or use of the Amazon-purchased ebooks on non-Kindle software.
Amazon has released Kindle applications for devices such as the iPhone/iPad and Google Android, allowing users to purchase and view Amazon ebooks via Whispernet, a framework for delivering Kindle ebooks.
33  2.
E-Reader:The eReader ebook format is created by Palm Digital Media, a company currently owned by Barnes and Noble.
eReader uses the .pdb file format and is a freeware programme, meaning it can be used by consumers and as a platform for development by software makers.
This flexibility makes eReader ebooks available for many popular digital devices and computers by installing eReader software.
In addition, anyone can create eReader ebooks using Dropbook or eBook Studio.
eReader books are sold on eReader.com.
3.
EPUB: EPUB is the ebook format developed by the International Digital Publishing Forum.
The format itself is based on the open standards of Open Publication Structure, a variant of HTML, XML and the ZIP compression format.
Because these technologies are widely used on the Internet and by computers, the EPUB file format can be used on Kobo eReaders, Apple's iBook app, Barnes and Noble's Nook eReader and several other software and devices.
4 Broadband E-Books: The Sony Corporation-developed Reader uses a type of ebook known as Broadband Ebooks, or BBEB for short.
Broadband ebooks use the .lrf file extension.
All BBEB ebooks are published with DRM encryption, which prevents the ebooks from being accessed on non-Sony Reader equipment.
According to Steve Haber, Sony Reader president, the company has sold millions of the eReader and was developing an app to work with Apple iOS (iPhone/iPad).
In February 2011, the Sony Apple app met with compatibility complications, pushing back the project indefinitely.
Hirsh (2013) classifies E-Books into the following: 1. epub: A cross-platform (Windows, Macintosh and Linux compatible) format based on XHTML programmeming, the ePub electronic book format can be created by and read on avariety of proprietary and non-proprietary software, making it a widely used format for creating accessible electronic books.
It uses the same basic programmeming as web pages, with special functions dependent on the skills of the programmemer and the abilities of the reading device.
2.
Amazon Kindle: Amazon’s Kindle is a popular electronic book reading device that has its own type of electronic book file denoted by the file extension .azm.
AZM files have restrictions on the way they can be used based on digital rights management (DRM) procedures.
These files are intended to be read only on the Kindle.
The Kindle is designed to read these files and may also be able to read other file types but it may corrupt their formatting.
3.
Adobe Books: Sony’s reader and the Barnes and Noble reader known as the Nook both read Adobe ebook and PDF files.
Adobe ebooks can also be read on Windows-based computers and Macintosh computers running OS X or newer systems.
It offers bookmarking features but is considered less user-friendly than many other formats.
34 4.
Mobile Pocket: MobiPocket is an electronic book format designed for Windows- based PCs, laptops and mobile devices.
In addition to reading books on your device, it offers simple bookmarking and instant table of contents features.
5.
Palm: The Palm electronic book format is similar to the MobiPocket format in features but can be used on mobile devices running Windows Mobile or iPhone and iPod Touch software as well as computers running Windows and Mac OS X.
6.
Microsoft Reader: Designed specifically for Windows-based operating systems, whether on computers or mobile devices, the Microsoft Reader format focuses on presenting clear, easy-to-read text optimised for the computer or device’s screen.
Other features include the software remembering where you left off when the book last closed and bookmarking options.
7. iBook: Created for Apple's iPad, iBook format offers specialized touch-screen page flipping technology, aggregated bookmarking features, full color capabilities, last viewed page memory and a graphic user library interface.
It is available only for specific Apple devices.
3.7 Formats of Ebooks Here are the most popular formats, along with the advantages and disadvantages of each: 1.
E-mail.
It is the simplest way to distribute your work electronically.
All that needs to be done is just copy the text of your book into an e-mail message and send it whenever you get a request.
If you donot want to be bothered with responding to individual requests, you can even set it up to go out on autoresponder, if that is a feature available through your Web host.One of the advantages of ebook is that it is easy to create and send on demand.
However, this format has limited text formatting and graphic capabilities.
E-mail message can be large, unwieldy and hard to read.
Requires reader to view on screen or print a paper copy (UNESCO, 2010).
2.
HTML.
If you know HTML or have a good Web authoring programmeme, you can publish your book as an attractive Webpage or series of Webpages.
You can also put your book online as a plain text file, although that is less attractive and eliminates your ability to use graphics, hyperlinks, etc.
The major advantages are: available immediately to anyone who wants to view it.
Allows for more attractive graphic design.
Can include images, hyperlinks, audio, video, etc.
However, it requires reader to view on screen or print a paper copy.
Printouts are of unpredictable quality.
Text and graphic appearance varies depending upon the browser used (UNESCO, 2010).
3.
PDF (portable document format).
With PDF, you essentially create a digital photo of your final book design.
Readers across various computer platforms see the text, layout and graphics just as you created them, as long as they have a copy of Acrobat Reader with which to view your book.
Just upload the PDF file to your Website and give readers a link or simply a file name they can access to download your book.
It has its own 35 advantages: This format allows print-quality text formatting/graphic design.
Can look and "feel" more like a print book, with a fully designed cover, page numbers, index, etc.
Can include hyperlinks, searchable features and bookmarking/note-making capabilities.
Acrobat makes your e-book perfectly formatted on the customer’s screen.
However, it requires reader to own or download Acrobat Reader (though it's free and can be obtained at Adobe’s Website http://www.adobe.com).
Requires reader to view on screen or print a paper copy.
Requires use of a separate software programme such as Adobe Acrobat or Adobe PageMaker to design your book.
Can be a large file requiring long download time.
The learning curve for the Adobe Acrobat is difficult to master for the graphically challenged (UNESCO, 2010).
4.
Electronic Book Reader: Several companies now manufacture electronic book readers that are about the size of a traditional print book and weigh a couple of pounds.
Powered by batteries with a life of several hours, these readers display a digital version of your book on a flat screen or pair of screens.
Users can "turn" pages electronically, bookmark passages and even make notes as they read.
In the case of books formatted for hand-held e-readers, such as SoftBooks, RocketBooks, the Librius Millenium E-Book Reader, etc.
; books may be available through a retailer such as Barnes and Noble and downloaded directly to the e-reader.
The advantages are: Immediately portable.
Allows near-print-quality text formatting and graphic design.
Usually backlit to allow reading even in the dark.
However, special reading equipment is indispensable (UNESCO, 2010).
3.8 General Characteristics of E Books Below are the general characteristics of ebooks, as identified by UNESCO (2010): 1.
Ebooks promote reading.
People are spending more time in front of screens and less time in front of printed books.
2.
Ebooks are good for the environment.
Ebooks eliminate the need for filling up landfills with old books.
Ebooks save transportation costs and the pollution associated with shipping books across the country and the world.
3.
Ebooks preserve books.
The library of Alexandria was burned and the collection ruined.
Richard Burton's wife, after his death and against his wishes, destroyed a book he had been working on for ten years.
The original manuscript of Carlyle's The French Revolution was lost when a friend's servant tossed it into the fire.
Ebooks are ageless; they do not burn, mildew, crumble, rot or fall apart.
Ebooks ensure that literature will endure.
4.
Ebooks are faster to produce than paper books, allow readers to read books about current issues and events.
5.
Ebooks are easily updateable, for correcting errors and adding information.
36 6.
Ebooks are searchable.
Quickly you can find anything inside the book.
Ebooks are globally searchable: you can find information in many ebooks.
7.
Ebooks are portable.
You can carry an entire library on one DVD.
8.
Ebooks free you to do other activities while you are listening.
9.
Ebooks can be printable: and thereby give a reader most or all of the advantages of a paper-based book.
10.
Ebooks defy time; they can be delivered almost instantly.
Ebooks are transported to you faster than overnight shipping: in minutes or in seconds.
11.
Ebooks defy space; ebooks online can be read simultaneously by thousands of people at once.
12.
Ebooks are cheaper to produce.
Thus, small presses can attempt to compete with media giants.
13.
Ebooks are cheaper to buy.
14.
Ebooks can be annotated without harming the original work.
15.
Ebooks make reading accessible to persons with disabilities.
Text can be re-sized for the visually impaired.
Screens can be lit for reading in the dark.
16.
Ebooks can be hyper-linked, for easier access to additional information.
17.
Ebooks with additional software and hardware can read aloud to you.
18.
Ebooks let you tweak the style.
Many ebooks allow readers to change the font style, font size, page size, margin size, colors and more.
19 Ebooks may allow the option for the addition of multimedia: still images, moving images and sound.
20.
Ebooks, with their capacity for storage, encourage the publishing of books with many pages, books that might be too expensive to produce (and purchase) in paperback.
21.
Ebooks can be quickly duplicated, and then distributed to strangers or given to your friends.
Worry no more about your loaned books that will never be returned.
22.
Ebooks empower individuals to write and to publish and in this way, help to challenge "the crushing power of big publishing", that excludes so many authors 37  23.
Ebooks allow authors to experiment in many themes and styles.
24.
Ebooks posted online encourage comments, corrections and feedback, which eliminates mistakes and improves accuracy, especially important when dealing with scientific and technological issues.
25.
Ebooks allow publishers to publish and readers to read works by a larger number of authors and works on a wider variety of topics.
3.9 Creating Ebook From this part, you will learn how to create ebook in HTML, PDF and electronic book reader formats.
1.
HTML: One of the options is to create e-book as an HTML file.
This method gives you the opportunity to make your e-book a multimedia production, with animation, audio, video, etc.
Such e-books can be presented in two ways: as Website or as executable file.
We’ll discuss the creation of Websites then we study production of e- journals, so now we will learn to create e-books as executable files.
Two basic steps are:  To create a book as a Webpage or series of Webpages;  To transform these Webpages into executable (EXE) files.
At first, you have to transform the text of your book into HTML format.
There are lots of different HTML editors; some of them are free, and some are very expensive and professional.
If you have a working knowledge of HTML – it means, if you can create a simple Webpage using only a text editor and a browser, you know what software you would prefer for creating HTML files.If not, you can try a “What You See Is What You Get”, or WYSIWYG HTML editors, such as Microsoft FrontPage or Netscape Composer for creating HTML files.
There is a good chance that you already have one of these programmes installed on your computer.
Both of these HTML editors are easy to use as a word processor.
There are a lot of different HTML editors, and we’ll talk more about that in the section about production of electronic journals or you can use Microsoft Word programmeme.
Most modern Word processors posses the ability to export a document to HTML format, just by saving the file as type “HTML document”.
Once you have your HTML pages ready, you can transform them into e-book.
This process is called “compiling” (“compiling” is the process when a computer translates code written in a computer language into an executable form) and is quite easy to do with special software.
The HTML compiler software compresses normal HTML files into a self-extracting executable file (EXE).
Anyone can download and view e- books produced with any compiler software using any Internet browser.
There are many programmes for compiling HTML files into EXE files.
For example:  HyperMaker HTML (http://www.bersoft.com/compilers.htm)  Neobook (http://www.neosoftware.com) 38  E-ditor (http://www.e-ditorial.com/software.html)  E-book Wizard (http://www.ebook-wizard.com)  And many others at http://www.ebookcompilers.com.
 Once your book has been created, the next thing you may need to do is to make it “download ready”.
This means that you will have to shrink e-book’s file size, so that it downloads quickly onto the customer’s computer.
WinZip(http://www.winzip.com) is a popular compression programmeme, which makes this task easy.
You choose the files you want to compress, and the software does the rest.
The file then will have a name like “myebook.zip” Now you need a way for readers without WinZip to be able to decompress the file.
For this, you right-click the zipped e-book file and choose option “create self-extractor” to transform it to executable file.
The only thing left to do is to “upload” it to your Web server.
It is the same process as uploading a Webpage (UNESCO, 2010).
2.
PDF: The Adobe Portable Document Format or PDF is one of formats that preserve formatting of the text regardless of the type of machine being used, and it has become an industry standard for the distribution of documents in electronic format.
With a free viewer application, like Adobe Acrobat Reader, anyone can display and print PDF files from his or her computer.
Documents in PDF format look just like the printed page.
The easiest way to create Adobe PDF files is to use the Adobe Acrobat programmeme.
Acrobatlets you to convert any document - including entire Websites - into an Adobe Portable Document Format (PDF) file, with its original appearance preserved, and then distribute it for viewing and printing on any system.
Adobe PDF files can have hyperlinks and indexes, making them a convenient way of reading for those that choose not to print the publication.
There are also new security features being introduced by Adobe, to help protect document rights and unauthorised distribution.
PDF files can be published and distributed anywhere: in print, attached to e-mail, on corporate servers, posted on Websites, or on CD-ROM.
If you have Adobe Acrobat 4.0 software installed on your computer, you can create Adobe PDF files from many popular authoring applications.
Here are steps how to create Adobe PDF file from Microsoft Word file:  Open the document in Microsoft Word.
 Click the Create Adobe PDF button in the task bar or choose File > Create Adobe PDF.
 In the General panel, select Use Acrobat Distiller, and then select Print Via Distiller’sPrinter.
Then choose eBookOptimised from the Distiller Settings pull- down menu.
 Click Create.
The PDF document is generated, placed in the same folder as the original document, and then opened in Acrobat.The Adobe Acrobat software can be obtained at Adobe’s Website athttp://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/ (UNESCO, 2010).
3.
Rocket E-book: The Rocket E-Book is one of new hand-held book readers, which provides an easy and portable way to read e-books.
Rocket E-Book is lightweight, 39 and includes good backlighting for night-time reading.
With a long battery life and large amounts of storage, it can store thousands of pages of text at once.
Rocket E-Book supports hypertext navigation and the playback of small sound files.
Rocket E-Book includes software that will convert a text document, or HTML Webpage, into RocketEdition format.
You simply convert it using the Rocket Writer software (you can get it at http://www.rocket-ebook.com/RocketWriter/index.html).
Then you can place a hyperlink to your electronic books, and allow them to be downloaded from your Website or publish them in the RocketLibrary (http://www.rocket-library.com).
The RocketLibrary is a collection of freely downloadable RocketEditions, covering a wide range of topics and subject matter.
It’s free to register, and you can submit as much content as you choose.
Converting a document to RocketEdition format: a.
Convert document to HTML: as it was mentioned before, you can do it with different software, but the simplest way would be using Microsoft Word processor and “save as” the file to the HTML file.
b.
Covert titles using the RocketWriter, which part of RocketLibrarian software.
RocketWriter allows converting text or HTML documents into RocketEditions.
It is available as a free download from the Rocket E-book site (http://www.rocketebook.com).
Start by running the RocketLibrarian software.
Move your mouse cursor to the RocketWriterglyph, and click once.
This brings up a file selection dialog box.
Simply select an HTML document or TXT file, and then click OK; then enter publication details.
Once you've converted the document, the software will offer to transfer it to your Rocket eBook.
c. Publishing your title: You can right-click on any title, and export it as a '.RB' RocketEdition file.
This can be placed on your Website, emailed to others, placed on an FTP site or contributed to the RocketLibrary (UNESCO, 2010).
3.10.
Tips for creating your e-book: Below are the tips for creating an E-Book: a.
Create a directory on your computer to include all the files for your e-book.
These files will include HTML, graphics, backgrounds, etc.
b. E-books should contain mainly text.
Try to limit your banners to one per page.
To keep your file size down, you may want to use only non-animated banners.
c. E-books are generally formatted at a small screen resolution so make sure your pages are viewable through any screen size.
d. Include good navigational links throughout your pages.
e. For massive distribution, make sure you include a short paragraph on your main page in regard to your copyrights and distribution.
40  g. Register your e-book with ISBN agency.
h. If you are really interested in e-publishing, join EPIC (Electronically Published Internet Connection) - you’ll need all the support you can get(UNESCO, 2010).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a.
What is your understanding of an E-Bok?
b.
How is an E-Book different from a traditional book?
c. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of E-Books 4.0.
Conclusion We have discussed the meaning, definitions and background of E-Books.
Also discussed are the advantages and disadvantages of E-Books, categories and types, as well as the format of E-Books.
E-Books are either published as versions of traditional books or published purely electronically.
5.0.
Summary In this unit, we appraise the historical development of E-Books.
As well, we examined the advantages and disadvantages of E-Books.
We also examined the processes involved in creating an E-Book.
Ebooks are changing the way book readers enjoy literature.
At their most basic incarnation, ebooks are viewable as plain text files or as PDF documents.
Several other formats were developed specifically for ebook implementation with the goal to digitise the experience of reading books while taking advantage of the benefits of information technology, such as Wi-Fi.
This has led to the development of a variety of ebook types and features.
6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assessment a.
Trace the historical development of E-Books b.
Identify and discuss the categories of E-Books c What are the types of E-Books?
d. Elaborately discuss the formats of E-Books e. What ate the general characteristics of E-Books f. Vividly discuss how to create an E-Book 41 7.0 References Encyclopedia (n.d).
E-Book: definition.
http://www.pcmag.com/encyclopedia/term/42214/e- book.
Accessed 09/11/2013 Gammon’s blog (2012).
Three general types of E-Books.
http://www.l1plus.com/3- general-types-ebooks .
Accessed 12/12/2013 Hirsh, A.
(n.d).
What are the types of electronic books?
http://www.ehow.com/list_6528027_types-electronic-books_.html.
Accessed 10/10/2013 Jaebi, L. (2013).
Types of E-Books.
http://www.ehow.com/info_8105813_types- ebooks.html.
Accessed 10/11/2013 Jane, M. (2013).
Definition of E-Book.
http://www.ehow.com/about_6392380_definition-ebooks.html.
Accessed 10/11/2013 Nomeh (2012).
The Meaning of E book, history of E book and types of E book or e- book.
http://ebooksworldblog.wordpress.com/2012/09/18/meaning-history-and- types-of-e-book-or-e-book/.
Accessed 10/11/2013.
Rouse, M. (2005).
E-Book: definition.
http://searchmobilecomputing.techtarget.com/definition/eBook.
Accessed 10/11/2013.
Scott (2013).
Disadvantages of E-books http://www.sunflowerbookfest.com/disadvantages-of-e-books.
Accessed 11/11/2014 UNESCO (2010).
Creating E-Books and E-Journals.
http://www.mch.mii.lt/UNESCOeducation/chapters/chapter3.pdf.
Accessed 12/12/2013 Wikipedia (n.d).
E-Book.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-book.
Accessed 12/11/2013 42  JLS 842: MODULE 2 MODULE 2 E-JOURNALS CONTENTS 1.1 Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
Conceptualisation of E-Journals 3.2 History of E-Journals 3.3 Two basic types of E-Journals 3.4.
Salient Features of Electronic Journals 3.5.
Identifiers of E-Journals 3.6.
Creating Electronic Journals 3.6.1 The Basic Stages 3.6.2.
Practical Advices 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction We can find several types of journals on the Internet today, and their number is increasing constantly.
Technology increasingly offers the possibility of using computers and communication networks to create alternative electronic forms of the conventional paper journal.
It is possible that these new forms of computer-based communication will transform the scholarly communication system.
There is much debate and discussion concerning how the roles of the various participants in the scholarly communication process, including libraries, may be redefined in the process.
Despite its benefits to science and scholarship, the paper journal system has been subject to much criticism.
Deficiencies noted by some authors include perceived 43 problems with the peer review process; that it suppresses new ideas, favours authors from prestigious institutions and causes undue delays in the publication process; high costs that are escalating faster than the rate of inflation and lack of selectivity.
Spiraling costs and long publication delays are perhaps the most serious of these criticisms.
At the same time that the costs of producing the paper journal have increased sharply, developments in computer and communications technology have accelerated.
And of course we now have the dramatic explosion of the World Wide Web (Harter & Joon, 1996).
This unit is therefore devoted to the explanation of the processes involved in publishing an electronic journal.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you should be able to: - Understand the meaning of E-Journal - Trace the History of E-Journal - Identify the type of E-Journals - Understand how to create an E-Journal 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Conceptualsation of E- Journal A journal is a publication in any medium issued in successive parts, bearing numerical or chronological designations and intended to be continued indefinitely.
The journal is accessible through Web.
E-Journal has various names, such as online journals, electronic serials, electronic periodicals.
(Wikipedia, n.d) avers that electronic journals, also known as ejournals, e-journals and electronic serials are scholarly journals or intellectual magazines that can be accessed via electronic transmission.
In practice, this means that they are usually published on the Web.
They are a specialised form of electronic document; they have the purpose of providing material for academic research and study and they are formatted approximately like journal articles in traditional printed journals.
Being in electronic form, articles sometimes contain metadata that can be entered into specialised databases, such as DOAJ or OACI, as well as, the databases and search- engines for the academic discipline concerned.
Some electronic journals are online-only journals; some are online versions of printed journals and some consist of the online equivalent of a printed journal, but with additional online-only, sometimes video and interactive media material.Most commercial journals are subscription-based or allow pay-per-view access.
Many universities subscribe in bulk to packages of electronic journals, so as to provide access to them to their students and faculty.
It is generally also possible for individuals to purchase an annual subscription to a journal, via the original publisher.An increasing number of e- journals are now available as open access journals, requiring no subscription and offering free full-text articles and reviews to all.
Individual articles from electronic journals will also be found online for free in an ad-hoc manner: in working paper archives; on personal homepages; and in the collections held in institutional repositories and subject 44 repositories.
Some commercial journals do find ways to offer free materials.
They may offer their initial issue or issues free and then charge thereafter (Wikipedia, n.d) 3.2 History of E-Journal Although e-journals have been under development since 1976, e-journals in their non- experimental phase did not begin until the 1990s, with a few exceptions (Harter& Joon, 1996).
The first peer-reviewed electronic, full-text e-journal, including graphics was Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials (OJCCT) (Keyhani, 1993, cited in Harter& Joon, 1996)).
In the most recently published list and one of the few research projects involving e-journals, Hitchcock, Carr, & Hall (1996), cited in Harter & Kim (1996) identified 115 scholarly, peer-reviewed e-journals in science and technology and there are many more in the social science and humanities.
These constitute the first wave of what are likely to be many more scholarly e-journals to come.
Narasimha (2005) avers that the history of electronic publishing is very short if compared with traditional forms of publishing, but full of important events.
After many changes, finally in the years 1994-95 appeared the very first e-journals (Narasimha, 2005).
The first e-journal to be distributed was Electronics Letters online by IEE (Institution of Electrical Engineers).
When the web was young, a common complaint was that it was full of junk.
Today a marvelous assortment of high-quality information is also available on line, often with open access.
Because electronic information can be collated, processed, and presented in multiple ways, it can become a scholarly information system, the central core of the technical-information, scientific-information and technical- information packages of the future (Narasimha, 2005).
3.3.
Two basic types of e-journals 1.
Parallel Published Journals:They are with both printed and electronic versions available to the public; these can be divided in two more types: electronic clones of “published on paper” journals and electronic journals with “published on paper” copies.
2.
Electronic Journals Only:Where there is an electronic version, the print option being available on demand.
3.4.
The Salient Features of Electronic Journals i.
They can be delivered to the desktop; ii.
They can be read by more than one person at a time iii.
Their text can be searched.
iv.
They can include multimedia and graphics, in colour, at marginal cost.
45 v. They can be published more quickly than paper publications.
vi.
They can be interactive; that is, they can foster an online exchange of ideas by e- mail, forums, chat rooms, etc.
vii.
They can take advantage of the ability to make hyperlinks, both internally and to other publications.
This means that readers can link directly to references cited in an article and also, with additional effort on the part of publishers and indexers, to later articles that cite the article they are reading.
viii.
Articles can be retrieved directly through links from abstracting and indexing databases.
ix.
The content can be reproduced, forwarded, modified, leading to possible problems with copyright protection and preserving authenticity.
3.5.
Identifiers of e-journals.
The library and publishing worlds have always maintained identification schemes for locating and tracking titles, including ISBN and ISSN.
Identifying individual print items, such as journal issues or articles, has been more difficult, but the identifier can still be linked to a physical piece.
In the online world, identifying items becomes more difficult because the items are no longer physically tied together.
Individual journal articles need to be identified as "digital objects"; in fact, the article itself may consist of a number of digital objects (text, images, sound bites, links to citations, etc.)
Today, information is not discrete physical units like books or articles, but web of objects without clear boundaries, not necessarily stored in the same location.
Relevant recent standards for identifying objects, digital and otherwise, are the SICI (Serial Item and Contribution Identifier) code and the DOI (Digital Object Identifier).
Schemes for persistent names for Internet addresses have also been developed, most notably OCLC's PURL (Persistent URL) system, and CNRI's Handles(UNESCO, 2010).
3.6.
Creating e-journal Creating electronic journal as periodical publication means creating Website, which will be regularly renewed;so before we turn to the process of creating an e-journal available on WWW, we have to dedicate some time for the basic concepts of the World Wide Web.
The World Wide Web Structure of a Website Websites are at the heart of the World Wide Web.
A Website is a location managed by an individual, group, organisation or company that provides information about specific areas of interest, products, services, general knowledge and so on.
The Web has millions of 46 Websites, each of which contains many Webpages.
These pages use text, graphics, animations, and sometimes multimedia elements like video options and sounds.
Websites often contain links to other Websites.
Connecting between Websites by clicking on these links is known as 'surfing' the web (UNESCO, 2010).
The Website Webpages are collected together in Websites.
Websites contain all the pages developed by an individual or company about a certain topic.
Each Website has an opening, or home, page.
Often the homepage will provide a site map or Website content listing.
By clicking on entries within this listing, you will be connected with pages relating to each entry.
You will usually be provided with an option to return to the homepage from each of these pages (UNESCO, 2010).
The Webpage Websites contain Webpages.
They vary in size from just a few interlinked pages to corporate sites containing hundreds of elaborately constructed pages.
A Webpage will often appear the same size and dimensions as the full-screen browser window on which you view it.
It can also be a different size and shape.
If the Webpage is bigger than your full-screen browser window, or the viewable area of the browser window on your screen, you can use scroll-bars found at the right-hand side and sometimes at the base of the screen to bring the information into view.
Clicking on the arrows on the scroll-bars will move the informationup and down, or left and right, to enable you to view it (UNESCO, 2010).
3.6.
1 The Basic Stages Now that we understand the basic concepts about what the WWW, Website, Webpage and URL means, we can turn to the creation of the e-journal.
The basic stages of the process are the following: 1.
Planning: Before you start the work with HTML editor, you have to spend some time on planning your future e-journal.
You have to prepare the project of it – it is one of the most important stages of your work.
You have to plan project’s aims, resources and creative potential, and to make a schedule of works, too.
The more details and possible mistakes you foresee at this stage, the easier it will be for you to make your publication a reality.For this you will have to answer some questions:  What will be the type of this e-journal?
As it was mentioned before, e-journals can be “parallel published” or “purely electronic” editions.
If the aim of you efforts is to create an electronic clone of your print publication, then the easiest way is to put information from your print edition to the Website of e-journal (here you’ll have to decide, if you are putting the whole material from print publication or only the most important or maybe only abstracts of articles).
Of course, you can expand the material and possibilities of 47 print version by adding some multimedia or chat room to your electronic version, for example.
If you are beginning absolutely new and purely electronic journal, your possibilities are much broader: you can use various multimedia, make your own volume- release schedule, etc.
In this case you’ll have to spend more time on preparation of the project for you edition, as you have to make important decisions about the structure and regularity of your ejournal.
 What will be the style of your Website?
You have to think about it in order to find suitable design, graphics, planning, etc.
This will help you to make the form suitable for the content.
 What will be the hierarchical structure of the files in your Website?
You have to foresee it in order to create hierarchical “tree of folders” there you’ll be placing your documents.
This will help you to create site with easy and understandable navigation, convenient for your readers.
 What will be the hierarchy of separate documents?
How will you organise ties between documents of the site; which pages will be basic and which will be dependable?
Think about making simple navigation between various documents and their parts.
 How frequently will you release new volume of e-journal?
You need to make a schedule of new volume releasing and follow it.
Remember that maybe not all the parts of your e-journal have to be renewed every time; some can be stable.
2.
Creating Content: This has to do with the message you are to pass across to your readers.
Thus, the content is the essential part of your e-journal.
Content is the text or information provided on a webpage.
Content is the most critical element of a website.
Content should be engaging, relevant and appropriate to the target audience.
3.
Design: Your Website should look not only informative, but attractive as well.
You need to layout the flow of your site on paper before attempting to put it on the web.
Try to create a framework of your future e-journal.
Try to make a model of folders and documents of your Website on paper, thinking what kind of information you will put in one folder or another and what will be the ties of certain folders and subfolders.
You can draw on paper the structure of your e-journal.
This will help you a lot making the navigation of your ejournal comfortable and that is very important for the user.
4.
Realisation I: Composing Website: Webpages are created, using simple personal computer by two stages: Creation and checking the pages on the computer; publication of pages on the Web.
You will need two kinds of programmemes for creating e-journal: i. HTML editor, which is used to create Webpages; 48 ii.
Browser, which is used to see how created Webpages look on the screen.
A browser allows you to enter and find your way around the Internet.
While you are on the Internet, the browser, like the operating system, will always be functioning in the background, providing the framework in which you work.
It enables you to retrieve and display pages from the Web, save page locations for future reference, link to search facilities and save information from the Web permanently.
There are two main browsers; namely:Microsoft's Internet Explorer and Netscape's Navigator.Although, there are others available such as Neo-Planet and Opera.
Internet Explorer and Navigator work in much the same way and generally have similar, but not identical, commands and layouts.
At the moment the most popular browser is Microsoft Internet Explorer; it is used by about 80% of Internet users all around the world (UNESCO, 2010).
HTML and its editors HTML The Webpages are prepared, using HTML language.
To understand the idea of what it reallymeans, we have to look through the basic principles and examples of HTML.HTML - Hypertext Markup Language is based on the principle of using tags, which is markers, to indicate the formatting and structure of text, placing of images and so on.
This approach gives access to the information whatever the browser used, unlike a word processed file or spreadsheet, which is accessible only to users with compatible software.
The layout that others will see is totally dependent on the tags and how the browser interprets them, not on how you lay out the page when you create it.
Thus, text will flow continuously until told otherwise, and heading styles start where indicated and continue until the corresponding end-of-heading tag is reached.
Different browsers will display the text in different ways, for example where line breaks occur or in the amount of space above or below headings.
The file in HTML format will look very different from what is displayed, though it is helpful to you to put in plenty of spaces to see where the commands are.
Tags are normally used in matched pairs, one to indicate the beginning of a particular feature and the other the end.
They begin with a less-than sign: < and end with a greater than sign: >.
What goes inside the < and > is the command.
Learning HTML is learning the tags to perform whatever command you want to do.
Here's an example: HTML editors There are two most important types of software for Webpages: text-only editors and WYSIWYG editors.
Webpages are files of simple text, so they can be created using primitive programmes like Notepad of Windows 95, but in order to make Webpages from textual files, you have to know a bit of programmeming HTML.
If you are not a programmemer, it can cost you a lot of time.
Thus you can use so-called WYSIWYG editor, which enables you to see the Webpage exactly as you are creating it.
One of popular editors of this kind is Netscape Composer;it is free and simple.
This programmeme is part of software called Netscape Communicator, which can be obtained at http://www.netscape.com.
Editor Microsoft FrontPage has much more possibilities, 49 but it is much bigger and more complicated, too.
There are a lot of really good HTML editors you can find on the Internet.
All these editors are good and popular:  HotDogProfessional (http://www.sausage.com/hotdog6)  Homesite (http://www.allaire.com/Products/Homesite/)  HoTMetal PRO (http://www.hotmetalpro.com/)  LiquidFX Professional (http://www.psylon.com/)  WEB-ED (http://www.jsware.net/jsware/webed.html) 5.
Realisation II: Publication on the Web: In order to make your e-journal available over the Net, you need a host.
This will take the form of a computer that is permanently connected to the Web, which will act as the host server for your Website.
Many ISPs provide free Webspace to those who are registered with them, and there are a number of free online content and host communities that provide help with constructing and uploading sites, and hosting them For example:  Virtual Avenue (http://www.virtualave.net/index.gsp)  Atmosphere Community (http://www.atmosphere.be/)  NBCi My Website (http://wwwx.nbci.com/mywebsite/)  PiterWeb (http://www.piterweb.net/)  Escalix-Freepage (http://www.escalix.com/freepage/)  Phrantic’s Tralerpark (http://dpec.webserve.net/dpec/webpromo/) Using one of the community sites means that your Website URL may be rather convoluted and will probably include the name of the community site.
Similarly, if you use your ISP as the host, the URL for your Website will probably include the name of the ISP.
However, they may be able to host your site with a unique domain name of your choosing, but they may charge an additional fee for this service.
The domain name can be important if you are trying to attract the maximum number of visitors to your site.
Many people prefer to use a separate domain name because it makes the site seem more professional than if it ispreceded by an ISP or Web host service name.
It will also make the site easier to find.
In order to have the right to use a domain name you have to lease it from one of the domain name registration companies such as NetNames.
You will need special software to put your e-journal on a web server.
You could use Netscape Navigator to do this, but you don't have a lot control that way.
The best way to go is using special FTP software.
FTP stands for File Transfer Protocol.
This software makes it possible to put files in your own directory, and to take them off again.
Most FTP software has two windows: the left showing your computer, the right the web server.
It looks a lot like Norton Commander or Windows Commander.
You can see exactly what is on your computer and at the server.
One of the most used programmemes is WS_FTP.
The process then consists of 3 quite simple steps: i.
Connecting to the server ii.
Transferring files iii.
Checking 50  After that, your e-journal will be accessible to visitor from the whole world (UNESCO, 2010).. 3.6.2.
Practical advices Here are several practical advises that you should bear in mind while creating your ejournal:  Minimise time of documents download; make your Webpages simple but impressive;  Use colours carefully; colourful or mixed background can “choke” the text;  Keep your paragraphs at 2-3 sentences each.
 Use headings.
 Use lists.
 Use bolding for highlighting important information.
 Watch out for too many fonts and their font sizes.
A good rule in traditional print design is two font styles and two font sizes, one for headlines and one for the body copy.
 Navigation should be easy.
Navigation bars, which are a simple set of buttons or text, should be repeated on every page in the site, usually at the top, left, or bottom.
Make sure you locate them in the same place on every page.
 It is also a good idea to let people know exactly where they are at the given moment.
You can accomplish this by having the button for the page they are on slightly altered in appearance, for example dimmed or highlighted or another colour.
 Every navigation bar should include a home page button, contact information and if your site is large; an index page or site map.
A site map will show a complete outline of the site.
Search capabilities are another good idea and allow people to conduct a one or two word search of your site and get back a possible list of pages(UNESCO, 2010).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a.
What do you understand by E-Journals?
b.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of E-journals c. Identify the two major types of E-Journals 51 4.0 Conclusion Building on the tradition of print journals, the e-journals can be a forum where scholars articulate their needs, by writing, editing and refereeing articles that evaluate and contextualise important resources.
Scholars do these in print journals as well, but in an electronic format the resources can be hyperlinked and thus immediately integrated for the readers.
With the help of Internet technology and website management, users can easily get the paper by searching by author, keyword, title, journal, year, and publication format.
5.0.
Summary Compared to the print journals, the main disadvantage of online journals is the perceived quality of paper.
As they often have a short history and have not had many years to publish famous papers, people may give online journals of less credibility.
The only solution is the paper with peer-review.
Peer-review, which is often considered the gold standard of scholarly publishing.
6.0 Tutor- Marked Assessment a. Differentiate between traditional journal and e-journals b.
Trace the historical development of E-Journals c. Elaborately discuss how to create an E-Journal d. Identify and discuss the identifiers of E-Journals 7.0 References Carol, T. and Donald, K. (2000).
Towards Electronic Journals.
Special Libraries Association, 2000 Harter, S.P.
& Kim, H.J.
(1996).
Electronic journals and scholarly communication: A citation and reference study.
Information Research.
Vol.
2(1).
Available at: http://InformationR.net/ir/2-1/paper9a.html.
Accessed 12/11/2013.
Li, X., & Crane, N. B.
(1993).
Electronic style: A guide to citing electronic information.
Westport, CT: Meckler.
Narasimha, L. R.Y.
(2005).
An analysis of E-journals in open and distance education from Mega Open Universities.http://www.eurodl.org/materials/contrib/2005/ Reddy.htm.
Accessed 12/12/2013 52 UNESCO (2010).
Creating E-Books and E-Journals.
http://www.mch.mii.lt/UNESCOeducation/chapters/chapter3.pdf.
Accessed 12/12/2013 Wikipedia (n.d).
Electronic journal.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-journal.
Accessed 12/12/2013 53 JLS 842: MODULE 2 UNIT 3 E-Newspapers and E-Magazines CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of E-Newspaper 3.2 The Meaning of E-Magazine 3.3 How Electronic Newspapers and Magazines work 3.4.
How to create E-Newspapers and E-Magazines 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Virtually all printed newspapers and magazines have online editions distributed over the Internet which, depending on the country may be regulated by journalism organisations, but as some publishers find their print-based models increasingly unsustainable, Web- based "newspapers and magazines" have also started to appear on the Internet.
Customised newspapers and magazines online have been offered by MyYahoo, I-Google, CRAYON, ICurrent.com, Kibboko.com, Twitter.times and many others.The shift from receiving information via paper to computer and mobile applications has created a proliferation of online communications, including magazines and newspapers.
Online magazines originally began as lower-cost alternatives to print publications, eliminating the printing and mailing expenses associated with traditional magazines.
Today, they have evolved into purposeful revenue-generation tools.
Online publications still follow many of the principles of traditional communications, delivering high-quality messages to tech-savvy audiences (Edmunds, n.d).
Thus, in this unit we will treat online newspapers and magazines.
Reenen (n.d) notes that the newspaper industry has taken a substantial hit in recent years.
Despite the companies' best efforts, sales of print edition news are dropping every year.
The only way for newspapers to survive is for them to adapt to the changing times.
They have to move into the era of the downloadable newspaper, so called the e-newspaper.
Thus, in this unit, we are looking at E– Newspapers and E-Magazines.
54 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you should be able to: - Understand the meaning of E-Newspapers and E-Magazines - Understand how E-Newspapers and Magazines work - Understand how to create E-Newspapers and Magazines 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Electronic Newspaper E-Newspaper is also referred to as online newspaper orweb newspaper.
It is the type of newspaper which exists on the World Wide Web or Internet, either separately or as an online version of a printed periodical.Going online create more opportunities for newspapers, such as competing with broadcast journalism in presenting breaking news in a more timely manner.
The credibility and strong brand recognition of well-established newspapers and the closerelationships they have with advertisers, are also seen by many in the newspaper industry as strengthening their chances of survival (Wikipedia, n.d).Giavedoni (n.d) says it can be an individual daily that is available online only or it could be an online version of a printed periodical.
The Internet has allowed the printed daily newspapers to compete with television, radio and other means of broadcast journalism in presenting their news timely.
Previously, you had to wait till the morning to read about an event which had happened the evening before.
Online newspapers are updated several times a day, so you come to know about an event the moment it happens.
Basically, an online newspaper is quite similar to the hard-copy newspapers;they have to comply by the same legal boundaries, such as laws pertaining to libel, privacy and copyright.
A daily newspaper contains literature of various types to suit the interests of different readers(Giavedoni, n.d).An online newspaper contains a detailed coverage of political news, sports events and information on entertainment, health and lifestyle.
Most papers have separate sections dedicated to business and economics.
Besides, there are special pages that have editor’s columns, features that give subjective views of the top journalists about various events.
Daily newspapers also have pages for advertisements of various types of products.
They also have classified pages for jobs and many more.
Sunday edition of a daily newspaper may have coupons and comics ( Giavedoni, n.d).Online newspapers also have similar sections; they also contain editorial opinions, opeds, persuasion, obituaries, entertainment and criticism.
They also have pieces of games like crosswords, sudoku and many more.
They also have reports of astrology and horoscopes.
They contain weather news and forecasts.
They also have gossip, food recipes and other columns.
You can read about critical reviews of movies, plays, shops and restaurants.
They contain cartoon strips and classified ads(Giavedoni, n.d).
3.2.
Meaning of E-Magazine By definition, an online magazine is a publication that is published on the Internet.
A lot of popular magazines also have online versions of their issues available to customers.
An online magazine is a magazine published on the Internet, through bulletin board systems 55 and other forms of public computer networks(Wikipedia, n.d).
Some online magazines distributed through the World Wide Web are calledwebzines.
An online magazine shares some features with a blog and also with online newspapers, but can usually be distinguished by its approach to editorial control.
Magazines typically have editors or editorial boards who review submissions and perform a quality control function to ensure that all material meets the expectations of the publishers (those investing time or money in its production) and the readership.Many large print-publishers now provide digital reproduction of their print magazine titles through various online services for a fee.
These service providers also refer to their collections of these digital format products as online magazines, and sometimes as digital magazines.Some online publishers have begun publishing in multiple digital formats or dual digital formats, that may include both HTML version that look like traditional web pages and Flash versions that appear more like traditional magazines with digital flipping of pages.Online magazines representing matters of interest to specialists in or societies for academic subjects, science, trade or industry are typically referred to as online journals (Wikipedia, (n.d).
3.3 How E-Newspapers and Magazine Works The following points must be considered before publishing an online magazine: 1.
Goals:The aims of an online magazine differ, depending on the organisation publishing it.
Profit-oriented publishers want to generate revenues and create content for the specific purpose of establishing audiences, gearing articles toward particular demographics, such as women, seniors or parents.
Creating a large, specific audience helps businesses attract advertisers who want to get in front of those groups.
Nonprofit organisations want to increase membership or awareness about an issue or seek donations.
Trade associations publish practical information that helps readers in their professional pursuits, encouraging membership in the organisation.
The online magazines of charities appeal to a visitor’s social conscience (Edmunds, n.d).
2.
Advertising Development: A for-profit publisher must know where its revenue is coming from before it starts to develop editorial for its e-magazine.
To that end, the publisher creates a list of potential advertisers and researches them, determining which have shown an interest in online advertising.
It also researches its competitors to know what they are charging(Edmunds, n.d).
3.
Audience Development:Before an online magazine is launched, its publisher determines what type of reader it wants.
This is necessary to serve the mission of a nonprofit or to help a for-profit company create a readership that attracts advertisers.
The publisher decides on a set of demographics that includes age, gender, ethnicity, income and education level (Edmunds, 2013).
4.
Once a publisher knows who its audience is, it can create an editorial calendar to ensure it can deliver attractive articles in every issue.
Each issue may have a specific theme, or it might be divided into sections.
For example, an online tennis magazine could include sections such as instruction, equipment, fitness and pro tournaments (Edmunds, 2013).
56 5.
Format: A computer screen is smaller than a printed magazine and users of technology may have less time or a shorter attention span than someone who sits down to read a paper magazine.
For that reason, online magazines rely on short articles and slide shows to quickly deliver content.
Web pages are laid out to keep readers from leaving the site.
Ads often are placed on the outside of pages with content placed in the middle of the screen.
Some ads may appear inside the main text blocks, with links to revenue- generating affiliate sites highlighted within the text.Readers are more likely to scroll down a page after they have begun reading an article and determine it contains valuable content than to wade past many ads and graphics to determine whether there is anything of value on the page.
Some online magazines come in PDF formats, laid out in a more traditional magazine style that readers can download, open and read later without the clutter of ads, videos and links.Many online publishers use magazine software that allows them to create the pages of their e-magazine with the same typeface, graphics, layout and other features(Edmunds, 2013).
6.
Online publications generate revenue through banner ads, click-per-pay programmes, links, affiliate programmes, mailing lists and editorial opportunities.
The publisher can sell its own banner ads directly to advertisers or use a programmeme such as Google’s AdSense, allowing the programmeme to place ads on e-magazine pages.
The publisher can sell links to advertisers’ websites, the opportunity for the advertiser to write an article or be quoted, or email blasts on behalf of the advertiser (Edmunds, 2013).
3.4 How to Create Online Magazine and Newspaper 1.
Establish a Budget: Determine how much money you will need to start your online magazine.
When forecasting your magazine, consider your rate of return, note the current economy, allocate money for advertising, establish a savings account for any unforeseeable events and determine your staff needs.
In determining your staff needs, consider freelance writers, interns and volunteers.
2.
Create a Business Plan: Create a strategy to publish the magazine and produce an income.
Your business plan should include goals for the magazine.
For example, the magazine's mission, the type of content and how you plan to get and keep subscribers.
In developing your marketing strategy, note your target audience, how often the magazine will be published, your ability to produce an online magazine and research the competition.
Use social network sites to promote your online magazine and specific articles.
3.
Choose a Name: Brainstorm a name for the magazine that will compliment the niche and content for the magazine.
Try selecting a name that will draw customers to explore the magazine.
Make sure you trademark your title to protect the name.
Once you have selected a name for the magazine, research the availability with WHOIS, a query based research tool.
If the name is available, register the name.
Hire a graphic artist or create your own magazine logo that is succinct and represents what the magazine is about 4.
Outline the Online Magazine Content: Outline topics you want to include in the magazine.
For example, if your niche is food or travel, choose related topics and 57 interviews with experts in that industry.
Develop a table of contents to let the readers know what the magazine entails.
Keep articles short, communicative and to the point.
Write headlines, using keywords so that readers can find your magazine.
To engage your readers and allow them to comment on the magazine and articles, include blog page.
Create a subscription link.
This will build your relationship with the magazine readers.
You can use email service to get subscriptions and remind customers when new issues are available.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a.
What is online newspaper?
b.
What is online magazine?
c. Identify and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of online newspapers and magazines 4.0 Conclusion The popularity and ease of use of the Internet have made online magazines and newspapers a much more affordable alternative to traditional magazines and newspaper publishing.
An online magazine/ newspaper is essentially a website that contains articles, information and advertisements, just like a traditional print magazine/newspaper.
Many publishers have been able to create and run highly successful magazines/newspaper on the Internet, because technology has significantly reduced the barriers to entry of this industry.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have examined the meaning and definitions of online magazines and newspapers; as well as how electronic newspapers and magazines work and how to create online newspapers and magazines.
An online magazine/newspaper starts with a domain name and a website hosting account.
The publisher then either designs the look of the website or hires a web designer to create an attractive layout.
Often, a web designer may install what is known as a content management system, which allows the publisher to add new content to the website without having to have web design and coding skills.
If this type of system is not installed, the magazine publisher may have a web designer on staff or on a contract basis that is responsible for uploading articles and other content to the website.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment a. Differentiate between online newspapers and magazines b.
Elaborately discuss how online newspapers and magazines work c. Elaborately discuss how to create online newspapers and magazines 58 7.0 References Edmunds, S. A.
(2013).
How does an online magazine work?
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/online-magazine-work-39498.html.
Accessed 12/12/2013.
Giavedoni, N. ().What is an Online Newspaper?
http://ezinearticles.com/?What-is-an- Online-Newspaper?&id=4767281.
Accessed 10/11/2013.
Reenen, H.V.
(n.d).
E-Newspapers: The downloadable newspaper.
http://ezinearticles.com/?E- Newspapers---The-Downloadable- Newspaper&id=2941583.
Accessed 11/12/2013.
Stringefellow, A.
(2013).
How does an online magazine work?
http://www.ehow.com/how-does_4587425_online-magazine-work.html.
Accessed 12/12/2013 Wikipedia (n.d).
Online magazines.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_magazine.
Accessed 12/12/2013 59 JLS 842: MODULE 2 MODULE 2 FUNCTIONS OF ONLINE PUBLICATIONS Unit 1: Functions of online publications CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Function of online publications.
4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION It is an irrefutable fact that web publishing is one of the means of disseminating information in the society.
Just like traditional publishing and traditional means of disseminating information in the society.
Thus in this unit we are going to examine functions of online publications.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: - Explain the functions of online publications 3.0.
CONTENT 3.1 Functions of Online Publications Online publishing plays the following functions: 1.
Socialisation 2 Agenda setting 60 3 Gate keeping 4 Status Conferral 5 Watchdog 6 Education 7 Advertising 8 Motivation, moblisation and Campaigns 9 Correlation 10 Entertainment 1.
SOCIALISATION FUNCTION Socialisation is seen as the process by which persons acquire the knowledge, skills and dispositions that make them more or less integrated members of the society.
It is through the process of socialisation that members learn certain habits, knowledge, skills, norms and values, which the society considers important.
Socialisation continues throughout one’s life.
It entails the transmission of the socio-cultural heritage and the development of personality.
In the absence of socialisation, society would not be able to exist beyond a single generation and also, culture will be non- existent.
The media are capable of socialising the members of the society through their different programmemes and features.
Television programmemes, radio programmemes, features in magazines and newspapers go a long way in socialising the audience members.
Although, the media generally are not a formal agent of socialisation, they can be used in most cases as powerful instruments of socialisation.
Online publications often transmit messages of all sorts.
Such messages among others are direct information, entertainment, propaganda, persuasion, etc.
These messages transmitted by the mass media affect people's orientations, values and experiences in no small measure.
Thus, online publications, especially online newspapers and magazines can be used to socialise the readers.
Socialisation is very important in our society because it: a. provides the foundation for the individual's effective participation in society; b. inculcates basic discipline in the individual such as respect for elders, toilet habits, behaviour, etc; c. instills aspiration in societal members; d. provides individuals with identities largely through the aspirations it encourages or discourages; 61 e. provides for the stability, persistence and continuity of society by communicating the contents of the culture from one generation to the other; and f. makes minimum, initial communication and interaction possible by providing for members to possess specific skills and values (Asemah, 2011).
The media generally are one of the socialising institutions in the society that can facilitate the promotion of culture.
Ebo, cited in Sambe (2008) says socialisation through the media can be used to standardise culture throughout all social levels of society.
The mass media therefore, have dominant roles to play in the society.The foregoing implies that online publications can inculcate certain attitudes and behaviours into the members of the society, which thereafter, make them to behave in an acceptable way in the society.
Every society has its own values, norms and ways of doing things.
According to Ineji (2003), socialisation basically refers to the adaptation of behavioural norms and values by a social system, a group of people.
These online publications can be used to describe cultural industries where all sorts of cultural portrayals have been displayed for creative impressions, imitations and adaptation by society.
The mass media, including online publications, constitute themselves into veritable tools where a plethora of cultural gratifications thrive.
This implies that the mass media generally are a storehouse of behavioural norms, cultural values and beliefs.
When the audience-members expose themselves to online publications, they consciously and unconsciously learn how to act in certain ways and appreciate certain values.
The audiences who are exposed to the contents of the online publications are likely to grow up and accept values portrayed by the online publications.
This explains why social value is transmitted from one generation to another.
This is what Harold described as the transmission of cultural heritage from one generation to another.
2.
AGENDA SETTING FUNCTION The word agenda means a list, plan or outline of things to be considered.
It is generally agreed that the media set agenda for the public to follow.
How do they do this?
They do this by raising salient issues in our society thereby making people to think along that line.
The concept implies the ability of the media to mentally order the world for us.
Thus, agenda setting is seen as the way the media set the order or importance of current issues, especially in the reportage of news.
When we say that the media set agenda for the public, we simply mean that the media, whether electronic or print, have the ability to choose and emphasise certain topics, thereby causing the public to perceive these issues as important (Asemah, 2011).
According to Orewere (2006), agenda setting refers to the ability of the mass media to influence the level of the public's awareness of issues as opposed to their knowledge about those issues.
This implies that the media provide information to the members of the public and through this provision of information, people learn about important issues of the day.
Langs and Langs, cited in Yaroson and Asemah (2008) posit that the media build up public images of public figures.
The media constantly present objects and suggesting what individuals in the society should think about, know about 62 and have feelings about.
Research has shown that most of the pictures people store in their heads is based on what they come across in the media.
If for example, online newspapers and magazines devote most of their space to the spread of HIV/AIDS, the issue of HIV/AIDS will likely remain topmost on the minds of the audiences.It is however worthy to note that the agenda they set changes with time.
This is because, the society is dynamic; meaning that it changes with time.
Events unfold on daily basis.
As events unfold, the media shift their attention.
The agenda that is set today is not what will be set tomorrow.
An issue may be burning today but will not be burning tomorrow.
3.
GATE KEEPING FUNCTION This is another media performance.
The sociological term was coined in 1947 by Kurt Lewin who used it to describe the fact that news must travel through a series of check points (gates) before reaching the public.
It is the process of deciding what should be made known to the audience and what should not be made known to them.
A gatekeeper is anyone or group that has control over what material eventually reaches the public.
Gatekeepers are the media people who influence the message.
Yaroson and Asemah (2008) observe that any media person who can stop or alter any message enroute to the audience is a gatekeeper because he decides what is aired or published and what is not.
Bittner (1989) describes a gatekeeper as any person or formally organised group directly involved in the relay or transfer of information from one individual to another through a mass medium.
Bittner further explains that a gatekeeper can be a film producer who cuts a scene from the original script or any other individual in the processing or control of messages disseminated to the public through the mass media.
Gate keeping entails the media men making decisions on what should be emphasised and what should be de-emphasised.
Gatekeepers have tremendous responsibility because they shape the message that reaches us.
They even decide which messages should reach us and should not reach us.
According to Wilson, cited in Yaroson and Asemah (2008), the media control our access to news, entertainment, information through gate keeping.
The process of gate keeping begins with the journalist who goes out to gather news items.
He is the one who decides on what event to cover and what event not to cover.
The journalist covers what he wishes to cover and submits it to the editor who will now select the important items, which will be reported.
Thus, news goes through many gates before reaching the audience.
This therefore implies that web publishers, equally act as gate keepers 4.
STATUS CONFERRAL FUNCTION Online publications create prominence for issues and people by giving them coverage.
These publications enhance attention to people, subject and issues.
The media generally in an attempt to make public certain issues inadvertently or deliberately make heroes out of ordinary people or issues.
This is what sociologist call status conferral.
This is based on the fact that when individuals and issues receive media attention, they achieve a degree of prominence which may sometime be undue.
The danger is that other issues and 63 personalities, which are not focused on by the media, suffer to the detriment of others.
Some people identify with the mass media in order to strengthen their positions in the society.
Perhaps the proliferation of mass media houses during political era is as a result of the power of the media to confer prestige on their owners and associations.
According to Lazarsfeld and Merton, cited in Sambe (2008), mass media confer status on persons, organisations, and ideas.
Those whose deeds are reported by the media are instantly elevated to prominence more than they previously enjoyed.
The import is that, the media carve out certain images for people in the society.
This is often as a result of their regular coverage of such people.
In most cases, the media promote only those who have something in common with them.
As the media continue to feature an individual, the individual will continue to gain prominence in the society.
The media can therefore elevate an individual to a certain position to the extent that the members of the public will begin to look at such an individual as very important.According to Okunna (1999), in every society, the mass media can play important political roles in the social system.
The media in addition to providing information about the political process can confer status and legitimacy on political leaders and issues making them appearing more important and right.
5.
WATCH DOG AND SURVEILLANCE FUNCTION The media generally are the eyes and ears of the public.
Online publications provide information and alert us of the changes that take place around us.
The newspaper has long been called the watchdog of a free society.
Surveillance is described by the New Standard Encyclopaedia Dictionary as a careful watching of someone or something usually carried out in secret or discreetly.
The surveillance function of the publications (online newspapers and magazines) is its basic responsibility.
Journalists survey the environment and report to the people in order to reduce uncertainties and increase the probability that the audience will react to conflicts and changes in a rational way.
The media in their surveillance activities scout round their environment and bring news of development, danger, threats to national stability, threats to public welfare and so on, to the people.
News about happenings at home and far-away land is also brought to the people.
The media are the watchdog of the society.
They watch over the society so as to know what is happening in order to report to audience- members.
The media are saddled with the responsibility of finding out about relevant events and conditions in immediate surroundings.The information function of the media is the most important.
Every day of our lives, we are witnesses to the incredible power of the mass media to provide us with all sorts of incredible information.
This is what news and many other contents of the mass media are all about.The information function of the mass media according to Okunna (1999) is all-embracing and indispensable for the meaningful existence of members of the public.
Through their various contents, the mass media collect, store, process and disseminate messages, opinions and comments which members of the public require in order to react knowledgeably to personal, environmental, national and international conditions as well as to be in a position to take appropriate decisions.
The media have the marvellous ability to reach millions, to raise issues, to create awareness on topics and to disseminate information with great efficiency.
Yaroson and Asemah (2008), cited in Asemah (2011) say: 64  Surveillance is the collection and distribution of information concerning events in the environment both within a particular society and outside it.
The journalist surveys the environment so as to know what is taking place so that he can gather news items and in turn, report to the public.
The journalists are the watchdog of the society.
One positive consequence of surveillance is that it provides warning about imminent threats or dangers.
Another social consequence of communication is that it contributes to the everyday institutional operations of a society.
The import of the above is that the online journalist owes it as a point of responsibility to continuously monitor the environment so as to gather news and report to the public.
Who else could report transpirings in the society to its members if not the journalist?
He gathers news items and informs the audiences.
This is done through news, which may be soft, hard, investigative, interpretative or in-depth.
This explains why Dominick (2008) says that surveillance refers to what we popularly call the news and information role of the media.
Dominick classifies surveillance function into: a.
Warning or Beware Surveillance: This happens when the media inform us about threats from terrorism, hurricanes, accidents, crises, wars, etc.
These are reports that are negative.
The report can be about immediate threats.
These are stories that people do not like to hear but, because we cannot control or stop such event from happening, we hear them.
b.
Instrumental Surveillance: This entails the media organisation transmitting information that is useful and helpful in our everyday life.
Thus, news about stock market prices, wedding, coronation, etc, is instrumental surveillance.
The media inform us about what is happening in the society and that is what surveillance is all about.
6.
EDUCATION FUNCTION The term education has been described as the process of acquiring knowledge, skills, values and positive attitudes so as to make the individual to be a better member of the society.
Mallum and Haggai (2004) describe education as the process by which an individual acquires knowledge, attitudes, skills and values.
Education is not just confined to the classroom, but all the experiences an individual acquires outside and inside the classroom.
In other words, the task of the educator is to create or influence desirable changes in behaviour of an individual.
Online publications (online books, magazines, newspaper and journals) through their various contents educate the audience- members.
There are Through the contents of these various online publications, we get to be educated.
Online publications, especially newspapers and magazines have messages that are meant for instruction and teaching.
They broaden and deepen one's perspectives.
They give knowledge and skills.
Sambe (2008) observes that the rapid growth in 65 communication technology and the expansion of various forms of communication have opened up new horizons and multiplied the connections between education and communication.
The advancement in communication has led to the loss of monopoly of the educational system.
The school according to Sambe is no longer the only avenue for learning.
These online publications serve learning environment.
Learning takes place through the various contents purveyed by online publications.
This may be through news, features, etc Okunna (1999) says that the mass media play an important role in the education of the members of the society.
Education according to Okunna, comprises intellectual development, acquisition of skills and capabilities and the formation of character.
Thus, online publications are involved in the passing of the character necessary to achieve all three aspects of education.
Education can be formal and informal (or incidental), online publications are involved in both types of education.
Thus, skills and knowledge could be acquired from reading online newspapers, books, magazines and journals.
7.
ADVERTISING FUNCTION Advertising is seen as the communication that is aimed at creating awareness about goods and services.
Asemah (2010) sees advertising as any form of communication that is paid for, identified by a sponsor, directed at a target audience through the mass media like radio, television, newspaper, magazine and billboard with the aim of creating awareness about goods and services.
All online publications are used for selling goods and services of organisations.
Most companies use online publications to advertise their products and services because they believe that they are reach large audience and that they are persuasive in nature.
Thus, messages are designed to induce readers to buy a particular product or idea.
Online publications perform advertising function by bringing buyers and sellers together through advertisements.
What the media sell through advertising may be a product, service, idea or a cause.
8.
MOTIVATION/MOBILISATION OF THE CITIZENS Online publications can stimulate the members of the public to take steps to achieve the aims and objectives of the society.
Online publications, especially newspapers and magazines encourage and ginger up people to achieve the aims and goals of the society.
These goals can be promoted through electronic newspapers and magazines which then stimulate and foster the aspirations and activities of individuals and communities to achieve such goals.When electronic magazines and newspapers are properly positioned, they can be an effective way for mobilising the populace towards political, educational, cultural and economic aspirations of the people.
They can galvanise the people to support government policies and act as watchdog on political system.
The media generally are used for promoting national interests and certain behaviours especially during times of national crisis.
Online publications can therefore be used to advance national interests in the spheres of politics, war, economic development, work, religion and sports.
66 9.
CORRELATION FUNCTION It is the interpretation of the information presented about the environment, prescription on what to do about it and attempts to influence such interpretations, attitudes and conducts.
These operations are usually seen as editorial activity, propaganda or attempts at persuasion.
Opinion correlation entails the selection, evaluation and interpretation of events; it involves explaining, interpreting and communicating the meaning of events and information providing support for established authority and norms socialising, consensus building and agenda setting.
This function is synonymous with editorial opinion.
Electronic newspapers and magazines do this a lot.
Correlation has to do with the interpretation of the messages presented about the environment, prescriptions on what to do about it and attempts to influence such interpretations, attitudes and conducts.
According to Orewere (2006): Correlation refers to the process of going beyond mere gathering and distribution of information to include reasoned interpretation of what is given out as news about the environment, including at times, the prescription for conduct in reactions to the events reported.
This is what is often referred to as editorial or an attempt to present ‘‘news behind the news’’ such as going beyond facts to situate the events.
This is also called news analysis or news communication which of course, could accommodate some forms of propaganda.
The import of Orewere's assertion is that electronic newspapers and magazines help in interpreting events in the society as they unfold so that the audience- members will understand such happenings.
Thus, correlation function of the electronic publications (newspapers and magazines) include editorial, comment and opinion that can afford the reader a particular perspective.
This explains why Dominick (2008) posits that the mass media do not only provide or supply facts and data; they also provide information on the ultimate meaning and significance of events.
The media explain, interpret and comment on the meaning of events and information.
10.
ENTERTAINMENT FUNCTION Online publications can be used to entertain the audience- members.
They entertain us through their contents, thereby leading to relaxation.
Mass entertainment through online publications can offer some diversion and amusement for everybody.
Relaxation and respite can be functional for people and beneficial to the society.
The mass media generally are means of escapism for the audiences.
Through features, cartoons etc, people are entertained.
The media, according to Asemah (2009) can be wonderful entertainers bringing together huge audiences not otherwise possible.
Almost all the media have an entertainment component.
Hanxy and Maxcy, cited in Asemah (2009) says that entertainment refers to communication activities primarily considered as amusement 67 irrespective of any other feature they seem to have.
Thus, online publications are capable of providing amusement, diversion and means of relaxation.
McQuail (1979) summarises entertainment thus: The provision of escape or release from anxiety, loneliness, tension, personal troubles usually into a fantasy world, the assurance and increase in self esteem, help given in social interactions as a topic of conversation, the provision of ritualistic accomplishment to daily activities which bracket the day, sets the mood and maintains a familiar environment.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a.
Are online publications important in our society?
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, we have been able to look at the various functions of online publications like online newspapers, online magazines, online books, and online journals.
Students should therefore understand that the traditional media play the same function as the online publications.
5.0 Summary This unit elaborately examines the functions of electronic publications also known as online publications.
It explains the various functions of online publications.
Although there are several functions of online publications, only ten of the functions were treated.
They, among others include: agenda setting, education, integration, entertainment, correlation, advertising and surveillance function 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment a.
List and discuss the functions of online publications 7.0 References Asemah, E.S.
(2009).
Principles and practice of mass communication.
Jos: Great Future Press.
Asemah, E.S .(2010).
Perspectives in advertising and public relations.
Jos: Lizborn Press.
Asemah, E.S.
(2011).
Selected mass media themes.
Jos: University Press.
68  Bittner, J..(1989).
Mass communication: An introduction (5th ed).
New Jersey: Prentice Hall Publishers.
Dominick, J.
(1990).
The dynamics of mass communication.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Dominick, J.
(2008).
The dynamics of mass communication: Media in the digital age (9th ed).
Boston: McGraw publishers.
Hanxy, J and Maxcy, D. (1996).
Sources: Notable selection in mass media.
Guildford: Duskin Publishing Group/Brown and Bench Mark Publishers.
IneJi, P. (2003).
Mass communication studies: The basis.
Calabar: Ushie Printers and Publishing Company Limited.
Mallum, J and Haggai, M. (2004).
Educational psychology: Class room practice.
Jos: Yabyangs Publishers.
McQuail, D. (1987).
Mass Communication Theory (2nd ed.).
London: Sage.
Ndolo, I.
(2006).
Mass media system and the society.
Enugu: Rhyce kerex Publishers.
Okunna, S,C .
(1999).Introduction to mass communication.
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Orewere, B .(2006).
The mass communicator and the audience.
Jos: Karis Production.
Sambe, J .(2008).
Introduction to mass communication practice in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Yaroson, E and Asemah, E. (2008).
Theories and models of mass communication.
Jos: Great Future Press.
69 JLS 842: MODULE 3 MODULE 3: LAWS OF WEB PUBLISHING Unit 1: Understanding the Meaning of Law Unit 2: .
Various Web Publishing Laws UNIT 1 UNDERSTANDING THE MEANING OF LAW CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptualisation of Law 3.2 Classification of Law 3.3 Characteristics of Law .
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction This unit is about the legal issues to keep in mind when publishing for websites.
The key is to remember that all the laws, policies and social rules that apply in real life also apply on the Internet.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Understand the meaning of Law  Understand the classification of law  Explain the characteristics of law 3.0 Main Contents 3.1.
Conceptualisation of Law The definition of law much as it is important has always been a subject of controversy among jurists and scholars.
This means that there is no generally acceptable definition of law because, it is variable in nature and does not give room for uniform definition.
70 As a result, its definition differs from society to society.
Thus, what may be considered law in one society may not be considered so in another society.
The definitions of law that are in existence today are formulated by authorities of diverse backgrounds and orientations.
Thinking along the same line, Jacdonmi.
(2008:1) says that many jurists, scholars, philosophers and legal practitioners have tried to come up with a unified definition of law and all efforts have proved fruitless.
Law according to Jacdonmi is not static in nature; it is constantly changing.
It is because of this dynamic nature of law that Jurists and legal practitioners have defined law as a code of behaviour laid down by the people.
Going by the above, law can be described as a body of rules designed or formulated to guide human conducts or actions which is imposed upon and enforced among the members of a given state.
In other words, it means a set of rules or principles created or approved by the state government authority in a society for the guidance or regulation of human conducts, the violation of which attracts a sanction or punishment.
Okoye (2007:4) sees law as the set of rules established by nature or human authorities to regulate natural phenomenon or human behaviours within a given community or country.
It is crystal clear from the above definitions that law can either be natural or manmade.
The natural laws are the laws of nature.
For example, we have the law of natural science.
We have the law of gravitation discovered by Isaac Newton, we have the law of supply, demand and diminishing returns.
For the fact that the earth rotates on its axis is a law which was imposed by nature.
Man-made laws are those imposed by human authorities for the regulation of human activities.
In this book however, we are concerned with the man-made laws.
3.2.
CLASSIFICATION OF LAW There is two broad classification of law; namely: international and municipal law 1. INTERNATIONAL LAW This can further be discussed under two categories: a.
Public International Law: This is the law that governs the mutual relationships between states or countries of the world.
No country of the world can live in isolation.
Countries of the world need to maintain mutual understanding as this is the only way that there can be global peace.
To have this global peace, there is public international law.
b.
Private International Law: It deals primarily with determining what system of state law should be properly applied by state courts in cases involving crisis between persons of different nationalities.
71 2.
MUNICIPAL LAW It simply refers to the set of rules and regulations established by human authorities in a particular country or state.
Such body of rules are only recognised and enforced in a particular country.
Municipal law can be classified into: i.
Public and Private Law: Public law is primarily concerned with the state and with the rights and duties existing between the individuals and the state.
A very good example is the constitutional law.
Private law on the other hand, deals with the rights and duties of individuals.
It is primarily concerned with matters affecting the rights and duties of individuals among themselves.
For example, the laws of contract, torts, property, succession etc.
ii.
Criminal and Civil Law: Criminal law as a branch of law concerns itself with the regulation of offences committed by members of the society against the state.
It deals with the trial and punishment of persons who commit offence against the state.
It is the duty of the state to punish those who commit crime in the society.
These offences are such that can seriously harm the community and based on that, it is considered an offence against the state.
Civil law on the other hand, protects the rights of the individuals towards each other.
It can be classified into commercial law, media law, company law etc.
iii Substantive and Procedural Law: Substantive laws refer to the set of rules and regulations that govern people.
That is, the text or substance of the law itself which guides the courts in making decision.
Procedural laws on the other hand, are those which consist of rules that lay down the procedure for applying the law.
In other words, they are rules which determine the course of an action or the rules which govern the machinery as opposed to the subject matter of litigation.
3.3.
Characteristics of Law i.
It is a body of rules.
ii It is prescribed or designed by state or sovereign or governing authority.
iii It is enforced by the state through the instruments or means of sanctions.
iv It is given to a society (unless where it is repealed or modified).
v In their prescribed form, the rules of law are generally certain and predictable in character and in content.
3.4.
Functions of Law in the Society Eweluka cited in Okoye (2007:5) identifies five important contributions of law to the society.
They include: i.
Regulation of Human Conduct: In a society where there is no law, people will choose to fight, kill and rob at will; anarchy will definitely prevail when there is no law to regulate the behaviours of the people.
Laws exist in a society to ensure that the citizens conduct themselves in an orderly manner.
When you have a society where everyone conducts himself in an orderly manner 72 because he is guided by his conscience or religion, there would be no need for law.
But because we do not have such a society, laws are made to regulate the behaviours of the people.
This therefore brings about peace and tranquility in a given society.
ii.
Reconciliation of The Interest of Individual To That of TheCommunity: Some people's interests may be different from that of the community.
There is the need to ensure that the interests of the individuals correspond with the welfare or interests of the community at large, hence, laws are made.
The essence is to ensure that every individual considers the good of all and the public good in particu1ar.
iii.
Pointing Out Where Interest Exists: The court of law examines cases brought before it and identifies and protects where interest has been violated.
iv.
ManOwes His Dignity To Law: Law makes it possible for everyone to be subject to the law of the land.
It is supreme and all men must obey the laws of the land.
The law guarantees the inalienable rights of the individual in the constitution.
Because we have the rule of law, the civil and political rights of the individual are recognised.
v. Change In Economic, Political, Social And Religious Structures Are Initiated By Laws: The only thing that is constant is change.
The society as we know is dynamic, it changes with time and every society must move with changing times.
When there is a change in the social, political and economic structures of a country, the only way the society can restructure itself to meet up with progress and continuity is through the initiation of laws.
From the going, it is quite evident that without law in any given society, anarchy and lawlessness will be the order of the day thereby, leading to pandemonium in the society.
The resultant effect will be economic, social and political stagnation with ultimate consequence of societal disintegration.
Sambe and Ikoni (2004: 8) however say that the purposes of law in any given society among others include: i.
To ensure and maintain order.
ii.
To achieve justice and fairness.
Ill. To protect the rights and the interests of the weak and the oppressed.
iv.
To preserve the integrity and personality of an individual.
v .
To preserve the fundamental values or ethics of the society.
73 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a.
Is it possible to regulate web publishing, just like traditional publishing?
4.0.
Conclusion In this unit we examined the meaning of law as a general concept and as it relates to web publishing.
We also examined the various classifications of law, functions and characteristics of law.
Though as old as man and hence supposedly very familiar to everyone, web publishing law requires elucidation and amplification to the clear understanding of all, especially potential online publishers.
5.0.
Summary This unit is an explanation of the meaning, classification, functions and characteristics of law.
Law as it were is the set of rules established by nature or human authorities to regulate natural phenomenon or human behaviours within a given community or country.
Law is mainly classified into two in this unit; this includes international and municipal laws.
Law is important in the society for several reasons, these among others include: regulation of human conduct, reconciliation of the Interest of individual to that of the community and pointing out where interest exists: The court of law examines cases brought before it and identifies and protects where interest has been violated.
6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assessment b.
What do you understand by the concept “ law?” c. Briefly discuss the classification of law d. Identify and discuss the functions and characteristics of law 70.
References/ Suggestions for further Reading Eweluka, B.
(2004).
Introduction to Nigerian press law.
Onitsha: Maranatha Press.
Jacdonmi, V. (2008).
Nigerian media lawand ethics.
Jos: Great Future Printing and Business Centre.
Okoye, I.(2007).
Nigerian press laws and ethics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Limited.
Sambe, J. and Ikoni, U.
(2004).
Mass media laws and ethics in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Caltop Publications Nigeria limited.
74 JLS 842: MODULE 3 UNIT 2 Various Web Publishing Laws CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Law of Defamation 3.2.
Law of Sedition 3.3.
Copyright Law 3.4.
Shield Law 3.5.
Law of Privacy 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Reading 1.0.
Introduction Publishing laws equally apply to online publishers in general.
As discussed in unit 1 of module 3, law regulates human conducts; thus the conduct of web publishers can also be regulated through various web publishing laws.
Thus, this unit is devoted to treating the various web publishing laws.
2.0.
Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify and discuss the various web publishing laws 3.0.
Main Contents 3.1.
Law of Defamation Every human being whether rich or poor, highly placed or lowly placed, literate or 75 illiterate has his integrity to protect.
The law of defamation is that law which seeks to protect individuals from indignity, ridicule, disrepute and the social embarrassment which the persons may be disposed to through malicious publications.
The chief ingredient of a reputation is a good name which is said to be among a man's priceless possessions and gives him the respect and love of his family, the honour, esteem and confidence of his family and community in general.
It also measures the respect and goodwill he has earned among his peers.
Thus, any word spoken or written, that generates adverse, derogatory or even unpleasant feelings against a person is said to have injured his reputation for which he is entitled to seek redress.
The law that provides redress for such injury is known as law of defamation (Asemah, 2011).
Sambe and Ikoni (2004:47) say that the law of defamation tries to strike a balance between individual's right to have his reputation protected and freedom of speech which does not imply the freedom to expose wrong doing at the expense of others' reputation.
The common interest in law of defamation therefore, is to protect the reputation of individuals from being unjustly messed up before the right thinking members of the society.
The essence is to guide against unnecessary and avoidable character assassination.
The law is aimed at protecting the reputation of the people in the society from being injured by the members of the society through the organs of mass media or interpersonal communication.
The law of defamation falls under the law of torts.
3.1.1 MEANING OF DEFAMATION Many scholars have given their definitions of defamation.
In the words of Fogam and Acqua Dadzie (1987:65), defamation is any article or broadcast which exposes a person to hatred, ridicule or contempt, lowers him in the esteem of his fellows, causes him to be shunned or injures him in his business or calling.
Defamation is also defined as an intentional false communication either published or publicly spoken, that injures another's reputation or good name.
Enemo (1998:1), cited in Asemah (2011) says that defamation is the publication of a statement concerning a person which is calculated to lower him in the estimation of right thinking persons or causes him to be shunned or avoided or expose him to hatred or ridicule or convey an imputation on him, disparaging or injurious to him in his office, profession, calling, trade or business.
It is any publication or aired message which vilifies a person.
It is writing or saying things that bring a person or organisation into disrepute or public odium or generally injures the person's or organisation's reputation before the public.
The basic thing is that, an organisation or a person is lowered or ridiculed in a manner injurious to him.
Defamatory statements may be made in numerous ways.
This means that there are no comprehensive definitions of defamation.
This has made the job of a journalist more onerous, more especially as the definitions so far proffered do not cover every case.
Under the Nigerian Defamation Law of 1961 which is still in force, any spoken or written word is considered to be defamatory if it does any or a combination of the following: i.
Has the tendency of lowering the estimation of a person in the eyes or minds of the right-thinking members of the society.
ii.
Exposes a person to hatred, contempt, odium and public ridicule.
iii.
Causes other people to shun or avoid a person.
iv.
Injures a person in his or her trade, profession or office.
76  It should be noted that the defamatory words must not excite hatred, ridicule or contempt before it will be regarded as defamation.
3.1.2 TYPES OP DEFAMATION Technically, defamation, as noted by Asemah (2011), can be categorised into two: 1.
LIBEL It is simply described as a written communication that has defamatory content against a person, community, religion or an organisation; it is actionable perse.
Libel is any defamatory statement that is made in any visual form which is permanent.
This covers photographs, pictures, cartoons, books etc.
Thus, Eweluka (2004:212) sees libel as defamation by means of writing or by any other permanent form as video tapes, pictures, art work, effigy etc.
Malami (1999:77) also says that libel is a defamatory statement made in a visible permanent form such as written or printed words or statements as in books, newspapers, magazines, notes, circular, letter or by way of effigy, caricature, painting, photograph, film, radio and television broadcasts, any recorded audio-visual material and so on.
From the foregoing, libel simply means any communication which is permanent and which tends to expose an individual or an organisation to hatred.
By the provision of section 3 of the Defamatory and Offensive Publication Acts, words contained in radio broadcasts as well as television are to be treated as libel because, they are recorded in permanent form.
Libel can be classified into criminal and civil libel.
i.
Criminal Libel: It can be grouped into blasphemy and obscenity.
Blasphemy is a libellous statement that tends to annoy a particular faith or religion.
Such Statements or publications can bring about war in a society.
Obscenity on the other hand is committed when a journalist or an individual tends to corrupt the morals of the people.
Obscenity is any publication that causes immorality in the society.
ii.
Civil Libel: This is the type that has a bandwagon effect.
For example, when you defame the leader of a particular religion or a particular tribe, his followers are bound to rise up to fight.
It is worthy of mention here that libel is actionable perse and this means that the aggrieved party need not prove any actual damage.
Thus, once there is a publication which has been proven to be libellous, the law presumes damage on the part of the affected party and damages will be awarded to him in form of general damages.
However, where the affected person goes further to prove actual damage, the court will award him what is known as special damages in addition to general damages.
This is simply because, libel is a written defamation which tends to injure a person's reputation or good name or that diminishes the esteem, respect or good will due a person.
77 2.
SLANDER It is defamation through spoken words or gestures.
It is defamation in transitory form.
Slander is a defamatory statement addressed to the ear, but as earlier stated, radio and television is classified under libel.
The general position of the law is that, slander is not actionable perse thus, where the plaintiff complains that words uttered by the defendant are defamatory of him, no action will lie unless, in addition to the words uttered, the plaintiff further shows that he has suffered actual damage either by way of his business or by conduct of the people towards him or some other material or financial loss or disadvantage occasioned by the conduct of the defendant.
As we earlier noted, slander is the defamation of one's reputation or character by spoken words.
The common ground open for a plaintiff to prove a case of slander is to convince the court beyond reasonable doubt that he or she really suffered some damages on account of what the defendant said.
Slander can therefore, be proved by producing a witness to testify upon oath that he or she witnessed the occasion where the defendant actually used the words complained of against the plaintiff.
However, there are exceptional cases in which slander is actionable perse.
The exceptions are the recognition of the fact that there are some words which are very harmful and injurious to a person when uttered, in which case, the injured person or party need not prove actual or special damage before he succeeds.
This means that where these exceptions are obtained, slander becomes actionable perse and consequent upon that, have the same effects as libel.
Below are some of the exceptions: i. Imputation of Crime: Publications which impute the commission of crime are actionable perse.
For it to be qualified as actionable slander, the imputation of crime must be a direct assertion of guilt.
This therefore means that mere allegation of suspicion will not be enough.
More so, the alleged crime must be punishable by imprisonment in the first instance.
If punishable only by fine, then, actual damage would have to be proven.
Also, the words complained of must be looked at in the context in which the imputation was made in order to discover what was imputed ii.
Imputation of Disease: Where the slanderous statement contains words which impute that one has certain contagious diseases then, the slander is actionable perse.
This is because, when you say that someone has such contagious ailment, there is the possibility of the person being shunned and avoided by the mentally sound members of the public.
Here, we have disease like tuberculosis, HIV / AIDS, leprosy etc.
Enemo (1998:5) says that it is a slander actionable perse to say that a person is infected with a contagious or repulsive disease likely to prevent others from associating with such a person.
Enemo however said that there is uncertainty as to what diseases are included in this exception.
iii.
Imputation of Unchastity or Immorality Against A Woman (Adultery): Where the imputation is against unchastity or lack of moral uprightness on the part of a woman or a girl, the slander is actionable perse.
This is because, such statements are likely going to make people to shun her, 78 including the husband (the married ones).
To accuse a married woman of adultery is actionable perse.
But the context in which the imputations were used will be taken into consideration.
Thus, if the woman has actually committed adultery and the defendant can prove beyond reasonable doubt, it is not actionable perse.
iv.
Imputation Affecting Office, Profession, Calling, Trade or Business: When words that are defamatory are used against someone and such defamatory words in turn affect the plaintiff in his business or office, such a slander is actionable perse.
To therefore say that a lawyer is a quack is actionable perse, to say that a Doctor is a quack is actionable perse.
Thus, Enemo says that imputation of unfitness, dishonesty or incompetence in respect to an office, profession, trade or business held or carried on by the plaintiff at the time of the publication will be actionable perse.
ELEMENTS OF DEFAMATION The elements of defamation are the necessary ingredients that are common to libel and slander which must be proven (Asemah, 2011).
Asemah identifies the elements thus: 1.
Publication: Before the law recognises a statement or comment as defamatory, it must be published.
In the eyes of the law, publication occurs when one person, in addition to the writer and the person who is defamed sees or hears the material.
The defamatory statement must be communicated to at least, one person other than the plaintiff.
Publication to the plaintiff alone is not actionable.
This is because, defamation has to do with the publication that tends to reduce the reputation of an individual before the right thinking members of the society and not from injury to his feelings about himself.
The publication could be through radio, newspaper, magazines, cartoons, books, journals, etc.
It is the publication that gives a cause of action.
The material part of the cause of action in libel is not the writing but, the publication of the libel.
Publication made innocently comes under innocent dissemination.
So, when you destroy someone’s reputation through online publication, it is defamatory.
2.
Identification: The plaintiff must be able to prove that him or her is the one that is being referred to.
The words must be seen to refer to the plaintiff.
The injured party must show to the court that the alleged defamatory statement is, of and concerning him or her.
Failing to do so, the plaintiff will lose the suit.
3.
The Words Must Be Defamatory: Defamatory words are words which tend to expose an individual to hatred in the estimation of the right thinking members of the society.
Sambe and Ikoni (2004:55) observe that the question of what standard to apply in determining whether the words used are defamatory has not been answered uniformly.
The commonest text however, seems to be that the plaintiff must be able to prove that the words complained of are defamatory of him in the eyes of the right thinking members of 79 the society generally and not merely a section of it.
Thus, where the injured party is able to satisfy this requirement, the words will be held defamatory.
Usually, it is the court that decides whether the words used are capable of conveying a defamatory meaning.
And in so doing, the court or Judge is guided by the text of reasonableness, taking into consideration what natural and ordinary meaning of those words would mean to or to be understood by those to whom they are published.
Having known what defamatory matter means and how it can be determined, it becomes necessary to discuss the ancillaries of defamatory words: a.
The Intention of The Defamer: The law does not take into consideration the motive or the intention of the defendant in the court of law.
The motive or intention of the defamer is immaterial in an action for defamation.
The major concern of the law is the effect or consequence of what has been published on the plaintiff and not the intension of publishing the story.
Whether the intension is good or bad does not really count.
In the court of law, it is assumed that everyone is of good character and based on this fact, the defamation of an individual is considered to be false until it is proven to be true.
In this sense, malice is used in a technical sense to mean the same thing as intension which refers to wrong intension for doing an act without a just cause or excuse and this is presumed by the law from the fact of publication.
Sambe and Ikom (2004:56) note that it must be borne in mind that this presumption is reputable.
Thus, when the defendant shows a just cause or excuse for the publication, the defence of qualified privilege avails him.
Where that is the case, the onus of proof is shifted to the plaintiff to prove the existence of malice in the popular sense.
This means that there is an indirect motive under the influence of which the defendant abused the privileged occasion.
Journalists must therefore, base their reports or publications on complete identification of the individual possibly, his age.
This is necessary because, it will save the reporter and the establishment the risk of describing a separate person bearing the same name.
b. Innuendo: In Okon V. Advocate, an innuendo was defined as defamatory imputation whose extrinsic facts known to the reader impart into the words as an addition to or alteration of their ordinary meaning.
This connotes that an innuendo relies on a conjunction of the words used and some extrinsic facts; mere implication of the words complained of without any extrinsic support will not suffice.
Innuendos in the law of defamation are of two types: i.
True or Legal Innuendo: This is a situation whereby the words in their ordinary and natural meanings do not have any defamatory tendencies, but, there exist a special situation where the words would convey to a person who is knowledgeable of those situations and to whom the words were published to consider them defamatory.
The plaintiff argues that even though the words are not defamatory on the face, they contain and convey a defamatory meaning to person to whom they are published because of special facts or circumstances not set out in the words themselves but known to those persons.
In other words, legal innuendo alleges that although, a statement may be innocuous on the surface, because of the special knowledge of those to whom they were published, it is defamatory.
A case in which innuendo was established was that of Akintola V. Anyia.
In that case, the defendant published a book titled "Among the 80 Nigerian Celebrities".
In the book, it was alleged that the plaintiff was the son of "Chief Sawe of Ilesha and Alice".
Meanwhile, it was revealed that the plaintiff does not come from Ilesha but, Ogbomosho and belong to a different family entirely.
It was held that the words were defamatory of the plaintiff.
Although, the words were innocent on their face, they were nevertheless held defamatory; this is because, if the people who know the plaintiff to be an Ilesha man read the story, they would think that he had been untruthful about his origin and parentage.
Also, if for example a journalist describes Miss.
B. as always frequenting house number 20 Akara street, Jos and the house is known to be the habitation of prostitutes, the statement may seem innocent on the surface, but, it is published to persons who know that house number 20, Akara street is an abode for the prostitutes.
Meaning that, the statement carries innuendo that Miss B is also a prostitute.
However, the plaintiff must establish that persons having knowledge of special facts or circumstances might reasonably understand the words in a defamatory sense (Asemah, 2011).
ii.
False or Popular Innuendo: A defamatory meaning which derives no support from extrinsic facts but, which is said to be implied from the words which one used is said to be popular innuendo.
This simply entails that the court can draw its own conclusion as to the meaning of the words and not necessarily accepting the meaning assigned to the words by witnesses.
Here, the plaintiff contends that the words are defamatory not because of any extrinsic facts or circumstances known to those to whom the words were published, but, because of some defamatory inferences which reasonable persons would generally draw from the words themselves.
A false innuendo goes beyond the literal meaning of the words but is inherent in them (Asemah, 2011).
DEFAMATION OF A GROUP A troublesome question regarding identification is group identification.
Can a member of a group sue when the group as a whole is defamed?
Sambe and Ikoni (2004:64) opine that the general position of the law is that an individual cannot successfully bring an action or complaint of a defamatory statement that refers to a group, class or body of persons.
Thus, where it is stated that all lecturers are rogues, no single lecturer can sue for defamation successfully.
This general rule is grounded on the belief that a derogatory statement of a large and indeterminable number of persons described by general name can hardly reflect on a single member of the group.
The plaintiff usually, has little problem in convincing the court that defamation has occurred.
But where defamatory words are published of a group or class of persons, a member of the group can sue if the group is so small as to lead to the inference that what is said of the group is necessarily said of every member of that group or that the circumstance of the case shows that the plaintiff was clearly being referred to.
This was why the Supreme Court upheld the decision of the trial court in Dalumo V. Sketch and found that sufficient reference to the plaintiff being inferred from the publication even though it relates to all top officials of the Nigerian Airway Corporation, of which the plaintiff is the acting secretary since the group was so small and ascertainable.
It is left for the court to decide whether or not there is sufficient evidence which the words complained of and that can be regarded as referring to the plaintiff.
Where such evidence exists, it becomes a matter 81 of fact (Asemah, 2011).
DEFENCES FOR DEFAMATION There are so many defences available in an action for defamation.
It is imperative for the web publisher to know these defences, because when he knows them, he can use them to test the safety or otherwise of what he intends to publish.
The defences are.
1.
Truth: Before a web publisher can use this as a defence, he must be able to prove beyond reasonable doubt that what he is saying is nothing but the truth.
It means that the defendant is able to justify his derogatory statements.
The web publisher admits the publication of the defamatory words but, pleads that he is not liable to the plaintiff because, the words as they stand are true in substance and fact.
Where the defendant can prove that the alleged defamatory words are true, it does not matter whether the publication was actuated by malice or ill-will.
2.
Privileged: It is categorised into absolute and qualified privilege.
Absolute Privilege: It is a complete defence to an action for defamation however false or defamatory the statement may be and however maliciously it may have been made.
Absolute privilege covers the following areas: a.
Statement made in the course of and with reference to judicial proceedings by any judge, jury man, advocate, party or witness.
b.
Statements made in the proceedings of the legislature.
For example, National Assembly and States House of Assembly.
c. Commendations made by one officer of state to another in the course of his official duty.
d. Reports of judicial proceedings.
Qualified Privilege.
The main difference between the absolute privilege and qualified privilege is that a plea of qualified privilege will be defeated if the plaintiff is able to prove that the defendant in publishing the words complained of, was actuated by express malice, whereas in absolute privilege, the malice of the defendant is irrelevant.
Qualified privilege covers the following occasions: a.
Statements made in the performance of a legal moral or social duty.
b.
Statements made to the proper authorities in order to obtain redress for public grievances.
c. Statements made in self defence.
d. Statements made between parties having a common interest.
e. Fair and accurate reports of proceedings in the legislature.
f. Fair and accurate reports of judicial proceedings.
3.
Fair Comments: The journalist is free to comment on issues of public interest.
It is a defence to an action that the statement complained of was fair comment on a matter of public interest.
It is very important to preserve the fundamental human rights to freedom of 82 expression and the defence is available to all who comment fairly on all matters that may be said to be the legitimate concern of the public.
The constitution charges the press to make government accountable and uphold the fundamental objectives of the Nigerian state.
It therefore follows that fair comments made in respect of any public officer or public figure or any matter of public interest can form a defence against an action for defamation.
For a comment to be fair, it must satisfy the following conditions: a.
The matter must be of public interest like affairs of government, administration of justice, management of public institutions, church matters etc.
The statement must be an opinion, not an assertion of fact.
The statement must be based on facts truly stated.
The comment must be honestly made.
The comment must not be actuated by express malice.
4.
Consent to the Publication: He who agrees should not complain.
If someone willingly invites an online journalist to cover his function or he grants the online journalist an interview based on his own decision, it becomes a defence if the interviewee turns round to institute an action of defamation.
For this defence to be a successful one, there has to be written consent between the online journalist and the interviewee before publication.
However, if the publication goes beyond the limit of the initial approval, there maybe grounds for an action.
This defence is known as volentia non-fit-injuria.
5.
Death of the Plaintiff: Reputation is a personal possession and only the owner of the reputation can sue for it.
If the owner of the reputation dies, it becomes difficult for an action to continue.
An action for defamation is an action "inpersonam".
That is, such actions are personal and only the person whose reputation has been injured can seek redress.
The purpose of an action for defamation is to vindicate the character of the person defamed.
Accordingly, the proper party to bring an action is the person defamed.
Thus, an action for defamation by the plaintiff cannot survive him or be continued by his heirs or successors in titles.
That is, when the plaintiff dies, the action also dies with him.
Also, when a defamatory statement is published concerning a dead person, the relations cannot maintain an action on behalf of the deceased.
6.
Resjudicata: This means that a case cannot be treated in two courts of the same jurisdiction.
If a case of defamation has been adjudged, whether lost or won, by law, the plaintiff or defendant is not allowed to file a fresh action on the same matter.
Resjudicata is to say that the case has come to a logical conclusion and has died a natural death.
Resjudicata is a proposition to the effect that the matter has been adjudicated upon before by a competent jurisdiction.
To qualify as such, it must be shown to the satisfaction of the court that: a.
The parties in the case at hand are the same as those in the case being pleaded as resjudicata.
b.
The alleged defamatory matter in the suits is the same jurisdiction.
c. The said suit was decided by a court of competent of jurisdiction.
Thus, the court will not entertain a second action based on the same complaints against the same defendant by the same plaintiff.
The defendant or plaintiff who is not 83  satisfied with the judgements can only go to a court of higher authority AVOIDING LIBEL SUITS A successful libel suit can cause an individual, or organisation much harm and fortunes.
The following are tips on how to avoid the troubled waters as supplied by Mencer (1996:402), cited in Asemah (2011): 1.
Confirm and verify all possible defamatory materials.
The writer should double- check anything that questions a person's fitness to handle his or her job, alleges a person has committed a crime or performed some acts that constitute a crime and implies or directly states that a person is mentally ill or has a loathsome disease.
2.
Make sure that questionable materials can be proven.
3.
Be especially careful of arrest reports, damage suits and criminal court hearings.
These stories cause more libel suits than all others and almost all the suits are the results of careless reporting or writing.
Check names, addresses and make sure the defendants and plaintiffs are properly identified.
4.
Do not try to sneak in defamatory materials with such words as alleged or reported.
These words are not protections against libel.
5.
When charges and accusations are made in privileged situation, it is a good idea to check with the person being defamed, this extra check demonstrates your fairness.
6.
Do not colour an article with opinions.
Watch out for personal enthusiasms that cause you to loose control of the writing.
7.
Be careful of statements made by police or court officials outside court.
8.
Truth is a defence, but good intentions are not, you may not have meant to defame someone, but, when your well-meaning writing proves to be untrue, your intention is no longer a defence.
9.
A retraction of an error is not a defence.
At most, it could lessen damages and eliminate punitive damages.
3.2.
LAW OF SEDITION The seditious law is one of the first few enactments of the British Administration to put a check on the press.
It was one of the laws fashioned to curtail the operations of the press.
It was believed that the press could do and also undo any government, so, the colonial government enacted the Seditious Offence Ordinance of November 6, 1909 to restrict the press report of the railway scandal which was widely published by nationalists/journalists; one of whom was Herbert Macaulay (Asemah, 2011).
Momoh in Akinfeleye (1988:114) says that since the criminal code Act of 1916, this offence has been in our status book and has been very much involved since after independence.
It constitutes one of the political offences against the state in criminal law.
Sedition can be described as the statement or publication made with the intention to incite people against 84 the federal or state government and make the people to call for a change of government through unlawful means.
It is the communication of a message which could incite people to be restive, to riot or to rebel against the government of the day.
When the publication or aired message is seen to be an intention to encourage people to unlawfully oppose the government, it becomes a seditious publication or a seditious broadcast.
Enactments on sedition are made by the government of a nation to ensure order among citizens.
It is the duty of the court or Judge to determine whether the alleged publications by the accused are capable of bearing a seditious meaning and if so, whether written or oral.
In doing that, the court or judge puts in several tests to determine whether a particular publication is serious or not.
These include but, not limited to the following: i.
Does it bring the government of the federation or state or the Head of state or Governor into hatred or contempt?
ii.
Does it excite the citizens or inhabitants of this country to attempt alteration of any matter in Nigeria other than by law established?
iii.
Does it engender discontent or disaffection among the citizens of Nigeria?
iv.
Does it promote feelings of ill-will and hostility between classes of the population of Nigeria?
From the foregoing, it can be concluded that sedition is any publication which is likely to disturb the internal peace, security, tranquility and government of any given country.
3.2.1.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS OF THE OFFENCE The penal code provides for the offence of sedition in Nigeria.
Under the section 50 (1) of the criminal code, seditious words and seditious publications are defined as words and publications having seditious intentions.
Section 50 (2) further elaborates on the description of law of sedition by stating that a seditious intention is an intention: a.
To bring into hatred or contempt or to excite disaffection against the person of a state or the government of the federation or of any state thereof, as by law established or against the administration of justice in Nigeria.
b.
To excite the citizens or other inhabitants of Nigeria to attempt to procure the alteration, otherwise than by lawful means of any other matter in Nigeria as by law established.
c. To raise discontent or dissatisfaction among the citizens or other inhabitants of Nigeria.
d. To promote feelings of ill-will and hostility between different classes of the population in Nigeria (Asemah, 2011).
Under the criminal code, the offence of sedition is also created in section 51 which provides that a person shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction, for first offence to imprisonment for two years or to a fine of one hundred pounds or to both such fine and imprisonment if he: a.
Attempts to do or make any preparation to do or conspires with any person to do any act with a seditious intention.
85 b. Utters any seditious words.
c. Prints, publishes, sells, offers for sale, distributes or reproduces any seditious publication.
d. Imports any seditious publication unless, he has no reason to believe that it is seditious.
Under the penal code, the offence of sedition is contained in section 416- 422 and the content of the provision is similar in all respects to the provisions of the offence under the criminal codes (Asemah, 2011).
3.2.2.
ELEMENTS OF SEDITION The elements of sedition, as noted by Asemah (2011) can be classified into two: 1.
Intention: Whether the offence is in words or in writing, it must carry a seditious intention.
That is, an intention to expose the government to hatred or to bring about disaffection against the government.
Section 419 of the penal code in part is to the effect that: ‘‘Whoever has in his possession without lawful excuse the proof of which shall lie on him any book, pamphlet, newspaper, the publication or exhibition of which constitute an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment’’.
Section 50 (3) of the criminal code states: ‘‘every person shall be deemed to intend the natural and probable consequences which would naturally follow from his conduct at the time and under the circumstances in which he so conducted himself ’’.
This therefore means that the motive, reason or intention behind the publication, carries a great weight in qualifying a publication as sedition.
2.
Publication: This is simply making known the alleged act to another person.
Publication here stands for the writing of materials that contain seditious intentions.
This includes all written and printed matter and any matter containing visible representation.
Any writing or cartoon that has intentions enumerated under section 50 (2) of the criminal code is publication.
3.2.3.
DEFENCES FOR SEDITION As documented in section 50 (2) (i-iv) of the criminal code, a speech or publication will not be regarded or amount to sedition if it intends to: i.
Show that the president or governor was misled or mistaken in any measure in the federation or state as the case maybe.
ii.
To point out errors or defects in the government or constitution of Nigeria or of any region as by law established or in legislation or in the administration of justice with a view to remedying such errors.
iii.
To persuade the citizens to procure by lawful means the alteration of any matter in Nigeria as by law established.
iv.
To point out with a view to removing any matter which is producing or having the tendency to produce feeling of ill-will and enmity between different classes of people or the population of Nigeria.
86 The court is to take the overall view of the publication to determine seditious intention.
Thus, once the article is seditious as a whole, the mere fact that it has certain redeeming parts such as contained in section 50 (2) (i- iv) will not absolve the accused person.
The following may be regarded as the traditional defences for sedition: a.
Consent of Attorney General: Section 52 (2) of the criminal code says that someone cannot be prosecuted for a seditious offence without the consent of the Attorney General of the federation or State.
b. Lapse of Time: Any offence that is related to sedition should be handled within six months from the date the offence was committed.
If the proceeding does not start within the time frame of six months, it will run contrary to the provision of the law.
c. Corroboration: If the seditious offence is committed by mouth (words of mouth), no person shall be convicted of the offence of altering seditious words if such words or testimonies of the witnesses is not corroborated.
d. Lack of Knowledge: Newspaper vendors can use this as a defence because, they innocently disseminate seditious materials.
They often do not know the seditious nature of materials.
This becomes a very useful defence when the offender is an illiterate that cannot read nor write (Asemah, 2011).
3.3.
COPYRIGHT LAW The digital transmission of text, graphics, audio and video on the Web make them highly susceptible to theft, also known as copyright infringement.Thus, it is always safe to get permission before using anything you find on the Web (Lieb, 1999).
It is axiomatic that every labourer is entitled to reap the fruit of his labour.
It therefore follows that where someone has published a work- book, journal article, etc.
; it is his exclusive right to continue to enjoy the benefits and he also has the exclusive right to preserve such a work from invasion from others.
Copyright law is one of the legal issues a good web publisher needs to know so as to save himself from problems.
He needs to know it and apply it in his daily practice.
Often times, people appear in court for reason of copyright infringement.
The reason may be that, they have little knowledge of copyright law.
It is viewed as the exclusive right of an author to prevent all other persons from printing or otherwise, multiplying copies of any work invented by him.
The author's works (thoughts) as contained in the work are his own and so long as these thoughts are not voluntarily given to the public, he possesses a right of copyright.
In the words of Nwodu (2006: 176), cited in Asemah (2011) copyright law is the constitutional rather than, privileged rights of an author or originator of a creative work to reap the benefits accruing to his work by exercising maximum authority or control over the reproduction, distribution and commercial use of his work for a specific period.
It is the right to prepare and distribute copies of an intellectual production.
The Black Law Dictionary defines copyright as the right of literary property as recognised and sanctioned by positive law; an intangible, incorporeal right granted by statute to the author or originator of certain literary or artistic production whereby, he is invested for a limited period, with the sole and exclusive privilege of multiplying copies of the same and selling them.
Along this reasoning, Okoye (2006:109) says that copyright is the right which the law gives an 87 author or other originator of an intellectual production whereby, he is invested with the sole and exclusive right of reproducing and selling copies of his work.
From the foregoing, it can easily be understood that copyright law is that law which covers the originality of every form of creative work; that is, work created based on the creative and imaginative ability of an individual.
The originator of such creative and intellectual work is conferred with the right to continue to reproduce, broadcast and sell his work.
The law controls any literary work, its communication to the public, broadcasting it and the reproduction of it in any form.
Copyright law protects all works of authorship fixed in a tangible medium of expression.
This description includes writing, paintings, music, drama and other similar works.
Ideas are protected by the law relating to plagiarism.
Copyright does not protect ideas, but, the specific expression of those ideas It is usual to see warnings like the example below in books and other artistic works: All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced for storage in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical recording etc, without the prior permission of the author or publisher.
Reproduction of any part of this publication for an entire school or school system is prohibited.
The advancement in technology is making it difficult to really enforce copyright law.
This is because, thousands of copies of books and materials of various kinds can now be easily reproduced by pirates and this has even been more facilitated by the different photocopying machine and audio/visual recording centers we have.
Piracy has assumed a worrisome dimension in the developing countries where poverty and the get- rich-quick syndrome, coupled with the poor law enforcement have combined to provide a very fertile ground for such vices.
In schools and universities, indigent students photocopy whole books for their use, even where such materials are available and affordable.
Thus, Okoye (2007:109), cited in Asemah (2011) says that in Nigeria, the wide spread violation of copyright, especially in the music industry led to the enactment of the Copyright Act of 1990.
This was to further strengthen the existing Copyright Act of 1970.
3.3.1 CONDITIONS FOR THE EXISTENCE OF COPYRIGHT Statutory copyright in Nigeria is not automatic when a work of an author is published or copyrighted.
There are some conditions that the work must meet before it is eligible for copyright.
Below are some of the conditions that must be met: 1.
The work must be original in character.
This means that the work must not be a copied or an imitated one.
There must be an element of originality in the supposed copyrighted work otherwise, the work will not be eligible for copyright.
The word originality here means that the author has done his own work and that he has not copied another author.
The true question is whether the same plan, arrangement and 88  combination of materials have been used before for the same purpose.
2.
The work must have been put in a particular medium of information dissemination.
This means that the work must be in the form where or through which it can be used either directly or indirectly.
This could be in tape, book, video etc.
3.
It must not be a work that is to be used as a raw material for a final work.
Thus, it must be in its final stage before it can be eligible for copyright.
Works that are still in their skeletal or outline stages are not eligible for copyright.
4.
For any work to be copyrighted in Nigeria, the author or authors must be either citizens of Nigeria or be staying in Nigeria.
If the work is done by a corporate body, then, such a corporate body must have been registered under the law of Nigeria.
5.
For a work to be eligible for copyright in Nigeria, it must in addition, be originated in Nigeria.
Going by the law, all works apart from broadcast must first be published in Nigeria and incase of sound recording, be made in Nigeria.
6.
There must be sufficient objective similarity between the infringing work and a substantial part of it, for the former to be properly described as a reproduction or adaptation of the latter, although not identical with it.
Section 14(1) provides for instances where copyright can be infringed upon indirectly.
These include: 1.
Importing into the country an infringing material for use other than for private or domestic use.
2.
Exhibiting in public an infringement article.
3.
Distribution of a copyright article by way of trade, offer for sale, hire or otherwise.
4.
Having in possession, materials such as plates, master tapes, machines, equipment or devices used for the purpose of making infringing copies of the work.
It should be noted that the decree did not state the extent of infringement of a copyrightwork to make it actionable.
However, it can be seen from the provisions of section 5 (2) that acts in respect of the whole or a substantial part of the work will be sufficient to constitute an infringement.
It is therefore submitted that, the material copied need not be extensive or lengthy in order to constitute an infringement.
3.3.2.
COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT This simply means using the work of a copyright owner without prior permission from him.
An unauthorised use of a person's work is a breach of this law and it is what is referred to as copyright infringement.
Infringement constitutes a violation of the right of the owner or author of a copyright work to his exclusive use.
Copyright is infringed by any person who without the authorisation of the owner of the copyright does or causes any other person to do an act, the doing of which is controlled by the copyright.
Thus, when a printing press decides to produce the book of an author without his consent, it constitutes infringement of copyright.
Copyright is intellectual property; intellectual property is a product of man's ability and man should be able to enjoy the fruit of his labour.
It is to this end that the law has made infringement of copyright actionable as civil suit and also a criminal offence (Asemah, 2011).
89  The Nigeria Copyright Council has been put in place to address the problem of infringement; Section 34 of the Copyright Act makes the provision.
Copyright inspectors are empowered to inspect the premises suspected to be used in infringing copyright as well as to prosecute offenders.
Any person found guilty of infringement is liable to a term of imprisonment or fine or both.
3.3.3 EXCEPTIONS The exceptions of copyright law are the defences.
To every law, there are exceptions.
It is therefore mandatory for the journalist and every individual to know these exceptions when held liable for copyright infringement.
Below are some of the exceptions: 1.
Fair Dealing: This exception or defence is workable only when the violator did not use substantial part of the work.
In schedule 2(a) of the copyright decree, it is stated that any fair dealing with literary, musical, artistic, cinematograph film for the purpose of research, private use, criticism or review and reports of current events is not an act constituting an infringement of copyright.
2.
Academic Purpose: If the work was actually used for academic purpose, it becomes a defence.
3.
Public Enlightenment: Where someone uses copyrighted work for public enlightenment it becomes a defence.
4.
Acknowledgement of the Source: When you use someone else's work and you acknowledge him, it becomes an exception.
3.4.
SHIELD LAW Shield law is most commonly used to protect journalistic integrity.
In the context of online journalism, shield law protects journalistic sources.
The idea is that, people might be afraid to approach journalists with confidential information if they know that journalists could be forced to reveal their sources and that this would compromise the integrity of the news.
Shield law permits journalists to assure their sources that they will remain confidential, allowing journalists to get better stories.
Under the shield law, a journalist can decline to answer questions which could compromise his or her sources with the goal of getting information into the public eye while protecting the source of that information from repercussions(Asemah, 2011).
Journalistic sources regularly risk losing their jobs or facing legal penalties to provide information and they rely on shield laws for protection.
Some people argue that a story has more weight when the source is revealed, and journalists certainly prefer to use sources they can identify and quote, as it increases the integrity of the story.
However, there are situations in which an anonymous source might be necessary and such sources can be critical and invaluable, especially in the case of major breaking stories.
By having the shield law for protection, journalists can access such sources with confidence.
It is in line with this that Pember (2003:370), cited in Asemah (2011) notes that shield law provides thus: 90  No person engaged in, connected with or employed on any newspaper, radio broadcasting station or television station while engaged in newsgathering capacity shall be compelled to disclose, in any legal proceedings or trial, before any court or before a grand Jury of any court, or before the presiding officers of any tribunal or his agent or agents or before committee of the legislature, or elsewhere, the sources of any information procured or obtained by him and published in the newspaper for broadcast by any broadcasting station or televised by any television station on which he is engaged, connected with or employed.
The above assertion implies that the journalist, whether the online or traditional journalist, has the power and the right to refuse to disclose the source of his information even when he or she is under pressure.
When a journalist is given any information, facts, or ideas, in strict confidence, he is not permitted to divulge the source of that information.
This implies that the source of an information may prefer anonymity and the journalist is expected to maintain that anonymity otherwise, his chances of getting information from such a source next time will be jeopardised if he reveals his source of information.
Therefore, shield law is the law which empowers the journalists not to disclose their sources of information regardless of the situation they find themselves.
Shield laws are those laws or the statues which give the journalists and the press the power not to disclose in legal proceedings, confidential information obtained by them in their professional capacities as press men or journalists.
Under the shield law, the journalists and press men are empowered to resist any attempt by any court of law, parliament or enforcement agent to reveal their sources of information.
Eweluka (2004:132) describes shield law as it pertains to the press as a peculiar advantage, right, franchise, exemption, power or immunity enjoyed by the press and the journalists.
Shield law is therefore guaranteed in section 39 of the 1999 constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria.
Section 39 sub section 3 states that “nothing in this constitution shall invalidate any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society while subsection 9 states that “for the purpose of preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, maintaining the authority and independence of courts or regulating telephony, wireless broadcasting television or the exhibition of cinematograph films” Based on the constitutional empowerment therefore, journalists are protected to probe the affairs of public government office holders so long as the issue being probed is of public importance.
Government officials on their own are expected to be opened enough to journalists since withholding information runs counter to section 39 subsection 3(b) of the constitution.
Withholding information will not stop journalists from informing the public about activities in the public sector, instead, when the government officials withhold information from the press men, they would be more motivated to gather the same information using other legal means.
More so, that the journalists are protected under the shield law, nothing is wrong when legal and ethical means are used to get public information that is of public importance and is not meant to intentionally affect 91 someone in his office, especially public office holders (Nwodu, 2006).
Shield law is important in mass communication for the following reasons: i.
Makes the source to reveal more vital information to the journalist especially, information that is of public interest.
A source who feels highly protected will not be afraid to divulge vital information to the journalist.
ii.
It makes investigation much easier.
This is because, as the journalist goes from one source to another, he gets information from respondents easily since their protection is guaranteed by shield law.
When a journalist discloses his source of information, it leads to drying up of investigative journalism, as no source with relevant information of public importance will like to reveal his source of information.
iii.
It encourages free flow of news and information.
When a journalist discloses his source of information in the course of his professional practice, he will be exposing the source to a serious danger.
But, when there is maximum protection for news sources, there tend to be free flow of information in the society as more people will be more willing to divulge information in the society.
3.5 THE LAW OF PRIVACY The law simply seeks to prevent people from invading into other people's private lives.
Every individual has the right to be left alone.
The Black's Law Dictionary, cited in Asemah (2011) defines right of privacy as the right to be left alone; the right of a person to be free from unwarranted publicity.
It also means the right of an individual or corporation to withhold himself and his property from public scrutiny if he so desires.
The right to be free from the unwarranted appropriation or exploitation of one's personality, the publicising of one's private affairs with which the public has no legitimate concern or the wrongful intrusion into one's private activities in such manner as to outrage or cause mental suffering, shame or humiliation to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
Section 37 of the 1999 constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria guarantees the right to privacy.
It states that ‘‘the privacy of citizens, their homes, correspondences, telephone conversations and telegraphic communication is hereby guaranteed and protected’’.
From the foregoing, it is evident that every citizen of Nigeria has the right to be left alone.
However, it is worthy to state here that people who are newsworthy (prominent people) have less privacy while those who are not prominent have more privacy.
The implication is that, the moment you become a public figure, you lose your right to privacy and this is because, you have followers who will always want to know about you.
So, you cannot enjoy being a public figure and at the same time enjoy the right to private life.
3.5.1 ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIVACY Jacdonmi (2008:40) says that the law of privacy began to develop as a public issue at the end of 19th century in America.
America was fast growing from rural to urban towns.
With urbanisation, big city dailies were becoming the order of the day.
Editors had to device a scheme of selling their newspapers and keeping their customers.
One of the most 92 successful schemes was the use of sensational stories about the rich and the famous on the pages of newspapers (Asemah, 2011).
Sambe and Ikoni (2004: 116) say that the first case in which relief was granted because of an invasion of privacy is believed to have occurred in Michigan in 188.
In that case, the US Supreme Court held that the 4th and 5th Amendments provide protection against all government invasions of the sanctity of a man's home and the privacies of life.
The origin and development of the rights of privacy can be found in the article of Warren and Brandeis who wrote about the public press prying into the lives of citizens and included the history and development of individual rights.
In the words of the authors: That the individual shall have full protection in person and in property is a principle as old as the common law; but it has been found necessary from time to time to define anew the exact nature and extent of such protection.
Political, social and economic changes entail the recognition of new rights and the common law, in its eternal youth, grows to meet the demands of society.
Thus, in very early times, the law gave a remedy only for physical interference with life and property, for trespasses.
Then, the "right to life" served only to protect the subject from battery in various forms; liberty meant freedom from actual restraint; for the individual, his lands and his cattle.
Later, there came a recognition of man's spiritual nature, of his feelings and his intellect.
Gradually, the scope of these legal rights broadened; and now, the right to life has come to mean the rights to enjoy life - man secures the exercise of extensive civil privileges, and the term 'property' has grown to comprise every form of possession intangible, as well as tangible.
From the foregoing, it is gathered that the complexities of life, the need to retreat from the world and the refining influence of culture, have made people more sensitive to publicity, hence, the origin and development of the law of privacy.
3.5.2 EXCEPTIONS Below are some of the defences for invasion of privacy, as identified by Asemah (2011): 1.
Newsworthiness: It covers public interest, public figures and public records.
Publications on newsworthy items do not attract action for invasion of privacy.
If they however do, newsworthiness becomes the defence at the disposal of the defendant.
Readers have broad ranges of tastes and interest and as long as the media stay within the range of these tastes and interest, it is usually safe.
More so, those that are prominent 93 have less privacy.
The fact that the subject matter is a public figure is a defence.
This is because, public figures through their own conducts have become news.
To some extent, public figures have given up their rights to be left alone.
Those who attract public attention have sacrificed most of their private lives to the public.
2.
Public Interest: This is closely related to newsworthiness.
Public interest has to do with a story that is published based on its importance to the public.
Especially when the story concerns public interest and welfare.
Thus, if what has been published concerning a person is of public interest, an action for invasion of privacy will not succeed.
The question however is, how does an online or traditional journalist know what issue is of public interest?
The guidelines below will enable the online journalist to know what constitutes public interest: i.
Free flow of information is in the public interest.
ii.
Information about public affairs.
iii.
Publication of newsworthy information.
iv.
Communication diversity is in the public interest.
v. Government regulations of certain communication activities affected with a public interest is in the public interest.
vi.
Matters of public interest which affect the interest shared by citizens generally in affairs of local, state or national government even though it affects the privacy of an individual is privileged on the ground of public interest; it is therefore a defence.
3.
Consent: He who volunteers or agrees cannot complain.
One who willingly doles out information to a journalist and consents that the journalist should publicise such facts has no basis for taking action against the journalist for invasion of privacy.
4 Permanent Publication: The right to privacy can only be violated by permanent publication and not by hear say or rumours.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a.
Why should web publishers be familiar with web publishing laws?
4.0.
Conclusion This unit is devoted to the law of web publishing.
Thus, we treated law of defamation, law of sedition, copyright law, law of privacy and shield law.
Most of the issues and problems with web publishers today occur because most web publishers do not have a proper understanding of these various laws of web publishing; it is therefore advisable that as a web publisher, you understand the various laws of web publishing so as to safe yourself some troubles.
94  5.0.
Summary In this unit, we examined the laws which web publishers ought to take into consideration when publishing.
These various laws serve various purposes; thus, the web publisher must be able to distinguish among these various web publishing laws.
6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assessment a.
What do you understand by defamation?
b.
With clear examples, differentiate between libel and slander.
c. What are the defences available to a web publisher who commit defamation?
d. Discuss what you understand by defamation e. Discuss law of privacy, copyright law and shield law 7.0 References/ further Reading Asemah, E.S.
(2011).
Principles and practice of mass communication (2nd ed).
Jos: Great Future Press.
Enemo, I.
(1998).
Notes on the law of torts.
Volume 2.
Enugu: PAMOB Ltd. Eweluka, B.
(2004).
Introduction to Nigerian press law.
Onitsha: Maranatha Press.
Jacdonmi, V. (2008).
Nigerian media lawand ethics.
Jos: Great Future Printing and Business Centre.
Lieb, T. (1999).
Editing for the web: Keeping up with ethical and legal challenges.
http://pages.towson.edu/lieb/editing/legal.html.
Accessed 11/11/2013.
Nwodu, C. (2006).
Journalism practice: News, aesthetics, ethics and laws.
Enugu: Rhyce Kerex Publishers.
Okoye, I.(2007).
Nigerian press laws and ethics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Limited.
Pember, D. (2003).
Mass media law.
New York: McGraw Hill.
Sambe, J.
(2008).
Introduction tomass communication practice inNigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Book Limited.
Sambe, J. and Ikoni, U.
(2004).
Mass media laws and ethics in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Caltop Publications Nigeria limited.
95 MODULE 4: ETHICS OF WEB PUBLISHING Unit 1: Understanding the Meaning of Ethics Unit 2: Ethical Principles UNIT 1 Understanding the Concept of Ethics CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Definition of Ethics 3.2.
Purpose of Web Publishing Ethics 3.3.
Origin of Ethics 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0.
References/Further Reading 1.0.
Introduction This unit is about the ethical issues to keep in mind when publishing for websites.
The key is to remember that there are ethics that apply in publishing on the Internet.
2.0.
Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define ethics  Explain the purpose of ethics  Trace the origin of ethics 3.0.
Main Contents 3.1.
Definition of Ethics Ethics can be described as the systematic study of the principles and methods for distinguishing right from wrong and good from bad.
Ethics is a moral concept.
The word ethics is of the Greek origin "ethos" which means character while the word "morals" comes from the Latin word "moralis" which means custom or manner (Asemah, 2011).
96 Tschudin cited in Okunna (1995:1) says that ethics and morals mean custom, that is, a very fundamental way of doing things or of conduct which are not only customary, but also right.
Frankena and Granrose cited in Okunna (1995:1) say that the word ethics stands for a branch of morality and its problems.
Ethics as moral philosophy is therefore, that branch of knowledge which is concerned with the standards of good and bad conduct in a society using societal norms as a basis for the evaluation of human conduct or behaviour.
Ethics therefore, is the moral philosophy or science which determines what is right or wrong in a social context.
It is a moral rule or principle of behaviour for deciding what is right and wrong.
Thus, Merrill cited in Nwodu (2006: 135), cited in Asemah (2011) defines ethics as a normative science of conduct which stipulates guidelines, rules, principles and codes that are designed to lead individual to make moral decisions.
From the foregoing, it can be seen that ethics is a matter of morality.
Thus, in the context of ethics, the acceptance of or otherwise of human attitudes and behaviours, actions and inactions and overall conduct can be based on relative moral uprightness or otherwise, of such conduct.
Thus, when we speak of people as moral or ethical, we usually mean that they are good people and when we speak of them as immoral or unethical, we mean that they are bad people.
This agrees with Nwodu (2006: 135) who says that a given action can be said to be ethically right or wrong, good or bad, responsible or irresponsible, logical or illogical, socially acceptable or unacceptable and moral or immoral.
A study of ethics is a study of all those rules and guidelines which are designed to regulate the actions of human beings as they make moral decisions.
Ethics are the codes or rules of conduct that point us towards the right or best way to act in a situation; they are the codes for men in the discharge of their duties.
3.2 Purpose of Web Publishing Ethics The purpose of web publishing ethics is to assist the online publishers to be moral professionals.
The importance lies in the fact that the web publisher who has concern for ethics obviously cares about good or right actions and such a concern leads him to seek the "Summum Bonum" or highest good in publishing thereby, increasing his credibility both as a person and as a web publisher.
Ethics should therefore, saturate the whole process of mass communication, rather than be regarded merely as a minor aspect of communication.
The purpose of web publishing ethics is to stipulate rules, guidelines, norms and principles that would guide the online journalists in making moral decisions.
Attempting to gain public acceptance or prevent public outcry is not the only reason for advocating ethical professional practice and it is not a very profound one at that.
The most compelling reason for making ethical choices, other than internal personal satisfaction is what ethical behaviour can contribute to the profession.
Ethical web publishing is better publishing.
Each day at work, online journalists make ethical decisions or choices and some days.
Ethics takes us out of "this is the way I do it" or "this is the way it is always being done" into the realm of "this is what I should do" or this is the action that can be rationally justified.
Merrill and Lowenstein cited in Okunna (1995:27) sums the purpose of journalistic ethics thus: 97  At least, a concern for ethics instills in the journalist a continuing sensitivity to his every action, to his every decision; it integrates or blends with his total search for truth and it gives him general awareness of himself, of others, of the consequences of interpersonal relations.
A concern for ethics is the key plank in any journalistic platform; it is the alpha and omega of public communication.
3.3 Origin of Publishing Ethics Generally, the concept of ethics has a very long history, dating back perhaps to the beginning of human existence.
Philosophers believed that the concept of morality must have existed in a more or less unreflective form, probably closely associated with myth, religion and taboo from the time human beings began to live in groups.
The concept of ethics must have being in existence in more primitive forms long before it came to be documented in written words.
There is however, a measure of uncertainty about the precise origin of this first book.
Journalistic ethics is however a modern philosophy.
The earliest signs of mass communication ethics appeared at the turn of the twentieth century as a reaction against the excesses of the extreme freedom of the libertarian theory of the press.
The libertarian theory called for complete press freedom on the part of the Journalist.
The theory advocated that there should be no pre-censorship and post- censorship of the press as human beings are rational beings.
The press men grossly abused this press freedom as they began to embark on negative journalistic practices like, yellow journalism, junk journalism, sensationalism, invasion of privacy, character assassination etc.
Yaroson and Asemah (2008:64), cited in Asemah (2011) put it that, ‘‘as early as the late nineteenth century, critics began to identify flaws in the libertarian theory.
The press was evolving in a manner that fell short of the idealistic libertarian goals.
And by the twentieth century, the voices for change were loud’’.
The negative practices by journalists encouraged by complete press freedom brought about the social responsibility theory which calls for responsibility on the part of the journalist in the course of his duty.
The social responsibility theory states that "freedom carries concomitant responsibility".
Thus, by the twentieth century, the time was ripe for the emergence of a theory of a free but, responsible press.
This brought into existence the social responsibility theory of the press characterised by the rise of professional journalistic associations with codes of ethics designed to encourage responsible behaviour by their members.
The social responsibility theory reconciles the freedom enjoyed by the journalist with his obligations to the society.
It places emphasis on persons and media institutions that operate the media.
McQuail (1987), cited in Asemah (2011) identifies some of the principles as: a.
Certain obligations to society should be accepted and fulfilled by the press.
b.
These obligations are mainly to be fulfilled through setting high professional standards of truth, accuracy, objectivity, balance and informativeness.
c. In the discharge of their duties, the media should be self regulatory within the 98 frame work of law and established institutions.
d. The society and public have a right to expect high standards of performance from the media and intervention can be justified to secure public good since journalist should be accountable to the society.
To maintain high standards, the theory holds that the press must be controlled either by itself or by the government.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a.
Should there be codes of ethics to regulate web publishing?
4.0.
Conclusion We have discussed the meaning, definitions, background and purpose of web publishing ethics.
Ethics is as old as man; it acts a guide to web publishers; thus, web publishers ought to be familiar with the ethics of web publishing.
5.0.
Summary In this unit, we appraised the historical genesis of ethics, from its modern inception in the United States of America to its emergence in Nigeria.
As well, we examined the purpose of web publishing ethics, in addition to detailed look at some conceptual definitions.
This is imperative as you must be able to discuss the concept “ethics” and understand it purpose.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment a.
Discuss the concept “ethics” b.
Trace the origin of ethics c. Discuss the purpose of ethics 7.0.
References/ Further Reading Asemah, E.S.
(2011).
Principles and practice of mass communication (2nd ed).
Jos: Great Future Press.
McQuail, D. (1987).
Mass communication theories (2nd ed).
London: Sage.
Nwodu, C. (2006).
Journalism practice: News, aesthetics, ethics and laws.
Enugu: Rhyce Kerex Publishers.
99  Okunna, C. (1995).
Ethics of mass communication.
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Yaroson, E.D and Asemah, E.S.
(2008).
Theories and models of mass communication.
Jos: Great Future Printing and Business Centre.
100 JLS 842: MODULE 4 UNIT 2: ETHICAL PRINCIPLES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
The Ethical principles 3.2.
Theories of Ethics 3.3.
Ethical Values 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Reading 1.0.
Introduction Ethical principles are the guidelines that help us as individuals to make ethical decisions.
Since the days of ancient Greece, philosophers have tried to draft a series of rules or guidelines governing how to make ethical choices 2.0.
Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify and discuss the ethical principles  Understand the ethical theories of web publishing  Identify the ethical values in web publishing 3.0.
Main Contents 3.1.
Ethical Principles .
Below are some ethical principles as identified by Asemah (2011): 1.
Aristotle’s Golden Mean Principle: This principle says that moral values lie between extremes.
It stresses moderation as opposed to extremes or excesses.
Aristotle believed that an individual could obtain strong moral character, but he or she would necessarily face difficult choices.
By adopting a middle position, one could avoid both 101 excesses and deficiencies.
Going by the Golden mean, an individual has to exercise practical reason in the conduct of any particular activity through the setting of high standards.
Aristotle's ethical system resulted in what is now called virtue ethics.
Virtue ethics flows both from the nature of the act itself and the moral character of the person who acts.
In the Aristotelian sense, the way to behave ethically is that: i.
You should know through the essence of practical reasoning what you are doing.
ii.
You must select the act for its own sake in order to flourish.
iii.
The act itself must come from a firm and unchanging character.
Courage for example is a mean between foolhardiness on one hand and cowardice on the other hand.
But to determine that means, you have to exercise practical wisdom, act according to high standards and act in accordance with firm and continuing character traits.
Principles of the Golden Mean are evident today, especially in online journalistic practices.
For example, balance and fairness in reporting is built on golden mean.
2.
Judeo-Christian Ethics Principle: The Judeo-Christian ethics appears in phrases from scripture such as “do unto others as you want them do unto you and love thy neighbour as thyself”.
This principle simply emphasises respect and dignity for all people based on a universal love for God in making ethical decisions.
Based on this norm, one would consider how his decision will affect other people.
The emphasis of this principle is that the journalist in the course of carrying out his assignment or duties should not treat people the way he will not like to be treated.
Do not treat people as a means to an end.
The basic rule of human beings to self determination should not be violated by using them as simply a means to accomplish a goal.
The rights, values and decisions of others must always be respected.
3.
Kant’s Categorical Imperative: The German philosopher, Emmanuel Kant is identified with this ethical principle guideline.
The baseline is that, an individual should act on the premise that the choices he makes could become universal law in making moral decisions; we must seek what would be acceptable to all human beings in the society.
In other words, those principles we can apply comfortably to all situations will lead us to the right decision.
To measure the correctness of our behaviours, Kant suggested that we act according to rules that we would want to see universally applied.
In Kant's formulation, categorical means unconditional, no exceptions.
Right is right and it should be done, no matter what the consequences.
The individual’s conscience plays a large part in Kant's thinking.
A categorical imperative is discovered by an examination of your conscience; the conscience informs us what is right.
If after performing an act, we feel uneasy, guilty, we have probably violated our conscience.
Applied to mass communication, a categorical imperative might be that all forms of deception are wrong and must be avoided.
No one wants deception to become a universal practice.
4.
Utilitarianism: The writings of John Mill Stuart established the philosophy of the utilitarianism in the nineteenth century.
Mill claimed that when faced with moral decisions, we must consider which action will result in the most happiness for the greater number of the people.
This is often referred to as the greatest good in decision making.
Utility is described as the greatest benefit for the greatest number of people.
Thus, the 102 basic tenet of the principle is that, we are to determine what is right or wrong by taking into consideration what will yield the best ratio of good or bad for the general society.
Utilitarians ask how much good is promoted and how much bad is restrained by different courses of behaviours.
Clear methods to evaluate ethical choices are: i.
Calculate all the consequences, both good and bad that would result from each of your options.
ii.
Choose alternatives that maximise value or minimise loss.
Under the utilitarian view, it may be considered ethical to harm one person for the benefit of a large number of people.
For example, a driver who has eighteen passengers in his vehicle may consider it ethical to knock down somebody who tries to cross the road while the driver is on a high speed.
The essence is for him to save the eighteen passengers and harm just one person.
5.
Egalitarianism: Based on the work of John Rawls, egalitarianism argues that everyone must be treated equally and fairly when we form ethical judgements.
Rawls introduced the veil of ignorance as an element in ethical decision making.
This means that, choosing a right course of action requires blindness to social position or other discriminating factors like religion, ethnicity, tribe, age, sex etc.
By wearing a veil when considering a decision, an individual can eliminate possible biases or discriminations and therefore, treats all persons in an equal manner.
Without the veil of ignorance, minority viewpoints and those representing weaker points of view may be ignored or overlooked.
The veil allows decisions to be made without partial thinking or cultural biases.
Justice is blind, and it only emerges when everybody is treated without social differentiation.
3.2.
THEORIES OF ETHICS A theory is a far reaching conceptualisation of a phenomenon based on systematic observations.
Ethical theories offer precise and detailed ethical conduct or behaviour of human beings.
Fab Ukozor (2000:7) describes ethical theory as being explanatory in nature in the sense that they give reasons why human beings take whatever moral decisions they take or arrive at in their relationships with others.
Ethical theories propose the appropriate reasons in which our moral decisions should be based and have been developed to identify how we should determine what is actually good not only for ourselves, but, for others.
They are theories about justifying our moral actions.
To justify here is simply to propose reasons for or to explain.
Generally, ethical theories can be described as generalisations put forward to explain, describe, prescribe or predict human ethical behaviours.
They are explanatory because, they give reasons why human beings take whatever moral actions and decisions they arrive at in their dealings with fellow human beings.
Theories of ethics are descriptive in the sense that they stipulate how people should behave in situations that involve ethical considerations.
In addition, these theories are predictive in that, they indicate how people are likely to behave under certain situations.
Below are some of the theories of ethics, as identified by Asemah (2011): 103 1.
Deontological Theory: This theory simply assumes that for an action to be judged right or wrong, it should not be hinged on the consequence, rather, it should be based on the intension behind the action.
Deontology or non-consequentialism defines right action- considering the intrinsic qualities of an action.
Deon means, what ought to be done.
For the deontologists, certain things like virtues are intrinsically good and ought to be sought after.
The rightness or wrongness of actions should depend on the intrinsic quality and not the consequence.
Thus, once an online journalist believes that the action he is taking is right, he should not consider what the outcome will turn out to be.
He is to appraise the motive behind an action, rather than the consequence.
2.
Teleological Theory: The word “teleological” comes from the Greek word "teleo" which means result or consequence.
This theory is the opposite of deontological theory in that the emphasis is on the consequence of an action on the people.
In taking ethical decisions, the individual has to weigh the consequence of such actions on the people.
Here, people judge a moral ethics not by rule but, by the aftermath effects.
The prediction is that, it is the result or consequence of an action that determines the rightness or wrongness of such actions hence, teleological theory is also called consequence ethics or consequentialism.
Therefore, in any situation, one should calculate the possible consequences of performing various actions relevant to that situation and choose the one that produces the greatest ratio of good or evil.
Consequence oriented theories emphasise that we should look at the possible consequences or practical implications of our intended actions in order to determine whether an action is right or wrong.
If the bad consequence outweighs the good ones, then, the proposed action should be abandoned and it should be regarded as morally wrong.
Should the good consequence outweigh the bad ones however, the proposed action should be considered as morally permissible.
3.
Absolutist Theory: The ethical absolutist believes that there is one universal and eternal code that basically applies to everyone in all ages.
The change in opinions, traditions and conditions makes no difference.
This implies that whether a journalist finds himself in the north, south, east or west, it does not matter; the location or locality or geographical enclaves does not matter.
Regardless the socio-cultural, economic and political environment an online journalist finds himself, he has to take into consideration objectivity, truth, balance and fairness, credibility etc.
This theory of ethics is based on the argument that a right action should be right in all places at all times and in all circumstances.
4.
Relativist Theory: The relativists believe that ethics are not universal.
The fundamental reasoning of relativism is that moral standards should vary according to cultures, circumstances, times etc.
This goes to say that the geographical location an online journalist finds himself determines what is ethical.
What is ethical in a given socio-cultural and political context may be unethical in another socio-cultural and political context.
5.
Legalistic Theory: The legalistic theory is very rigid and uncompromising in its insistence on objective absolute moral principles in a society.
These are the principles 104 which traditions and social consensus have ratified over the years as serving the society or group best.
The theory therefore states that absolute principles that worked for a society and which are objectively considered to have served the society best should be meticulously codified and religiously applied as moral principles that will guide the actions in that society.
6.
Antinomian Theory: The theory is simply called "against the law theory".
It totally rejects all other theories and ethical principles and it is a kind of non-ethics.
Non-ethics in the sense that it does not subscribe to any of the assumptions.
The web publisher who subscribes to antinomian theory believes that man is a rational human being and being a rational human being, there is no need to set rules, standards, principles etc, for him to follow.
This it is believed negates the rational property of man.
When there is no ethical standard to guide a web publisher, he will be pruned to unpredictable, erratic and irrational behaviour guided by his whims and caprices.
Thus, it is called whims and caprices.
This situation of non-ethics can lead to anarchy in the society because every web publisher will begin to act on intuition, imagination and instinct.
7.
Situational Theory: This theory tries to strike a balance between legalistic and antinomian theory.
The situational theory of ethics considers the rightness or wrongness of an action in relation to the particular situation in which the doer of the action finds him or herself.
Ethical decision making should depend on the context or situation; it should aim at contextual appropriateness.
The snap with the theory like that of antinomian is that often times, practitioners are guided by mere feelings, instincts and intuitions that are not too good for taking decisions that would affect many lives.
3.3.
Ethical values Below are some of the ethical issues a web publisher should always consider: 1.
Honesty: The web publisher has to be honest to the core.
People who are honest command more respect than those who are dishonest.
When the members of the public discover that the online publishes are not honest, they no longer repose confidence in them.
2.
Integrity: One who has integrity is one who has principles.
A man with principle and integrity does not easily fall to cheap things- brown envelop.
When you have integrity, your yes becomes your yes while your no is your no.
Integrity means, being in a state of wholeness, uprightness, honesty or purity.
Integrity makes a man.
Integrity earns societal respect while the opposite, would attract disrespect and scorn from those with whom one interact.
3.
Pursuit of Excellence: Ethical values also entails that one should strive to achieve excellence in all ramifications.
105 4.
Truth: Truth is the absolute reality.
The web publisher needs a firm commitment to the truth.
An allegiance to truth is at the base of ethical values.
A virtuous web publisher is the one who has respect for and tries to live by the virtues of truth, wisdom, courage, justice and temperance.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE a.
How do these ethical values help in adding to the reputation of the web publishers?
4.0.
Conclusion We have discussed ethical principles and ethical theories in this unit.
As well, we examined the ethical values.
This is imperative as you must be able to understand the ethical basis for web publishing.
5.0.
Summary In this unit, we have discussed ethical principles, theories of ethics and ethicalvalues.
Among the ethical principles are: Aristotle’s Golden Mean Principle, Judeo-Christian Ethics Principle and Kant’s Categorical Imperative.
There are several theories of ethics; they include: Deontological Theory, Teleological Theory, Absolutist Theory, Relativist Theory, Legalistic Theory and antinomian Theory.
One of the ethical values identified in this unit is truth.
Web publishers must be truthful in their publications 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assessment a.
Identify and discuss the various ethical principles known to you b.
Elaborately discuss the theories of ethics, using relevant examples c. What are the ethical values known to you?
7.0.
References/ Further Reading Asemah, E.S.
(2011).
Principles and practice of mass communication (2nd ed.).
Jos: Great Future Press.
Elsevier (2013).
Legal guide for editors concerning ethics issues.http://www.elsevier.com/editors/legal-guide-for-editors-concerning-ethics- issues.
Accessed 12/12/2013.
106
