 CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: CSS 243 COURSE TITLE: PRINCIPLES OF SECURITY PRACTICE AND MANAGEMENT 1  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management COURSE GUIDE CSS243 PRINCIPLES OF SECURITY PRACTICE AND MANAGEMENT Course Developer: Monsuru Adegboyega Kasali University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Course Writers: Monsuru Adegboyega Kasali University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Abisoye M. Alesinloye O.C.E.
Institute, Ibadan, Ibadan, Oyo State.
Course Editor: Prof. P.E.
Agbebaku Department of Political Science Ambrose Alli University Ekpoma, Edo State NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14 / 16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.
ng URL: .nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by For National Open University of Nigeria 3  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Unit 1: Meaning of Security……………………………………………..1-10 Unit 2: Discourse on Violence & Violent Crime………………………..11-21 Unit 3: Domestic Violence………………………………...…………….22-33 Unit 4: Theories of Violence………………………………..…………...34-43 Unit 5: Theory of Crime Control …………………………44-52 Unit 6: Approaches to Security Management…………………………..53-62 Unit 7: Meaning of Intelligence………………………………………...63-72 Unit 8: Intelligence Collection and Disciplines……………………...…73-82 Unit 9: Intelligence Analysis and Evaluation………………………...…83-93 Unit 10: Counter-Intelligence and Intelligence Security Management….94-102 Unit 11: Security Personnel Management I…………………………...103-117 Unit 12: Security Personnel Management II…………………………..118-124 Unit 13: Management of Job Stress Among Security Personnel…...…125-135 Unit 14: Trauma Management in Security Career: REBT………….....136-148 Unit 15: Public Relations Management in Security Sector.……...……149-160 Unit 16: Operational Management & Capacity Planning in Sec.
Sector 161-168 Unit 17: Issue of Asymmetric Aggression in Strategic Planning……...169-178 Unit 18: Guerilla & Tactical Measures to Counter-Guerilla………......179-191 Unit 19: Relevance of Fortification Tactic in Security Management…192-198 Unit 20: Maneuver Tactic in Defence & Security Management……...199-205 4  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management CONTRIBUTION Abisoye Alesinloye wrote unit 3 in module 3: “management of job stress among security personnel” while other nineteen units were written by Monsuru Adegboyega Kasali.
Introduction CSS 243: Principles of Security Practice and Management is a 3-credit unit course.
It is a compulsory course for all postgraduate students of Criminology and Security Studies of the University.
The course is recommended for any other student(s) particularly those in the School of Arts and Social Sciences, who may have interest in secur ity studies.
The course can also be taken as elective or required course by other students whose main field(s) of discipline is not Criminology and Security Studies.
The Course shall consist of 20 units, which include the meaning of security, discourse on violence and violent crime, domestic violence, theories of violence, theory of crime control, approaches to security management, intelligence cycle, security personnel management, and management of job stress among security personnel and trauma management in security career: REBT.
Other areas of discourse are public relations management in security sector, operational management and capacity planning, issue of asymmetric aggression in strategic planning, guerilla and counter- guerilla, fortification and manoeuvre tactics in defence and security management.
The course material draws its major case studies from the Continent of Africa with particular reference to Nigeria with the aim of ejaculating the students’ desire towards developing viable analytical and conceptual framework for addressing the security problems in Nigeria and elsewhere.
The course has no compulsory pre-requisites for it to be registered for.
The course guide informs us on what this course is all about, what student should appreciate in each unit, what text materials we shall be using and how we can make best use of these materials.
The course guide also discerns the need to take tutored marked assignments so seriously by student.
However, necessary information on tutored marked assignments shall be made known to students in a separate file, which will be sent to each student.
This course is also supported with periodic tutorial classes.
What you will learn in this course The overall aim of CSS 243: Principles of Security Practice and Management is to introduce you to the principles of security management and practice by looking at the meaning of security and other prominent areas of inquiry and issues in the discourse of security management.
Your understanding of fundamentals in security management will enable you to explain some basic concepts and approaches security 5  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management studies.
In fact, the course will also expose you to various relevant issues in the study of security management as well as techniques, approaches and challenges to effective security management and strategic planning.
CSS 243 is a very interesting course as it stimulates our understanding about security practice and management.
It helps to expose us to some of the fundamental ways through which effective security management can be actualized.
Therefore, this course is so significant as it shows how violence both domestic and non-domestic constitute act(s) of criminality.
The study also draws a line in the relationship between intention and justifiability of a violent act by examining the positions articulated by relevant theories on the subject.
The study also examines how intelligence can impact on effective security management.
In carrying out this task a number of issues on intelligence cycle will be discussed such as meaning of intelligence, its collection and disciplines, its analysis and evaluation as well counter- intelligence and intelligence security.
Owing to the importance of public relations in security business, the study also explains the roles and the impact that public relations activity can have on any security organization especially as it concerns attaining its overall goals.
Prior to discourse on public relations management in security sector, this study has found it pertinent to focus on a number of issues that bother on personnel management and the ways to assist security personnel to have a healthy and fulfilled work life, so that they can carry-out their functions effectively.
However, this study cannot be complete if we fail to discuss the relationship between operational management and security management.
Security business is a very challenging one.
Necessary equipment will need to be provided by security employer to assist the employees to be functional.
We shall also focus on a number of other issues and tactics that relate to security management.
Course Aims The main aim of this course is to expose you to the basic concepts, issues, approaches and practice that have attracted a great attention among scholars and policy makers in security management.
The study also throws its search-light on the issues in security discourse, which have continued to attract growing attention among scholars in security studies.
These issues have remained subjects, which have been baptized with several conceptual and theoretical positions of scholars.
This course also x-rays a number of security challenges that nations face in the contemporary time as well as a shift from the traditional security management system to non-traditional order.
Several (inter) governmental and non governmental 6  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management organizations have continued to advocate for replacement of the traditional coercion and deterrence system of security management to a more effective non-traditional approach, which focuses on human development measures such as socio-justice, provision of employment opportunities, social secur ity among others.
In this course, you should be able to: • Describe security and its types; • Explain violence and violent crimes; • Discuss domestic violence and ways to address it; • Examine the theories of violence; • Analyze the theory of crime control; • Examine the various approaches to security management; • Describe intelligence cycle • Suggest counter-intelligence measures to prevent or mitigate attack from the foreign intelligence service; • Illustrate the relationship between security personnel management and ability of security organization to meet its overall goals; • Stress the importance of effective trauma management in security career; • Clarify the impact of job stress on security personnel especially as it relates to service delivery; • Discuss how REBT can help in managing trauma among security employee; • Demonstrate the relevance of public relations in security business; • Appreciate the importance of effective operational management and capacity planning in security sector; • Analyze the growing security threat that assymetric aggression constitute and how it affects strategic planning; • Evaluate the methods that can be adopted to counter guerilla threat; and • Examine the relevance of fortification and manoeuvre tactics in security management.
Course Objectives With utmost desire to achieve the aims set out above, the course has some set of 7  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management objectives as demonstrated in all the units of the course.
Each unit has its own objectives.
Objectives are always included at the beginning of every unit to assist the student in the appreciation of what he or she will come across in the study of each unit to facilitate his or her better understanding of the course-CSS 243 (Principles of Security Practice and Management).
Student is therefore advised to read these objectives before studying the entire unit(s).
Thus, it is helpful to do so.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way, you can be sure that you have done what was required of you by the unit.
Stated below are the wider objectives of this course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
At the end of the course, you should be able to: • Describe security and its types; • Explain violence and violent crimes; • Discuss domestic violence and ways to address it; • Examine the theories of violence; • Analyze the theory of crime control; • Examine the various approaches to security management; • Describe intelligence cycle • Suggest counter-intelligence measures to prevent or mitigate attack from the foreign intelligence service; • Illustrate the relationship between security personnel management and ability of security organization to meet its overall goals; • Stress the importance of effective trauma management in security career; • Clarify the impact of job stress on security personnel especially as it relates to service delivery; • Discuss how REBT can help in managing trauma among secur ity employee; • Demonstrate the relevance of public relations in security business; • Appreciate the importance of effective operational management and capacity planning in security sector; • Analyze the growing security threat that assymetric aggression constitute and 8  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management how it affects strategic planning; • Evaluate the methods that can be adopted to counter guerilla threat; and • Examine the relevance of fortification and manoeuvre tactics in security management.
Working through this course In completing this course, student is required to study the whole units, and try to read all (or substantial number of) the recommended textbooks, journals and other reading materials including electronic resources.
Each unit contains self assessment exercise(s) and student is required to submit his or her assignment for the purpose of assessment.
At the end of the course, student(s) shall be examined.
The time of the final examination and venue shall be communicated to all the registered students in due course by relevant school authorities-study centre management.
Below are the components of the course and what you are required to do.
Course Materials Major components of the course include: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule It is incumbent upon every student to get his or her own copy of the course material.
You are also advised to contact your tutorial facilitator, if you have any difficulty in getting any of the text materials recommended for your further reading.
Study Units In this course there are twenty units, which include: Unit 1: Meaning of Security Unit 2: Discourse on Violence & Violent Crime Unit 3: Domestic Violence Unit 4: Theories of Violence Unit 5: Theory of Crime Control 9  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 6: Approaches to Security Management Unit 7: Meaning of Intelligence Unit 8: Intelligence Collection and Disciplines Unit 9: Intelligence Analysis and Evaluation Unit 10: Counter-Intelligence and Intelligence Security Management Unit 11: Security Personnel Management I Unit 12: Security Personnel Management II Unit 13: Management of Job Stress among Security Personnel Unit 14: Trauma Management in Security Career: REBT Unit 15: Public Relations Management in Security Sector Unit 16: Operational Management and Capacity planning in Security Sector Unit 17: Issue of Asymmetric Aggression in Strategic Planning Unit 18: Guerrilla Warfare and Tactical Measures to Counter-Guerilla Unit 19: Relevance of Fortification Tactic in Security Management Unit 20: Manoeuvre Tactic in Defence and Security Management The first five units are centered on the meaning of security, violence, theories of violence and theory of crime control.
The second set of units explains approaches to security management, intelligence cycle and intelligence security management.
The following set of five units focuses on principles, approaches and strategic issues in security personnel management and public relations management in security sector.
The last five units emphasize on the importance of operational management and capacity planning in security management, the growing threat of asymmetric aggression to inter (national security, counter-guerilla (insurgency) techniques, and fortification and manoeuvre tactics in security management.
In each segment of each unit, you have at least one self assessment exercise, which helps you to know how far you have progressed in understanding the content of each unit.
These self assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignments create a great opportunity for student to achieve the overall objectives of the course.
Set Textbooks The following textbooks are recommended to each student taking the course.
The first four textbooks are compulsory for your study of this course.
1.
Teriff, Terry et al (1999), Security Studies Today, Massachusetts Blackwell Publishing 2.
Lipschutz, Ronnie D.
(ed.)
(1995), On Security, New York: Columbia University Press.
3.
Tickner, J.A.
(1994) “Re-visioning Security” in Ken Booth and Steve Smiths (eds)., International Relations Theory Today, 10  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 4.
Smith, Steve (2000), “The Increasing Insecurity of Security Studies: Conceptualizing Security in the Last Twenty Years”, in Stuart Croft and Terry Terrif (eds.
), Critical Reflections on Security and Change, London: Frank Cass.
5.
Hannah, Greg et al (2005), Intelligence for security Legislation for Security sector Reform, RAND.
6.
Kent, Sherman (1965), Strategic Intelligence, Archon, Books 7.
Imbus, Michael T. (April 2002), Identifying Threats: Improving Intelligence and Counterintelligence Support to Force Protection.
See .au.af.mil/au/awcgate/acsc/02-059.pdf.
Retrieved on 3rd Nov. 2007.
8.
Wisner, Frank G. (22 Sept. 1993), On “The Craft of Intelligence”, available on .cia.gav/library/center-fo r-the-study-ofint ellige nce/Kent-CSI/doc/V081a07p- 0004.htm.
Retrieved on 3rd November, 2007 9.
Armstrong, M. (1981), A Handbook of Personnel Management Practice, London: Kogan Page Ltd. 10.
Federal Bureau of Investigation (2004), Crime Reporting Handbook.
Also available on .fbi.gov/ucr/handbook/ucrhandbook04.pdf.
11.
Goode, William (1971), “Force and Violence in the Family”, Journal of Marriage and the Family, 33.
12.
Indik, A. P., Seashere O. T. et.al.
al., (1964), “Occupational Stress, its Causes and Consequences for Job Performance”, Journal of Applied Psychology.
71.
13.
Ellis, Albert (1975), A Guide to Rational Living, Wilshire Book Company.
Cutlip, Scott M., Allen H. Center & Glen M. Broom (1994), Effective Public Relations, 7th Edition, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc. A Simon and Schuster Company.
14.
Krajewski, Lee J., & Ritzman, Larry P. (2005), Operations Management: Processes and Value Chains, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 15.
Giap, Vo Nguyen (2001), People's War, People's Army, Honolulu, University Press of the Pacific.
Assignment File In this file, you will find the necessary details of the assignments you must submit to your tutor for assessment.
The marks you get from these assignments will form part of your final assessment in this course.
11  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the tutor-marked assignments; second, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignments There are twenty tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit four assignments out which the best three will be used for your assessment.
These three assignments shall be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with TMA (tutor- marked assignment) file to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment gets to your tutor on or before the deadline.
However, in case of being unable to complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the submission deadline of assignments elapses to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of CSS 643 will be of three hours’ duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination shall consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
12  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your tutor-marked assignments and the comments of your tutor on them before the final examination.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 4 Four Assignments are to submitted, of which the three best shall be considered at 10% each, maki 30% of the overall scores Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Making Scheme Course Overview This table brings together the entire units contained in this course, the number of weeks you should take to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title Week’s Assessment Activity (end of unit) Course Guide 1 1 Meaning of Security 1 Assignment 1 2 Discourse on Violence & Violent Crime 2 Assignment 2 3 Domestic Violence 2 Assignment 3 4 Theories of Violence 3 Assignment 4 5 Theory of Crime Control 4 Assignment 5 6 Approaches to Security Management 5 Assignment 6 13  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 7 Meaning of Intelligence 6 Assignment 7 8 Intelligence Collection and Disciplines 6 Assignment 8 9 Intelligence Analysis and Evaluation 7 Assignment 9 10 Counter-Intelligence and Intelligence 7 Assignment 10 Security Management 11 Security Personnel Management I 8 Assignment 11 12 Security Personnel Management II 9 Assignment 12 13 Management of Job Stress among 10 Assignment 13 Security Personnel 14 Trauma Management in Security Career: 11 Assignment 14 REBT 15 Public Relations Management in 11 Assignment 15 Security Sector 16 Operational Management and Capacity 12 Assignment 16 planning in Security Sector 17 Issue of Asymmetric Aggression in 13 Assignment 17 Strategic Planning 18 Guerrilla Warfare and Tactical Measures to 14 Assignment 18 Counter-Guerilla 19 Relevance of Fortification Tactic in 15 Assignment 19 Security Management 20 Maneuver Tactic in Defence and 16 Assignment 20 Security Management 21 Revision 17 22 Examination 18 Table 2: Course Overview How to get the best from this Course In distance learning the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In this same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set of books or other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives shall let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
14  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Thus, you should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished, the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
Reading Section Remember that your tutor’s job is to assist you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments related to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as 15  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
10.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unity) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are between eight and 12 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
The dates, time and venue of these tutorials shall be communicated to you.
The name and phone number of your tutor will be made known to you immediately you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
You will definitely benefit a lot by doing that.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, • you have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, • you have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should make an effort to attend the tutorials.
Thus, it is the only opportunity you have to enjoy face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary CSS 643 aims to expose you to basic principles, approaches, theories and efforts in security practice and management.
As you complete this course, you should be able to answer the following questions: • How do you describe security?
• What is violence?
• What are the theories of violence?
• How do you explain theory of crime control?
• What are the approaches to security management?
• How do you describe the relationship between intelligence cycle and security management?
16  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management • What are the measures to counter-intelligence?
• How can you explain security personnel management?
• What are the principles of managing security personnel?
• What are the tasks to manage job stress among security personnel?
• In what way(s) can REBT help to address the problem of trauma among secur ity employees?
• What are the roles of public relations management in security management?
• Is there any significant impact played by operational management and capacity planning on security management and the ability of any security organization to attain its overall goals?
• How does assymetric aggression constitute threat to security?
• What are the measures that can be adopted to counter guerilla?
• What is the importance of fortification and manoeuvre tactics to security management?
Finally, you are advised to read the course material appreciably well in order to prepare fully and not to be caught pants down by the final examination questions.
So, we sincerely wish you success in your academic career as you will find this course (CSS 643) very interesting.
You should always avoid examination malpractices!
17  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management CSS643 PRINCIPLES OF SECURITY PRACTICE AND MANAGEMENT Course Developer Monsuru Adegboyega Kasali Institute of African Studies, University of Ibadan.
Ibadan, Oyo State.
Course Writers Monsuru Adegboyega Kasali Institute of African Studies, University of Ibadan.
Ibadan, Oyo State Abisoye M. Alesinloye O.C.E.
Institute, Ibadan, Ibadan, Oyo State.
Course Editor Prof. P.E.
Agbebaku Department of Political Science Ambrose Alli University Ekpoma, Edo State NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 18  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-949-X All rights reserved Printed by---------------------- For National Open University of Nigeria 19  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Unit 1: Meaning of Security……………………………………………..1-10 Unit 2: Discourse on Violence & Violent Crime………………………..11-21 Unit 3: Domestic Violence………………………………...…………….22-33 Unit 4: Theories of Violence………………………………..…………...34-43 Unit 5: Theory of Crime Control …………………………44-52 Unit 6: Approaches to Security Management…………………………..53-62 Unit 7: Meaning of Intelligence………………………………………...63-72 Unit 8: Intelligence Collection and Disciplines……………………...…73-82 Unit 9: Intelligence Analysis and Evaluation………………………...…83-93 Unit 10: Counter-Intelligence and Intelligence Security Management….94-102 Unit 11: Security Personnel Management I…………………………...103-117 Unit 12: Security Personnel Management II…………………………..118-124 Unit 13: Management of Job Stress Among Security Personnel…...…125-135 Unit 14: Trauma Management in Security Career: REBT………….....136-148 Unit 15: Public Relations Management in Security Sector.……...……149-160 Unit 16: Operational Management & Capacity Planning in Sec.
Sector 161-168 Unit 17: Issue of Asymmetric Aggression in Strategic Planning……...169-178 Unit 18: Guerilla & Tactical Measures to Counter-Guerilla………......179-191 Unit 19: Relevance of Fortification Tactic in Security Management…192-198 Unit 20: Manoeuver Tactic in Defence & Security Management……...199-205 20  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management MODULE 1 Unit 1:Meaning of Security Unit 2:Discourse on Violence & Violent Crime Unit 3:Domestic Violence Unit 4:Theories of Violence Unit 5: Theory of Crime Control Unit 1 MEANING OF SECURITY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Definition of Secur ity 3.2 Types of Security 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION Security has been a subject that has attracted a rapidly growing interest and concern among the scholar in social science in which a wide spectrum of issues on the subject – security has remained persistent in which new breakthroughs and findings are still being made, showing the strategic importance of security in the development of nations and actualization of peace and order in all levels of human relations.
It is no surprising that the increasing research attention given to the concept and practice of research attention given to the concept and practice of security has brought about invocation of different types, dimension of analytical explanations and theoretical approaches.
In this unit, we shall be focusing on the meaning of security.
It is our belief, that, it is when we do this, that other issues or topics of discourse can be meaning fully appreciated by the reader (student).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 21  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Define the term security and Discuss types of security 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definition of Security A layman definition of security is the protection of life and property of a person.
The concept of security has undergone a transition from traditional conceptualization to a non traditional meaning, Traditionally, security management was the unilateral function of the state especially if we consider the intellectual view(s) of some political theorists like Thomas Hobbes who argued that the essence of a state is to provide law and order, which are attained through (effective) security management.
However, in an attempt by the state to actualize the purpose of its creation (through social contract), it has found it necessary to acquire legitimate use of force (violence).
This idea has made security issue a function of effective monopoly of violence, which the state applies to engender strict conformity and complaisance to state laws by the peoples for effective security management.
But, in contemporary time, definition of security goes beyond the traditional military ways of protecting the state against internal and external aggression.
The fact is that since the end of the cold war, security management has assumed a new dimension, external threat to security resulting from international hostilities and aggression that characterized the cold war era has been replaced with non- traditional security threats like information warfare, drug trafficking, nuclear pollutions, disease epidemics like HIV-AIDS, corruption, human trafficking, (internal) insurgency among others.
Nevertheless, this situation has led to multidimensional approach in security discourse and management.
Now, governments have now realized that they can no longer monopolize the business of security in local domains as well as the world at large.
This has led to extending the security community to include private players in security business, NGOS and above all the civilians take the centre stage in security management.
This we shall discuss further in the subsequent segment of this unit.
Well, on the question of definition of the term security, it is not a mischief to say that there are various definitions of the term (security) without any consensus among scholars in their conceptualization.
And thus, to some, security can be defined as: --------an all-encompassing condition in which individual citizens live in freedom, peace and safety; participate fully in the process of governance; Enjoy the protection of fundamental rights; have Access to 22  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management resources and the basic necessities of life; And inhabit an environment which is not detrimental to their health and wellbeing (see South Africa White Paper on Defense, 1996).
Not only in terms of the internal security of the State, but also in terms of secure systems of Food health, money and trade (Tickner, 1994:180).
Exercise Define the term Security.
3.2 Types of Security As we have pointed out earlier, security covers a wide-range of issues both traditional and non-traditional which go beyond describing security as protection of life and property of an individual, but it also covers measures to mitigate (to avoid) the effects of other threats like environmental pollution, terrorism, shortage of water, HIV-AIDS etc, on man and the state.
It is against this background that it is pertinent to discuss various types of security, to stimulate our better understanding of the subject.
They include the following: (a) Food security: This underscores the strategic importance that self sustenance in food production has on the security of any nation.
Though, the interdependence that dominates relations among nations also covers food.
This is because there are particular types of agricultural items that cannot be acculturated in one country or the other.
Notwithstanding, some normal food items like rice, millets and others need to be made available to the people, even at cheap rate, because food is no luxury but a necessity.
Secure society will always adopt strategy to produce its food locally, trying as much as possible to avoid importing the food items it can produce locally.
Nigeria began to experience deepened crisis and insecurity since the emergence of oil boom in the 1970s, when our problem was not basically how to generate funds but how to spend it.
Thus, the situation brought about by the petrol-dollar regime led to the demise of productive agricultural activities in the country Nigeria.
Nigeria that used to be one of the greatest food baskets and a major exporter of agricultural products overnight became a perpetual importer of food items.
The agricultural sector has however become moribund.
More than 70% of urban dwellers go about in cobra face (fierce looking), eating thrice a day becomes a very difficult task.
A hungr y man is an angry man!
There is palpable tension every where, creating a high degree of insecurity both in public and private domains.
The strategic importance of food was played up in northern Nigerian, resulting from astronomical increase in the prices of essential commodities like food stuffs.
The situation deepened the agony of the Almajirai, and migrant and unemployed 23  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management youths in the region, which has been one of the factors responsible for the culture of religious crises among these diverse people (Lubeck, 1991:186).
(b) Health Security: This involves safety against HIV-AIDS pandemics and other diseases like malaria that accounts for a very high mortality rate.
It is part of government responsibilities to provide health security for its citizens, knowing the impact that good health condition(s) can have on the development of any country.
That is why in advanced countries, government provides platform to promote healthy living among the people.
Health security is very crucial to national development, and that is the reason why countries like the United States have created opportunity for people to access national health insurance scheme, in which everybody will make contribution (premium) to the scheme.
When they fall sick, there is insurance cover that will take care of their hospital bills according to their policy type(s).
In addition, most governments usually have some strategic interventions to respond to pandemics.
One of such interventionist techniques is awareness programme by educating the people about the danger of the outbreak of some diseases particularly those that are infectious like HIV/AIDS, SARS, and Tuberculosis among others.
Enlightenment also helps to guide people against reckless lifestyles that can aid pandemics.
Also, in most states sanitation officers are appointed by government to ensure strict compliance of environmental and sanitation laws among the people not only in ensuring good sanitation behaviour but also to guarantee the health security of the state.
Another way of providing health security is by putting in place free health services for the people.
Though this kind of programme is very expensive, there are some governments that still take up the responsibility of providing both quantitative health care to citizens at low cost.
The purpose of doing this is to provide health security for the people.
(c) Economic Security: This can be described as a way of putting in place measures and strategies that will ensure that every individual in the state is not only entitled to employment but also has the right to a living wage.
In advanced countries, government often puts in place social security for citizens who are out job, in which stipends are provided for the citizens to keep body and soul together.
But, it is quite unfortunate that in most developing countries, unemployed people are left to their own fate, such that nothing is done to ameliorate any economic misfortune being experienced by the citizens.
The people who have jobs don’t have any job security as several employees are cheated and underpaid by their employers.
This situation has therefore been one of the major factors responsible 24  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management for the increasing criminality and criminal activities among the people especially the youths.
The problem of economic deprivation has been a major source of violence in Nigeria.
The major issue is poverty and it is no surprising that the life expectancy of Nigerians has fallen to between 46 years and 50 years while their counterparts in developed countries have life expectancy that stand at 70 years or more.
(d) Environment Security: The concept of environment has begun to dominate international discourse.
The issue of environmental pollutions has continued to attract attention among the individuals, Non-Governmental organizations (NGOS), nations as well as international organizations.
Within the world body (the United Nations), efforts are being made through its relevant agency – the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), to monitor environmental issues, and make reports and plans for such issues and to act and promote legal instruments on environment.
By and large, environment can be described as the total surrounding or external conditions within which an organism or a community exists” (Adeboyejo, 1994: 74).
And if we want to talk about environmental security, our focus shall be on atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere and biosphere.
People now talk about issues like ozone layer damage, water pollution environmental degradation, to mention a few.
Environment has great impact on, which has led to increasing interest of state and non-state actors on environmental protection and security.
The growing interest since 980s on environmental security has also attracted a number of international agreements aimed at protecting the environment see table 2.1 for the list of some of such agreements and when they were signed.
Table 2.1 International Agreements on the Protection of Environment Agreement Year signed or in effect Convention on the conservation of Antarctic Marine living Resources 1980 Lima convention for the protection of the marine Environment and coastal Area of the South East 1981 Pacific United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) 1982 Jeddah regional Convention for the Conservation of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden Environment 1982 Cartegena Convention for the 25  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Protection and Development of the marine Environment of the Wider Caribbean Region 1983 Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer 1985 Nairobi Convention for the Protection, Management, and Development of the Marine and coastal management of the Eastern 1985 African Region US – Canada Pacific Salmon Treaty 1986 Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 1986 Convention on Assistance in the case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency 1986 Resources and Environment of the South Pacific Region 1986 Protocol on the Reduction of Sculpture Emission or Their Tran boundary Fluxes by at least 30 1988 Percent 1985 Protocol concerning the control of Emissions of Nitrogen Oxides 1988 Wellington Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources 1988 Basel Convention on the control of Tran boundary Movement of Hazardous Water and their Disposal 1989 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer 1987 - 1990 Protocol on Reduction of Voluble Organic Compounds 1991 Bamako convention on the Ban of import into Africa and the control of Tran boundary movement and management of Hazardous Wastes which Africa 1991 Espoo convention on Environmental impact Assessment in a Tran boundary context 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection, Antarctica 1991 Convention on Biological Diversity 1992 Convention on Climate Change 1992 26  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Convention on the prohibition of the Development, Production, stockpiling, and use of Chemical Weapons and on their destruction 1993 United Nations Resolution Against Drift-Net Fishing 1993 Reflecting on the foregoing table, no less than twenty agreements were reached in thirteen years.
This shows that protecting environment has become a key element of strategic planning among various nations.
Insecure environment is more susceptible to natural disasters.
The damage inflicted on the ozone layer by several environmental pollutions has been responsible for the change in weather in which tropical areas like Africa now experience increasing hotness in weather Apart from that, deforestation has also constituted a great security thereat to several nations attracting incidence of drought (by making the soil to dry out faster).
Bush burning can lead to economic calamity and environmental degradation.
The issue of oil spillage can also be a source of environmental image.
This is often experienced in the Niger-Delta region of Nigeria, where oil spillage usually pollutes the waters and killing the fishes, attracting (violent) conflicts between the local people and oil companies engaging in exploration in the region.
One basic fact that I will like to bring out at this juncture, is that securing environment is the beginning of wisdom, so you are admonished to always protect the environment.
(e) Personal Security: This is type of security which involves protecting every individual from any physical violence.
Therefore both the state and other entities like any other people or group or people, member(s) of the person’s immediate family are barred by the law to carry out any action(s) that can cause injury or death against that individual.
Here the individual is protected against domestic and non-domestic violence.
Personal security also prevents the individual from physical aggression against himself or herself.
He/she is therefore not allowed to cause injury (deliberately) against himself/herself.
And the issue of killing oneself is regarded by the law as a criminal offence (f) Community Security: This form of security engenders the need to respect traditional relationships and social values of the people by protecting the people from losing such communitarian values.
Therefore several international and national institutional frameworks are put in place to ensure freedom of the people to association (s) does not constitute a security threat), religion etc; and no violence should be directed to him/her by another person or group of person.
27  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management (g) Territorial Security: This denotes protecting the state against any internal and external aggression.
This is one aspect of the United Nations mandate, which the world body has found crucial to the maintenance of global peace and security.
Exercise Discuss any five types of security.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is a new meaning of security since the end of sold war.
The world has realized the need to peopling security, such that management of security has became a subject of how much a state caters for the wellbeing of its people.
During the cold war, a majority of wars at that time were international but now political strife, insurgencies and civil wars plague most of the countries.
The truth is that most of these internal wars are created by economic deprivation, (inter) religious violence, ethnic rivalry, maladministration among others.
Nonetheless, state and non-state actors have a new twist to security discourse by tracing major threats to security of a nation to its domestic domain rather than external environment.
The use of violence by the state has proved less effective in the management of security, as focus in now being shifted to providing empowerment opportunities for such economic security, human rights for the people as the alternative strategy.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to explain the meaning of security.
We began our discourse by looking at various definitions of the term.
Various scholars have however defined the concept (security) differently.
But most of these definitions have demonstrated the importance of providing a viable network of opportunities in terms of protection of human rights, good governance, access to basic needs, social justice, accountability etc, to people, as the best form of secur ity.
We also discussed various types of security.
It is my belief that you have found this unit interesting.
But, if you have any problem in understanding any segment (or part) of this unit feel free, to consult your tutorial facilitator.
Thank you very much for your great attention.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT (i) What is secur ity?
(ii) Discuss any four types of security.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING 28  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Adeboyejo, Thompson A.
(1994) “Man’s Physical Environment System”, in S.K.
Balogun (ed).)
Basic Concepts in Society, Government and Economy, Ibadan: Sam Bookman.
Henk, Dan (2005) “Human security: Relevance and Implication,” Parameters, Vol.
35.
Lubeck, Paul M. (1991), “Islamic Protest Under Semi Industrial Capitalism”, in Olupona, J.K. and T. Falola (ed), Religion and society in Nigeria: Historical and Sociological Perspectives.
Ibadan Spectrum Books Limited.
Okafor, S.I.
(1988), Introduction to Man–Environment Interaction, Ibadan: External studies Programmes Series.
South African White Paper on Defence (1996), Pretoria: Department of Defence Tickner, J.A.
(1994) “Re-visioning Security” in Ken Booth and Steve Smiths (eds).
International Relations Theory Today.
Ukeje, Charles (2001), “Youth, Violence and the Collapse of Public Order in the Niger-Delta of Nigeria”, Africa Development, Vol.
XXVI, No.
1 & 2.
Unit 2 DISCOURSE ON VIOLENCE AND VIOLENT CRIME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Defining Violence 3.2 Discourse on Justification of Violence 3.3 Forms of Violent Crimes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The concept of violence has been a complex one.
It can be applied to the disruption of the peace of any community, as it can also be used to maintain peace and security.
It has continued to be a regular feature in the history of human civilization.
It is exhibited in every level of human relations, from intra-personal to global.
It is no news that violence is sometimes perpetuated against oneself as evident in some religions where aggression against oneself is seen as a form of 29  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management spiritual cleansing or upliftment.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), it is estimated that yearly almost 1.6 million people die due to violence.
In this unit, we shall be focusing on the subject (violence).
Now, let us quickly browse through the objectives of this unit before we begin the discourse of the day.
Thank you as you pay attention.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define the term violence; Discuss the justification of violence; and Explain forms of violent crimes.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Describing Violence Violence is a concept that has attracted huge attention among the scholars in peace and conflict studies, criminology and security studies as well psychology.
Consequently, a lot of definitions have emerged.
One of the scholars who have contributed on the subject (violence) is Arendt who described violence basically by focusing on its characteristics rather than conceptual definition.
She therefore stressed that “violence” interprets itself basically through the way it “harbours within itself an….element of arbitrariness….this intrusion of the utterly unexpected….” (Arendt, 1968: 4).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on its part defined violence as “Injury inflicted by deliberate means”, which includes assault, as well as “legal intervention, and self-harm”.
Other definitions of violence may include the following: A situation or event is violent to the extent that a sudde n and drastic increase occurs in the scale of negative values at stake.
The more drastic and rapid the increase the more the negative, and the more people who experience this increase, the more violent is the situation or event (Lustick, 2006: 6).
Any form of behaviour directed toward the goal of harming or injuring another living being who is motivated to avoid such treatment (Baron, 1997).
The intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or actual, against oneself, another person or against a group or community, that either results in 30  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, maldevelopment or deprivation ( Repo rt on Violence and Healt h, 2002).
Violence is aggressive behaviour that may be physically, sexually or emotionally abusive.
The aggressive behaviour is conducted by an individual or group against another, or others.
Physically abusive behaviour, is where a child, adolescent or group directly or indirectly ill treats, injures, or kills another or others.
The aggressive behaviour can involve pushing, shoving, shaking, punching, kicking, squeezing, burning or any other form of physical assault on a person(s) or on property.
Emotionally abusive behaviour, is where there is verbal attacks, threats, taunts, slagging, mocking, yelling, exclusion, malicious rumours.
Sexually abusive behaviour is where there is sexual assualt or rape (Nov.AS.
R.E.S.).
Actions that inflict, threaten, or cause injury.
Actions may be corporal, written or verbal.
Injuries may be corporal, psychological, material, or social (Jackman, 2002: 20).
Violence is the exertion of physical force so as to injure or abuse.
The word is used broadly to describe the destructive action of natural phenomena like storms and earthquakes.
More frequently the word describes forceful human destruction of property or injury to persons, usually intentional, and forceful verbal and emotional abuse that harms others ( .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/violence).
Exercise How do you define violence?
3.2 Discourse on Justification of Violence Exlusive right of government to the use of violence thesis: There is a great debate on the issue of justification of violence or violent actions.
Some scholars believe that it is only the government that possesses rights to the application of violence.
According to these theorists or simply members of this school of thought the essence of a state is to regulate the human conduct for the purpose of maitaining law and order.
How do you feel if you find yourself in a society, which has no laws or agency to enforce the laws?
There is tendency that there will be breakdown of law and order if not perpetually but such misnormal is bound to occur occassionally.
Even in places where there are laws and (effective) regulatory agencies, some deviant members of such societies will still break the laws.
However, one of the responsibilities of government is to make laws and ensures strict compliance of the people to the laws of the land.
Knowing that the 31  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management fundamental basis of law is to check the excesses of man especially as it concerns the issues of violence and violent crimes, having the enforcer of the law remains very important.
Nevertheless, the importance of government in the maintenance of law and order cannot be overemphasized.
This explains why people, in the state of nature, had to submit their individual sovereignty to the state according to the intellectual articulations of Thomas Hobbes.
Here, Hobbes claimed that the absence of government in the state of nature accounted for various unspeakable atrocities that dominated the affairs of men, such that the life of man was not only “solitary” but also “poor, nasty, brutish and short”.
There is doubt that the character of the modern state will definitely generate conflicts particularly as it relates to control of resources, which demands great competition.
One of the sources of this competition is Population.
It was ppopulation growth that attracted the evolution of agrarian societies into ones that are more politically organized.
People began to accumulate greater information exchange, which brought about innovations and skills to invent, increasing resources, as societies began to live beyond agriculture (Christian, 2004: 146– 147).
It is against this background that: ……it appeared pertinent to bring a political authority or government into force because of the danger that conflicting interests could pose to mankind.
Thus, a body of people, to regulate the behaviour and activities of people, was set up, in whom the people would surrender their individual power.
And as a sovereign power, the government in turn would provide them with public order and security, and make binding decisions on the people (Kasali, 2008: 6).
On the question of justification of violence, Max Weber argued that the power of the state include the monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force or violence within its defined territory.
This is to say no government has right to extend its power beyond its territory, and thus it is illegitimate and criminal to apply force or violence on the citizens of another country outside your domain.
This issue is a very controversial one considering the power-play among nations in the world politics, which does not fall within the scope of this lecture (unit).
Moreover, power is so fundamental to the business of governance.
Even as a parent, you need some power to be able compel your children to respect the rules of the house.
At levels of leadership, power plays a very important role to ensure that the followers comply with the rules and regulations guiding their relations within and outside the organizations.
I therefore concur with the intellectual submision of Kasali (2008) on the relationship between the government and power, and it goes thus: 32  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management ……the impact of power on governmental operations is so enormous, as also evident in the divine origin of state theory.
In this theoretical proposition, people were said to have cried on to God for assistance when the world was in a state of nature.
They said: “we are perishing, give us a chief whom we shall worship in concert and who will protect us.” In this case, obedience of one’s government appears to be religious and civil duty of every citizen (Kasali, 2008:11).
Owing to the need to guarantee law and order, the state exercises its power by applying sanctions against lawbreakers or deviant members of the society.
The government fulfills this task by putting in place law enforcement mechanisms (Police, Customs Service, Immigration Service etc) that ensure strict compliance of the people to the laws of the land through the use of violence.
Additionally, there are legal systems which contain the rules, regulations and laws that govern the conduct of each individual and public officer.
The laws are itemized and codified with relevant penalties particularly in penal codes and other relevant documents of law.
The scholars like Max Weber who argue that, it is only government that has the right to the use of violence also claim that in anticipation to maintain law and order in a given state, the government has the power to apply some considerable amount of violence through the use of the police and military.
Just App lication of violence by ind ividu al(s) is Legitimate thesis: There are a number of scholars and philosophers who believe that it is not only the government that has right to the legitimate use of violence.
The legitimacy of any violent action is a function of its justification.
Take for instance, if somebody is being attacked by people possessing some dangerous weapons, one thing that will come to the mind of such person is that the armed attackers should either be armed robbers or hired killers.
Dangerous weapons are neither toys nor pleasant objects but they are objects of destruction and harm.
Therefore, the person in question will have two options.
The first may be to surrender to fate while the second option will be to resist the attack by fighting back.
If the person chooses the second option, then we arrive at the issue of self- defence.
In someone’s attempt to defend himself against any harm from an attacker or a group of attackers, he/she kills or injures the attacker(s) or some of the attackers, has he./she committed an offence for doing so?
Or the person should, in order not to violate the laws, accept to be harmed (or killed) by the assailants?
Nevertherless, the law allows anybody to apply violence if it is for self defence.
According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), homicide can be classified into two, which include criminal homicide and justifiable homicide (e.g.
self defense).
33  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Another factor that can justify any perpetuation of violence by an individual against any other party(ies) is when such individual has become mentally ill to the extent that he cannot control his actions.
However, this is ascertained through psychiatric examination.
It is the report of such test that show if truly the suspect was mentally unstable at the time he carried out the violence.
One of the factors that can make somebody lose his mental stability may be finding his/her spouse with a boyfriend/girlfriend having canal pleasure right in their matrimonial home.
In such case the law may be lenient with the perpetrator of violence but not in all cases.
Another factor that make individual(s) carry out a just violence is if the government is repressive and does not respect the natural rights of the people.
The people have justification to wage violence against such government because their natural rights are fundamental to their human existence, and nobody including the government should deny them such rights.
Additionally, people can also carry-out violence if the government fails to meet their yearnings, which form the basis of the social contract between them and the government.
But it is always advisable that violence should be the last resort.
People should explore the pacific means in getting government to do their bid.
From all we have discussed so far, it is not only government that enjoy legitimate use of violence, individual(s) can also enjoy such legitimate right if there is justification for exhibiting the violent behaviour.
The same rule goes to state (government) because if the state exercises this power in an unjust way, the people have the power to resist such state or government.
Justification of violence goes beyond the principle of the end justifies the means.
This is because if the means are evil, the end will definitely be evil.
Exercise Discuss what are the factors that justify act of violence by an individual.
3.3 Forms of Violent Crimes Violent crimes are any aggressive actions which are outlawed or prohibited by the law.
Anybody who engages in any of such actions has committed a serious offence.
Thus such a person shall be punished by the law based on the grativity of his/her offence.
Violent crimes can be classified into two: domestic and non- domestic.
There are many forms of violent crimes and they include the following: a) Abuse: This involves any action targetted towards wrong or improper use of another person.
There are several types of abuse that can be committed.
One of such is child abuse - unkind and/or brutal treatment of children especially those under the age of 18 years.
Child sexual abuse is another form of abuse 34  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management committed agaisnt children by adult(s).
This involves indescent sexual actvity against a child but it does not always mean that the offender must have had sex with the victim before this kind of offence would have been committed.
The act of child sexual abuse can also come in form of playing with sexual organ of the child among others.Emotional abuse is not usually regarded as a criminal act but it has the tendency to bring the sufferer or victim of such abuse to aggressive behaviour leading to crime.
We usually hear cases of people harming their love partners because they’re jilted by their partners.
The point we are trying to make is that jilting can cause emotional abuse but it is not a crime.
But the act of jilting can make the victim, after considering all he/she has done for the partner either in monetary terms etc, to embark on actions that may be considered criminal.
Sexual abuse is unwanted sexual activity like touching some sentive parts of the victim.
It can also involve subtly compelling the victim into a sexual activity; b) Assault and Battery: Assualt is a form of violent crime, which involves unlawful attack aimed at causing bodily injury to another party or person.
Battery is illegal beating that may lead to injuring another person.
This is usually evident in most homes in Africa where parents use objects such as cane and horse-whip to discipline their children or someone else.
Now, let us quickly talk about different types of assualt.
These include aggravated assualt (a form of assault that involves the use of weapons or violently attacking another person beyond ordinary assualt), and sexual assault that involves making violent sexual advances on a person; c) Homicide: This violent crime involves the killing of another person.
This criminal offence is often perpetuated with levity in most of our tertiary institutions in Nigeria in the name of secret cultism.
Many husbands have committed this violence against their wives, several wives have been reported doing same.
This crime is one of the violent crimes that carry great penalties ranging from long imprisonment terms, life jail term, to even death penalty; d) Murder: It can be regarded as homicide in certain proscribed conditions.
But, it is act of killing another human being with pre-meditated malice.
Research findings have shown that murder accounts for several deaths.
It has been estimated on annual basis that no less than 55,000 murders are recorded in Brazil, while 30,000 in Russia, 25,000 in Columbia (see .news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/americas/5024428.stm) , 20,000 in South Africa, 15,000 in Mexico, 14,000 people are murdered in the United States ( .users.erols.com/mwhite28/warstar8.htm#Murders) etc.
e) Rape: The offence is also very criminal.
It is an unlawful act of engaging another preson in sexual intercourse through the use of physical force.
It is a focible and unlawful carnal knowledge of a person.
The offender can be male or female.
It 35  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management was in the olden days that men were thought of capable of committing such offence but now females too can be culprits; f) Property-Damage and Arson: Property-damage is also a violent crime in which a person damages or destroys another person’s property by breaking, burning, or any other forms of destruction or impairment.
Arson is a malicious burning of another person’s house.
This offence also involves a person burning his/her own property usually house that’s insured with the aim of defrauding the insurer(s); g) Crue lty to : This kind of violent crime is not usually crime per se in Nigeria and some other places.
But in the Western world, animals have a number of rights, which their governments protect.
It is therefore criminal to perpetuate any brutal act against an animal.
So, those who usually hunt birds or stoning another person’s dog(s) or commit any other form(s) of violence against animals should be warned to desist if they are visiting or relocating permanently to any part of the Western world where governments protect the rights of animals.
In Africa, protecting animals rights looks absurd in the face of growing abuse of the fundamental rights of the people.
Human beings never get their protected rights let alone animals; and h) Dome stic Vio lence: This is form of violent crime in which a person carries out violence against another person within the same household.
This form of violence is so rampant to the extent that we have at least 30 cases in every minute in Nigeria and many of which have remained unreported.
It is therefore pertinent that we use a whole unit to discuss it.
We shall therefore be focusing on this subject (domestic violence) in the next unit, so that we can develop an analytical insight on the subject aimed at providing recommendations through which this violence can, at least, be reduced if not eradicated completely.
4.0 CONCLUSION The issue ofviolence has continued to attract growing interest among scholars, policy-makers as well as human rights advocates.
The negative consequences of violence on mankind has necessitated a quite number of international organizations and the United Nations to come out with polict frameworks to address the problem of violence.
Violence is often defined as human attack targetted at harming another human being.
This definition is rather too fluid because it is not only the humans that perpetuate violence.
There are non-human violence, such as attack from the animals or natural disaster.
Natural disasters too can be violent, causing injury, damage, even death to human and other animals.
What most governments do to avoid violence from natural disaster is to put in place viable early warning mechanisms that alert the relevant agencies of the government on the possible occurrence of a partiocular natural disaster or the other.
36  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management In Africa, we still lack such mechanisms and our response to emergency is phlegmatic or lackadaisical.
There is no doubt in human civilization, violence has interpreted itself in various forms, such as do mestic violence and non domestic aggression i.e war, riot, armed robbery, assassination, arson, among others.
In spite of its negativity, it remains part of human civilization.
Exercise Explain forms of violent crimes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have focused on a number of issues concerning the subject of violence.
We began our journey into the subject matter by looking at various definitions of violence to alert our conceptual minds.
Thereafter, we discussed the justification of violence.
Here, we looked at whether it is only the government that enjoys legitimate use of violence or individuals too can enjoy such right (legitimate violence) provided there is justification for such aggressive behaviour.
Third area of discourse on the subject was explaining some of the various forms of violent crime.
I hope that you have found this unit (very) interesting and self- explanatory?
Meanwhile, if you have problem to decipher any segment of this unit, you are advised to consult your tutorial facilitator or share your problem with your study group.
Thank you for your attention.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is violence?
And explain the various forms of violent crimes.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Arendt, Hannah (1968), On Violence.
New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Baron, R.A. (1997), Human Aggression, New York: Plenum Christian, David (2004), Maps of the Time.
Los Angeles, California: University of California Press.
Federal Bureau of Investigation (2004), Crime Reporting Handbook.
Also available on .fbi.gov/ucr/handbook/ucrhandbook04.pdf.
Jackman, Mary R. (2002), “Violence in Social Life”, Annual Review of Sociology, Vol.
28.
37  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Kasali, Monsuru Adegboyega (2008), POS 113: The Organisation of Government, University of Ibadan for Distance Learning Centre, University of Ibadan.
Lustick, Ian S. (2006), Defining Violence: A Plausibility Probe Using Agent- Based Modelling, Paper prepared for LiCEP, Princeton University, May 12-14, 2006.
Also available on .psych.upenn.edu/sacsec/abir.
NoV.
R.E.S., European Commission on Education and Culture Connect Program.
Peterson, Dale & Richard Wrangham (1997), Males: Apes and the Origins of Human Violence, Mariner Books.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Also avalaible on .cdc.gov/ncipc/wisqars/nonfatal/definitions.htm#violence.
Retrieved on the 20th April, 2008.
Report on Violence and Health (October 3, 2002).
Also available on .who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/en.
Retrieved on 30th June, 2007.
.boston.com/news/world/latinaamerica/articles//2006/09/25/brazil_murder_rate_s imilar_to_war_zone_data_shows/.
Retrieved on 17th of April 2008 .en.wik ipe dia.org/ wik i/ violenc e. Retrieved on 23rd of April 2008.
.news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/americas/5024428.stm.
Retrieved on 20th of April 2008.
.users.erols.com/mwhite28/warstar8.htm#Murders.
Retrieved on 16th of April 2008.
38  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 39  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 3 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Defining Domestic Violence 3.2 The Cycle of Domestic Violence 3.3 Sources of Domestic Violence 3.4 Solutions to Domestic Violence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The issue of domestic violence has been a subject of great debate.
This is as a result of the way in which various scholars, policy makers as well as institutions (governmental and non-governmental) have conceptually defined the subject.
There is no doubt that the “patriarchal violence” model has attracted a great criticisms by conceptualising domestic violence as that one which only produces male paerpetrator(s) and female victims(s).
Experience has shown that it is not only men that are perpetrators of this violence, there have been cases where women have been reported to be culprits.
Even within the same-sex households, the situation is not in anyway different.
The subject has attracted a phletora of literature in which several definitions have emerged in the conceptualization of the term (domestic violence) by scholars, policy-makers and non-governmental organizations working in the field.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define the term domestic violence; Describe the cycle of domestic violence; Explain sources of domestic violence; and Identify ways to address the scourge of domestic violence in (y)our society.
40  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Defining Domestic Violence Domestic violence is often referred to as a form of violence involving child abuse, elder abuse, other forms of aggressive behaviour between two or more people within the same family (or household) (Wallace, 2004: 2).
The term domestic violence goes beyond, in its conceptual meaning, aggressive behaviour between husband and wife.
The victim may not be married to culprit but they may only be living in this same household (Waits,1985: 267-330).
According to the U.S. Office on the Violence against Women (OVW), domestic violence can be defined as a: pattern of abusive behavior in any relationship that is used by one partner to gain or maintain power and control over another intimate partner ( .usdoj.gov/ovw/domviolence.htm.).
The Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service through its Domestic Violence Assessment Policy described domestic violence as: Patterns of behaviour characterised by the misuse of power and control by one person over another who are or have been in an intimate relationship.
It can occur in mixed gender relationships and same gender relationships and has profound consequences for the lives of children, individuals, families and communities.
It may be physical, sexual, emotional and/or psychological.
The latter may include intimidation, harassment, damage to property, threats and financial abuse ( .cafcass.gov.uk/English/publications/consultation/04DecDV%20 Policy.pd f).
Exercise Define the term domestic violence.
3.2 The Cycle of Domestic Violence Domestic violence has the tendency to keep recurring in homes.
This form of aggression has been experienced, especially those families where the couples and other members of the households often use offensive or rather abusive language.
In relationships where there is manifest exhibition of abusive behaviour, the probability that domstic violence will erupt between partners or members of the household is usually high.
In his model of cycle of violence, Lenore Walker presented three phases to explain the impact that a domestic violence will have on the relationship between the perpetrator and victim.
The basic truth is that violence seems to have epochal 41  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management effect on the relationship between the affected parties.
Let us consider a situation where a victim of domestic violence loses one of his/her eyes at the time the perpetrator exhibits his/her aggressive behaviour against him/her.
How do you think that their relationship will not be affected?
Unless, there is geniune transformation of their conflict relation through the peocesses of healing and mutual recognition of each other’s need and interest, violence will keep recurring in their relationship.
In an attempt to illuminate or shed light on the patterns of behaviour of the parties in relation to domestic aggression that has existed between them, that Walker has brought an analytical framework, to explain the recurrence of aggressive behaviour in affected families or households.
Now, let us quickly look at the three basic phases.
Honeymoon Phase In this phase, there is tension freezing.
The atmsphere is rented with affection, apology, an end to the violence.
The perpetrators of the violence usually demonstrate a sense of regret for the aggressive behaviour exhibited by them against the victims.
But, it is not in all cases that we have parpetrators showing affection to the victims, as some (perpetrators) will rather leave the scene.
However, it is important to note that, not in all cases that domestic violence is negative.
This is because some couples are deriving pleasure in such abnormal behaviour.
I could remember hearing a lady saying that it was after her husband battered her that she began to know that the man really loved.
To her domestic violence is a way of showing love and affection.
I have the feeling that the lady in question must have hidden some other vital information, which made her to think that way.
Nevertheless, I suggest that the husband realized, after the violence, that what he did was wrong.
He therefore apologized to the wife and showered her with love and affection which climaxed in love-making.
The lady might have really enjoyed the way the husband made love to her that night more than any other time.
In situation like this, there is tendency that the lady will try the repeat of the violent situation to actually know if the husband will always satisfy her better sexually under such aggressive condition.
If the result of the subsequent incident of domestic violence is the same with the previous event, I have no doubt, that domestic violence will become habitual in that kind of family.
Tension Building Phase This phase is greeted with break-down in communication as tension and fear of violent outbursts will rent the air.
At this stage the victim will try to appeal to the perpetrator to be calm and reason along with him/her to find solutions to their conflict relations.
42  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management In several situations of do mestic violence, the victims might be the ones who actually started situations, which led to the exhibition of aggressive behaviour by the culprits.
A number of wives are used to nagging and such an act is capable of producing emotional abuse that tends to activate the other party’s anger.
The anger is likely to produce aggressive or violent behaviour, which the culprit is likely to direct against the victim.
Communication break-down usually creates misunderstanding between parties.
If care is not taken such situation will most likely generate tension in the conflict relation between the parties.
If the parties fail to allow the tension to fizzle out by maintaining decorum and avoid further exchange of hot words or they walk away from each other (for a while), the probability that confrontation will set-in is very high.
Acting-out Phase In this stage, there is evident consequence of communication break-down.
This consequence is outburst of violent and abusive behaviour.
The parties will engage each other in physical violence, and efforts will be made by each of them to have a strategic advantage over each other in their violent conflict relation.
Though, it is not in all cases that you will find the victims and perpetrators of domestic violence in engage each other in a fight.
The victim may simply avoid engaging the perpetrator in any physical combat but the perpetrator may insist prevailing on the victim by applying domestic violence.
A good example is a man bringing to his matrimonial home a girlfriend to sleep overnight.
The wife may (peacefully) kick against such plan, and consequently a serious argument may ensue between them.
In order to prevail on the wife to accept his plan, the husband way use violence against wife.
Exercise How do you describe the cycle of domestic violence?
3.3 Sources of Domestic Violence There are many different causes that accounr for domestic violence.
In this segment of the unit, we shall be focusing on these causes.
Now, let us discuss the causes one after the other.
a) Sensit ive Nature of One’s Job: Resulting from the sensitive nature of one’s job, there is tendency that one’s partner may wish to capitalize on it to make some extraneous demands from the person.
Such demands are most likely to get the person infuriated.
For instance, the wife of a pastor may decide to make a request from him.
And if he fails, the wife can resolve to shout on him, knowing that the man will like to protect his image, having no other option other than yielding to her request.
43  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management In a situation that the poor pastor decides otherwise, the possibility that tension will emerge is apparent.
If the man becomes angered and can no longer control his temper, he may have no other option but to use (domestic) violence against the wife.
Meanwhile, it is not the sensitive nature of one’s job that makes one to perpetuate violence within the family but a member of the family may wish to capitalize on it by making inconsiderate demands.
It is the reckless attitude of the victim that would force the culprit to consider aggression against him/her; b) Personality Traits and Mental Characteristics: According to Psychological theorists of domestic violence, the personality traits and mental characteristics of the offender are responsible for his/her domestic violent behaviour.
Examples of personality traits may include high temperament or getting angry much quickly, and low self esteem.
Nonetheless, several other personality disorders and psychopathology can also lead to aggressive behaviour.
Take for instance, the children of homes that frequently experience domestic violence, there is great possibility that when such children become adults, they will exhibit some domestic violent behaviour.
Again, children that are abused are very much likely to be violent when they become adults.
Some research findings have also shown that men who frequently abuse their wives have borderline personalities (between psychotics and neurotics), which they have developed in their early life (Dutton, D. G. & A. J. Starzomski ,1993: 327-337); c) External Factors: Here, we are talking on how some enviromental factors contribute to the habit of domestic violence.
One who goes out with friends who often perpetrate aggression against their spouses or any other members in their families may (un)consciously internalize or cultivate such aggressive behaviour.
So, with little misundestanding with another person in his household, he/she may then exhibit the learnt or acquired value of domestic violence.
The structure of one’s family can also play a role in his/her acquisition of violent behaviour.
If someone has a misunderstanding some certain (extended) family member(s) may incite one to perpetuate violence against his/her partner or any other person in the family.
Additionally, if one comes into a family that is violent, there is tendency that such person will also exhibit violent attitudes when he/she also has his/her own family; d) Resources: Resources are said by Goode (1971), to be some of the fundamental sources of domestic violence especially in a family where it is only one of the partners that provides the needs of the family.
There is possibility that, if that person who unilaterally povides the family’s needs is always confronted with financial burden to the extent that he/she becomes frustrated, there will be anger.
If the other partner is found by him/her to be wasteful, the erupt ion of violence is 44  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management very likely.
This explains why most homes where it is one of the (intimate) partners is responsible for the family’s needs, often collapse when the bread- winners begin to experience the problem of dwidling resources.
Research findings have shown that couples that both provide the needs of the family on equal terms experience less incidence of violence.
But the problem of control and power may likely provoke situation of conflcit in the family, which can even to abuse (Kurz, 1992).
Here, the man will claim to be the leader of the house.
And where the wife thinks that she can be at the same level with the husband, considering the equal contribution they make in terms of providing for the needs of the family, there is likelihood that any good relation between the couple may become severed and domestic violence may be brought to bear to settle the power tussle between them; e) Social Stress: There are so many factors that can cause stress.
These may include inability of someone to pay his/her house-rent, unemployment, loss of job, childlessness, financial problems, inability of one to meet his/her desired goals, among others.
All these and more can actually lead a person to stress.
These stressors can increase situation of tension in the family.
Though, violence is not caused by stress most times, it can lead some people to anger (Seltzer & Kalmuss, 1988: 473-491).
If one is not able to dispose off the anger, it can lead to aggressive behaviour.
This situation is likely to lead to transferred aggression.
The major environment where transferred aggression often takes place is the home.
f) Social Learning or Modelling: Another source of domestic violence is social learning.
According to environmental psychologists, it is believed that any violent behaviour exhibited by a person must have been acquired from external forces, and such behaviour and any other behaviours are not innate.
Therefore, it is through socialization that we cultivate habits, values and ideas, which mould our behaviours.
A child that is raised in a peaceful home will hardly exhibit any domestic violent behaviour.
But most children that are brought up in homes where domestic violence has been a common phenomenon, there is possibility that most of such children would have imbibed the culture of domestic violence.
g) Alcoho l: Heavy consumption of alcohol can easily lead to domestic violence (Jewkes, 2002: 1423-1429) .
The situation of do mestic violence is rampant among the families where one of the partners indulges in very high comsupt ion of alcohol.
After the incidence of violence, if asked the reason for the aggressive behaviour when they are no more under the influence of alcohol, most of the culprits would tell you that they never knew what they were doing; and 45  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management h) Hard Drugs: Hard drugs may include cocaine, heroine, marijuana (weeds), to mention a few.
These are also potential sources of domestic violence.
In most homes where you people taking hard drugs, the situation of domestic violence will not be far from them.
This is because, many times persons taking hard drugs will find it difficult to have control over their emotions and behaviour.
For instance, if a member of a particular family is indulging himself/herself in cocaine consumption, what will be paramount to him is to have money to take his drugs.
If he/she does not have money to buy the ‘stuff’,that house is in great danger.
This is because he/she will look for means to get money in the house if no alternative means outside.
The person may resort to use of domestic violence if he/she cannot get the money peacefully.
Etc.
Exercise What are the sources of domestic violence?
3.4 Solutions to Domestic Violence a) One of the ways to eradicate or limit the incidence of domestic violence is to articulate for combined action between law enforcement agencies, the courts, social service agencies and corrections/probation agencies.
Each of these agencies should take pro-active measures within constitutional ambits to bring the problem of domestic violence to public view.
This is because the problem of domestic violence especially in Africa is seen as family matter, which needs to be addressed privately.
Police is usually relunctant to facilitate the arrest of the culprits in most cases except there is a reported case of homicide.
May be the reason for that, is the way society as whole sees domestic violence as normal and private issue.
This partially explains why domestic violence is regarded by the law as a misdemeanor offence; b) There should be adequate medical interventions for the victims of domestic violence.
After the treatment, it is expected that the victims should be advised by the medical personnel or doctors to visit relevant agencies that can help to counsel the victims and culprits to ensure transformation of their conflict relation.
This process can assist the victims and culprits to improve the communication break- down and healing through apology and forgiveness; c) Apart from attending to the victims, medical professionals should also endeavour to assist the culprits by providing medical inteventions that will enable the perpetrators to control their violent behaviour.
Application of drugs like clozapine, Lithium and anticonvulsants can be very helpful to control aggressive behaviour.
46  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management d) Provision of Standard Operations Procedures for Arrest of Culprits is essential.
In making a warrantless arrest, there is a need for Standard Operations Procedures (SOP), which must be considered and observed by the Law enforcement agents.
To make any arrest of perpetrator(s) of domestic violence, certain questions need to be answered.
They include: • Are there signs of physical abuse?
• Were there witnesses?
• Is it recent?
• Was the victim assaulted by the alleged suspect?
• Who is the primary aggressor?
• Could the victim be lying?
• Could the suspect be lying?
(see .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domestic_violence); e) Criminologists often find it difficult to understand why detterence measures have not actually prevented the occurrence of domestic violence up till now.
One of the reasons for the continued occurrence of such ugly incidence is the phlegmatic or relunctant posture being articulated by most prosecutors to bring the culprits to justice.
Even, when the perpetrators of domestic violence are prosecuted, they get minor jail sentence.
On several occassions, the court(s) give many of the culprits option of fine.
In order to reduce to a bearest minimum the incidence of domestic violence, there is need by the government to make the offence attract steep penalties; and f) Efforts should be made towards reconciliation and conflict Transformation.
These peace tasks can also be performed by law enforcement agents as well as the court(s) to assist the parties (victim and offender) to appreciate the need to restore their severed friendship and recognize the needs and interests of each other.
This is why it is pertinent for the government to provide a platform for restorative justice.
The criminal justice focuses on retributing the offender(s) while restorative justice system deals with ways to restore and improve the cordial relationship that formerly existed berween the parties before the incident of domestic violence.
Exercise What are your recommendations for addressing the problem of domestic violence?
4.0 CONCLUSION Domestic violence is experienced in every part of the world irrespective of class, age, sex, profession, culture, race, etc.
It is a common phenomenon, especially in societies where there is increasing poverty, unemployment, absence of socio- justice.
Most definitions of the term domestic violence center on the violent relations between husband and wife.
47  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management But domestic violence goes beyond violent behaviour between couple(s), and it also involves a member of a family aggressing against another person within the same household.
The victim may be a child or cousin or sister (inlaw) or brother (inlaw) or uncle or aunt or nephew or mother (inlaw) or father (inlaw) to the perpetrator of a do mestic violence.
Woman and girl-child have remained the greatest victims of domestic violence but this does not mean that we don’t have female perpetrators of domestic violence.
In several households, we can find women who are husband beaters 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have tried to discuss a wide range of issues concerning domestic violence.
We bagan our academic task in this unit by looking at some of the available definitions of the subject (domestic violence).
Thereafter, our attention was drawn to expaining the cycle of domestic violence.
We also recognized the need to discuss the various sources of domestic violence, which we accomplished in the segment succeeding the one we focused on the cycle of violence.
The last but not the least area of discourse was exploring ways to address the problem of domestic violence.
I really appreciate your attention, and if you have any problem in deciphering any segment of this unit, please consult your tutorial facilitator.
Thank you and God bless.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT I.
Define the term domsetic violence.
II.
Discuss any four sources of domestic violence.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Bowen, Erica, Len Brown and Elizabeth Gilchrist (July 2002) , “Evaluating Probation Based Offender Programmes for Domestic Violence Perpetrators: A Pro-Feminist Approach”, The Howard Journal of Criminal Justice, 41(3).
Bowker, L.H., Arbitell, M.,& Mcferron, J.R (1988), “On the Relationship Between Wife Beating and Child Abuse”, in K. Yllo & M. Bograd, Feminist Perspectives on Wife Abuse, Sage.
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service, Domestic Violence Assessment Policy.
Available on .cafcass.gov.uk/English/publications/consultation/04DecDV%20Policy.pdf Retrieved on 16th June, 2007.
Dutton, D. G. & A. J. Starzomski (1993).
"Borderline Personality in Perpetrators of Psychological and Physical Violence".
Violence and Victim 48  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Dutton, D. G. & S. K. Golant (1995).
The Batterer: A Psychological Profile.
Basic Books.
Follingstad, D.R., L.L.
Rutledge, et al (1990), “The Role of Emotional Abuse in Physically Abusive Relationships”, Journal of Family Violence.
Goode, William (1971), “Force and Violence in the Family”, Journal of Marriage and the Family, 33.
Jewkes, Rachel (April 20, 2002), “Intimate Partner Violence: Causes and Prevention”, The Lancet 359. pp.
1423-1429.
Johnson, M.P.
(2000), “Conflict and Control:Images of Symmetry and Asymmetry in Domestic Violence”, in Booth, A., A.C. Crouter, and M. Clements, Couples in Conflict.
Erlbaum.
Kurz, D. (1992), “Battering and the Criminal Justice System: A Feminist View”, in Buzawa, E.S., C.G.
Buzawa, Domestic Violence: The Changing Criminal Justice Response, Auburn House.
Office on Violence Against Women.
.usdoj.gov/ovw/domviolence.htm.
Retrieved on 13th June, 2007.
Renzetti, C. M. and C. H. Miley (1996), Violence in Gay and Lesbian Domestic Partnerships.
Haworth Press.
Seltzer, Judith A.& Debra Kalmuss (December 1988), “Socialization and Stress Explanations for Spouse Abuse”.
Social Forces 67(2).
Straus, M. A.
(1980), “A Sociological Perspective on the Causes of Family Violence”, in Green, M.
R.(ed.
), Violence and the Family, Westview.
Waits, Kathleen (1984-1985).
"The Criminal Justice System's Response to Battering: Understanding the Problem, Forging the Solutions".
Washington Law Review 60.
Wallace, Harvey (2004).
Family Violence: Legal, Medical, and Social Perspectives.
Allyn & Bacon.
.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domestic_violence.
Retrieved on 8th of April, 2008.
Unit 4 49  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management THEORIES OF VIOLENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 The Malthusian Theory 3.2 Youth Bulge Theory 3.3 Historical Theories 3.4 Hobbesian Theory 3.5 Rousseauen Theory 3.6 Political Science Theory 3.7 Marxist Theory 3.8 Rationalist Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the discourse of violence, various theories have been presented to explain its causes.
Some scholars are of the view that violence is a subject of nature while other scholars see it as a function of nurture.
The debate on the causes of violence has generated heated argument among scholars in the fields of criminology, psychology and other related disciplines.
The view that holds that cause of violence is embedded in nature of man is rather insufficient owing to the fact that there are some non-natural factors that produce aggressive or violent behaviour in man.
Relying on nurture as the main cause of violence is also inadequate to explain the cause of violence.
One basic truth that has emerged is that there are many causes of violence, which can be explained by both variables: nature and nurture.
In this unit, various theories of violence shall form the basis of our study.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Identify the theories of violence; and Explain various theories of violence.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 The Malthusian Theory 50  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Thomas Malthus, the proponent of this theory, presented essentially different approach in the study of the causes of violence.
This theory focuses basically on the grand function of violence rather than the origin of violence or the relationship between the human nature and war or violence.
The conscious and deliberate motive behind aggressive behaviour of man is basically to check the growing population, which available resources cannot take care of.
Malthus (1766–1834) wrote that populations will continue to increase until they are limited by war, disease, or famine.
Members of this school of thought opinionate that the essence of violence or war is to decimate or reduce the rising population, such that population outburst can be prevented with the aim of preventing the available resources from being overstretched.
Malthus maintained that violence or war is of greater function, which is not intentionally articulated by man due to its invisibility but it is deliberately engineered by God to check population outburst.
Nevertheless, this function of violence or war is cosmic, in warfare remains the plan of God and nature to reduce any population outburst at necessary intervals.
The examples include ancient Stoics and Renaissance neo Stoics who had the belief that warfare is a product of a providential scheme designed to keep populations from outgrowing their food supply.
Malthus also argues that the situation of or human aggression or war is beyond human comprehension and it is also not part of human intentions but a grand function designed by God to regulate human population.
Men, however, are ‘only puppets manipulated by the transcendent laws of demography, which when population reached a certain point would pull on the strings of gain and safety, honour and glory’ (Dawson, 1996: 3).
However, this theory inspired a large of the 19th century philosophers in supporting the importance of war in human civilization within the context of demographic contradictions.
Human aggression or war helps to keep human population below the available resources.
The theory underscores the necessity of violence or war to adequately address the problem of population outburst.
Counter-factually, in the history of human population and war, statistics has shown that death rate is far below.
The average death rate is 5% of the population of the warring parties.
This theory has been considered as a subject of intellectual absurdity.
3.2 Youth Bulge Theory This is another demographic theory, which is different from the Malthusian theory.
Though, they both believe that high birth rate is the major source of violence or war but their views are (slightly) different from each other.
Malthusian theory sees inadequate supply of food to meet the challenge(s) of a population outburst as the main source of human aggression or war where war is 51  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management used as a function to reduce the growing population so that food supply will be adequate to cater for the existing people who are able to survive the war.
On the other hand, Youth Bulge theorists blame human aggression or war situation on a disparity between the numbers of well educated, well fed, angr y "fighting age" young males (2nd, 3rd, and 5th sons) and the number of positions available to them in society as a primary source of violence.
The members of this include Jack Goldstone, Gunnar Heinsohn, and Gary Fuller among others.
War is not basically a function of disproportion in population outburst and the available (scarce) food per se but the inability of parents to provide for the children who are of fighting age.
Thus according to Huntington (2001): Generally speaking, the people who go out and kill other people are males between the ages of 16 and 30.
Youth Bulge theory holds that youth bulge is the main source of war.
Youth bulge arises when 30 to 40 percent of the males of a state are found within the fighting age of between 15 and 30 years of age.
It will follow periods with average birth rates as high as 4-8 children per woman with a 15-29 year delay.
Youthfulness of the people within this age bracket makes them to easily get angry and violent when they are unable to meet their expectations like access to medical care, employment, quality education among others more than other age brackets.
Exercise Distinguish between the Malthusian theory and Youth Bulge theory.
3.3 Historical Theories This is another level of macro-level theory of violence, which explains cause of violence in the context of war.
In the historical theories of violence, historians seem to be wary of making any sweeping explanation for all wars.
Historical theorists like A J P Taylor often see wars as traffic accidents.
There are some circumstances and situation that make the occurrence of wars more likely, but there can be no system for predicting where and when each one will occur.
This theoretical approach is criticized by Social Scientists basically because political leaders sometimes make careful decision before adopting a war policy.
A good example is the Iraq war where the US government made conscious efforts to consider the available options in addressing (perceived) Iraqi aggression in the Middle-East and the world at large due to the alleged production of the weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
Though, the US may be having a clandestine motive not declared to the world public other than the WMD allegation.
The war later erupted.
It can never be proven that the war in Iraq is accidental.
From available facts, the war was carefully planned by the US, and so it was intentional.
Accidental dimension of 52  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management war demands that a hostile situation will just happen without any previous plan in carrying out such action.
However, one can still argue that war on occasional basis happens purely by accident.
War may sometimes erupt without any previous intention.
A good example was the Biafran War.
The Eastern Nigeria or the Federal Military Government never had any previous intention to go into war in the real sense of it.
The war just erupted when it was least expected.
Hobbesian Theory In early modern Europe, it was believed that violence was inherent in mankind, meaning that aggression formed part of human nature.
The experience of war in civilized states is being an offshoot of the wars of savages.
This view is expressed in the Hobbesian theory.
This theory is credited to the intellectual artistry of Thomas Hobbes.
What we mean is that this theoretical proposition was propounded by Hobbes.
Meanwhile, Thomas Hobbes in his theoretical construction articulated through his social deterministic description, that man by his nature is violent.
Man is egoistic, and he is controlled by an animus dominandi consisting of three passions.
Hobbes drew his theoretical inspiration from Thucydides.
According to him (Hobbes): “……..in the nature of man, we find three principal causes of qua rrel.
First, competition; second, diffidence; thirdly, glory (see Slomp, 1990:565-586).
These three passions are responsible for the rivalry among men as each tries to gain relative advantage over the other, which often results in violent hostilities.
The scenario is evident in his state of nature, which was a “state of warre”.
This theory stresses the importance of violence in the maintenance of peace and security of any state.
It is expected of every state to uphold the principle of defensive violence such that before the enemy carries out its attack, the state should act fast to undermine the threat or military capability of the enemy.
Thus, the theory advocates for the “principle of first attack” as a secur ity strategy.
Exercise What is Hobbesian theory?
3.5 Rousseauen Theory This theory was propounded by J. J. Rousseau.
Rousseau contributed on the subject of social contract where he presented an opinion contrary to the one provided by Thomas Hobbes about the prevailing situation on the state of nature.
According to Rousseau, man cannot be said to be naturally violent, and the state of nature was very peaceful, no aggression among men.
He also claimed that 53  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management every man went about his/her normal business and social engagement without being harassed physically by any other person(s).
The affairs of the people were regulated by ‘golden’ rules and there was peace among them.
Ovid and Seneca: the primitive and natural state was a peaceful golden age where general good of the people was the order of the day.
Meanwhile, violent hostility and warfare erupted in human social intercourse when there was rise or introduction of (individual) property acquisition and inequality.
The rise of property and inequality propelled the situation of war and violence among men against communal philosophy and absolute pacifism that characterized the golden age.
Rousseau, therefore, concluded that violence is not inherent in human nature.
Man has only cultivated the habit of violence as a result of the emergence of modern state.
The main factor responsible for man’s inhumanity against fellow man is not located in human nature but in human nurture.
3.6 Political Science Theory There is a variety of international relations theory schools.
One of the notable schools is political realism, which articulates that violence is a veritable mechanism in the actualization of the prominence or superiority by any state in military and security power relations within the global environment.
The members of this school are of the view that military power determines the relevance of any state in international relations.
They also believe that the most viable way of dealing with state deviance in international relations is through the use of violence or force.
This school became popular consequent on the eruption of the 2nd world war, which negated the importance of democratic peace theory in the maintenance of peace and security.
Democratic Peace Theory (DPT) makes us to understand that democracies don’t engage themselves in violent hostility or war.
It (DPT) advocates for the promotion of democracy and its norms like equality, rule of law (rather than rule of force), socio-justice, collectivism among others as fundamental to effective security management.
Political realism argues that there is no way states will absolutely uphold the principle of collectivism due to the individualistic nature of state behaviour in international relations.
Thus, national interest plays a prominent role in the action of any state within international environment.
Consequently, there is no “born- againism” in international relations.
Every nation places more priority on achieving its self interest above global interest.
54  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management This view is one of the sources of militarism and arms struggle in the post World War II global environment where the use of violence has become very attractive in the relations among states.
Therefore, military capability and mobility as well technological advancement of a state basically determine its influence and relevance in international relations.
Military power is more important than any other form of power (i.e.
economic power etc).
Power Transition theory is another major theory in international politics.
Violence is a source of power transition such that the differentials between the power capabilities narrow between the advanced (strong) and disadvantaged (weak) nations.
Here, the disadvantaged states are often more aggressive with the aim of becoming great powers.
They challenge the existing powerful nations to facilitate their transition from the weak to strong or powerful, which is mostly achieved through war.
Again, power transition theory reminds us of the (important) roles that economic resources play in power transition.
This is because there is tendency for a state to move to a greater level when it experiences economic growth.
Hence, the economically weak state cannot fulfill its adventure very well in power transition.
Thus, economic growth can lead a state to aggressive behaviour.
Another major school is cyclical theory of war.
This school is of the opinion that violence is not necessary but absolutely inevitable.
Every century produces World Power, which monopolizes military power and viable economic base to maintain its hegemony.
No hegemonic power can retain its power status for more than four decades.
The emergent challenger will come on stage, and in the process of well articulated aggression policy, the delegitimatization and redistribution of the existing system power may become manifest.
However, the challenger may eventually become the dominant power and the cyclical process emerges again till its displacement by another power (country).
This school also argues that there will always be eruption of violence despite the presence of any (long) period of peace due to the behaviour of states in international relations.
This is because weak nation(s) would like to displace the strong one(s) to enjoy hegemony.
Exercise What are the schools of thought in Political Science theory?
3.7 Marxist Theory The Marxist theory of violence is of the view that violence is a function of class struggle.
It sees violence as imperial instrument to increase the power of the ruling class and divide the proletariat of the world through divide and rule strategy, causing confusion and enmity among them (proletariat).
55  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management The dominant powers use deceptive formula such as religion, nationalism, among others to continue in enjoying their hegemony over the proletariat world public, to prevent any anticipated challenge by the latter, undermining any solidarity among the proletariat.
Violence is a natural consequence of the free market and class system, and will not disappear until a world revolution takes place.
3.8 Rationalist Theory Rationalist theory argues that perpetrators of aggression are rational.
Here, the aggressor uses violence as a platform to meet his goals.
Therefore, each party that engages in violence tries as much as possible to minimize the loss of life and property in its own camp while trying hard to outsmart the other party in achieving the best outcome for itself.
Violence, according to the rationalist theorists, operates largely on the corridor of reciprocity.
What we mean here, is that violence is a situation where each party tries to attack the other party while at the same time trying to defy other party’s attack or control the offensives coming from the other party.
This theoretical position has become; popular in international relations in the explanation of war, since the writing of Carl von Clausewitz on war.
Then, one may ask that when parties are aware of the nature of attacking and defensive variables in the articulation of violence, then why don’t they empower themselves to focus mainly on the possible outcome of war rather than engaging in aggression?
The rationalist theory presents three reasons why some states cannot take solace in bargaining or diplomatic settlement but to resort to violence.
These reasons may include issue-indivisibility, information asymmetry with incentive to deceive, and the inability to make credible commitments (Fearon, 1995: 379- 414).
The issue of indivisibility arises when parties in conflict fail to prevent their conflict relation from degenerating into violence.
They will fail to adopt diplomatic bargaining because the thing, over which they are struggling with each other, cannot be shared between them.
In this case, it is one of the parties that can have control of the object(s) of conflict.
In Nigerian societies and elsewhere, if there is conflict between two men over a woman, the custom will have that it is only one of them that can eventually have the woman.
The problem of information asymmetry with incentives to deceive involves a situation whereby the parties in violence don’t bother to appreciate diplomatic alternative.
This is because each of them has (mutual) conviction about the possibility to have a favourable violence outcome.
56  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management In international arena, each of these parties believes that through the military secrets of its capabilities and the need to maintain such secrecy, it is unnecessary to adopt bargaining.
This is because such diplomatic bargaining is capable of exposing its military strength to the enemy.
Nonetheless, the enemy party can capitalize on the situation, if it appears that she enjoys strategic advantage over the other party.
Sometimes, a state may call up a large number of its civilian population and dress them like normal and regular soldiers when a potential enemy state representative is visiting her.
During the visit, the perceived enemy state representative may be requested to see her standing army (with overwhelming population) not for any other reason(s) but to deceive the other party about the size of its army.
Seeing a large number of regular soldiers may make the enemy party to concede.
The inability of a state to make bargaining may fail due to the states' inability to create credible commitments.
During a process of bargaining, one of the parties is likely to feel that it is not getting enough from the diplomatic process.
If the attitude of great commitment to mutual recognition of interest and need is not reinforced in the peace process among the parties, the one with strong bargaining capability may likely consider its diplomatic advantage as an incentive to take undue advantage over the other party, even in the nearest future.
This kind of attitude is capable of germinating violence among the parties because the party with weak bargaining power may decide to adopt violent means to settle their conflict especially when it discovers that it also enjoys military advantage over the other party.
Exercise Explain the Marxist and Rationalist theories of violence.
4.0 CONCLUSION Several theories have presented various sources of violence.
The causes of violence are both defined in nature and nurture of man.
Some of the theories have shown that violence and violent crimes can be said to be products of the inherent nature of human aggression.
Thus man is by nature a violent being and his violent nature explains why aggression dominates the affairs of man.
Nurture on the other hand, holds that man is not violent naturally but only learns violent behaviour in the course of his experience about the world he lives.
Meanwhile, both schools of thought have been able to present necessary facts to support their positions, but the basic fact is that both nature and nurture viewpoints can be used to explain the violent behaviour among men.
5.0 SUMMARY 57  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management In this unit, we have been able to discuss several theories of violence in stimulating our understanding of various causes of violence.
Some of the theories treated in this unit include the Malthusian theory, youth bulge theory, historical theories among others.
Congratulations for successfully completing this unit.
If you don’t understand any aspect of this unit, please contact your tutorial facilitator.
Thank you.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss any five theories of violence.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING Fearon, James D. (1995), "Rationalist Explanations for War" International Organization, 49(3).
Fuller, Gary (1995), "The Demographic Backdrop to Ethnic Conflict: A Geographic Overwiew", in: CIA (Ed.
): The Challenge of Ethnic Conflict to National and International Order in the 1990s, Washington.
Goldstone, Jack A.
(1991), "Revolution and Rebellion in the Early Modern World", Berkeley.
Huntington, Samuel P in an interview.
See The Observer, Sunday October 21, 2001.
Powell, Robert (2002), "Bargaining Theory and International Conflict."
Annual Review of Political Science.
Slomp, Gabriella (1990), “Hobbes, Thucydides and the Three Greatest Things”, History of Political Thought, 11.
58  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 59  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 5 THEORY OF CRIME CONTROL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Marxist Theory 3.2 Environmentalist Theory 3.3 Realism 3.4 Social Democratic Positivism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The experience of the world the end of World War II has shown that incidence of crime has been on the increase.
Even those countries that initially experienced very low rate of crime have become plagued with crime.
Every-time, new forms of criminal behaviour are emerging.
This situation has really undermined the efficacy of the traditional deterrence and coercive techniques of crime control.
The criminal justice system has begun to undergo some reforms in several countries in an attempt to fine-tune it to meet the challenges of modern time as relates to crime control.
According to Garland, no less than 2 million people are in prison in the United States while in this same country at least two condemned prisoners are executions on weekly basis.
The dynamics of crime have necessitated proliferation of intellectual inquiries and a plethora of literature on the subject of crime control.
A number of theories have been developed to address the problem of crime and recommend measures that can be adopted in crime control.
In this unit, we shall be exploring some of the theories.
Thank you for 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Identify a number of crime control theories; Explain Marxist theory of crime control; Discuss environmentalist theory of crime control; 60  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Describe the realist theory of crime control; and Illustrates the position of social democratic positivism on crime control.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Marxist Theory This is one of the theories of crime control.
The theory describes the causal relationships between society and crime.
According to this theory, the source of crime can be traced to the introduction of private ownership of property in the evolution of state.
The members of this school of thought are of the view that the disrupt ive character of industrialized societies can be said to be responsible for criminal behaviour.
The state is stratified where people belong to one class or another based on their position in the equilibrium of power, wealth and prestige.
Therefore, it is the class that controls the mode of production that will determine not only the economy and polity but also the law that regulates the conduct of the people in a given society.
This view is nonetheless shared by Chambliss (1971: 3), and according to him: The shape and character of the legal system in complex societies can be understood as deriving from the conflicts inherent in the structure of these societies which are stratified economically and politically This theory presents a theoretical foundation for intellectual articulation, which describes the structural make-up of a state within the context of the intercourse between the economic power and the political power.
The relation explains the way society is structured in class arrangement such that the few who control the mode of production (bourgeisie) are those who decide on the laws and the legal machinery of the state with the aim of protecting their property.
The Marxist theory further holds that capitalist contradictions have forced majority (proletariat) into structural relegation.
This situation has created conditions, which have hitherto given rise to a climate of crime and criminality in the society.
Willem Bonger also believes that it is the class system that characterizes the modern state that is responsible for criminal behaviour.
Bonger drew a nexus between crime and economic and social conditions.
He however argued that crime is social in foundation and an actual reaction to the existing cultural order.
The primitive societies discouraged the habits of selfishness while the relationship among the people were guided by altrustic ethos in where selflessness was the order of the day.
61  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management But when societies began to move beyond agrarian production, the improved exchange of information gave birth to growing technology and people started producing for commercial purposes.
This situation led to the introduction of private property ownership.
Then, modern state emerged to reinforce the selfish motives, which casualize the criminal subjugation of the majority by the few economically and politically.
This school of thought affirms that it is the socio-economic deprivation suffered by the majority and the attempt by them to address the structural inequality that explain the acts that the state regards as criminal.
The poor would engage in crime out of frustration and perceived injustice.
Nevertheless, the modern state enables the rich to control the power and they are the ones who also have the right to impose punishment for any acts they consider as criminal.
On the issue of stealing, such a criminal act if perputated by the poor, it attracts more noise but if committed by the rich, it carries little or no noise.
However, the theory concludes that control of crime can only be facilitated if the state assumes the exclusive control of the means of production and ensure the enthronement of a classless society.
There should be socio-economic justice among the people such that no one will feel a sense of deprivation.
It is only when these are put in place that the state will be able to address the problem of crime.
Again, according to Milton Mankoff, the much lower incidence of crime in Western Europe than in the United States is because Europe is more ‘Socialist’ than America.
The position of the Marxist theorists is that the only remedy to the problem of crime is to institutionalize socialism in the state, such that everyone will be catered for by the state according to his needs.
Exercise What is theory Marxist theory of crime control?
3.2 Environmentalist Theory The environmentalist theory was popularized by Paul and Patricia Brantingham in the 1980s.
They argued that there are some fundamental factors responsible for criminal behaviour.
According to them, these factors include space (geography), time, law, offender, and target or victim.
This theory opines that crime control can be carried out through the application of large pin maps to illustrates the areas where crimes occurred.
The art of mapping and analysis of crime has reached a new stage, resulting from the emergent information revolut ion.
Therefore, there are computerized mapping systems, which police and the scholars working in the area of criminology can use to appreciate the dynamics of crime in a given place.
62  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management This theory underscores the importance of using the character of any environment in strudying its pattern of crime.
This theory is also of the view that environmental factors are always taken into consideration before anybody can take to crime.
According to Bartol and Bartol (2006), geographic profiling is based on the notion that perpetrators of crime often consider environmental factors in their decision to commit crime, and they will prefer to do so in the societies that are environmentally vulnerable.
In the control of crime, the environmentalist theorists argue that a great practical application must be put in place such as Crime Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED).
This theory holds that environmental situations like poor lighting, high presence of uncompeted buildings, overgrown bushes, poor space management among others account majorly for crime incidents in any given society.
It is against this background, that environmentalist theory holds that CPTED measures can help to address or control the incidence of crime in one’s neighbourhood.
These measures include adequate lighting (installing street lights etc), effective space management, cutting of overgrown weeds, avoiding proliferation of abandoned buildings among others.
Exercise Explain the environment theory of crime control.
3.3 Realism Conventionally, coercive and deterrence measure s are put in place to regulate human conduct and control crime in the society.
Laws are made to outlaw some acts, which are considered to be criminal.
Punishment or sanctions are meted-out on the offenders of crimes without looking at the nature and the impact of such criminal acts.
But according to the realist theory, the best way to control crime is to examine the nature of the crime, the conditions that produce such crimes as well as the impact of the crimes.
Therefore, the effective way to control crime in any society is to ensure that the control measures which are being provided can respond effectively to the nature of crime.
Exercise Discuss realist theory of crime control.
3.4 Social Democratic Positivism This is a form of positivist theory, which blames incidence of crime and acts of criminality on (socio) injustice.
The main source(s) of criminal behaviour cannot 63  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management be basically found in abject poverty or inadequate housing or unemployment.
All these factors are the manifestations of deprivation.
The main source of crime, according to this theory, is unjust and unfair distribut ion of wealth in the society.
In societies laws are made and deterrence measures are put in place to discourage people from engaging in acts considered to be criminal.
Yet, sanctions and punishment have appeared to be ineffective in the control of crime in most societies.
However, people conform to the norms and rules (laws) of their societies based on how they see justice in the distribution of wealth, such that no section of the society(ies) is deprived economically.
But, if there is a sense of relative deprivation by any segment of the society, there is tendency for the perpetuation of crime(s) by those who are deprived.
There is general consensus on the causality between the conditions one faces and his/her resolve to commit crime.
Unfavourable and poor situations can force one into acts of crime.
There is a general belief that crime cannot be controlled if the conditions that make people to engage in crime in the first instance, are not changed.
It is however unethical to sanction offenders of crime without addressing the conditions, which lead them into perpetuation of acts considered to be criminal.
This task of juxtaposing the circumstances and crime is hardly accomplished in developing countries like Nigeria.
There is no doubt that many of the people going into crime are victims of circumstances, with conditions that are beyond their control.
How do you feel, if as a graduate, you have remained jobless for more than five years and the people who have less qualifications are economically favoured just because they have some godfathers or godmothers somewhere?
The socio-economic depravity dominates the affairs of people in Nigeria where there is no just and equitable distribution of state wealth.
The endemic poverty, massive unemployment and absence of social security have forced a lot people into crime.
Crime has become alternative route through which people can meet their needs.
The pauperization of workers in Nigeria is one of the reasons why corruption and other fraudulent practices are on the increase among the workers.
The structural injustice that characterizes wage system in the country is a veritable source of crime.
Just consider a situation where two friends attended the same university, having the same qualification and class of degree in the same course, but incidentally in seeking for employment, one of them is employed in an oil company, and after a long search the other friend only manages to secure job in 64  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management the civil service.
The person working in an oil company earns more than 5 times of what is being earned by the other friend.
They both go to the same market to purchase their food items and other daily needs.
Considering the foregoing scenario, you may agree with me that the other friend working in the civil service may have two options: resign to fate or look for alternatives (often through corrupt practices) so that he/she can meet his needs.
There is no doubt that wage system in Nigeria and monetization culture that exists among the people coupled with the problem of high unemployment, and endemic corruption and stealing among the ruling elites in the country, can be attributed to be major sources of growing rate of crime in Nigeria.
The dimension that the situation of crime has reached constitutes a great security threat to the nation at large.
In attempts to survive, even at marginal level, people seek for a lot of means most of which are criminal or criminal tendencies.
We now hear strange news like parents selling their children to human traffickers or ritualists to meet their basic needs.
Cyber-crime has become a fancy among large segment of the public.
Commercial prostitution has been on the increase with social and health implications, for example the HIV-AIDS pandemics.
Again, bank robbery, kidnapping and other terrorist acts have become phenomenal in recent time.
Criminalization of the police and other law enforcement agencies appears very evident.
The coercive deterrence has failed to control the growing crime rate in Nigeria and elsewhere.
Nonetheless, this theory holds that rather than focusing on how to mete out punishment or sanctions on offenders of crime, our attention should center on the conditions that bring about a person’s resolve to take to crime.
In countries like Nigeria, a major reason why people take to crime is inequitable distribution of state wealth where the ruling elites and their cronies who constitute less than 10% of the entire population allocate to themselves more than 85% of the national resources.
The middle class is obliterated in Nigerian society.
Therefore, we only have upper and lower classes of people such that the richer get richer while the poor get poorer.
Moreover, the supporters of this theory are of the view that focusing on the offender of crime and coercive deterrence cannot adequately control incidence of crime in any society.
Therefore, our attention should be geared towards changing the conditions that actually force people into crime.
In Nigeria, the socio- economic conditions of the people must be improved through provision of social security, employment opportunities and fair wage system.
Above all, there should be value orientation; the society should go beyond the present monetization culture.
Man should be honoured not according to how much he/she has but based on his/her community development efforts, integrity, honesty, hard work, and contribution to knowledge.
In managing the nation’s 65  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management security, law enforcement agencies only need minor coercion to control crime among the people, if there is fair distribution of state wealth.
Exercise Discuss social democratic positivist theory of crime control.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is emerging discourse on this distinction between applying sanction on criminals and the control of crime (Garland, 2001:120).
The power to met-out punishment on offenders of crime largely lies in the state.
As you may know, one significant feature of the state is the legitimate use of violence in the maintenance of law and order in any given society.
On the other hand, the business of crime control goes beyond the domain of the state.
It involves partnership between the state and the people.
This view partly explains the holistic approach that many countries are now adopting in the control of crime in their doorsteps.
The policy of state as it relates to crime control is one way or the other informed by theoretical connectivities.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to explore a number of the existing theories of crime control.
The theory we focused on was Marxist theory.
Thereafter, we discussed environmentalist theory of crime.
Other theories we explained in this unit include realist and social democratic positivist theories.
You are hereby advised to source for other theories of crime control not discussed in this study.
You can get a number of literature that deal with various theories of crime control to widen your knowledge of crime control.
Thank you for your patience and attention.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain theories of crime control.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Bartol, Curt R. & Anne M. Bartol (2006), Current Perspectives in Forensic Psychology And Criminal Justice, Sage Publications.
Bonger, Willem.
(1905), Criminality and Economic Conditions.
Available on .marxists.org/subjects//economy/authors/bonger//present-system.ht m. Retrieved on 6th of April, 2008.
Brantingham, P. J.
& Brantingham, P. L. (1991), Environmental Criminology.
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
66  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Chambliss, W. (1973) , “Elites and the Creation of Criminal Law”, in Chambliss, W.
(ed.
), Sociological Readings in the Conflict PerspectiveI, Reading, Mass.
: Addison-Wesley.
Chambliss, William J.
& Mankoff, Milton (eds.)
(1976), Whose Law?
What Order?
A Conflict Approach to Criminology, New York: John Wiley.
Chambliss, W & Seidman, R. (1971), Law, Order, and Power.
Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley.
Garland, D. (2001) The Culture of Control: Crime and Social Order in Contemporary Society.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Owen, Tim (2007), “Culture of Crime Control Through A Post-Foucauldian Lens”, Internet Journal of Criminology.
Also available on www.internetjournalofcriminology.com Quinney, Richard.
(1974), Critique of Legal Order: Crime Control in Capitalist Society, Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environmetal_criminology.
Retrieved on 6th of April, 2008.
MODULE 2 Unit 1:Approaches to Security Management Unit 2:Meaning of Intelligence Unit 3:Intelligence Collection and Disciplines Unit 4:Intelligence Analysis and Evaluation Unit 4:Counter-Intelligence and Intelligence Security Management Unit 1 APPROACHES TO SECURITY MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Approaches to security Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION 67  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Security management requires more than application of coercion in the actualization of law and order both at national and international levels, the experience of world nations since the collapse of Berlin Wall has evoked further complexities and challenges in security management.
The search for stable security order appears to be elusive, considering the dimension that insecurity and criminality has taken in recent time.
Rather than the traditional insecur ity that pervaded the relations among nations in the cold war era, most states are now plagued with international armed struggle and organized crime such as terrorism by non-state actors.
In Nigeria, armed robbers in the olden days usually carried out their nefarious activities in the middle of the night.
But nowadays, the men of the world do not only rob their victims in broad day light, but they have also extended the coverage area (for their operations) to police stations and several other government institutions.
This situation has however posed some intellectual questions and policy concerns about the efficacy of various approaches to security management.
In this unit, we shall be exploring various theoretical approaches to security management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Explain major theoretical approaches to security management 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Approaches to security Management Managing security has remained an activity that requires the stakeholders to develop connections and relationships in theoretical terms, which assist, policy- makers to explore a wide range of policy options, assessing their strengths and weaknesses in addressing the (complex) political, socio-economic and environmental threats to security.
Some of the approaches to security management may include: (a) Idealism: This is a theoretical approach that emerged in the 1920s, as formulae to guarantee the world peace and security.
This approach opines that security can best be managed through non-coercive or non-violent process, owing to the fact that violence would only give birth to further violence.
The use of force or violence within national or international environment cannot guarantee any security.
The members of this school hold that security can best be managed if government at all levels (from local to world) ensure that a security system ‘based on development of civic culture on inter(national) agreements and treaties, stress on 68  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management depolarization, demilitarization, transcendence of enemy imaging, and solidarity (Kasali, 2003: 43).
This approach is also of the view that democratic governance is the ultimate mechanism for effective security management.
Meanwhile, the emergence of World War II had undermined the relevance of this approach in the management of international security particularly as it concerned the issues of democratic order.
The experience of the world population has not only shown that democracy could not guarantee peace and security but some democracies can carryout offensive capable of jeopardizing national and international (security;.
(b) Realism: This is another traditional approach to security.
It is a response to the failure of idealist approach in preventing the outbreak of the World War II.
The members of this school of thought agree that it is only through the use of coercion and deterrence that international security can be maintained.
They also stress that apart from security, peace habit can only be engendered through judicious application of force or violence, which will generate effective dispute settlement and international security.
This approach ensures management of security based on balance of power and multi-deterrence mechanisms.
From the realist view point, states make decision in the attainment their self – interest agenda, by evaluating available policy options and see how each of those options can fulfill or meet their secur ity objectives.
However, in the attempt to managing national security every country has begun to invest in the purchase of weapons to resist not only external security threats but also internal aggression.
In this case, coercive power and military force play fundamental roles in the management of security.
They will ensure compliance of state and non – state actors to the laws in the maintenance of world security.
Also, in the management of internal security, state should ensure that its legitimate use of violence is reinforced by adequate military capability and mobility.
This situation tends to lead to rapidly growing military expenditure.
The amount of military hardware and personnel according to this approach, will determine how secure a nation will be.
Realist model, therefore, led to arms race, in which states drastically increased their military expenditure in the defence of national sovereignty.
In developing countries, increase military budget has created internal tension and structural violence in which the local people have often lacked basic necessities, making them to survive marginally.
On the African continent, this problem has attracted deepening political crisis, military coups and counter-coups, inter-ethnic violence, religious bestiality among others.
The bottom line is that, rather than accumulating military wares for the protection of their various countries against the attacks from external forces, most 69  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management governments in developing countries use the arms against their own citizens for variety of reasons.
Some of the reasons may include tenure elongation, racial discrimination, ethnic rivalry, religious chauvinism etc.
One good example was the application of hydrogen gas chemical weapon against some of its own citizens by the government of Saddam Hussein where several innocent civilians including women and children were killed.
The violence experienced in Rwanda and Burundi made Africa a true reflection of Hobbesian state of nature.
The madness that pervaded Hutus–Tutsi rivalry was monumental with high degree of bestiality.
The violence was a nightmare!
Nevertheless, foreign enemies can partner with local insurgents to undermine internal security of any nation as experience has shown since the end of World War II.
The experience of the cold war era made a great number of world states to align along the West –East polarity.
Even, those countries that were not aligned (Non Aligned Movement) were still mingling between the East and West blocs.
Since the end of cold war, the world has recorded more internal armed conflicts than international wars or aggressions, making it necessary to seek for another approach that can address the problem of increasing local insurgency in Africa and elsewhere; (c) Pluralism: Pluralist approach emerged in the 1960s.
This approach was a departure from the state-centered security system that dominated the world system during the early cold war era.
Pluralists articulated that balance of power, a key element of realism had not only failed to protect human race against insecurity but it had also aggravated pains that accompanied such insecurity.
The world began to experience a security dilemma resulting from the emergent danger posed by the politics of balance of terror where proliferation of weapons has become the order of the day.
This approach explains why regional and world organizations have mandated their various agencies to carry-out programmes that can influence international security policies, which may affect the self-interest of some (member) nations.
This will bring us to the question of which national interest policies are internationally moral?
Pluralists admonish states to discountenance any of their self interest policies that are considered to be immoral or capable of undermining international security; (d) Marxism: This approach became popular in security studies in the 1970s.
According to this approach, economic factors and struggle for the control of state resources are the bases for security relations among states.
Within the structure, the struggle for the control of means of production can lead to violent conflict situation between the proletariat and bourgeois.
Marxist approach therefore, opines that the state should control the economy and abolish private ownership of property and every individual should be catered for 70  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management according to his/her needs.
If the state unilaterally controls the economy, selfish pursuits, which form the larger security threat, must have been addressed.
The issue of selfish accumulation of wealth would not arise if private ownership of property is discouraged.
The crimes and threats that crop-up through struggle for the control of resources would have been eliminated, if no individual is allowed to own a property.
Nevertheless, struggle for the control of the state resources by individual actors tends to generate tension in the polity and those who perceive exclusion can resort to violence and other forms of criminality like armed robbery, terrorism, and insurgency.
Weak nations or developing countries appear to be most palpable victims of such structural tension.
In the process, the insurgents engage government forces in armed struggle and in replenishing their armoury, insurgents and government often use valuable resources (they are fighting over) in the purchase of weapons, most of which come from developed.
In this case, powerful nations derive enormous economic benefits from such situations of violence and insecurity in the weak states.
(e) Social Constructivism: This is another approach to security, which emerged in the 1990s, immediately after the collapse of the Berlin Wall (the end of the Cold war).
This approach advocates for more cultural understanding to security studies.
In international relations as well as national politics, the self- interest of any nation is paramount, and it is considered as the driving force of its policy directions particularly as it relates to meeting its security goals.
State actors have now realized the need to pursue regional interest, even above their own national interests.
This approach underscores the emerging interest nations are having towards collective security.
This has created a new understanding in security relations among states.
State actors have begun to show deep concern in the spill-over effect(s) of any insecurity in their neighbouring countries, on their own internal security.
One of the reasons why Nigeria intervened and ensured the resolution of the armed conflicts in the region, i.e.
Liberian and Sierra Leonean crises, was the negative impact those violent conflicts would have on her internal security.
The civil wars that plagued Sierra Leone and Liberia generated large amount of refugees in the sub-region, and Nigeria was one of the host countries, that accommodated those refugees.
Many of the refugees hosted by Nigeria were not properly disarmed.
Some of them came in with arms, which found their way into the hands of some local criminals, who used the weapons to further terrorize the nations.
This situation has posed a great security threat to the nation.
Apart from the weapons exchanged for money, some of the refugees joined some local criminal gangs to engage in armed robbery and other violent crimes, constituting a threat to national security.
The experience of the countries in the 71  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Great Lakes was horrendous as the region did not only generate the highest flow of refugees, but armed conflict also became an infectious disease that plagued a great number of countries in that region.
Moreover, in combating crime, several countries have formed international police (INTERPOL) community to arrest and prosecute or even repatriate criminal suspects who are creating security problems to any of the member nations.
Few years ago, a notorious trans-border bandit operated along with other members of his gang, to rob people of their valuables especially cars in Nigeria.
After robbing their victims, the bandits usually crossed to the neighbouring country, Republic of Benin where the group resided.
The cooperation between the police authorities in Nigeria and Benin paid off, leading to the arrest of the suspect(s) in Benin.
The suspect was therefore repatriated to Nigeria where he is currently facing trial.
By and large, nations now appreciate taking regional approach in the management of their internal security.
This is as a result of the (negative) impact that breakdown of order or insecurity in a country can have on its neighbouring countries.
It is against this back-drop that countries sometimes sacrifice their national interests for regional interest.
It is on record that the rising wave of crime and insurgency in Nigeria can be blamed largely on maladministration, but the upsurge of political strife in Liberia played a part in the security dilemma that Nigeria has since been experiencing; (f) Human Security: There is no doubt, that the decade preceding the year 2000 witnessed a lot of contradictions and negativities in terms of war, which posed a great threat to national and international security.
The spread of HIV- AIDS was rapid during this period.
Global warming has emerged as a cankerworm ready to destroy the human race, and volcanic nationalism that greeted post-cold war era has become a major source of state collapse.
The subject of legitimate use of violence by the state has attracted a great debate, especially as we consider the unjustifiability in the exercise of power by some governments.
By the 1990s, the attention of the world population has shifted to redefining security and look for the best approach that can guarantee effective security management, different from the traditional ones that have failed to address the increasing security threats.
The search for the best approach led to the emergence of the term human security.
This approach advocates for a paradigm shift.
Rather than allowing the state to continue to define security, people who make up the state should be the ones to define their own security.
Therefore, it is not the function of the state (or government) to determine security imperatives for the people; it is the people who decide their own security.
72  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management So, the state traditional security measures of coercion and deterrence are moribund or outdated.
Hence, policy-makers in several countries have adopted this approach as the guiding principle of their security laws.
The consensus of state and non-state actors is now geared towards appreciating “any security issues, including without limitation those of a political, strategic, economic, social, or ecological nature” (Vale, 1992: 100).
Nevertheless, the theoretical ingenuity brought about by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) in its “Human Development” Report popularized the concept of ‘human security’ among the scholars and practitioners in the field of security studies and management (see Henk, 2005: 2).
It’s no surprising then that in its publication, the UNDP reaffirmed that: The concept of security has for too long been interpreted narrowly: as security of territory from external aggression, or as protection of national interests in foreign policy or as global security from the threat of a nuclear holocaust.
It has been related more to nation-state than people…..forgotten were the legitimate concerns of ordinary people….for many of them, security symbolized protection from the threat of disease, hunger, unemployment, crime, social conflict, political repression, and environmental hazards (see UNDP Human Development Report, 1994: 22).
Since 1990s, this approach has not only become the priciest bride among the state actors but several non-state actors including the Non Governmental Organizations (NGOs) that have acted spontaneously in the popularization of human security as an approach to security.
One of the leading NGOs advocating for the global adoption of this approach is the Human Security Network.
The organization has been championing the need to “energize political processes aimed at preventing or solving conflicts and promoting peace and development” (see .humansecur itynetwork.org/network-e.php).
It is no news that several nations have articulated the relevance of human security approach in the formulation of their security policies.
For example, in South Africa defined its national security in its “White Paper on Defence”, which was published in 1996.
It states that: In the new South Africa national security is no longer viewed as a predominantly military and police problem.
It has broadened to incorporate political, economic, social, and environmental matters.
At the heart of this new approach is a paramount concern with the security of people.
Security is an all-encompassing condition in which individual citizens live in freedom, peace, and safety; to participate fully in the process of governance; enjoy the protection of fundamental rights; have access to resources and the basic necessities of life; and inhabit an environment which 73  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management is not detrimental to their health and well-being (South African Department of Defence, 1996).
Similarly, Canada has also incorporated human security approach into its foreign policy formulation process(es).
The country has redefined the concept of security from the traditional one to that which guarantees “safety for people from both violent and non-violent threats…..characterized by freedom from pervasive threats to people’s rights, their safety, or even their lives” (Department of Foreign Affairs, Canada, 1999: 5).
The country has also backed its new commitment, expending huge national resources in the promotion of human security worldwide especially in form of aids (see .humansecurity.gc.ca).
Exercise Explain approaches to security management.
4.0 CONCLUSION Before the collapse of the Berlin Wall, scholars and practitioners in security had been confronted with problem of identifying which of the available approaches was the best in the management of security nationally and internationally.
Basically, various traditional approaches have focused exclusively on the secur ity relations among state actors, relegating the relevance of individual people in security affairs.
The traditional coercion and deterrence techniques are becoming moribund and ineffective in security management.
Non-state actors are becoming more visible in national and international theatres of violence, such that some individuals or groups have become more powerful than the state.
A good example is Hezbollah (militant group) that is considered in several quarters as more powerful than the government of Lebanon.
One of the reasons is that its (Hezbollah’s) membership extends beyond Lebanon.
It members scatter across and beyond the whole Middle East.
Al-Queda taught the whole world that commercial planes could be used as the weapon of mass destruction as in the 9/11 incident where thousands of people were massacred by crashing planes at the World Trade Centre and the Pentagon.
There is need for world governments to adopt the new non-traditional approach, human security to address the structural security threats that bedevil most countries in the world.
The issues of hunger, poverty, proliferation of weapons, landmines, authoritarianism, environmental pollution and degradation, social injustice, political exclusion, crime, human rights abuse, illiteracy, economic deprivation, militarism, and maladministration, which human security seeks to solve, must be critically addressed in making security decisions.
It is heartwarming that several states have started adopting this approach.
74  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management On the question of, if Nigeria will soon join the league of countries having human security as the foundation of their security agenda, it is only times that will tell.
It is only time that will tell, if the country will move beyond its traditional AK-47 coercion and deterrence approach, which is state-centric.
Human security approach is most effective approach to security management.
Apart from other reasons, it allows people to deliberate and decide their own security matters.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, our focus has been on various approaches to security management.
The first five are traditional approaches while the last approach is non-traditional, which advocates for paradigm shift in security management.
Human security advocates for ‘peopling’ of security in which the people define security matters rather than the state.
The writer will wish to remind you that there are other non-traditional approaches, which are not covered in this unit.
You are hereby advised to search for other non- traditional approaches to security management in the library or on the internet.
Did you find this unit interesting?
If yes, bravo!
And in case you have difficulty in understanding any segment of this unit, please contact your tutorial facilitator or other student(s) in your study group.
Good luck.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly explain the following approaches: Idealism, Realism, Marxism, Social Constructivism and Human Security.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Anderson, B (1987), Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of Nationalism, London: Verso.
Canada Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade (1999), Human Security: Safety for People in a Changing World, Ottawa: Department of Foreign Affairs.
Henk, Dan (2005), “Human Security: Relevance and Implications”, Parameter, vol.
35.
Hobbes, Thomas (1962), Leviathan, New York: Collier.
Kasali, Monsuru Adegboyega (2003), The Pacific Settlement of International Disputes in International Law: Origin and Dynamics of Diplomatic-Legal Manoeuverings to Bakassi Question, an M.Sc Dissertation, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria.
75  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Lipschutz, Ronnie D.
(ed.)
(1995), On Security, New York: Columbia University Press.
Morgenthau, Hans (1976), Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace, 5th Edition, Alfred A. Knopf.
Smith, Steve (2000), “The Increasing Insecurity of Security Studies: Conceptualizing Security in the Last Twenty Years, in Stuart Croft and Terry Terrif (eds.
), Critical Reflections on Security and Change, London: Frank Cass.
South African White Paper on Defence (1996), Pretoria: Department of Defence.
Teriff, Terry et al (1999), Security Studies Today, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing UNDP, Human Development Report (1994).
Also available on .hdr.undp.org/reports/global/1994/en.
Retrieved on 10th January, 2008.
Vale, Peter (1992), “Can International Relations Survive?” International Affairs Bulletin, Vol.
16, No.
3.
.humansecurity.gc.ca.
Retrieved on the 10th January, 2006.
76  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 2 MEANING OF INTELLIGENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Defining Intelligence 3.2 Dimensions of Intelligence 3.3 Categories of Intelligence 3.4 Sources of Intelligence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The experience of the world since World War II has shown that security management is a very serious business.
It is no surprising that the security sectors both nationally and internationally have undergone a number of reforms aimed at addressing security challenges and threats that bedevil the world population.
There is no doubt that one of the security areas or fields receiving rapidly growing interest and attention, not only among the security practitioners, but also the academics and policy makers, is intelligence.
Nonetheless, intelligence has become one of the key elements of security sector reform.
This explains why state and non – state actors currently invest huge amount of resources both in human and material terms on intelligence owing to the strategic roles it plays on (effective) security management in public and private environments.
It is against this background that we find it important or germane to use a number of units in this course to conceptualize intelligence and to look at its practical application, dimensions, categories, collection, analysis, evaluation among others.
In this unit, we shall be drawing our search light on the definition of intelligence and some other uses of discourse.
Now, let’s quickly browse through the objectives of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 77  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Define the term intelligence; Discuss the dimensions of intelligence; Explain the categories, of intelligence; and List the source of intelligence.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Defining Intelligence The term intelligence is often mistaken for information or data.
This is because most people (or simply the laymen) usually describe it to mean information.
Well, the truth of the matter is that intelligence is different from (ordinary) information but it is a form of information, which has been ingrained with added value through analytical and evaluative instrumentation.
Intelligence is a refined, analysed and evaluated information or data gathered through either overt (open) or clandestine (secret) means or both.
The conceptual differentiation between information and intelligence can be described “….. along a continuum, with data at the far left and intelligence at the far right, as one moves from left to right additional value and context is added to discrete or posited facts to provide enhanced meaning to an ultimate consumer” (see .Fas.org/sgp/crs/intel/RL33616.pdf).
As I have rightly said in the introductory segment of this unit, intelligence has attracted growing interest among scholars and security corporations.
Thus, various intellectual efforts and articulations by these groups of people have yielded fruits in academic discourse and one of such is conceptualization of the term (intelligence).
Therefore, several definitions have emerged among which include the following: Intelligence ------ is not only about spies and satellites.
Intelligence is about the thousands and thousands of routing everyday observations and activities.
Surveillance, interactions – each of which may be taken in isolation as not a particular meaningful piece of information, but when fused together, gives us a sense of the pattern and the flow……….. ( .Fas.org/sgp/crs/Intell/RL 33616.pdf).
Intelligence is knowledge, organisation and activity (Kent, 1965).
Intelligence ……… is the product resulting from the collection, evaluation, analysis, integration, and interpretation of all available information which concerns one or more aspect of foreign nations or areas of operation which immediately or potentially significant for planning (see the Dictionary of United States Military Terms Joint Usage).
78  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Intelligence is a special kind of knowledge, a specialized subset of information that has been put through a systematic analytical process in order to support a state’s decision and policy makers.
It exists because some states or actors seek to hide information from other states or actors who in turn seek to discover hidden information by secret or covert means (Hannah et al, 2005, iii).
Intelligence can also be described as what a ‘state must possess regarding other states in order to assure itself that its cause will not suffer nor its undertakings fail because its statesmen and soldiers plan and act in ignorance (Kent, 1966: 3).
Additionally, according to Wilson (2004; 5) the term intelligence denotes: Production of unbiased information about threats to the national vision.
Considering the foregoing definitions, you may agree with me that Intelligence has not only become a key element of security management but also the heartbeat of security in modern time.
This is because its impact on security cannot be under-estimated.
In the next segment of this unit we shall be looking at the various dimension of intelligence.
Exercise How do you define intelligence?
3.2 Dimensions of Intelligence As we have been able to demonstrate in the preceding segment of this unit, intelligence, conceptually, interprets itself in various forms, according to how each individual or state perceives it.
The British intelligence officials are used to saying that “intelligence is about secrets, not mysteries” (see Davies, 2002).
By and large, intelligence involves analyzing and evaluating information collected through open and secret means.
In intelligence community, interpretation of gathered information for intelligence purposes usually exhibits itself in three dimensions which include: (a) Intelligence as a process: Here, intelligence is described as a process through which information is collected or gathered.
After information has been collected and collated, such information will then be subjected to systematic analysis and evaluation.
Intelligence process is very important, as it allows us after collecting the raw data, to separate the information that is useful from those that are not useful.
During this process, values are added to information which make it (information) refined “into a usable form for decision makers” (Hannah et al, 2005: IV).
There is no doubt that, it is often said that “the relationship between processes and structure … determines the successful outcome of the intelligence activity” (Ibid); 79  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management (b) Intelligence a structure: This is all about the agency or agencies and institution(s) charged with the responsibility of intelligence sourcing for consumer i.e.
the government.
The institutions (often referred to as intelligence services), in carrying out their intelligence activities, are influenced by a number of factors.
According to Hannah et al, 2005: iv), these factors may include: • The roles and mandates adopted by one or more services (i.e.
are there different agencies for both the domestic and foreign role?)
– as well as understanding overlaps between intelligence agencies and other players (such as law enforcement) in the security community; • The shape of any central analysis and / or assessments mechanism to process collected intelligence; • The need to ensure central control and coordination of and accountability for, the intelligence community; and • The need to ensure pubic oversight of the intelligence community.
As you may be aware, there are several overlapping aspects, or rather types of intelligence such as security intelligence, domestic intelligence, military intelligence, to mention a few, which according to each nation, maybe separated by delegating different agencies with different categories of intelligence.
In this case, each intelligence agency will be tasked with a category of intelligence.
In Nigeria, the intelligence unit of the Nigeria Police is mandated by the law to carry out home security intelligence while the Directorate of Military Intelligence (DMI) performs the task of providing military and strategic intelligence.
By and large, countries decide on the (possible) framework to adopt in intelligence activity.
Some countries divide various intelligence roles to be played by different intelligence services that operate independent of one another but within the approach of complementing functionality.
What we are trying to say is that despite being independent of one another, the intelligence services or institutions must act to complement one another’s roles for system maintenance.
On the other hand, there are countries where there exists only one intelligence agency, which performs all intelligence activities ranging from domestic to foreign, at the same time.
A good example was the KGB in the defunct Soviet Union.
A caution has to be exercised here, and this is because having one intelligence service or agency performing all intelligence functions does not always mean that there exists only one intelligence service.
The number of available intelligence services varies from country to country.
Sometimes, there may be plurality of intelligence agencies in a state, and among them, there may be a single agency that can perform all intelligence activities.
80  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management For instance, in the United States, in practical terms, there are several intelligence outfits or agencies that perform various intelligence functions but the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) performs all functions ranging from do mestic, paramilitary to foreign intelligence.
However, the art of separating various forms of intelligence functions (domestic, military foreign etc) demands that there should be proper coordination of such tasks among various agencies particularly as it concerns the cross border security threats such as Cyber war, terrorism and others.
In some cases, intelligence services, though separate from one another, may be mandated to perform all intelligence activities and functions.
Thus there will be a body that will coordinate, collate and synthesize various intelligence reports coming from all the intelligence services through (scientific) analysis and evaluation of the information collected.
On the question of accountability, in some countries, the intelligence services are answerable to the legislature while in some political systems like Nigeria, the executive controls the intelligence service; (c) Intelligence as a product: The intelligence services undergo the process of collecting information, which will be analysed and evaluated.
After analysis and evaluation, the information gathered will become refined, and ready to be used by the consumer to meet its short and long-term goals.
It is worth-nothing that, in contemporary time, intelligence consumers are not only governments.
This is because corporate individuals and organizations can also seek for the services of intelligence agencies in the provision of some specific intelligence, which may be strategic to their decision–making and security.
Meanwhile, as we have earlier mentioned, the outcome of any intelligence activity is determined by the relationship between the process and structure.
Here, the outcome is the product of the intelligence.
According Hannah (2005) intelligence–product is aimed at assisting the consumer(s) to address ‘foreign or external threats’, threats to national security’, as well as providing ‘advice on policy and decision–making’.
Exercise Discuss the dimensions of intelligence 3.3 Categories of Intelligence There are several categories of intelligence and these include the following: (a) Security Intelligence: This form of intelligence, according to Kent (1965:209- 210) can be described as: …..the intelligence behind the police function …... the knowledge and the activity which …… defensive police forces must have 81  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management before they take specific action against the individual ill-wisher or ill doer.
Security intelligence usually involves collecting, collating, analyzing, evaluating and disseminating information that can protect a nation against internal threats.
(b) Criminal Intelligence: This is a kind of intelligence activity or function carried out by the relevant service or intelligence agency to provide evidence in support of prosecution of any criminal suspects.
Take for instance, before a suspect can be arraigned in court by the Police, it is expected that enough intelligence must have been collected, analysed and evaluated, which will help the court (as the consumer) to make a decision on the suspects.
In fact, lack of adequate criminal intelligence has been a great challenge to the prosecution of criminal suspects in Nigeria.
It is a shame that the Nigeria police and State Security Service (SSS) have failed to bring any of the perpetrators of political assassination which the country has recorded in the last eight years to book.
Several suspects have been prosecuted in court(s) but nobody has been indicted, since there is no sufficient criminal intelligence to nail the perpetrators.
(c) Home security or National Intelligence: It is that intelligence, which involves gathering, collating, analyzing and evaluating as well as disseminating information within a given state for the effective management of national security.
The national intelligence is reinforced by integrating intelligence within a wide spectrum of national strategy mechanisms that go beyond unilateral competences or needs of a single department’ (Hannah, 2005:2).
(d) Foreign Intelligence: This is a traditional form of intelligence in which the intelligence activity takes place outside the home country.
The importance of this intelligence to the strategic intelligence of any nation cannot be over emphasized.
This explains why Ambassador John Negropontes, in his speech before the United States Chamber of Commerce submitted that “what happens abroad can kill us at home”.
I quite agree with Negropontes, considering the emergent ‘villagelization’ of the world system where globalization has broken the (traditional) barrier among nations not only in geographical terms, but also economically, politically and socially.
Thus the world has become a global village!
Foreign intelligence allows a country to have strategic information about foreign nations’ activities and how such activities constitute a threat to her security, as well as what counter – measures can be adopted to any external threats.
(e) Strategic Intelligence: This category of intelligence tends to focus basically on gathering, analyzing and evaluating about the capabilities, vulnerabilities and aims of foreign countries.
In doing this, the country will have an opportunity to identify its strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats 82  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management (SWOT Analysis) in the time of peace and provides a platform to develop a framework for strategic military operations in case there is war in the nearest future.
It’s on the basis of the strategic intelligence outcome that the policy and decision makers will resolve on which programme(s) to adopt.
Net assessment can be adequately conducted by any country or party, if there is strategic intelligence, which will help decision-makers to take into account fundamental uncertainties about the future.
I know that many of us may be wondering and seeking to know what net-assessment is all about.
Well, net assessment involves developing an analytical framework that takes into account the strategic goals, doctrines, operational concepts and strategic military capabilities of competing countries, alliances as well as several other international actors.
(f) Tactical Intelligence: This involves devolut ion of responsibility among the hierarchy of personnel in an intelligence service such that information are collected, collated, analysed and evaluated for the use by the leadership or top management for short term policy agenda.
(g) Counter-intelligence: This involves measures to counter any foreign intelligence activities, capable of constituting a threat to national security (Ramsokn, 1958).
It also includes launching intelligence operations to arrest or destroy the human intelligence capabilities of the enemy states (hostile countries).
Exercise List and discuss any five categories of intelligence.
3.4 Sources of Intelligence (a) Member(s) of the public; (b) Foreign governments; (c) Intelligence personnel; (d) Communication technologies; (e) Open sources like newspapers, academic journals, unclassified government documents, treaties etc.
; (f) Internet; and (g) Government institutions, etc.
Exercise Highlight any five sources of intelligence 4.0 CONCLUSION 83  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Intelligence has remained crucial in security management.
Since the end of World War II, intelligence has assumed a new dimension, and it has formed the large part of strategic planning and securitization agenda of the world powers particularly as it relates to prevailing ideological polarity.
Providing adequate and effective intelligence can assist an organisation or country with a wide range of opportunities, including assessing the risk and threats and they can undermine the internal security of that organisation or country.
Due to the strategic importance of intelligence, it is quite paramount for services to conduct regular intelligence reform to meet the challenges of modern security sector.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have focused on the meaning of intelligence.
We began the study by defining the term intelligence.
Therefore, we discussed the various dimensions of intelligence.
In the following segment, our analytical compass was drawn on explaining categories of intelligence.
The fourth subject of discourse was highlighting the sources of intelligence.
Thank you for your attention.
I strongly believe that you’ve found this unit very interesting too.
But if you have problem understanding any segment or the whole of this unit, feel free to consult your tutorial facilitator who will help to illuminate on areas of difficulty, if there are any.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT (i) What is Intelligence?
(ii) Discuss any four categories of intelligence.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Davies, Philip H. J.
(2002), “Ideas of Intelligence: Divergent National Concepts and Institution”, Intelligence, Vol.
24 (3), Fall.
Also available on .harvardir.org/articles /1064 131.
Retrieved on 8th April, 2008.
Hannah, Greg et al (2005), Intelligence for security Legislation for Security sector Reform, RAND.
Kent, Sherman (1965), Strategic Intelligence, Archon, Books (1966), Strategic Intelligence for American World Polity, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Lowenthal, Mark (2000), Intelligence from secrets to Policy, Washington DC; CQ Press.
84  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Michael Chertoff (2006) Remarks at the Bureau of Justice Assistance and SEARCH symposium on “Justice and Public safety information sharing” on 14th March, 2008.
Also available on .fas.org/spg/crs/intel/RL 33616.pdf.
Retrieved on 12th March, 2008.
Ramson, Harry (1958), Central Intelligence and Nations Security, London: Oxford University Press.
.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intellige nce.
Retrieved on 6th March, 2008.
Unit 3 INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION AND DISCIPLINES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Defining Intelligence Collection 3.2 Disciplines of Intelligence Collection 3.3 Means of Intelligence Collection 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Intelligence has several aspects and one of them is information collection.
Therefore, intelligence officers are divided along the aspect(s) of intelligence they will perform.
The foundation of any intelligence work or production is found in collection of raw data which the (intelligence) analysts will refine and be turned out as intelligence product.
In intelligence community (IC), efforts are made (in an attempt to produce intelligence) to look for data that will assist so as to come out with intelligence product.
The process of collecting information for intelligence purposes is known as intelligence collection.
In this unit, we shall be 85  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management focusing on intelligence collection, and we shall fulfill this task by discussing a wide range of issues concerning intelligence collection.
Thank you.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define intelligence collection; Identify various disciplines of intelligence collection; and Explain means of intelligence collection.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Defining Intelligence Collection Information is very crucial to carrying out intelligence tasks.
This means that the art of collection of information must first be considered, in intelligence business.
Then, what is intelligence collection?
It can defined as “the procurement of information believed to be pertinent to decision-maker (sometime referred to as ‘raw’ intelligence data)” (Hannah et al, 2005:1) Intelligence collection can also be described as a process of gathering and assembling information through several methods for the purpose of producing intelligence.
3.2 Disciplines of Intelligence Collection In intelligence community, there are several intelligence collected discipline that assist professionals in the collection of intelligence aimed at providing support for policy makers in the choice of a particular policy direction.
Intelligence collection disciplines can be divided into two: technical and non-technical means.
The technical forms of intelligence disciplines include Signals intelligence (SIGNIT), Imager of Intelligence (IMINT), and measurement and signatures intelligence (MASINT).
On the other hand, non-technical intelligence disciplines include Human Intelligence (HUMINT) and Open Source Intelligence (OSINT).
Now let us explain them one after the other.
Technical Intellige nce Collection Discipline s - Signals Intelligence (SIGNIT): This involves gathering intelligence through interception or seizing of electronic communications; 86  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management - Imagery Intelligence (IMINT): This involves the use of satellite images for the collection of intelligence.
It is a method of collecting information through the use of snapshots to provide security; and - Measurement and Signatures Intelligence (MASINT) is scientific and technical intelligence.
Here, information is gathered through “quantitative and qualitative analysis of data (metric, angle, spatial, wavelength, time dependence, modulation, plasma, and hydromagnetic) derived from specific technical sensors for the purpose of identifying any distinctive features associated with the source, emitter, or sender and to facilitate subsequent identification and/or measurement of the same” (see .fas.org/irp/program/masint.htm).
There are several forms of MASINT, and they include: Radar Intelligence (RADINT); Acoustic Intelligence (ACOUSTINT); Nuclear Intelligence (NUCINT); Radio Frequency/Electromagnetic Pulse Intelligence (RF/EMPINT); Electro-optical Intelligence (ELECTRO-OPTINT); Laser Intelligence (LASINT); Materials Intelligence; Unintentional Radiation Intelligence (RINT); Chemical and Biological Intelligence (CBINT); Directed Energy Weapons Intelligence (DEWINT); Effluent/Debris Collection; and Spectroscopic Intelligence (ibid).
Non Technical Intelligence Collection Disciplines - Human Intelligence (HUMINT): This involves covert or secret collection of intelligence through human sources.
A good example is espionage; and - Open Source Intelligence (OSINT): It involves collection of intelligence through public sources like archival resources, government documents, academic and professional materials, media etc.
This collection discipline gathers information through non-secret sources, and it also plays a crucial role in the production of intelligence.
87  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Marl Lowenthal, in his work, Intelligence: from Secrets to policy, argued that “Despite the fact that OSINT has always been used, it remains undervalued by significant segments of the intelligence community”.
Exercise Explain the disciplines of intelligence.
88  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 3.3 Means of Intelligence Collection a) Espionage: This usually involves the art of covertly or secretly collecting information through the use of human sources.
According to the United State Department of Defense (DoD), espionage refers to “the act of obtaining, delivering, transmitting, commenting or receiving information about the nation defense with an intent, or reason to believe, that the information may be used to the injury of the United State or to the advantage of any foreign nations” (US Dept of Defense, 2007).
Spying or espionage is a traditional intelligence system in which some individuals are appointed on full time or part time basis, to work for some government(s) or intelligence agencies (either private or public) to steal valuable or important information from enemy targets with the aim of having strategic advantage over them.
The set of people used for espionage include: Agent: Agents are also known as assets.
They are spies who gather information.
They are involved in all sorts of clandestine reporting, sipping (or stealing), and illegitimately breaking into the information (systems) of their target parties, i.e.
nations, business organizations, security agencies among others; Case Officers: The business of spying is structured in a cell form.
Spies are grouped in small units, and spies can only know other spies in their cell(s) or unit(s).
it is the case officer who recruits his/her own spies.
He/she must demonstrate some level of competence, understanding and professional matur ity.
He/she must also be a good team coach, having mentoring potentials to be role model to the spies or agents working under him/her and Courier: Couriers are suppo rt personnel who assist the spies in managing their clandestine communication by securing them (the communications) against enemy’s interceptions or detection; (b) Black bag operations: These are clandestine or secret) ways of making (illegitimate) entry into the information facility (ies) of any target party for intelligence purpose(s).
the methods may include lockpicking, safecracking, finger-printing, electronic surveillance, mail manipulation, forgery among others.
: © Interrogation: This involves putting questions to person(s) with the aim of getting information which can help, which can aid intelligence collection.
There are various ways through which person(s) can be interrogated.
These methods of interrogation include: - Suggestibility: This a kind of interrogation technique in which people or person being interrogated is (is) subjected to sleep deprivation or exposed to continual loud sound, etc.
89  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management - Reid: This technique involve interrogators watching the body language of the person(s) (or suspects) being interrogated.
This method is questionable because it is (very) difficulty to read the mind of man through his/her face or the so called body language; - Deception: Here, the interrogator applies deceptive mechanism or lie to confuse and make the suspect to vomit information that may assist in producing criminal intelligence.
The investigator may lie to the suspect that he/she had been implicated by some other person(s) and there is need for him/her (suspect) to assist, sometimes, interrogator promises the person being interrogated heaven and earth, just to deceive the suspect in order to get information from him/her; and - Torture: This is a process of interrogating a person (suspect) to getting information from him/her through infliction of extreme physical pain.
Law enforcement agencies often apply torture technique on suspects to make confessions.
Torture includes severe beating jaw breaking, head breaking, face and/or body mutilation, rib-crushing among others.
This technique is obsolete and not effective because of the tendency of the person being tortured to make false confessions (or give false information) due to the extreme physical pain he/she suffers.
Even if one is innocent or does not have (the needed) information, in the face of torture, the person may resolve to give false information as to escape further torture.
(d) Number Stations: These are (covert) short wave radio stations.
The voices that are heard on these stations are often created mechanically in various languages.
The voices on the radio can be generated to represent or look like those of women or men as well as adult or children.
Number stations are used to pass instructions or messages to spies or used to deceive the public or the government (management) of the target countries (organizations); (e) A One-Way Voice Link (OWVL): It’s another form of shortwave radio in which transmission is targeted towards aiding communication flow between the spies or agents working on the field and their respective intelligence agencies (employers).
This system allows the spies to transmit already recorded message without having to stay on air for so long; (f) Steganography: The term steganography emanated from the Greek word, meaning “covered or hidden”.
This technique that involves sending information to the recipient in a hidden way.
Here, the messages are concealed in such a way that they are hardly noticed.
Examples of steganography include invisible ink, chaffing and winnowing etc; (g) Cryptography: This is art and process of writing in secret characters.
This technique is different from steganography because the message is not hidden but 90  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management it is the meaning of the message that is coded while steganography primarily deals with the writing of hidden messages.
(h) Concealment Devices: These are devices that we can secretly hide information or things (i.e paper) and they will look kike ordinary object.
Example of these are (special) books (especially the religion materials), candles, coin, etc; (i) Diversion Safe: This is device which can be left open while concealing some information materials in its hidden compartment that can be hardly noticed by anybody; (j) Eavesdropping: This is a method which involves one secretly listening to a private conversation or discussion.
People often do this by pretending as if they’re deeply asleep but listening to conversation between some other parties.
Eavesdropping occurs everywhere.
Some people may deceive other people as if they have left but only to hide in a corner with the aim of listening to the conversion of other people secretly; (k) Surveillance: This is the act of watching people or objects.
In contemporary time, the art of surveillance has gone beyond observing or watching (closely) the movement or behavior of people through human monitoring.
It also includes monitoring through electronic gadgets and (other) technological and non- technological methods.
Technological methods include telephone tapping, closed- circuit television, reconnaissance aircraft, internet and computer surveillance, GPS tracking, binoculars, postal interception, bugs (covert listening devices), etc.
There are several other types of surveillance and these include: Biometric Surveillance: It is the use of technologies to measure and study the physical and behavioral features of person(s) for the purpose of authentication, identification or screening.
The physical features that (some of) these technologies analyze include eye retinas and irises, DNA fingerprints etc.
The behavioral features may include signature, voice, gait etc.
It is important to note that biometric surveillance is still a subject of further research; and Natural Surveillance: Such models like crime Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTEI) and Defensible Space.
This technique underscores the importance of the character of any society in influencing the behavior of anybody attempting to commit crime.
It is popularly believed that people are often skeptical of going into crime, if there is high risk, and ‘natural surveillance occurs by designing the placement of physical features, activities and people in such a way as to maximize visibility and foster positive social interaction’ (see .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_surbveillance ); (l) Pseudo Operations: These operations are often targeted towards collecting strategic information for intelligence purposes.
They are usually adopted by states (nations) to locate and break into the insurgent areas by sponsoring a number of 91  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management state agents who will pretend to be sympathetic to the cause of the insurgents.
These state agents (defector) deceive the insurgents by fighting along with them, the anti-government forces (Cline, 2005).
Basically, the aims of carry-out pseudo operations may include collection of vital information for long term or short term intelligence, or covert activities like assassination of palpable foes or decimation of the enemy’s ranks etc.
Law enforcement agencies particularly the police usually apply this technique by sponsoring defectors to enemy’s camp and pose as if they are also anti- government; (m) Political Campaigning: This is another means through which intelligence can be collected.
In several societies like Nigeria, a number of people who are supporting a candidate may decide to pose as some of the admirers of the opponent candidate with the intention of getting information that can nail or deny the opponent of the anticipated victory.
All the decision secretly arrived at in the opponent’s camp are revealed to their camp.
The people who’re used to carry out such intelligence task can be regarded to as “Straw men”.
I could remember in 2003 gubernatorial election in one of the state in Nigeria, the leading opposition party was alleged of planning to kill some thugs with po lice uniforms with the aim of snatching the ballot boxes and filling them with unlawful ballot papers.
The ruling party, later, intercepted a vehicle, in the company of law enforcement agents, and after searching that vehicle, they saw thumb printed ballot papers, just few weeks to the election.
Also, a raid was conducted in a public school where police uniforms and ballot papers already thumb printed for the opposition party and a lot of dangerous weapons were found.
One important thing to note is that it’s likely that the ruling party positioned some “straw men” (its agents) among the ranks of the opponent, collecting intelligence which can be used to monitor or identify the weakness of the opponent, or even implicated the opponent for the purpose of having strategic advantage over the enemy party; (n) Sex and Honey pots: How will you feel, if you find a poster or in the media, the picture of a deceased man whose family is announcing his demise, and in the course of the public announcement, it is said that the man died after having a (marathon) sex?
I know many people will burst into laughter considering the novelty or strangeness of the content of that announcement.
This is because most families would rather put it as: ‘he died after a brief illness’.
For better, for worse sex has remained one of the effective means of intelligence collection.
Several kingdoms and empires have collapsed to evils that sex is capable of evoking in intelligence collection; sex is a very good tool in information supping.
The law enforcement agents use it to gather information, which can assist them to arrest some criminal suspects.
Criminals suspects also 92  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management apply it to get valuable information from security chiefs by trapping with women particularly those considered as ‘women rapper” (womanizers), to escape arrest by the law enforcement agents.
There are two basic ways that this technique can be facilitated: Internal and external.
The external sources appear to be more effective than the internal.
The external may include commercial sex workers specific, female members of the group (or agency, girl friends (or boy friends) etc.
The internal may include one’s spouse, and among those that commit incest, we may have daughters, female/male cousins, parent, mother (in-law) or father (in-law) among others.
The internal source(s) usually has (have) emotional attachment to the target person(s) which can make it a great risk using the internal sources for intelligence task.
This is because, there is tendency that such people will give false information (due to the bond or blood ties they have with the target persons.
But, there are some exceptions.
The external sources appear to be more productive in intelligence collection, due to the unscrupulous nature of the relationship between the target persons and their sex partners.
The basis for such relationship may only be material concern or mere canal pleasure or clandestine reporting etc; and (o) Walk-ins: walk-ins also play great role(s) in intelligence collection.
Walk- ins are those that voluntarily give information to law enforcement agents.
But, it is quite important that the information must be subjected to scrutiny and analysis to know if it is aimed at assisting the security operations in the combat of crime or meant to deceive security personnel.
Exercise Explain various means through which intelligence can be gathered.
4.0 CONCLUSION Intelligence collection is that art and science of information gathering for intelligence activities.
In an attempt to carry out investigation, there is need for security personnel to consider utmost how to gather information that will assist in crime detection, and even prevention of act(s) that can constitute a threat to national security e.g.
terrorism, insurgency etc.
Therefore, intelligence is not only collected to detect crime and identify the offender, but also to prevent crime and insecurity.
The intrusive nature of intelligence collection has become a subject of (great) debate.
This is because most intelligence collection methods can undermine the right to privacy of individual(s).
Some of the means through which intelligence is collected have also brought up the issue of moral question.
This is because they are capable of 93  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management undermining the fundamental rights of the people.
It is therefore necessary to put in place control measures in the collection of intelligence.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to cover a wide spectrum of issues in our discussion on the subject of intelligence collection.
We began our academic journey into the subject (of the day) by considering some of the available definitions of intelligence collections for conceptual purpose(s).
Thereafter, we focused on various disciplines of intelligence collection.
The third (and last) area of discourse was the means of intelligence collection.
I strongly believe that you have found this unit interesting.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is intelligence collection?
ii.
State any four intelligence collection disciplines.
iii.
List any four means of intelligence collection 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Cline, Lawrence E. (2005), Pseudo Operations and counter insurgency: lessons from other countries, Strategic Studies Institute.
Hannah, Greg; Kelvin A. O’Brien and Andrew Rathmell (2005), Intelligence and Security legislation for Security Reform, Technical Report for the UK’s security Sector Development Advisory Team, RAND Corporation.
Monahan, Torin (ed) (2006), Surveillance and Security: Technological Politics and Power in Everyday life, New York: Routledge.
Silverstein, ken (200), “Sex and the CIA” Harpers Magazine, April 17, Also available on .harpers.or/archive/2007/04/sb-sex-and-the-cia.
Retrieved on 1st January, 2008.
The US Dept of Defense (12 July, 2007) Joint Publ ication 1-02 Dept of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the- styd y-of-intellige nce/kent-csi/docs/vo8ila02p-0002.htm.
Retrieved on 8th January, 2008.
.en.wikipedia.org.wiki/black-Black-Bag-Operations.
Retrieved on 7th April, 2008.
.en.wikipedia.org/wili/intellige nce-collection.Retrieved on 7th April, 2008. ://www.fas.org/irp/program/masint.htm.
Retrieved on 6th March, 2008.
94  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management .militera.lib.ru/reseaech/suvorov8/16html.
Retrieved on 4th April, 2008.
95  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 4 INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS AND EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Defining Intelligence Analysis 3.2 Pillars of Intelligence Analysis 3.3.
Steps in Intelligence Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Collecting information for intelligence purpose(s) is not sufficient enough to become intelligence products.
This is because it is not all information gathered that have equal importance in intelligence planning.
Some information may even be totally discarded for lack of merit.
Then, how do we identify information that are important and those that are not?
Well, in intelligence community the process of identifying the information that is relevant for one intelligence initiative or the other is directed by analysis.
Therefore, the process of analyzing intelligence is very crucial in determining the quality of any intelligence products.
Here, there is application of knowledge in the evaluation of the collected information, which is refined and made useful for (Security) intelligence.
In furtherance of (our) discourse on intelligence, and our attempt to show how it impacts on security practice and management it is important in this unit to illuminate on how intelligence are analyzed.
Thank you as you stay with me in exploring the subject of the day.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define the concept, intelligence analysis; Explain the pillars of intelligence analysis; and Discuss steps in intelligence analysis.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Defining Intelligence Analysis 96  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management This is the process of determining out of the available information, the ones that are useful in producing intelligence.
The truth is that it is not all information gathered for intelligence will be useful, particularly as they relate to human nature analysis can also be described as: ---the process taken to know information about situations and entities of strategic, operationally or tactical importance, characterizing the known, and with appropriate statements of probability, the future actions in those situation and by those entities.
The descriptions are drawn from what may only be available in the form of deliberately deceptive information; the analyst must correlate the similarities among deceptions and extract a common truth ( .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intellige nce_Analys is) ---a way of reducing the ambiguity of highly ambiguous situations, with the ambiguity often very deliberately created by highly intelligent people with mindsets very different from the analysis ( .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligence_Analysis).
However the services of knowledgeable persons are often required for intelligence analysis, considering the task of revealing the facts from available information, often through systematic evaluation or assessment.
As you are expected to know, dealing with human-beings, one needs to be very alert mentally.
This is because man may be sometimes mischievous and will try to hide the truth by giving you false information.
As a security operative, you need to be very vigilant.
There is no doubt (effective) intelligence analysis is generally missing in our security sector in Nigeria.
May be, that is one of the factors responsible for ineffective security management.
This also explains the problem of incapacitation of various security agencies to provide substantial evidence (criminal intelligence) in the prosecution of suspects.
One of the examples of such inefficiency interpreted itself in the decision of the Lagos High Court to discharge and acquit the former Chief Security Officer to the late Head of State, General Sanni Abacha, of the allegation of trying to overthrow the government of the erstwhile President (Olusegun Obasanjo–1999 to 2007), for lack of evidence to show that the accused person actually committed the offence.
Moreso, the Nigeria Police is also bedeviled, in its operations, with the problem of ineffective intelligence analysis or intelligence misanalysis.
The second problem is very fatal, that is having security personnel acting on information without considering the merit of the less professional men and officers of the police institution, and this shows that the recruitment process(es) in the appointment and placement of people into its fold is (are) questionable.
Do you know how many innocent people have been killed, maimed or wrongly prosecuted by the Police in Nigeria?
97  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management I directly have a chat with one policeman, who told me that they shot some young-men to death at the back of their station.
The policeman informed me that an elder brother to one of the guys visited the police station, and reported that he was suspecting his younger brother and his friends were into armed robbery.
He asked the police to swing into action.
Though, the action of the police to burst the target place was commendable but later actions were unprofessional and criminal.
So, they searched the whole place, and found some incriminating objects like arms and ammunition.
Thereafter, the young-man who was reported by his brother as well as other friends and visitors were taken to the station.
The suspects pleaded innocence to the police.
In a regular extra-judicial jingoism and killing by most security personnel in Nigeria, the boys (suspects) were brutally murdered by the police personnel in question.
One fact must be noted here, the police agents failed to do their job (investigation) as demanded by the law while exchange of fire should be in self-defense, and shooting to death any suspects (or convicts) can only be ordered by the court (of competent jurisdiction).
The concerned police staff that carried out that dastardly action failed to subject the information given to them by an elder brother to one of the slain victims (suspects), to critical analysis to know if the information was genuine or deceptive.
Now, just imagine a situation where two brothers are fighting each other over the property left by their late father (or mother), and the elder one having the belief that he can cheat his/her younger one.
But the younger one can resist his/her brother’s (or sister’s) attempt,.
Hence, in a situation of conflict between the two particularly when the elder one is greedy may take any dimension.
The conflict may involve the use of thugs or supernatural attacks or even clandestine tactics such as the use of hired killers, set-up etc.
What I have gathered from my inquiry is that the policemen failed to build any scenarios about the information they were about to act on.
Even, after arresting those boys, one would expect them (the police) to take time in investigating the matter.
They only swung into killing of the boys without ascertaining their guilt (or innocence).
What a barbaric way of security management?!
By and large, analysis is a very vital element of intelligence planning and production.
The technical nature of this process demands that resourceful and intelligent people should be those in charge of intelligence analysis.
Anybody can be mandated or employed to collect information but the work of intelligence analysis is special and can only be managed by competent people who have inner eye (intuition and insight).
It is no surprising that, due to the importance of intelligence analysis in security management and crime detection and prevention, a number of countries have specifically created schools to teach and impart to the people the skills of 98  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management intelligence analysis.
One of such schools is Mercy-Hurst College Institute for Intelligences Studies.
Even several intelligence agencies have training centres for developing or improving among other things the skills of (a number of) their intelligence officers in intelligence analysis.
A good example is the Directorate of Intelligence (DI), a subsidiary of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
Exercise Define the term intelligence analysis.
3.2 Pillars of Intelligence Analysis As I have mentioned earlier (in the last segment of this unit), analyzing intelligence is a very challenging task.
This is because the analysts are confronted with a number of issues that can affect the outcome of the analysis.
One of such factors that can mitigate or undermine intelligence analysis is value.
Value tends to create identity and imaging in the mind(s) of (any) analysts.
In sharply ethnically divided countries like Nigeria, the probability of having distorted intelligence analyses will be high.
This is because ethnicity often creates problem of identity and (enemy) imaging in the minds of the people.
This problem covers all professions, segments and classes in Nigerian society, including the ruling elites and security personnel.
“No be your brother dey for government” (is it not your brother who is in government?
Standard English) has become regular phrase in Nigeria in which people express their opinion(s) about one regime or the other based on ethnic identification.
So, a situation like this leads to give ethnic legitimation to political leadership.
Thereby, the shortcomings of any political leader are ascribed to his/her ethnic group.
However, it is pertinent for intelligence analysts to avoid those turning their back to the pillars of intelligence analysis, which are the factors that can promote effective intelligence analysis, and these include: (a) Boldness and Honesty: Honesty, they say, is the best policy.
It is expected that for effective discharge of his/her duties, intelligence analysts must not only be honest but must also show to be honest.
Analyst should not allow some extraneous variables or selfish motives affect his/her job.
And in maintaining honest posture and resilience against distortion of facts, analyst will need to be bold, thus: …believe in your own professional judgments.
Always be willing to listen to alternative conclusions or other points of view, but stand your ground, if you really believe the intelligence supports a certain conclusion.
Just because someone is your boss, occupies a higher grade, or has been around longer than you does not mean he or she knows more than you do.
You are the one who reads the traffic everyday and who studies the issue --- It is better to be mistaken than wrong (see Watanabe, 1997).
99  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Reflecting on the last statement “It is better to be mistaken than wrong” in the above comment made by Watanabe, you may agree with me that the fear often exhibited by policy makers, from being found wrong in the choice of policy options, usually accounts for the ill-advice they get here and there.
It is unfortunate that these ill-advice, most times influence their policy direction(s).
Therefore, it is important for policy makers to have intelligence advisors and there should be significant amount of trust in their relationship.
Also, the intelligence advisors are advised not to misinform the policy makers or the executive whom they are working with for any reasons, and there must be honesty; (b) Goal Setting: This is a crucial aspect of intelligence analysis.
It is paramount to the goals of the intelligence consumer and needs of the consumer (like government, corporate organization etc).
And it is most important to complement what the consumer has with the knowledge of the intelligence being analyzed.
It is by doing this that you will be able reconcile and synthesize various information available to you, and bring out those that the consumer does not have any previous knowledge of and which can also meet the overall goal agenda of the consumer; (c) Appreciating the Consumer’s View and Expectations: It is important for analysts to appreciate the views and expectations of the consumer(s).
Sometimes, you may prepare intelligence for a particular consumer or the other, and you are further requested to provide an intelligence that is more detailed than the one you brought.
For instance, you may prepare an intelligence based information gathered by human sources (HUMINT) and your customer may ask you to provide more detailed one which may require considering other sources like imagery intelligence (IMINT), signal Intelligence (SIGINT) etc.
As an analyst, you need to comply with your customer’s demand and make sure that intelligence is produced in a very interactive and self explanatory way, such that the customer will find it easy to understand.
Therefore, you need to consider the educational background of your customer, and simplify the technical words to carry him/her (customer) along; (d) Organizational of Information Available: Analysts get a lot of information from various sources of intelligence collection.
It is the job of an analyst to identify the information that are important and those that are not to the task before him/her.
He/she should also ensure that the information that is true should be separated from the false ones.
In some intelligence institutions, information are sorted or arranged with the use of standard code according to the probable worth of confidence of the information and its collection source.
The intelligence analysis (IA) professional is confronted each day with high demands for rapid, yet accurate assessments that require discovery and 100  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management marshalling of evidence, integration and synthesis of data from disparate sources, interpreting and evaluating data and information that are constantly changing, and making recommendations or predictions in the face of inconsistent and incomplete data.
(Greitzer, 2005: 1).
In addition, after organizing the information, the process of evaluation will take place to assess the value of each of the information and the analyst will come up with some hypotheses; and (e) Team playing: Analyst needs to demonstrate at least a minimum degree of partnering with some other team players in the field.
He/she should not see them as rivals but should regard them as colleagues.
It is only when this is done that he/she can work with others conveniently.
Therefore, analysts need to adequately motivate the intelligence collectors who provide them with information to carry- out their work.
As an analyst, you need to always appreciate the work of the intelligence collectors and endeavour to feed them back.
This is because “if you are not frequently tasking collectors and giving them feedback on their reporting you are failing to do an important part of your job” (Watanabe, 1997).
Exercise Explain the pillars of intelligence Analysis 3.3.
Steps in Intelligence Analysis There are various steps analysts take, in the performance of their official assignments, to analyse intelligence.
Though, there is no consensus on any particular process to adopt by analysts.
They often adopt different approaches not only in the collection but also in analyzing the intelligence.
Nonetheless, various steps in the process of intelligence analyses may include: (a) Definition of the Problem: analysts will need to know the questions in the minds of their customers which bother on their intelligence requests.
If the questions are unclear the analysts will need to demand for further clarification to illuminate the thinking of the customer; (b) Developing Hypotheses: Hypotheses are statements, which are developed to predict the relationship between two variables.
For instance, if you a customer one of the major players in banking industry in the country to provide an intelligence on how she can attract people to her loan facilities.
You are likely to come up with some statements (hypotheses) like these: (i) Lesser the rate of a loan facility, the higher it becomes attractive to people (customers and prospective customers).
101  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management (ii) Lesser the conditions attached to the access of the loan facility, the more the people get attracted to seek for loans from the bank (iii) it is better to concentrate more or low income earners than high income earners considering their population.
Etc.
Analysts generate hypothesis by tasking their brains to identify various probable variables, which can have impact in addressing the problem of the intelligence sought by the customer; (c) Data Collection: Analysts require information to do their work.
In the case of case of not having information, already the analyst requests for the services of human intelligence collectors like spies or agents.
They also rely on other sources of data collection communication interception, satellites.
But these tasks (of intelligence collection) are carried out by intelligence collectors.
Sometimes, analysts rely on information gotten through newspapers, public records, or archive etc; (d) Evaluation of Information (sources): Analysts should have an assessment test on the information available to him/her and the sources of such information.
This is because distortion of information or deception cannot be ruled out in data collection.
It is therefore important to evaluate how accurate each information is, through which you identify those that are useful and those that are not; (e) Evaluate (Test) Hypotheses: This is the most crucial stage of intelligence analysis.
Analysts should ensure that they carry out a comparative analysis between the gathered evidence and their formulated hypotheses, with the application (or use) of different analytical tools and methods like Analysis of competing hypotheses etc.
This process will enable us to identify the hypotheses that are not useful or irrelevant, which may be thrown-out (f) Production and Packaging: After evaluating the hypotheses, analyst will come up with (intelligence) findings which he/she considers in packaging the intelligence product.
In the production of intelligence, three issues usually come to bear, and these include: (cid:1) Timeliness: Timeliness includes not only the amount of time required to deliver the product, but also the usefulness of the product to the customer at a given moment.
(cid:1) Scope: Scope involves the level of detail or comprehensiveness of the material contained in the product; and (cid:1) Periodicity: Periodicity describes the schedule of product initiation and generation ( .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligence_Analysis) Intelligence product is packaged either by written presentation or oral or electronic presentations (or both).
In some organizations, request is made for intelligence, demanding the analyst to present the product in written and oral forms; 102  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management (g) Peer Review: There is general belief that two good heads are better than one.
After the production of intelligence, it is advisable for analysts to seek for comments from their colleagues in intelligence community who may identify area(s) of deficiency in the intelligence product.
This view is also shared by the United States Department of Defense (DoD): Coordination with peers is necessary ----if you think you are right and the coordinator disagrees, let the assessment reflect that difference of opinion and use a footnote, called a reclama (see .dt ic.mil/do ctrine/jel/new pubs/jp102.pdf).
Exchange of ideas is very essential in the production of intelligence.
As an analyst, there may be some flaws, which you may not identify.
But bringing on board some other colleagues of yours in intelligence business, you may be alerted about such flaws or errors.
You must also be humble enough to entertain criticisms and see how various comments made can be catalogued, ranked and applied to improve your intelligence product.
Also, as an analyst you should always have it at the back of your mind, that no man is an island (of knowledge).
For this reason, it is important that one should choose among his/her colleagues those to work with as a team.
In this case good human relation and trust-building are essential; and (h) Customer Feedback and Production Evaluation: After delivering the intelligence product to your customer, you are also expected to always meet your customer and ask question about the product.
The questions may include: Has the intelligence been effective enough or useful to meet the customer’s goals?
Does the customer find the intelligence product easy to use?
Etc.
Analysts and their customer (policy makers, corporate organizations, individuals, security agencies etc.)
must make regular contact to discuss the efficacy or ineffectiveness of the intelligence products with the aim of fathoming ways to refine and put more life into them (intelligence products).
So, by doing these, it will be easy to meet the expectations of the customers.
Exercise How do you explain various steps to be undertaken in the production of intelligence?
4.0 CONCLUSION Intelligence analysis is the process of putting information in the right perspective by removing that information that is not useful as well those that are distorted or false in intelligence planning and production.
It is a very technical aspect of intelligence work which demands that anyone who wants to undertake such task should demonstrate high sense of intelligence and must be knowledgeable.
103  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management The analysts usually apply some specific methodologies in the conduct of intelligence analysis and they’re often referred to as analytic tradecraft.
In the business of intelligence analysis, you are expected to understand the nature of the business by professionally identifying the needs of the customer and the questions he/she want to solve with the use of your intelligence product.
Therefore your product must be problem-solving by providing the customer with an array of options that he/she can use to meet his/her goals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have looked at a wide range of issues concerning the subject matter: intelligence analysis.
We set out in our academic adventure by first looking at some of the many definitions of the term, intelligence analysis.
Thereafter, we drew our searchlight on the various pillars of intelligence analysis.
And the last area of inquiry was highlighting various steps of intelligence analyses.
Thank you for your attention.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT (i) What is intelligence analysis?
(ii) Explain steps in intelligence analysis.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Central intelligence Agency, Directorate of intelligence (Feb, 1997), A Compendium of Analytic Tradecraft Notes; .au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/cia/tradecraft_notes/contents.htm.
Retrieved on 23rd of October 2007.
Davis, Jack (1995), “A policymaker’s Perspective on Intelligence Analysis”, Studies in Intelligence, No 5.
Also available on .cia.go v/library/centre-fo r-the- study-of-intellige nce/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/95unclass/Davis.htm.
Greitzer, F.L.
(March 2005), Methodology, Metrics and Measures for Testing and Evaluation of Intelligence Analysis Tools, Pacific Northwest Division of Battelle Memorial Institute.
Heuer, Richard J. Jr. (1999), Psychology of Intelligence Analysis Chapter 8: Analysis of Competing Hypotheses, available on .au.af.mil./au/awc/awcgate/psych-intel/art10.html.
Johnston, R. (2003), “Developing A Taxonomy of Intelligence Analysis Variables”.
CIA: Studies in Intelligence, 47(3).
Also on http://www.cia.gov/csi/studies/vol47no3/article05.html.
104  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Krizan, Lisa (June 1999), Intelligence Essentials for Everyone, Joint Military Intelligence College.
Also available on .scip.org/2_getintel/ess.php.
US Department of Defense (12 July 2007), Joint Publication 1-02 Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms.
Available on .dt ic.mil/do trine/jel/new_pu bs/jp1_02.pdf.
Retrieved on 1st of October, 2007.
Wakanabe, Frank (1997), “Fifteen Axioms for Intelligence Analysts: How to Succeed in the DI {Directorate of Intelligence}”, Studies in Intelligence.
Also available on .bss.sfsu.edu/fischer/IR%20360/Readings/15%20axioms.htm.
Retrieved on 23rd of October, 2007.
.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intellige nce_Ana lysis.
Retrieved on 20th April, 2008.
105  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 5 COUNTER-INTELLIGENCE AND INTELLIGENCE SECURITY MANAGEMENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Definition of Counter-Intelligence 3.2 Aspects of Counter-Intelligence 3.3 Protective Disciplines and Counter-Intelligence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last three units our focus was on the meaning of intelligence, intelligence collection and analysis.
Every nation usually develops mechanisms and establishes institutions that engage in intelligence activities and it assisting her to have strategic relevance in the world polity.
In achieving the overall security agenda, nations do not only focus on how various intelligence activities can enhance their internal security, they also consider creating measures and platforms that can counter any intelligence (or security) threats emanating from both the local and external enemies which are capable of undermining the national security.
It is against this background that counter-intelligence has become a key element of security management.
Counter-intelligence is part of intelligence cycle and its coordination must also include the security issues that border on the protection of intelligence personnel, their facilities as well as operation.
These shall form the bases of this unit.
Now, let’s quickly browse through the objectives of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define counter intelligence; Explain aspects of counter-intelligence; and Discuss protective disciplines for counter-intelligence.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definition of Counter-Intelligence 106  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Counter-intelligence has become a rapidly growing intellectual area of inquiry in security studies.
It enables us to appreciate the need to look at intelligence from dual perspective: our strengths and vulnerabilities or weaknesses.
It is only when we can identify our weaknesses that we can fathom ways through which we can secure our intelligence community and counter other security threats.
On the definition of counter intelligence, we can consider the following: Information gathered and activities conducted to protect against espionage, other intelligence activities, sabotage or assassinations conducted for by or on behalf of foreign government or elements thereof, foreign organizations or foreign persons, or international tourist activities (see .fas.org/sgp/crs/intel/RL33616.pdf).
Counterintelligence (JC) refers to efforts made by intelligence organizations to prevent hostile or enemy intelligence organizations from successfully gathering and collecting intelligence against them.
Many governments organize counter-intelligence agencies separate and distinct from their intelligence collection services for specialized purposes (see .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/counter-intellige nce).
According to the United States Army in its-manual of counter intelligence, our conceptual definition of counter-intelligence cannot be adequate if we fail to consider two basic tasks performed by counter intelligence in our conceptual clarification of the term, CI.
And these include: (i) Developing, maintaining and disseminating multi-discipline threat data and intelligence files on organizations, locations, and individuals of CI interests.
These include insurgents and terrorist infrastructure and individuals who can assist in the CI mission; and (ii) Educating personnel in all fields of security.
A component of this is the multidiscipline threat briefing.
Briefings can and should be tailored, both in scope and classification level.
Briefings could then be used to familiarize supported commands with the nature of the multidiscipline threat posed against the command or activity (US Dept of the Army, 1995).
However, in several countries intelligence services are given separate mandates, and therefore counter intelligence institutions operate independently of other intelligence agencies.
For instance, in Britain, there exists an independent security organization which is known as “security service” or “MI-5, having no police powers but it is mandated by the law to have a good or collaborative working relation with the law enforcement agency known as the “Special Branch”.
MI-5 performs counter intelligence functions and through the special 107  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Branch, she can effect arrest or interrogate or facilitate a search warrant (on) the suspected enemies or intelligence threats.
In the United States, the Federal Bureau for Investigation (FBI) appears to be the major counter intelligence agency in the country.
In Nigeria, there is clear cut separation of functions among the intelligence agencies in the country.
What I mean is that there is no actual intelligence organization that is basically mandated by the law for counter intelligence only.
3.2 Aspects of Counter-Intelligence In this segment of the unit, we are going to look at various aspects of counter intelligence, though there may be more aspects than the ones we are providing in this study due to the dynamics of counter intelligence activities and studies.
Notwithstanding, we shall be focusing on four major aspects of counter intelligence.
These include: (a) Defensive counter intelligence: This aspect draws its attention on identifying vulnerable areas in one’s intelligence organization(s) which can be explored by foreign intelligence services (FIS).
The term, FIS in (modern) counter intelligence goes beyond foreign countries or agents in its meaning.
It therefore refers to opposition, either internal or external.
Defensive counter intelligence activities should cover defending one’s nation or organization against any threat that can undermine its security as well as protecting the friendly nation against enemy’s attack, which may be as a result of the diplomatic suppo rt your nation enjoys from the friendly nation, making the enemy-party dissatisfied.
In one of the broadcasts made by Osama bin Laden, the leader of Al Queda network, he called on the members of his group and his sympathizers (lovers) to carry out insurgent actions to destroy the United States and its allies.
This explains some of the covert suppo rt being received by some local insurgents in a number of countries from Al Queda network, to fight their governments who are considered to be pro-West by Al Queda and the likes.
The pro-American posture of the Iraqi government (majorly controlled by Shiites) has attracted insurgent condemnation not only from the Sunni dissidents but also violent threats from the Shiites militants.
The Shiites insurgency in Iraq has added a new twist to be post-war Iraq discourse.
This is because most people would think having Shiite led government, the majority Shiite population would welcome it and give her necessary support to succeed.
But the event has turned out to be contrary, resulting from the fact that more aggression comes from the Shiites rather than Sunnis.
108  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Well, one important revelation is that the aggression is more likely to be sponsored by Iran in evoking its defensive counterintelligence, considering the threat in the US sojourn in Iraq could constitute against its national security.
The covert support, Iran gives the Shiite insurgents in Iraq is overwhelming, with the aim of forcing the US and allies to consider the option of leaving Iraq.
If this is achieved by Iran, the US will not have access to Iraq as its military base through which it can launch a military invasion of Iran, in stopping her (Iran) from further developing nuclear power or any others weapons of mass destruction (WMD); (b) Offensive Counter intelligence Operations: These include all activities that are targeted towards arresting the mischief of the enemy-parties.
It is important to put in place measures that will undermine the structure and personnel of hostile intelligence organizations (Wisner, 1993).
This aspect is also known as counter espionage.
Here, efforts are made towards identifying and arresting the agents of a foreign intelligence services or enemy parties.
If the hostile agents are diplomats, the friendly nation or host country should declare them personal non grata, and facilitate their immediate repatriation.
The hostile agents who are not diplomats are to be arrested by law enforcement agents, and be prosecuted.
In some countries, if a spy is caught within or outside their intelligence domains working for foreign interests, usually face highest penalty (death sentence) while some other countries only have them imprisoned.
Intelligence services can also subject the detained hostile spies to torture, forcing them to reveal their planned clandestine actions for the purposes of liquidating such plans and prevent similar threats from any other hostile spies in the nearest future.
Recently, Nigerian government through its security operatives arrested some people alleged to be foreign spies and their local co-conspirators who were accused of espionage; (c) Counter intelligence Protection of Intelligence Services; Intelligence services don’t only guard the states against external infiltrations and (internal) attacks but they also undertake some (defensive) counterintelligence actions or measures to protect themselves from attacks or threats from the enemy or hostile party (ies).
Therefore, there is need for intelligence agencies to evaluate the source of, methods and resources they use in intelligence activities.
There is also need by services to conduct risk assessment on its operations with a view to identify appropriate counterintelligence measures to the risks in its operations; and (d) Counter intelligence Force Protection Source Operations (CFSO): These involve human source operations in which Clandestine activities ‘are conducted abroad ….. intended to fill the exiting gap in national coverage, as well as the combatant commander’s intelligence requirements’ (see .en.wikipedia.org/wik i/ coun ter-intellige nce; and US Dept of the Army, 1995).
Exercise Discuss aspects of counterintelligence?
109  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 3.3 Protective Disciplines and Counter-Intelligence These disciplines don’t actually have any direct relationship with intelligence activities but only play some complementary roles.
They assist to reinforce counterintelligence measures to undermine enemy’s attacks on the intelligence community and nation at large.
They include the following: (a) Physical Security: It is the dut y of intelligence services to ensure protection of their physical infrastructure against attacks by enemies that operate within and outside.
Apart from that, efforts are made to secure the civilian and government facilities against the infiltrations and attacks from mischievous elements (or foreign intelligence services).
Infrastructures like building require measures than can counter any threats from the enemies.
The enemies can make use of tall buildings; after gaining access to it, to monitor the movement of the occupants of another building being targeted.
Consequently, after collecting intelligence, the enemies will then identify the vulnerable areas, and strike.
This can explain, the tactics adopted by the Al Queda network in the planning and execution of the carnage (Sept 11 incident) that visited the United States.
The enemies studied the US and geography, noticing that there had been tight security at its borders making it difficult to smuggle in explosives into the country.
But the attackers chose to hijack commercial aircrafts to hit them against target building(s).
The US intelligence community failed to mount surveillance on the Arab immigrants who pretended to be students, enrolled to study the art of piloting.
One would expect the immigration service to have alerted the intelligence community to mount a close watch on the suspected immigrants, and plant electronic bugs at their residence.
Physical security may include fortifying infrastructures and building with security gadgets and other measure like the use of window blind.
The use of window blind will deny the enemies seeing your activities in the room through the windows.
Intelligence facilities need to be protected by putting in place high construction standards that are capable of mitigating enemy’s attacks and ‘might slow down, but certainly not stop, a determined entry attempt that used explosives’ (see .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counter-int ellige nce); (b) Personnel Security: Sometimes foreign intelligence services use some of the trusted people in an organisation or state to unleash their terror or attack.
FIS can decide to buy over some of the people working for your organization or home government who have access to some secrets that may be useful to FIS.
In order to avoid a situation like this, intelligence services will need to put in place security clearance system (or positive vetting) to ascertain if a person within the organization, holding sensitive position can still be trusted or not.
110  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management The services will have to conduct periodic clearance on the people holding sensitive or strategic positions.
One of the ways to do this is secret monitoring of one’s spending as against his/her income.
If one spends far above his/her legitimate earnings, such a person needs to be scrutinized.
There must be electronic reviews of one’s financial records, and it is also important to examine the lifestyle of each staff to identify the areas of vulnerability of each of them, and apply measures that can limit or curb possible compromise among (the) personnel; (c) Operations Security (OPSEC): This underscores the relevance of information, which is very crucial to the future operations of any organization or country, and, how ‘planning activities’ should be shaped to: • Identifying those actions that can be observed by adversary intelligence systems; • Determining indicators that adversary intelligence systems might obtain that could be interpreted or pieced together to derive critical information in time to be useful to adversaries; and • Designing and executing measures that eliminate or reduce to an acceptable level the vulnerabilities of friendly actions to adversary exploitation (see .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/intellige nce-cycle-secur it y).
Operations security usually involves-taking some measures like counter imagery, cover, concealment and deception to identify the interests and needs of the adversary in its (hostile) relation towards the friendly service (or country) as well as discovering critical clues about the services, which the enemy can collate, analyze and synthesize for (strategic) intelligence viewpoints, which can be used to identify or detect the vulnerabilities of the friendly service in its desires to carryout its threats.
It is therefore, necessary to develop measures that can mitigate the enemy’s threat by adequately addressing the problem of vulnerabilities being encountered by the friendly service; and (c) Communication Security (COMSEC); This is also germane to counterintelligence.
In intelligence activities, communication plays a great role, and that is why both the friendly service and enemy often extend their intelligence aggression to communication (environment).
Therefore, security of one’s communications and interception of the enemy’s has become one of the foremost principles in intelligence community (IC).
Communications security is geared towards: …preventing an adversary to intercept sensitive information that is transmitted, especially through free spaces, but also through wired networks capable of being wiretapped.
It includes several disciplines, including those 111  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management for protecting the hostile acquisition of information either from the patterns of flow of messages, or the content of messages… (ibid).
Communication security is a key element of counterintelligence.
That is why it is essential for security organizations including the military to provide secure communications and guard against interception by the FIS (or enemies).
Some of the counter measures against any specialized technical interception from the enemy may include encryption, traffic flow security, steganography etc.
The intelligence services are also expected to shield their office buildings against any electronic attack Exercise Discuss the protective discipline for Counterintelligence 4.0 CONCLUSION Counter intelligence activities have become widened in recent time due to emergent (non traditional) security threats that characterize national and international politics.
In the olden days, security threats often emanated from another country but now local dissidents constitute greatest security threats, undermining national security, and many of whom are even working for foreign interests.
Compromise (to enemy’s influence) has become a major challenge in intelligence community in which intelligence officers sell (or give) some classified information or secrets of their services (employers) to Foreign Intelligence Services (FIS).
The level of sophistication of modern communication technologies has also made friendly intelligence service vulnerable to technical interception and attacks of the enemies.
These and other factors have necessitated the need to put in place measures by intelligence community, to mitigate (reduce) or prevent threats from the enemies.
Counterintelligence activities should ensure not only to counter the attacks coming from the enemies but also to protect intelligence personnel, facilities, resources as well as operations.
It is by doing all these that effective counter intelligence can be actualized.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss a number of issues of regarding counter intelligence.
We began our intellectual discourse by looking at some of the available definitions of the term, counterintelligence, in the actualization of our task of conceptualization.
Thereafter, we explained various aspects of counterintelligence.
The third and the last subject we treated was discussing the major protective disciplines for counterintelligence.
I wish to congratulate you for successfully completing another unit in the course.
Thank you for your attention.
112  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT (I) What is counterintelligence?
(II) How do you explain various protective disciplines for counter-intelligence?
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Archick, Kristen (2006), European Approaches to Homeland Security and Counterterrorism, Congressional Research Service (July 24).
Also available on .fas.org/spg/crs/homesec/RL33573.pdf.
Retrieved on 5th Nov. 2007.
Dulles, Allen W. (1977) , The Craft of Intelligence, Greenwood Imbus, Michael T. (April 2002), Identifying Threats: Improving Intelligence and Counterintelligence Support to Force Protection.
See .au.af.mil/au/awcgate/acsc/02-059.pdf.
Retrieved on 3rd Nov. 2007.
US Department of the Army (3 October 1995), Field Manual 34-60: Counterintelligence, available on .fas.org/irp/doddir/army/fm34-60 Van Cleave, Michelle K. (April 2007), Counterintelligence and National Strategy, School for National Security Executive Education, National Defense University (NDU).
Wisner, Frank G. (22 Sept. 1993), On “The Craft of Intelligence”, available on .cia.ga v/library/center-fo r-the-study-ofintelligence/Kent-CSI/doc/V081a07p- 0004.htm.
Retrieved on 3rd November, 2007.
.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counter-intellige nce.
Retrieved on 4th of April, 2008.
.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/intellige nce-cycle-security.
Retrieved on 5th April, 2008.
.fas.org/spg/crs/intel/RL33616 .pdf.
Retrieved on 5th April, 2008.
113  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management MODULE 3 Unit 1:Security Personnel Management I Unit 2: Security Personnel Management II Unit 3: Management of Job Stress among Security Personnel Unit 4: Trauma Management in Security Career: REBT Unit 5: Public Relations Management in Security Sector Unit 1 SECURITY PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT I CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 3.1 Definition of Secur ity Personnel 3.2 Causes of Trauma 3.21 Job Design 3.22 Staffing 3.23 Training and Staff Development.
3.24 Performance Appraisal 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Security organizations, public and private, carry out their functions and responsibilities within the scope of what laws allows them to do.
Apart from the scope of their operation, one thing that is very important, and what that determines their success is the nature or quality of their staff or personnel.
The truth is that if you do not have the right staff for the right positions, there is the likelihood that the inputs which such staff will provide for the organization will be ineptitude.
In situation like this, meeting the overall goals of the organization will be difficult.
Therefore, it is pertinent to focus on the concept and practice of personnel management as it impacts on securitization.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 114  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Define personnel management; and Explain various principles of personnel management.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definition of Personnel Management There has been a consensus among scholars and practitioners in management that the heartbeat of any organization, be it security, finance, insurance, media etc, is the quality of the human elements within its fold.
It is no surprising that management theorists have also agreed that of all the resources available in any organization, it is only man that grows and develops.
Some of the definitions of personnel management may include: Personnel management is hat part of management concerned with people at work and with their relationship within an enterprise.
Its aim is to bring together and develop into an effective organization the men and women who make up an enterprise and having regard for the well-being of the individual and of the working groups, to enable them to make their best contribution to its success (Institute of Personnel Management, quoted on .webird.tcd.ie/bitstream/2262/5139/1/jssisiVolXXIIPartV_3677.pdf).
Personnel management is also concerned with the human and social implications of changes in internal organization and methods of working, and of economic and social changes in the community (Institute of Personnel Management, 1968).
Personnel management can also be described as: How the efforts of the people who make up the enterprise can be so organized and developed in order to attain the highest level of efficiency, adaptability and productivity (Barber, 1970).
3.2 Principles of Personnel Management There are several principles of personnel management.
They include the following: 3.21 Job Design Security job is a very challenging one, considering the conditions attached in the recruitment of personnel.
Apart from having mental stability and alertness, secur ity personne l must also be physically fit.
But, for them to perform their functions effectively well, there must be job design in the first instance, which will serve as a manual that specified “the content, method and relationship of jobs 115  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management in order to satisfy technological and organizational requirement as well as social and personal requirement of the job-holder” (Olise, 2005: 56).
Again, according to Olise (2005), there are aspects of job design, and these include: a) The productivity aspects: These are aimed at meeting the goal of the organization as its concerns productivity.
Therefore, it is pertinent in security business for the management (or government for public security outfits) to pay huge attention on ‘operational efficacy’ targeted at achieving greater results.
Thus, quality inputs often lead to quality outputs; b) The job-holder’s aspects: The rationale behind these is geared towards satisfying the needs of each staff particularly as it concern his/her interests, challenges and achievements.
Olise (2005) goes further to illuminate the ‘complexity’ orbit that exists in the relationship between the two set aspects of job design as elaborated above.
According to him: ………to achieve the organizational goals, it is necessary to meet the individual goals.
Consequently, the overall objective of a job design programme will be to integrate the individual needs with those of the organization (Olise, 2005: 57).
Considering the foregoing, we may be wondering on how an organization, in its efforts to meet its corporate goals, can be able to harmonize the variety of individual goals of its personnel, even considering the politics of human nature (one’s man meet is another’s poison).
However, job design must first draw the content of the job by enunciating various work tasks or activities, which the organization demands from its personnel to perform for the ultimate purpose of achieving its overall goals.
In attempts to integrate the individual goals of the personnel within an organization, a number of stages need to be considered.
These we shall be looking at in the next segment.
3.211 Stages of Job Design (a) Job Analysis: This is the process through which security organization (or any other organization) gives a detailed explanation and catalogue of the purposes, expectations, duties, features, behaviours and relevant skills that a particular job evokes on the job-seekers.
Olise (2005) describes job design as” ………a systematic investigation of job content, the physical circumstances in which the job is carried out, the qualification needed to carry out the job responsibilities.
Job analysis is considered to be the foundation or building block for most resource system.
116  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management By and large, job analysis is a very essential element of job design because it serves as a platform that enables any organization to accomplish other principles of personnel management such as recruitment, selection, training among others, which are very necessary for delivery of quality services by the employees for organizational development and attainment of the overall goals of the organization.
In our focus on analysis as a key element of job design, it is pertinent we quickly look at various features of job analysis and these include: The purpose of the Job: The rationale behind the inauguration or establishment of any security organization is not without a purpose.
For example, the establishment of the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) by the Act of parliament are basically to prevent, alleviate or reduce or eliminate (if possible) all offences relating economic and financial crimes like advanced fee fraud, money laundering, diversion and looting of public funds by public official(s) and their private co-conspirators among others.
The government realized that there’s inherent danger in activities of economic and financial crimes, capable of undermining the security and development of the nation, which culminated in the establishment of the EFCC.
Therefore, it is incumbent or simply important to indicate the purpose which necessitates the creation of a security establishment with the intent to meet the goals of the organization; Content: This can be described as the totality of what the job entails.
Therefore, it under scores the nature and scope of job especially as it concerns work task, functions, obligation, duties and operations to perform.
If the content of any job is – well spelt out, every employee with find it easy to identify the task he or she is to perform and the quality of the inputs from the employees has direct impact on the outputs which determine the ability of the organization to meet its fundamental goals.
Accountabilities: The essence of every work task is to promote the effective performance and productivity of the organization.
Job analysis should specify the tasks to be undertaken by each of the personnel and they (employees) must account for the various functions they perform.
That is why there is hierarchy of responsibility in personnel management.
For instance, in Nigeria Police, there are several police stations cutting across – every community in the federation, and they are managed by a number of officer sand men of the police institution and each of the stations is led by a divisional police officer (DPO).
The activities of the police personnel in each station as it concerns the delivery of their statutory functions and duties must be accounted for.
The police personnel cannot go to the armoury to fetch some ammunition without documentation.
No policemen or officer can shoot in the public or elsewhere 117  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management without accounting for such action.
In an attempt to uphold the principle of accountability, there is decentralization of authority in security community such that every security employee will have a superior officer to report to.
Again, in Nigeria Police, police personnel in various stations report to the DPOs or their representatives, the DPOs report to the Area Commander who also report directly to their respective commissioners of police.
The Commissioners of Police report to their zonal heads (who are usually on the rank of Assistant Inspector General of Police).
The AIGs report to the inspector General of Police (IGP) or his representative(s) who often are superior officers (DIGs).
The IGP is also answerable to the executive (the presidency) or relevant minister.
This chain of authority allows for easy identification of the staff that should account for any deficiency recorded by the force in its performance of its statutory duties and operations for satisfying the goals of the police organization.
Performance criteria: It is necessary for security organization to have standards of measurement to judge the performance of its personnel.
Currently in Oyo State, the police community usually gives awards monthly to the best performing officers in the commands that have fought situation of crime to a barest minimum.
They measure the performance based on the number of arrests of criminals, intelligence breakthroughs crime prevention measures, the level of maintaining the peace and order in their various territories among others; Responsibilities: In the course of carrying out your official duties as security men (or offices), it is incumbent on you to exhibit substantial level of mental alertness or ability.
In performing your functions as security employee two issues come to your mind in making decisions.
These include.
Programme Decision making, and Non Programme Decision making.
Then, what is the relationship between job analysis and the decision-making models relating to responsibilities in the discharge of official assignment?
Well, the relationship is that the programme decision making involves the process of itemizing rules and procedure that guide one’s operational decision making.
For instance, some of the operational rules of a private security firm may include searching of persons and vehicles that go in and outside of their places of operation and arrest those found going out with company’s property and find out if the management is aware of it or not.
Therefore, if the security operatives work within the codified and written operational rules of the organization, the organization shall be responsible for such actions.
Meanwhile, non-programme decision making can be adopted if you find it necessary to apply your own iniative to perform the task before you as a security employee.
Consider this scenario as a police officer leading a team of other police 118  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management personnel to arrest a gang of trans-border armed robbers that has been threatening the internal security of the country, after having an intelligence report that the robbers are still operating in a particular locality.
On getting there, the robbers resist arrest and engage your team in gun battle.
And through your superior fire power, the armed robbers ran into a vehicle containing some civilians and the civilians are therefore held hostage by the bandits.
The bandits driving in the snatched vehicle (containing some civilians) and heading towards the border to escape.
Here, you may consider the elusive nature of the criminal gang and its destructive antecedents.
And you may also find yourself in the waters of dilemma, if you are also aware that similar tactic had been used by the robbers twice previously to facilitate their escape.
Then, you may decide that there should be collateral killing if it is the best option to hunt–down the robbers.
When we are talking about collateral killing, we mean is the adoption of an aggressive strategy in which innocent people are not spared in an attempt to hit a target.
A good example of collateral killing was the US bombardment of Iraq in her attempt to decimate the Saddam army and presidential guards in the wake of the Iraq war, without considering possibility of having civilian casualties.
Sometimes, events may mandate you to take a personal decision in the performance of your functions as security operative(s).
but you will be responsible for such decisions outside the operational rules of your organization..
Organizational factors: In security systems where offices are allocated to individual staff based on patrimonial network, quality service delivery will be lacking because most times, people will be assigned positions that are beyond their individual capability.
(b) Job Description: This is the art of giving a detailed account of the task, which a particular job demands.
Somebody who is not physically fit cannot perform effectively in security occupation.
Though, such a person if he is very intelligent and resourceful, security organizations may consider him as consultant.
Job Description involved providing brief explanation of what a job entails.
As you might have seen in some of the pages of a number of national dailies (newspapers) or elsewhere, advertiser- organization- demanding some qualified people to apply for some vacant positions in their organizations.
Some of them usually briefly explain the task(s) each position requires, the job location, whom to report to among other variables are also captioned.
The features of job description include: i.
Job title: Job must be defined with a title for job-seekers to have an idea about what the job entails; 119  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management ii.
Hierarchy: The employee will be answerable to a superior officer.
As I have mentioned earlier the DPOs report to the Area Commanders who in turn report to the Commissioners of police etc; iii.
Job purpose and scope: The scope of the EFCC does not include making of arrest of armed robbers or terrorists or homicide suspect but only to arrest and prosecute the offenders of economic and financial crimes like money laundering, stealing of public funds among others.
The purpose of establishing the police is to maintain law and order in the country.
The purpose of creating the EFCC is to provide institutional platform to limit or prevent the incidence of economic and financial malpractices; iv.
Description of duties: Every employee has a role to play in the actualization of the (ultimate) goals of the organization Considering security organization like Police, there are many departments or units designed for the effective workability of the institutions.
In police, the personnel are given different tasks to perform; some are in intelligence, some in transport and traffic management, some in special anti robbery squad etc.
These various segments have different job tasks.
It is pertinent to describe what each job task or duty entails for effective performance; etc.
© Job Specification: This denotes mentioning of definite and complete conditions attached to the job.
These may include: (cid:1) Bio Data (cid:1) Academic Qualification; (cid:1) Professional Qualification; (cid:1) Years of Working Experience (cid:1) Publications (where required) (cid:1) Distinctions and Awards (cid:1) Strengths and Weaknesses; etc.
Other stages of job-design include planning, executing and controlling.
Exercise (i) Describe any two stages f job design (ii) What are the features of job description?
(iii) What conditions are usually contained in job specification?
3.22 Staffing This is another fundamental principle of personnel management.
Who are the individuals who should be considered for appointment into vacant security positions?
Can anybody apply irrespective of his sex, age educational qualification, race, nationality etc, in as much that he/she is physically fit?
I believe, you will agree with me that not all security positions are open.
120  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Again, as a security organization, you may have a great number of modern machines, tools and technologies available in the industry, but you cannot accomplish the organizational goals without having the (right) personnel to utilize such operational instrument in the actualization of the organizational goals.
The process of staffing is so essential because it has a great impact, with fundamental elements which include recruitment and selection, interview, placement, transfer and promotion.
3.221 Elements of Staffing (a) The Recruitment and Selection: Here, we advertise the requisite conditions which prospective employee must have before they can be considered for the selection process (short listing).
In every security organization, either public or private, there are two basic levels of personnel: Senior (Officer) and junior (Men).
Apart from age, physical fitness, height and mental alertness; educational qualification is a key condition that determines which level one can apply for.
In Nigeria, Short Service (Cadet) recruitment exercise in the Nigerian Army demands that it is only people with tertiary qualification like the first degree and (possibly) Higher National Diploma can compete for the vacant positions.
Attracting Candidates: The organizational culture has a very great impact on recruitment process.
This reason is that if the organization promotes patrimonial ethos, there is tendency that the best candidates will not apply.
But, if the system promotes culture of merit not only in the recruitment of her personnel but also in their promotion, there is possibility that several good candidates will be attracted to such organization, and consequently, they will apply; and Selecting candidates: The process of selecting candidates is very essential in identifying those that are qualified for the job who are most likely to be short listed for interview.
In doing this, it is pertinent to distinguish between the requisite conditions by identifying which of them are essential and those that are considered desirable.
(b) Interview: It is a structured conversation designed to achieve a purpose.
The purpose ranges from (ordinary) information research job offer.
But our attention here is centered on selection interview for employment.
Therefore, interview can be described as a process of trading information between two parties in which one (Interview (see) is seeker of job while the other (interviewer or interviewing panel) is the giver of job.
The giver of job may decide to offer or not to offer while the seeker of job can also decide to accept if given or refused the offer (Armstrong, 1981).
(c) Placement: In security organization, after reaching the stage of interview, the shortlisted candidates apart from the oral and written interviews, may be asked to 121  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management undergo a short physical test which is the main decider.
After passing the interview the successful candidates will undergo relevant training courses for a specific period of time.
For instance, in Nigeria Police, such training takes 18 months for cadet appointees while 6 months for the recruits.
It is after the training exercise that the newly employed personnel will be commissioned and placed in various units.
Some will go into intelligence unit, some to traffic control, some to maritime surveillance units.
Some will be posted to anti robbery squad, some to bomb detection unit, some to foreign missions etc.
(d) Transfer: Security job requires development of skills and potentials, and so getting new ideas is highly encouraged as this is one of the reasons why security personnel are moved from one department to another.
It helps in skill accumulation and improved knowledge through eclectic acquisition of ideas from one department to another.
Again, the nature of security occupation also allows for the personnel to be transferred from one locality to the other.
Another reason for transfer may be due to promotion.
If a security operative is promoted and there is no office vacant for him/her to occupy and there is vacancy somewhere then the management may decide to transfer him/her to where there’s vacant office, and (e) Promotion: This is a good jounce of motivation in which security personnel have opportunities to move upwardly one rank to the other.
But there is demotion punishment for erring or ineffective security personnel in which they’re subjected to downward movement from their (current) position to another one (less).
Exercise Briefly describe staffing and its basic elements.
3.23.
Training and Staff Development.
Security occupation is a very challenging one.
It requires training and retraining of personnel due to the dynamics of security threat and crime control.
Mischievous people often adopt new techniques to perpetuate their criminal activities and so it is also incumbent on security operatives to adopt new crime control interventions in the maintenance of security in any given place.
So what is training?
According to Olise (2005: 112): Training is the systematic development of the attitude and skill behaviour pattern required by an individual in order to perform adequately a given task….Training is designed to change the behaviour of the employee in the work place in order to stimulate efficiency and higher performance standards.
122  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Bearing in mind the foregoing, you may agree with me that training is a key element of staff development.
New security technologies are invented and manufactured from time to time.
So, security organization must make sure it updates its operational hardware i.e.
weapons, vehicles, and other technologies, information systems and intelligence, and building capacity for personnel development.
It is no surprising that in Nigeria, Police go about in warlike style brandishing AK 47 riffles as if the country is under siege.
Modern police system is doing away with the traditional methods of policing that placed higher pr iority combativeness of the force.
We are now in the era of constructive policing and massification of security management through sophisticated investigation techniques, human– capital development, effective espionage and strategic intelligence among others.
However, there are various methods through which security personnel have their training and these include: On the Job training: This form of training i.e.
acquired simultaneously as the security personnel carry – out their duties.
For instance, it is not obligatory on the police authorities to provide the officers and men of the organization magical power (Juju) to combat the armed robbers.
But some of the security operatives have learnt the relevance of traditional prevention and control mechanisms due to the ugly experience they’ve had in their encounter with armed robbed in Nigeria.
Some of the bandits use Juju that protects them against bullet penetration of their bodies.
So, several police personnel now patronize traditional witch – doctors, not only to be equipped with spiritual devices that liquidate the spiritual power of the bandits themselves against bullet penetration, but also to protect themselves against bullet penetration.
There is no doubt that we learn new skills and ideas due to some challenges we experience on the job; Off the Job Training: Sometimes, we learn new skills off our regular duties by going to the training college.
This kind of training allows the personnel to be temporarily out of duty posts for training purpose (s).
In Nigeria, virtually all the security agencies have their own training schools or centres.
This is with the aims of giving the employees opportunities to widen their horizon and acquire new security skill and ideas for effective performance and quality delivery of services aimed at attaining the overall goals of the organization, and External Training: This form of training totally takes place outside the organizational environment of the security personnel.
For instance in an attempt to fortify the efficiency of its personnel, the Nigeria Army can decide to send some of its staff to National open University of Nigeria for a short course in criminology and security studies in order to equip its staff with emergent strategic planning and information system.
Other examples of external training may 123  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management include (International) seminars, strategic management workshops, NGO organized conferences and technical assistance among others.
Exercise How do you describe training?
3.24 Performance Appraisal This is another principle of personnel management and the term refers to a system that helps to evaluate the past and present behaviour of employees with the use of systematic and standardized form which can be used in future by employee and or the employer.
According to Olise (2005:138), performance appraisal: …is the formal assessment of how employees are performing their jobs in relation to established standards.
The implicit logic in performance appraisal is that in order to get people to do what is right, management must tell the employees what to do, judge how well they have done and reward or punish them accordingly.
In addition, performance appraisal can also be described as the systematic assessment of job in relation to strengths and weaknesses of any employee or group of employees (Akinboye, 1999).
It also means a systematic process of gathering, checking, sharing, giving and using of systematic and standardized form for the purpose of evaluating performance of people at work aimed at improving their work performance (Ramdel et al, 1974).
There are several methods of carrying out performance appraisal in security industry and elsewhere, which we shall be discussing subsequently.
3.241 Methods of Performance Appraisal (a) Graphic Rating Scale: This method of performance appraisal or evaluation mainly focuses on particular behaviour or act of employee (s) as it concerns job performance.
Here, there s a rater, which shows the level at which any employee exhibits each behaviour act, which will assist us to assess his or her performance at work; (b) Written Assessment: This is also regarded as essay method.
It is a performance appraisal method that involves the employee’s supervisor describing his or her (employee’s) performance at work in writing not without considering some fundamental variables like the overall appraisal of employee’s performance, employee’s promotability, and employee’s strengths and weaknesses; (c) Behaviour Rating Scale: This involves rating of a set of attributes in relation to the behaviour or act of an employee.
These attributes have great impact on his/her performance at work, as they can contribute to or undermine his/her efficiency.
It is often administered by the employee’s supervisor; 124  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management (d) Management by objectives (MBO): It is a performance appraisal method which addresses the problem of subjectivity that characterizes most of the other methods.
This is done by focusing on identifiable job result as the basis for performance evaluation.
Therefore, the results are ranked against standards of performance not without considering the inherent challenge or difficulty of the job task; (e) Check List Method: Here, the behaviour of the employee is rated by drawing a long list of positive and negative adjectives, and see how they apply to him or her.
And all the variables are to be given equal importance; (f) Multi Raters: This method involves evaluating the employee’s behaviour or act through several sources like supervisors, subordinates, colleagues, himself/herself etc.
It is also known as the 360o appraisal.
Exercise What is performance appraisal?
What are the methods of performance evaluation?
4.0 CONCLUSION In the management of personnel in security sector and elsewhere, it is very essential in attaining the overall goals of the organization.
This is because the quality of service delivery by the personnel has a great impact on productivity and efficiency of the organization.
That is why many organizations both in security banking, insurance etc.
that are doing well in meeting their organizational goals have continued to pay greater attention on the affective management of their personnel.
Thus, disarticulated personnel can only guarantee disarticulated productivity (low yielding result), which makes it difficult for any organization to meet its target goals.
Of course, it is garbage in, garbage out (GIGO) situation if we pay lip service to the issue of personnel management in security sector and elsewhere.
I believe that is why most of the security agencies in Nigeria are not doing well.
The patrimonial nature of the nation’s polity has also worsened the situation, where appointment and promotion of security personnel are based more on how many patrons one has in the corridor of power.
Our discourse on security personnel management cannot be exhausted n this unit.
Therefore, we shall continue in the next unit, to discuss some other principles of personnel management.
5.0 SUMMARY 125  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management In this unit, we have been able to describe the term personnel management and its various principles have also been identified.
Due to limited time and space in this unit, we’ve been unable to exhaust the available principles of personnel management but we shall complete our discussion on it in the next unit.
The ones we have been able to explain so far include job design, staffing training and staff development and performance appraisal.
I really appreciate your attention.
Meanwhile, if you have any difficulty in understanding any part of this unit, please feel free to consult your tutorial facilitator.
Congrats for successful completion of this unit.
Best of studying!
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define the following terms personnel management, job design, staffing, training and performance appraisal.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Akinboye, J.O.
(1999), “Performance Appraisal”, Nigerian Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol.
5, Nos.
1&2.
Armstrong, M. (1981), A Handbook of Personnel Management Practice, London: Kogan Page.
(1982), Personnel Management: A Handbook for Employees and Line Managers, London: Kegan Paul.
Barber, David (1970), The Practice of Personnel Management, London: Institute of Personnel Management.
Olise, Fidelis (2005), Human Resource Management: Tradition, Transition and Trend, 2nd Edition, Emmanuel Concept Ltd. Ubeku, Abel K. (1984), Personnel Management in Nigeria: Principles and Practice, Macmillan.
.webird.tcd.ie/bitstream/2262/5139/1/jssisiVolXXIIPartV_3677.pd f).
Retrieved on 30th January, 2008.
Unit 2 SECURITY PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT II CONTENTS 126  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Compensation and Reward 3.2 Job Satisfaction 3.3 Leadership 3.4 Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.
O INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, we began our discourse on security personnel management with the definition of the concept of personnel management.
Thereafter, we focused on a number of other issues particularly its key elements or principles such as job design, training among others.
The preceding unit has also afforded us a great opportunity to identify the importance of the various principles of personnel management particularly as they affect utilization and productivity in organizations.
The long-list of the personnel management principles could not be exhausted in the preceding unit and it would amount to a mischief if we close our discourse on the subject matter without explaining some other principles which are equally if not more important.
It is against this background that n this unit, we shall continue from where we stopped in the last unit.
Therefore, we shall introduce and explain other principles and see how they impact on the performance of security personnel in relation to meeting organization goals.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Explain some other principles of personnel management 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Compensation and Reward There is a consensus that the two concepts (compensation and reward) are very strategic in the effective management of (security) personnel or employees.
Conceptually, according to Funk and Wagnall’s standards Dictionary, compensation can be described as “the act of compensating – to make suitable amends to or for; requite, remunerate”.
To counterbalance or make up for; 127  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management offset….”, while reward may mean something given or done in return; especially, a gift, prize, or recompense for merit, service, or achievement’.
Drawing our analytical minds to the foregoing, you may agree with me that if we conduct a dissection on the two concept for conceptual anatomy (meaning), what we will see are: to make for any damage suffered by any employee in dispensing his/her official duties (compensation) and recognizing the good efforts and contributions made by an employee to the development of the organization by giving him an award or gift or promotion to encourage him/her to make more of such noble contributions and admonish other employees to borrow a leaf from the awardee’s success or elevation.
It is no gainsaying to stress at this juncture that the two concepts are very important in promoting culture of hard work and diligence among the employees in security sector.
One may continue to wonder why our police personnel in Nigeria are not performing like their counterparts in the United States and other developed countries.
Let’s begin our response to such a question by looking at the issue of compensation.
In Nigeria if a policeman or officer dies in the course of carrying out his/her national duties, very little or nothing is paid (as compensation) to the family of the deceased, and most times, no government officials attend the funerals of deceased security personnel that died on active duties.
But in the United States, the President or head of the state executive (or representative) will personally attend the funeral of any public security operative who died in the course of national assignment, and the family of the deceased will be promptly and adequately compensated.
Considering the foregoing, you’ll then understand while American security personnel are always eager to carry-out their official duties even in the face of great danger, because they know that if they die in serving the nation, they would be celebrated as national heroes and their families would be adequately compensated.
The children of the deceased security personnel have automatic scholarships, free medical services and their late parents on the roll of honour.
But in Nigeria, contrary is the case.
Even when compensation is to be paid for permanent disability or death of any security personnel (both public and private), the families of the affected employees and even expected to give bribe (monetary or/and in kind).
Some widows may even be asked to sleep with certain officers before they can be ‘helped’ to get the paltry compensation.
The reward system in Nigeria of security personnel is ridiculous considering the nature of security personnel in the developed world who receive more than 10 times of what their counterpart in Nigeria and Africa are earning.
Yet, the level of inflation particularly on basic needs such as food is far higher in Africa (including Nigeria) than the developed world.
What a double dilemma?!
In Africa small pay 128  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management is given to security personnel (and virtually all workers), and there is very high cost of living.
This situation is capable of inhibiting the progress of any nation or organization especially as it relates to security management.
Nonetheless, people have begun to see corruption as the means to augment their poultry wages (that are not promptly and regularly paid) to improve their marginal survival.
There is no doubt that a system like this will definitely popularize crime and criminality both in public and private places, and the security personnel also become criminalized.
Let’s us quickly look at the elements of compensation and reward.
3.11 Elements of Compensation and Rewards (a) Salary: It is referred to as weekly or monthly or yearly payment made to employee for the service rendered; (b) Wage: This is hourly pay made to any employees for the work done; (c) Incentives: These include rewards provided by organizations to encourage any employees in form of profit sharing, bonus etc, in recognition of their contributions towards the growth of the organization; (d) Benefits: These are (additional) monetary privileges being enjoyed by employees in form of allowances like meal subsidy, housing allowance, and transport allowance among others.
The main reason behind giving personnel these benefits is to create a sense of comfort and job satisfaction for them, so that, their performance at work can increase.
The more your employees are motivated, the more they will perform at work; and (e) Insurance: This enables the employee to have a sense of security, which will make him in the case of any eventuality like death or permanent disability to have the hope that either him/herself or families will be taken care of.
Exercise Briefly explain compensation and reward, as well as their basic elements.
3.2 Job Satisfaction Job satisfaction can be defined as correlation between what an employee desires from his/her job and the extent at which the needs of the employee are met (Kahn, 1990).
In job satisfaction discourse, five principle models come to our minds and these include: (a) Need fulfillment Model: Here, job satisfaction is a function of the degree at which an employee is allowed by organizational behaviour, to meet his/her 129  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management individual needs or desires.
This explains why most of the security personnel (both in public and private practice) have found it difficult to meet their individual needs and suffer deepening dissatisfaction at work.
One of the reasons is that many of them found their ways into security occupation for lack of alternatives, resulting from job drought and high unemployment.
Anybody in that category of people may not see his/her occupation satisfactory considering insufficient motivation, hazards, public hostility paltry take home pay, inadequate operational tools and machineries, etc; (b) Discrepancies Model: This denotes that job satisfaction is a subject of Met Expectations.
Met Expectations can be described as the difference between employee’s expectation from the organization (in terms of remuneration emoluments and other incentives) and what he/she actually gets from the organization; (c) Equity Model: This means that employee gets job satisfaction based on how much he/she is being treated fairly at work.
No one like to work in a place where he will be cheated or shot-changed by the employer (or management); (d) Trait/Genetic Components Model: In this model, job satisfaction is derived by an employee provided that the job conforms to his or her traits.
For instance, a kleptomaniac employee will always find satisfaction in his job, if the behaviour of the organization provided him/her avenues to steal.
That is the reason why you see some people exhibit high desire, but the secret may be, the work conforms with their traits; and (e) Value Attainment Model: This explains job satisfaction in terms of how much employees are allowed by the organization to meet their work values: personal belief and principles.
For example, an honest man will find it difficult to attain any job satisfaction in an organization that institutionalizes act of corruption (either overtly or covertly).
Exercise Describe job satisfaction 3.3 Leadership According to Robbins (2001), leadership can be defined as.
…..the ability to influence a group toward the achievement of goals.
Leadership involves the process of directing the affairs of any organization, coordinating and controlling the personnel towards working to realize the overall goals of the organization.
In personnel management the term, leadership has attracted great debate particularly as it concerns what (best) method can be 130  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management adopted to identify who is a leader at a work place.
According to Gibson et al (1997), there are three dimensions of leadership, and include: (a) Effective application of influence; (b) Excellent interpersonal relations and ability to (re)mould the motivation and (occupational) behaviour of other people in the same organization; (c) Leadership involves intent for change; and (d) The basis of leadership is attainment.
Exercise Describe the term leadership 3.4 Communication Communication can be defined as the “transmission of information and understanding the use of common symbols” (Gibson et al, 1997).
It is a process of sending and receiving information as well as getting feedback.
In personnel management, the issue of communication is important.
This is because the management often allocates functions or duties to the (other) employees and this process can only be enhanced through communication.
Thus, this involves the process of message encoding, which is passed to the employees, and if the message is not carefully coded, decoding it may be a very difficult task.
The content of any message is the function of the sender’s thoughts feeling and perceptions.
It is important to note that encoding of message should not be applied wrongly while decoding should also be rightly applied for the message to have a meaning to the receiver.
In security organizations, communication should consist of certain elements which include: (a) Presence of clear and formal channel of communication among the personnel in the organization; (b) Authentication of communication; (c) The course of communication should be direct and short.
The use of extremely technical terms should be avoided as mush as possible; and (d) Competent staff should man or be in charge of the organizations communication facilities, with good knowledge of security codes and language etc.
Exercise Describe communication.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT 131  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Define the following terms: Compensation Reward, Job satisfaction, Leadership and Communication.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Armstrong, M. (1981), A Handbook of Personnel Management Practice, London: Kogan Page.
------------- (1982) Personnel management: A Handbook for Employees and Line Managers.
London: Kogan Page.
Funk and Wagnall Standard Dictionary International Edition (1962).
Gibson, I. et al (1997), Organization, Bahaviour, structures and processes, McGraw Hill.
Kahn, W.A (1990) , “Psychological Condition for Personal Engagement and Disengagement at Work”, Academy of Management Journal, 33.
Olise, Fidelis (2005), Human Resource management Tradition, Transition and Trends, (2nd Edition) Emmanuel Concept Ltd. Robbins S. (2001), Organizational Behaviour, New Delhi: Prentice Hall.
Ubeku, Abel K. (1984), Personnel Management in Nigeria: Principles and Practice, Macmillan.
132  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 3 MANAGEMENT OF JOB STRESS AMONG SECURITY PERSONNEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Defining of Job Stress 3.2 Causes of Job Stress 3.3 Effective Management of Stress Among Security Personnel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every job, ranging from menial jobs, helping, academic and security profession has its own hazards, or simply ‘stress’.
The term job stress has become a global phenomenon.
In 1992, the United Nations submitted that job stress is “The 20th Century Disease”.
Not too long, the World Health Organization also argued that job stress had become a worldwide Epidemic.
Due to the negative effects that stress may have on any employee, it is important that we discuss the subject in this unit.
Stress often leads to physical and psychological discomforts in (security) employees.
These discomforts could be short or long term.
The short-term physical symptoms include tense muscles, rapid breathing and increased sweating.
The long term physical symptoms are fatigue, headaches, back pains, 133  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management digestive problems and sexual disorders.
There are also short term effects on the performance such as inability to make good decisions, damages to positive frame of mind needed for high quality work and also consumption and diversion of mental energy to frustration, anxiety and temper.
Stress also has effects on behaviour and these include bad moods, reduced personal effectiveness, changing work habits and increased absenteeism.
Such experiences do harm employees’ health and ability to perform qualitatively and quantitatively which even affect the optimal profitable productivity of the organization and the nation in general.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define the term job stress; Discuss the causes of job stress among security personnel; and Explain ways to manage job stress among security personnel.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Defining Job Stress The concept of job stress is often confused with challenges at work, but they are different concepts.
Challenge(s) energizes and propels individuals physically and psychologically.
It motivates us to learn and acquire new skills, and to be competent in our various chosen jobs.
Since we feel relaxed and satisfied after overcoming challenges, it is thus an important ingredient for healthy and productive work –life.
these challenges could therefore be perceived as “good stress” that is needed.
Job stress on the other hand, is that which poses significant threat to employee’s health and consequently to the health of an organization.
According to the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, commonly termed NIOSH (1999) defined job stress as the harmful physical and emotional responses that occur when the requirements of the job do not match the capabilities, resources, or needs of the employee.
Wendy Boswell held that in some cases, stress can be desirable to both an organization and individua ls.
In their stress models, Boswell et al., identified stress as challenge-related or hindrance-related.
The former is defined as work demands, although potential gains for individual while the latter is defined as job demands that tend to constrain or interfere with an individual’s work achievement, and which do not tend to be associated with potential gains for the individual.
Examples are lack of job security and role ambiguity.
134  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management However, stress can be positive, some time galvanizing, energizing and propelling one to reach optimum potentials.
Some stress is therefore needed because it adds flavour, opportunity and challenges to work-life so as to jeer up workers’ optimal performance on their jobs.
Stress as a phenomenon has been defined by Cooper, Arnold and Robertson (1995) as any force that pushes a psychological or physical factor beyond its range of stability, producing a strain within the individual.
It does constitute threat to the equilibrium of the individual.
Caplan, Cobb, French, Van Harrison and Pinneau (1975) defined stress as any characteristic of the job environment, which poses a threat to the individual.
Beehr and Newman (1978) extensively defined job stress as a condition wherein job related factors interact with the worker to change (disrupt or enhance) his or her psychological or and physiological conditions such that the person (mind and or body) is forced to deviate from normal functioning.
This definition buttressed the fact that stress is not usually negative, thus there is positive stress termed Eustress.
Stress is not a distress; it only becomes one when the body can no longer cope with the demands made on it.
(Afolabi and Oviasuyi, 2001).
Hans Seyle(1956,1956) , defined stress as the stereo-typed response of the body to exerting tasks such as changes, which occur when an individual has to cope with any type of situation.
His General Adaptation Syndrome (GAS) describes the three stages an individual encounters in stressful conditions.
1.
Alarm Stage, in which the body respond when it becomes aware of stress or threat.
The individual’s resistance is lowered here; 2.
Resistance Stage describes the phase where the individual’s defense mechanism becomes active.
There is maximum adaptation and, hopefully successful return to equilibrium for the individual; and 3.
Exhaustion Stage involves the collapse of adaptive mechanisms which results to physical and psychological discomforts.
Cummings and Cooper (1979) looked at stress as resulting from a misfit between an individual and his or her environment.
This is why one person seems to flourish in a certain setting while another suffers.
Stimuli that serve as challenges for positive outcomes for Mr. A might represent stressor to Mr. B.
This also points to the fact that the coping abilities of individuals vary, based on certain factors in similar situations.
So Mr. A may perform excellently under a certain job setting while Mr. B would not.
Exercise 135  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management What is job stress?
3.2 Causes of Job Stress a) Poor working condition: This includes the physical surroundings, inadequate operational equipments, among others.
Poor mental health was directly related to unpleasant working condition, the necessity to work fast and to expend a lot of physical effort and inconvenient work schedule being experienced by many security employees can lead to stress.
In the course of performing their official functions, security employees are sometimes exposed to environmental hazards like inhaling poisonous gases.
Arnold et al., (1995) maintained that the incessant routine nature of these activities combined with poor working condition such as being exposed too long to poisonous gases, excessive light rays, heat and noise can lead to feelings of being trapped, and dehumanized.
(b) Shift work: This is the scheduling system of work, which impinges excessive physical and psychological costs to the worker.
Security business is one that involves putting in place structures and personnel to work round the clock.
Thus, work shift is a regular phenomenon in the security sector.
Shift work has been found to affect blood temperature, metabolic rate, blood sugar levels, mental efficiency and work motivation, not to mention sleep patterns, family and social life, (Arnold et al., 1995) It should be noted that the difference between working at night is not just that it is dark outside.
The real difference is that there are real impacts on employee’s performance, health, safety and quality of life which if ignored could imperil employer and employee altogether.
(c) Long hours: Security job is a very difficult especially as it concerns work schedule.
Sometimes, as a security employee, your organization may send you on special operations.
These operations may take a lot of time.
This can usually take tolls on employees’ health.
Breslow and Buell (1960) in their research study made a link between long working hours and deaths due to coronary heart disease.
Apart from regular official assignments, several security employees still engage in other commercial activities.
This is because their salaries are not sufficient, making them to look for some other businesses to complement their earnings from security job.
This situation can lead to stress.
According to a research finding, no less than 25% of young coronary patients had been working at two jobs, and an additional 40 per cent worked for more than 60 hours a week (Russek and Zohman, 1958).
It has been generally acknowledged that working beyond 40 hours a week can lead to inefficiency.
(d) Risk and danger: Security employees that are constantly aware of potential danger are usually prepared to react immediately.
This makes them to be in a constant state of arousal, which can result in higher stress levels.
The resulting adrenalin rush for flight, respiration changes and muscle tension are potential threats to long term health of the workers.
Though, individuals who face physical dangers and are trained for such, experience less stress levels.
136  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management (e) New technology: The introduction of new technology into work setting has required all workers to adapt to new equipment, systems and ways of working.
(Arnold et.
al., 1995).
Cooper (1984) found in his survey that in U.K., a high percentage of managers said that keeping up with new technology was a great source of pressure at work.
Managers in developing countries felt pressure due to the increasing emphasis on new technology, the need to deal with an adequately trained workforce and the imposition of deadlines.
(f) Work overload: This occurs when an individual is faced with a set of obligations, which when taken as a whole require him to do more than he is able to in the time available.
French and Caplan (1972) described work load in terms of quantitative overload that refers to having too much work to do, as well as qualitative overload that refers to work that is too difficult for an individual.
(g) Work under load: This refers to repetitive routine, boring and under stimulating work and has been associated with ill health.
Cox (1980) described work under load as problem of not being sufficiently challenged by work.
(h) Role ambiguity: This exists when the job or role is poorly defined, there is uncertainty about job expectations and where supervisory staff and their subordinates have different expectations of an employee’s responsibilities.
It is a situation where, as Warshaw (1979) stated “the individual just does not know how he or she fits into the organization and is unsure of any reward no matter how well he or she may perform”.
Stress indicators related to role ambiguity are depressed moods, lowered self esteem, life and job dissatisfaction and low motivation to work.
(i) Role conflict: This is a situation when an individual is torn by conflicting role demands or by doing things he or she does not really want to do, or things, which he or she does not believe are part of the job.
Role conflict has undesirable outcome for both the employee and the employer.
The best documented outcomes are job dissatisfaction and job related tension which have been isolated among a variety of occupational groups (Beehr, Walsh and Taber, 1976; Arnold et.al., 1995).
Ivancevich and Matteson, (1980) found that role conflict can lead to cardiovascular ill health risks.
(j) Responsibility: Cooper and Robertson (1995) categorized responsibility into two: responsibility for people and for things like budget and equipment.
The former is found to be more stressful than the latter because of its nature, particularly as it relates to the need to make unpleasant interpersonal decisions; (k) Relationship with superiors: Buck (1972) focused on the relationship of workers to an immediate boss and found that when a boss was perceived as considerate’ there was friendship, mutual trust, respect and a certain warmth 137  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management between boss and subordinate.
Workers who said that their boss was low on consideration’ reported feeling of more job pressure.
(l) Relationship with subordinates: The manner of supervision of work of subordinates by superiors could be a source of stress to him or her.
Arnold et.al.
(195) suggested that the inability to delegate has been a common criticism leveled against some superiors.
Therefore today’s emphasis on the participation in the work places can be a cause of resentment, anxiety, and stress for the superiors involved.
(m) Relationship with colleagues or peers: The relationship among co-workers can provide valuable support or cause high stress levels to the workers.
French and Caplan, (1972) found that strong social support, (good inter-relationship) from co-workers eased job strain.
This support also mitigates the effects of job strain on cortisone levels, blood pressure, glucose levels, and the number of cigarettes smoked.
(n) Career Development: Various issues can pose as a potential stressor or stress factor throughout one’s work life.
An impending re-organization and its potential consequences such as job insecurity, fear of redundancy, obsolescence or retirement, and numerous performance appraisals can cause pressure and strain.
Also, lack of opportunity for growth, advancement, or promotion, rapid changes for which workers are unprepared for causes worry about future with the employing organization and what will happen next to employees.
Ivancevich and Matteson (1980) suggested that individuals suffering from ‘career stress’ show high job dissatisfaction, job mobility, burnout, poor work performance, less effective interpersonal relationships at work and so on.
(o) Organizational Structure and Climate: Workers are found to usually complain that they do not have a sense of belonging, lack adequate opportunities to participate, feel their behaviour is unduly restricted, lack control over their roles and are not included in office communications and consultations.
Coch and French (1948) reported that workers who were allowed more participation in decision making produced more and had higher job satisfaction.
Also, non participation at work significantly predicted strain and job related stress, relating to general poor health, escapist drinking, depression, low self esteem, absenteeism and plans to leave work.
Employees who are unable to exert control over their lives at work are more likely to experience more work stress and therefore more likely to have impaired health (Sutton and Kahn, 1984; Saunter et.al, Al., 1989).
Many studies had found that heavy job demand, and low control, or decreased decision latitude lead to job dissatisfaction, mental strain and cardiovascular diseases.
Exercise 138  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Discuss the factors that can trigger stress among security personnel.
3.3 Effective Management of Stress Among Security Personnel (a) Stress reduction: This aims at decreasing or minimizing the amount of stress a person experiences.
The first strategy is to avoid stressful events, if it is not possible, then thorough planning and preparation should be made against such.
Perpetual blockage to negative aspect of one’s job and selective perception of the positive aspect can help to reduce harmful effect of job stress.
Time management skills can also help workers to manage the multiple demands that are often placed upon them in both work and non- work settings.
This includes reducing the number and length of meetings, reducing interruption when working and limiting the length of telephone calls.
Avoidance of role over load by being assertive, to be able to say no to excessive obligations.
Decentralization of decision making by a manager is a good way to reduce stress, (Cohen and Wills, 1985).
Social support in terms of emotional, appraisal, informational and instrumental supports from supervisors, co-workers, family members and professional organizations can help in reducing stress especially in cohesive groups faced with demanding task; (b) Stress Resilience: This strategy helps employee to develop physical and psychological stamina against potentially harmful stressors, and the most widely recommended strategy include physical exercise, proper diet, and weight control, (Champoux,1996).
Physical exercises help in conditioning the body to be able to face potential stressors with confidence.
Stress resilience comes from the heart and the lung conditioning, decreased blood pressure, and decreased serum cholesterol.
A balanced diet low in sodium and saturated fats help keep blood pressure and serum cholesterols within acceptable bounds (Quick and Quick, 1984); (c) Stress Recuperation: This helps people rejuvenate physically and psychologically after exposure to severe distress.
This strategy includes vigorous exercises and positive thinking (Champoux, 1996).
Physical and mental relaxation is a natural process including decreased respiration, heart and metabolic rates.
The individual must be in a comfortable position in a quiet environment to elicit the response desired.
Meditation generally known as focused awareness in healthy ways leads also to profound relaxation and rejuvenation from distress.
The most recent method of managing stress is the use of Heart or Emotional Intelligence.
Heart lock – in his or her homeostasis deliberately and consciously so as to normalize the heartbeat and reduce distress.
Another method of heart intelligence is with the use of a technological tool called freeze–framer.
This tool helps individual to intervene by consciously disengaging from negative feelings 139  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management or emotional reactions caused by stress and try to reverse or convert to positive feelings and mood (Akinboye, 2002).
Other forms of stress management for the individual include rest, vacations, being with people that will make him or her happy.
Psychotherapy, medical therapy and Counseling are forms of stress recuperation; (d) Stress Management: This involves programs that can teach each security employees or other workers about the nature and sources of stress, the effects of stress on health, and personal skills to reduce stress.
The strategies may include time management and relaxation exercises.
Stress management training may rapidly reduce stress symptoms such as anxiety and sleep disturbances; it is also inexpensive and easy to apply.
This training programs can also focus on job– related training that improves a person’s ability to do a job; (e) Jobs should be designed to provide meaning, stimulation, and opportunities for workers to use their skills; (f) Worker’s roles and responsibilities should be clearly defined; (g) Workers must be given opportunities to participate in decisions and actions affecting their jobs; (h) Communication should be improved so as to reduce uncertainties about career development and future employment prospects; (i) Opportunities for social interaction among workers should be provided; (j) Work schedules that are compatible with demands and responsibilities outside the job should be established; (k) Organizations should also design their selection and placement procedures to improve person – job fit by identifying skill requirements and skill availability among employees (Champoux, 1996); and (l) Other elements of a healthy organization include, open communications, employee involvement, health enhancing work environments, community responsibility and institutional fairness.
Security organizations can help their employees resist the effects of stress by providing on–site space for physical exercises and on–site massage therapists.
It is quite unfortunate that most security organizations, after recruiting their personnel, don’t regularly engage them in physical exercise.
Apart from the relevance of such physical exercise in security job, physical exercise can also be therapeutic, an effective stress killer.
Exercise Explain ways through which stress can be managed among security employees.
140  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 4.0 CONCLUSION Due to the fact that job stress is estimated to cost billions of dollars or naira annually as assessed by absenteeism, diminished productivity, employee turnover, and consequently legal fees and insurance premiums, it is important for employers to implement programs that promote low stress atmosphere so as to enhance good job performance in the workplace.
As a general rule, actions to reduce job stress should be given top priority by the management of any security organization.
Considering the challenges of security occupation, it is essential that the workforce be taught how to manage these work–related stressors and even the non–work stressors in a manner that will enhance their efficiency, productivity, and overall happiness.
5, 0 SUMMARY In this unit, we began our discussion by looking at some of the available definitions of job or occupational stress.
Thereafter, we focused on various factors that can trigger stress among security personnel.
After identifying the causes of job stress, we explained various ways or methods through which we can manage stress.
I hope that you have found this unit stimulating and thought-provoking?
Thank you.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Define the term occupational stress; and ii.
Briefly discuss any for ways to manage job stress among security employees.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Afolabi, A. O. and Oviasuyi, P. O.
(2001), “Stress among Women Executives: Causes, Reactions, and Management”, The Journal of Advanced Studies in Educational Management.
Vol.
1.
Akinboye, J. O.
(2002), Success Without Stress.
A Paper presented at the Department of Guidance and Counselling, University of Ibadan on February 6th.
Beehr, T. A., (1976), “Perceived Situational Moderators of the relationship between subjective role ambiguity and role strain”, Journal of Applied Psychology.
61.
141  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Beehr, T. A., Walsh J. T. and Taber T. D. (1976), “Relationship of Stress to Individually and Organizationally valued status: Higher order needs as a moderator”, Journal of Applied Psychology.
61, 468-472.
Blau, G. (1981), An Empirical Investigation of Job Stress, Social Support, Service length and Job Strain: Organizational and Human Performance”, A Journal of fundamental Research and Theory in Applied Psychology.
27, 279-302.
Caplan, R. D. C. (1983), “Person–Environment Fit; Past, Present and Future, in Cooper G. L.
(ed.
), Stress Research, John Wiley and Sons.
Caplan, R. D. and Jones, K. W. (1975), “Effect of work load, role ambiguity and Type A Personality in anxiety, depression, and heart rate”, Journal of Applied Psychology 60.
Champoux, J. E. (1996), Organizational Behaviour.
Integrating Individuals, Groups and Processes, New York: West Publishing Company.
Cohen, S. and Wills T. A.
(1985), “Stress, Social Support and the Buffering Hypothesis”, Psychological Bulletin.
98.
French, J. R. P. and Caplan, R. D. (1972), Organizational Stress and Individual Strain: The Failure of Success.
New York.
Indik, A. P., Seashere O. T. et.
al.
(1964), “Occupational Stress, its Causes and Consequences for Job Performance”, Journal of Applied Psychology.
71.
Jackson, S. E. (1983), “Participation in Decision making as a Strategy for reducing Job Related Strain”, Journal of Applied Psychology, 68.
National Institute of Occupational Stress and Health, (2001), Job Stress, See .cdc.go v/niosh/jobstress.ht ml .
Seyle, H. (1956), The Stress of Life, New York: Mc Graw Hill.
Sauter, S. L., Hurrell J.
Jnr., and Cooper, C. L.
(eds.)
(1989), Job Control and Worker’s Health, New York: Wiley.
Sauter, S. L., Murphy L. R., and Hurrell J.
Jnr., (1990), “Prevention of Work related Psychological Disorders”, American Psychologist, 45 (10).
Scheier, M. F. (1986), “Coping with Stress: Divergent Strategies of Optimists and Pessimists”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51 (6).
142  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 4 TRAUMA MANAGEMENT IN SECURITY CAREER: REBT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 3.1 Trauma and Security Personnel 3.2 Causes of Trauma 3.3 Emotional Effects of Trauma 3.4 Management of Trauma in Security Career: REBT 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Security profession attracts a lot of hazards.
May be, that is the reason why several families don’t usually support any members of their households to take security appointment especially the police.
Sometimes, in an attempt by one to carry out his/her functions efficiently, as a security officer, he/she may be at 143  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management greater risk.
This is resulting from the character of our society where one can be persecuted for no just cause but because the person is doing his/her job well.
The mischief makers within the organization may look (or pray) for the fall of such diligent officer.
The criminals in the society who are bedeviled or prevented by such diligent security officer(s) to continue their unlawful acts will also devise methods to get back at or punish such good officer(s).
Therefore, we will not be wrong to say that experience of trauma can come from within and outside one’s security organization.
Considering the challenges being faced in security career, and the susceptibility of security personnel to traumatic experience, you may agree with me that our study on Principles of Security Practice and Management cannot be complete without looking on at least one of the ways we can manage trauma in security sector.
In performing this task, the writer will adapt one of his previous works on the subject.
Thank you as you pay great attention.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Describe the relationship between trauma and security personnel; List various causes of trauma; Explain emotional effects of trauma; and Discuss the management of trauma in security career with the application REBT.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Trauma and Security Personnel The writer could remember the time he was seeking for employment in Nigeria Police as Cadet Assistant Superintendent of Police, and a great number of his family members as well as friends were against his decision to seek for appointment in the police.
Their fear was not basically about the hazards in security occupation per se but reputation problem that bedevils police as a secur ity institution in Nigeria Nevertheless, the reputation crisis being suffered by Nigeria Police due to the activities of bad eggs in that (important) institution has actually made police job much more hazardous.
A quite number of police personnel, in the course of protecting people’s lives and property, have either been injured or killed by criminals.
144  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Sadly, the society often feels no sympathy for the affected officers and men or their families.
The reason may be the evils, which society has also suffered in the hands of Police, especially during the dark days of military regimes when it (the police) was used to do all sorts of dirty job for the military tyrants.
The activities of the bad eggs in the police have also worsened the matter.
A situation like the foregoing can lead to trauma among security personnel working in an institution that experience public resentment like Nigeria Police.
Thus, traumatic experience usually accentuates psychological disorder and shocks with attendant mental problems or irrational feelings among the victims.
Security personnel encounter varying degrees of traumatic disorder after the experience some of the hazards that plague the security career.
The basic functions of security personnel may include protection of life and property of the client(s), combating acts and agents of criminality, respond rapidly to emergency situation(s), among others.
Responding to human and non-human security threats by security personnel, they face a quite a number of risks including death.
However, those of them that are not lucky to survive the hazards test (those harmed) may begin to experience a number of traumatic symptoms.
And the intensity and duration of the disorder also determine the level of their traumatic attitude.
Stress reactions will definitely surface ranging from general feelings of confusion and fear to more specific symptoms of sadness, guilt, anger, depression, anxiety and social withdrawal.
In a situation where the traumatic experience becomes very severe, symptoms can group together to form a condition known as Acute Stress Disorder (ASD).
If such symptoms are still being experienced within the first four weeks, then there is Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) These conditions require professional assistance and treatment.
Several factors can lead to trauma in security occupation.
The death of a beloved one(s) can lead to trauma especially if the death of such person(s) has a link with the job of the security officer.
A good example was the case of a police officer working in the Special Anti-Robbery Squad in one of the Area Commands in Lagos.
The man was very brave and he had led his team to make a number of arrests of armed robbery suspects in the state.
The officer’s diligence and commitment to his duties later made him the most wanted man on the list(s) of several criminal gangs within and outside his area of operation.
Several attempts were made to get him assassinated but all failed.
The man never allowed threats to his life by some hoodlums deter him from doing his job.
When it was clear to the hoodlums that the officer was a hard nut very difficult to crack, the attention of some of the hoodlums shifted towards his family.
Sadly, the wife and children of the poor officer were massacred by the criminals.
There is no 145  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management doubt that a situation like this can lead one to a great trauma.
What can be more traumatic than losing one’s entire family overnight just because one is doing his/her job.
Economic and socio-political factors can also play a great role in manufacturing or producing stress and traumatic disorder among security personnel.
It is quite unfortunate, owing to the risks that underlie security profession, security personnel both in public and private sectors are extremely underpaid compared to their counterparts in developed countries.
Getting far less than the task one is performing as a security employee in economic terms, can create a sense of frustration that may quite lead to trauma.
The incidence of set-up is not alien to security profession.
Setting-up a person can come in different ways including creating artificial secur ity loopholes, hiring of (external) individual(s) or group(s) of individuals to lie or give false witness against a person, being trapped with money, among others.
Set-up may come from one’s subordinates, colleagues, superiors in the same security organization or external forces.
the external forces may include friend(s), clients, mischief makers where one is posted to work, former lovers who feel jilted, etc.
If a person is set-up, and he/she is being told to face a disciplinary panel, one thing that is sure is that the person will feel sad about the allegation leveled against him/her.
The possibility that such person will be let-off the hook is a subject of chance.
He/she may be lucky to be exonerated, and it is also possible that sentence of guilt may be passed on him/ her.
In security sector and elsewhere, in the course of trial or investigation of such person alleged of wrongdoing may also be incarcerated.
A situation like this can lead the victim of set-up to trauma.
That is why every security employee must be vigilante.
There are several other causes of trauma, which we shall be highlighting in the next segment of this unit.
Exercise Describe traumatic disorder in security profession.
3.2 Causes of Trauma War/torture Animal Bites and attacks Assaults Earthquakes Falls Fire 146  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Motor vehicle accidents Storms or floods Suicide attempt Train/bus/plane accidents Unemployment Barrenness Loss of job Unfavourable political atmosphere Socio-economic marginalization Divorce and Marital Crisis Death of a loved one(s) Injustice Sexual abuse Examination failure Business failure Slavery Job stress and job dissatisfaction Shyness Endemic poverty Exercise List any ten causes of trauma.
3.3 Emotional Effects of Trauma Shock - Victim is likely to be doubtful of the reality of the activating event like rape, injury etc that propelled the traumatic experience.
- Victim will feel bewildered and bemused.
- Victim may suffer less sensation coupled with a sense of emptiness.
Fear - Victim feels that such crime can still be perpetrated against him/her again - 147  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management - Victim suffers persistent fear.
- Victim may seem to lose control.
- Victim may go mentally imbalanced, if adequate measures are not taken.
- When the situation is not checked, the victim may become mentally ill. Anger - Victim shows hatred towards the offender.
- Victim is displeased with the injustice and harm perpetrated against him/her.
- Victim demonstrates huge frustration that generates further resentment.
Sadness - Victim feels dejected as he/she is full of pains agonies about the crime or offence.
- Victim losses faith in the immediate environment where the harm was perpetuated.
- Victim always feel grievous about the past crimes and losses.
- Crying will definitely rent the air where trauma-induced harm or crime is carried-out.
Shame - Victim undergoes some emotional stress, feeling depressed and appears powerless.
- Victim shows a strange behaviour and feels alienated and uncomfortable.
- Victim seems to be an object of irrational beliefs and attitudes.
Need - Victim needs support, assistance and couselling as well as encouragement.
- Victim always desires for public appreciation of their traumatic experience and acknowledgment of the crime by the offender.
148  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management - Victim hates loneliness and such loneliness will further aggravate their conditions.
Guilt - Patient may have a feeling of being responsible for the trauma by refusing to do the right things at the right time, which may be the factor responsible for the ills that he/she and/or other persons suffer.
An example of this is a trigger happy security employee who deliberately or accidentally killed an innocent civilian.
The security team rather telling the truth can decide to cover-up to save their erring colleague from punishment.
It is possible that such erring security employee or any other member(s) of his team that had the knowledge of the ugly incident will start having bad dreams and nightmares about the dead.
Exercise Explain the emotional effects of trauma.
3.4 Management of Trauma in Security Career: REBT Traumatic events like rape, murder, natural disaster, war-making and participation in armed hostility, losing beloved one(s), false accusations etc are capable of having some adverse effects on person(s).
In ensuring the wellbeing of security personnel, it is important to put in place viable framework through which any experience of trauma by any of them can be managed.
It is worth-knowing that trauma management does not only involve counseling intervention but also includes medical suppo rt.
But in this study we shall be focusing on a particular counseling method, which is considered very effective for the management of trauma.
The Counselling method is known as Rational Emotive Behaviour Therapy.
Rational Emotive Behaviour Therapy (REBT) Rational Emotive Behaviour Therapy is a humanistic perspective of psychotherapy, which sees man as being responsible for any emotional or psychological problem that disturbs him.
It argues that not the event itself that propels the emotional turbulence being experienced by man but his/her thinking imperatives or thought- choice that actually triggers such traumatic experience.
This psychotherapy was developed by Albert Ellis who was born into a Jewish family in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in 1913.
His (Ellis’) development of REBT was influenced by Stoic mythology.
In Ancient Greece, the Stoics were of the belief that our actions are not basically the product of the event we faced or passed through but our interpretation or perception of what we experienced.
149  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management The postulator of this radical psychotherapeutic approach recounted his experience as a university undergraduate.
He was a very shy person and always afraid of approaching women.
He eventually addressed that problem, by (uncomfortably) mandating himself to approach women.
He recounted how he approached and talked with over hundred unfamiliar ladies at the Bronx Botanical Garden, and out of them, he only succeeded to have a lady agreeing on a date with him, but the lady never showed up.
REBT Assumptions on the Nature of Man Rational Emotive Behaviour Therapy assumes that human being has capacities for both rational or straight thinking and irrational or tricky thinking.
Human being is naturally endowed also with self preservation, happiness, thinking and verbalizing, loving, sharing, growth and self actualization.
The human being in his/her freedom of will also possesses the powers to engage himself/herself in negative actions-self destruction, avoidance of thought, procrastination, self- blame and avoidance of fulfilling growth imperatives.
So, let us now state the basic assumptions of REBT one by one, to stimulate our better understanding of the subject matter.
(a) Man causes himself/herself to undergo any traumatic experience he/she may be through, rather than influence from external source (s); (b) Man possesses the biological and cultural capabilities that allow him/her to choose his/her course of actions and thought-direction (choice of doing right or wrong); (c) Man is capable of creating unnecessary beliefs that can subject him/her to emotional disturbance; (d) One unique quality of man is that he/she is capable of determining the course of his/her cognitive, emotional and behavioural processes anytime, anywhere and in whatever circumstances.
Man can decide to be less anxious or disturbed about events around him/her, if he/she has a strong desire to do so; (e) Man is also self-talking, self-evaluating and self-sustaining.
They often react to their desires- they sometimes behave funny; and (f) Man, by nature always aspires for success (growth) and actualization of his/her dreams.
Again, according to REBT, man may adopt negative strategies in fulfilling his/her ambitions (aspiration(s) while putting into play his/her crooked artistry to outsmart any fellow man, if he/she perceives any stumbling block in (the) realization of his/her ambition or in meeting his needs.
REBT is a very good 150  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management healing and anger management technique.
REBT affirms that the feelings and thought should be main points of focus by any therapist.
See.
Figure 2.1.
FIG.
2.1 Rational Emotive Behaviour Therapy Intervention A B C Counselling Intervention D F Emotional Change Healing E A – Activating Event.
B -- Belief / Irrational thoughts.
C - Consequences / Emotional disturbances.
D - Disputing (detecting, debating and discriminating) E - Effective Philosophy.
F - A new set of feelings.
The activating event can be unemployment, loss of job, divorce, false allegation, poor working condition(s), sexual assault, electric shock, dejection, conflict, non- promotion, demotion, exam failure, loss of beloved one(s) and/or colleagues, among others.
This activating event has great impact on the affected person or victim of such circumstance(s).
The rational or irrational ideas or thought(s) of the affected person determines the emotional consequences which the affected person will face.
For instance, the security personnel who get injured in the course of engaging some criminals in shoot-outs, and the injuries sustained lead them to permanent disability.
Such security employees will find it difficult to live a happy life again.
There is the likelihood that such people will experience more traumas in societies like Nigeria where security employers (i.e.
government) give less attention to the wellbeing of their staff.
REBT makes us to understand that it is not the event itself that causes emotional disturbances or trauma but rather, it is our irrational thought.
Therapist is however expected to adopt some scientific strategies to assist the client to overcome the 151  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management challenges faced by the client resulting from his/her irrational beliefs.
Thus, the therapist will intend to achieve through: (a) detecting: Here, the client is guided on how to detect his/her irrational beliefs; (b) debating: After the therapist’s guidance and support for the client to detect his/her irrational beliefs, the client should be allowed to debate his/her dysfunctional beliefs by subjecting them to logical and empirical inquiry and through this he/she (client) can free himself/herself from the crutches of irrational thoughts and beliefs ; and (c) discriminating: Here, the client must have learnt how to discriminate irrational beliefs as he/she separates irrational beliefs from the rational ones.
After the disputing process (es), the client is expected to arrive at E where he/she appropriates an effective and rational philosophy, which denounces irrational beliefs.
Through this, the client will arrive at F where he/she develops a new set of feelings which produce healing, happiness, love, joy and self–satisfaction.
Therapeutic Strategies The Rational Emotive Behaviour Therapists adopt a variety of cognitive, affective and behavioural techniques, which conform to the needs of individual client.
These REBT strategies can be applied to various common clinical problems like depression, anger, psychological stress, anxiety, among others.
We are going to discuss some of these REBT strategies: (a) Disputing The therapist assists the clients stem down the negative influence of their thoughts, making them to know that their emotional problems are not hinged on the activating events but rather on their irrational belief and dysfunctional thoughts.
(b) Language Orientation Rational Emotive Behaviour therapist helps the client to do away with foul language, knowing fully well that language affects thinking as thinking affects language.
Client learns the grand rules of language orientation – a shift from absolutistic preferences to non-absolutistic imperatives.
(c) Humour Client is led by the therapist on the need to deviate from taking things too seriously.
Here, humour is employed as a counter–trauma measure, which helps the client in the development of new philosophy of life and discourages any tendency that enhances over-flogging of issues, which may lead to emotional 152  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management disturbances.
The therapist should bring the traumatized person and other victims of trauma together, and encourage them to sing humorously and trivialize their ugly experience(s ).Through humour victims of trauma become less serious, their experience will become less painful, and their anxiety and depression will become less visible.
This approach is quite viable in giving succor and more fulfilled life to any security employee experiencing trauma due to its healing quality.
(d) Rational Emotive Imagery This involves an intense mental exercise aimed at creating new emotional patterns.
Therapist assists a client to imagine how he/she will think, feel and behave if he/she finds himself/herself, in a particular circumstance.
Through this process, client is taught and equipped on how to face challenges he/she may encounter resulting from a traumatic experience.
Thus, this process will train clients how to easily switch from irrational perceptions to rational beliefs as an antidote to trauma.
(e) Role Playing Here, the therapist performs an emotional and behavioural operation on the client by interrupting the emotion session to find out if the client is responding to the mental exercise to always work against any irrational thoughts and traumatic feelings.
(f) Shame – Attacking Therapy Through professional support of the therapist, clients develop the psychological energies and zeal to combat shame in their thinking, feelings and behaviour.
Shame makes one who is undergoing a traumatic experience to feel more depressed, more emotionally disturbed as irrational thought will likely be more prominent in his/her actions, which may even lead to death.
The art of combating shame is very essential in the management of trauma and healing of victim.
Exercise Explain the importance of REBT in the management of trauma.
4.0 CONCLUSION Trauma is a regular feature in security and non-security sectors.
Certain human experience can also cause emotional problems, which can lead to trauma.
The incidence of traumatic disorder is usually on the increase in economically tensed societies like Africa where poverty has become the second nature of man.
Necessary peacebuilding and crime prevention measures must be put in place to reduce the incidence of trauma among the security personnel and other people.
The measures may include poverty alleviation or elimination programmes, improved standard of living, skill development training, responsive leadership strategy, community development, infrastructural development, creation of incentives for direct foreign investment among others.
153  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have described relationship between trauma and security occupation drawing our case studies from Nigeria We also highlighted several causes of trauma, even beyond that pertaining to security sector.
We went further to explain the emotional effects of trauma.
The last area of discourse was the management of trauma in persons working in security sector using REBT.
I hope you have found this unit interesting and interactive?
Thank you for your attention.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is trauma?
ii.
What is Rational Emotive Behaviour Therapy?
iii.
List the therapeutic strategies to the management of trauma.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ellis, Albert (1975), A Guide to Rational Living, Wilshire Book Company.
Ellis, Albert et al (2002a), Case Studies In Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy With Children and Adolescents, NJ: Merrill/Prentice Hall Ellis, Albert (2002b), Overcoming Resistance: A Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy Integrated Approach, (2nd edition).
New York: Springer Publishing, Ellis, Albert (2004), T.he Road to Tolerance: The Philosophy of Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy, Prometheus Books.
.health.vic.gov.au/trauma/review99/1c1.htm .traumamanagement.org/ Unit 5 PUBLIC RELATIONS MANAGEMENT IN SECURITY SECTOR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Defining Public Relations 3.2 Relationship between Security Sector and Public Relations 154  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 3.3 Approaches to Public Relations Management in Security Sector 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The growing attention being given to public relations in recent time in the security sector can be said to be a response to the reshaping of the security community.
The widening space created by traditional security system posed several challenges and incapacitations to major players in this important sector.
One of the problems was the deepening crisis that existed between the security community and the public.
Security community in this context refers to public security institutions.
The lackadaisical and lukewarm attitude of the security community towards cross- cultural exchange of expressions and opinions with the public was instrumental to the communication gap that exists between the two.
The “colonial epoch” fatality which characterized the setting up of the public security sector by colonizers has imbued a sub-culture of distrust and antagonistic polarity between the (public) security community and the public.
The reason for this resentment is not far fetched.
The colonizers created the public security community to their interests only, and security personnel many of whom were local people, were used to suppress the local public.
The culture of security management was basically to protect the interests of the colonial authorities, which has since become the grand norm of security sector in post- colonial Africa.
The security continued to do the dirty job, they were commissioned to do under the colonizers, for their new masters in post-colonial Africa.
The antecedents of the security sector have created enmity between her and the public.
Since the end of the cold war, the security sector in developing countries having been facing enormous challenges due to the dimension crime has taken.
The traditional coercion and deterrence techniques have failed to contain the growing crime rate, insurgency, terrorism among other forms of violence being perpetuated by individuals or group(s).
In an attempt(s) to address security threats that ravage most countries in the world, each country now appreciates the need to explore non-traditional measures in the management of its internal security.
One of such measures is public relations management, which forms the basis of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 155  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define public relation; Explain the relationship between security sector and public relations; Discuss various approaches to public relations management in security sector.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Defining Public Relations Public relations has been an age long concept.
In traditional African societies, the monarchs usually, according to the customs of the land(s), constituted council of chiefs.
The chiefs were assigned different functions but it was incumbent upon all of them to project the good name of their communities as well as launder the image of the monarchs.
They performed this utmost task through the use of several channels.
However, one of the ways was through the open-door policy they advanced.
Such attitude made the public (or villagers) form good impression about the (traditional) leadership as not only being accessible but also accommodating.
Being accommodating in this context does not mean that the leadership would always consider the views of their subjects but allowing them to freely express their (followers) minds sometimes creates healing.
In modern time, the term public relations was made popular by Thomas Jefferson, a former U.S. President when he was addressing the congress in 1807.
But his meaning of public relations centered more on policy than as a communication process (see Stuart, 2007).
Edward Bernays was one of the early scholars in the field of public relations, and according to him, public relations can be described as: --------a management function which tabulates, defines the policies, procedures and interest of an organization followed by executing a program of action to earn public understanding and acceptance (quoted on www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_relations).
Public relations can also be defined as: …..a set of management, supervisory, and technical functions that foster an organization’s ability to strategically listen to, appreciate, and respond to those persons whose mutually beneficial relationships with the organization are necessary if it is to achieve its missions and values (Health, quoted on .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_relations).
3.2 Relationship Between Security Sector and Public Relations 156  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management The purpose of security is to safeguard the state or client’s safety against any internal and external threats.
The metamorphosis of modern security community cannot be complete, if the relationship between her and the public remains hostile.
The history of police and the military in Africa has not been pleasant.
Law enforcement agents are often seen in several quarters as anti-people due to their subservient posture, always allowing themselves to be used by the ruling elites to suppress the public they are meant to protect.
The situation has remained the same from the colonial era till the present.
Security agencies in developing countries have continued the dirty job for the ruling class to continue to perpetuate themselves in office.
In the case of Zimbabwe, it’s unethical and barbaric the way the police and the military deal with the opposition groups and their leaders.
The way they conduct themselves do not only show that they are anti-people but also partisan.
The repressive attitude of the law enforcement agents towards the public is absurd and contradictory (harming people you are paid by the state to protect).
The foregoing attribute of law enforcement agencies in Africa and elsewhere has created a structural hatred between the security community and public.
The identity crisis that also dominates their relationship has also worsened the matter.
The “We” and “they” dichotomy, element of the identity crisis, also explains why there is huge communication gap between the two.
Even, within the security sector in Nigeria, there is the same dichotomy problem between the military and police, which has led to cases of blood letting and differentiation where the former sees the latter as civilian.
To add salt on injury, the police appears to be the most despised, of all the law enforcement agencies, by the public in Nigeria.
Every security agency has some overall goals that it wants to attain.
To meet these goals, the security agency will need to create a friendly impression in the minds of the people or clients.
This is the reason why various corporate organizations have a special unit for public relations.
Public relations will not only assist the security sector to build a friendly profile but will also enable her to meet its overall (organizational) goals.
If the basis of security sector is to provide safety and security of lives and property, it therefore needs the support of the public in accomplishing this aim.
A good example is a society where the security sector is criminalized, and to combat crime effectively, there must be adequate provision of (vital) information to the security community.
Nevertheless, the larger amount of information needed for securitization comes from the public.
This is because criminals are not spirits, and the public can identify them.
The security sector will definitely need the support of the public particularly at it relates to provision of useful information considering the fact that the security sector cannot know the hideouts of all criminals but the public knows.
157  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Here, you may agree with me that it’s quite imperative for the security sector to ensure a harmonious communication relation between her and the public.
It is not surprising that in most places where the guerilla insurgents usually record success, there is severed relation between the government and the people.
In society where public perception about the security sector is unfriendly, there is the tendency that the public will cooperate with elements who are working toward subverting the public order rather giving support to the security sector, which they consider working (basically) for the interest of the rulers.
Therefore, it is essential that security organizations, both public and private to setup machineries, which can help them to project a good image for their organizations as well as creating cordial impression in the minds of the public about their organizations.
Apart from security organization, any other organization, be it bank, Non Governmental Organization (NGO), media outfit etc, there is need to put in place effective public relations plan ‘to communicate a message that coincides with organizational goals and seeks to benefit mutual interests whenever possible’ (see .enwikipedia.org/wiki/pu blic relations).
Any security organization that has bad reputation among the people should make adequate efforts to change such impression, which portrays the organization as a bad one.
Public relations activity should be brought into play to change the mindset of the people about such security organization, showing the public that there is a good side of the organization, which the public is yet to know.
Through strategic public relations management, people will be made gradually to change their enemy posture towards the (security) organization to a positive one that engenders mutual confidence and cooperation between the security organization and the public.
Moreover, the battered and negative image of the police in Nigeria has begun improving for the better due to various public relations activities and programme that the institution has embarked upon.
The phrase “police is your friend”, which has been an anthem in Nigeria, is basically designed by the police authorities to change public attitude towards the organization and build a friendly reputation for the institution.
The importance of public relations is so enormous in the relationship between the security sector and the public.
This (same) position is shared by a number of scholars and practitioners in the security sector.
I have no doubt in the correctness of the intellectual submission made by Okere (1991:44), stressing that: Fortunately, the Nigeria police force has since recognized the need and at present a formidable public relations department exists in the force.
In this department, officers work within a frame work that enables each one of 158  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management them to continually strive to foster a cordial relationship between the force and the public.
The programmes adopted are not usually an ad hoc propaganda or campaign but it is actually a planned operational procedure aimed at specific results.
It is not only Nigeria police that is aware of the strategic importance of public relations in meeting their organizational goals.
Various public security agencies have also embarked on aggressive public relations activities.
The aim is basically to manage the relationship that exists between them and the public, such that public attitudes towards them will not only be friendly but also beneficial to the organization.
By 1953, the Nigeria police moved beyond its traditional public relations system in which the PR activities could be carried out by any officer(s).
It was that year, the office of the Public Relations officer was established, which marked the turning point in public relations management in Nigeria police.
Though, at the initial stage, the basic duty of the PRO was to oversee the welfare of the personnel in the force.
Later, the tasks to be performed by the PRO increased, and included planning and managing the relations between the force and public particularly as it concerned communication.
The office of the Police PRO was not replicated in various regions of the federation until 1964 when the Inspector-General of Police, Mr. Louis Edet ordered the establishment of the position of public relations officer in the capital of each of the regions (Enugu, Ibadan, Benin and Kaduna) while the one in Lagos had already been in existence.
Due to the new political development at that time, regions were replaced with states under the military government led by General Yakubu Gowon.
That development led to increase in the number of Police Public Relations officers at the state level.
The situation has remained the same up till now.
The office of the public Relations Officer exists in each of the 36 states of the federation and the FCT (Abuja).
These officers have their offices at various state commands while the Chief PRO of the force is in the Nigeria Police Headquarters in the FCT Abuja.
The police PRO in the state (command) level and the force PRO at the Police Headquarters must be officer not below the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police, and an Assistant Police Commissioner respectively.
Nonetheless, the art of public relations in recent time has been extended beyond its traditional approaches through which communication was built for mutual benefits of the security organization(s) and the public.
The modern communication technologies and sophisticated information mechanisms have really affected public relations practice in security sector and elsewhere.
The introduction of internet, satellite communication, web casts, among others has actually widened the scope of public relations.
Rather than traditional library 159  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management search approach, people now search for information about any security organization electronically especially through the use of internet.
Many newspapers have gone electronic, which affords one an opportunity to read the dailies through the internet rather than looking for newspapers vendor(s).
By and large, public relations can play a great role in the management of security, and for that singular reason, many security organizations have taken PR activities so seriously.
Again, security organizations are now beginning to appreciate the importance of creating good image and friendly relationship with the public.
In managing (effectively) their public relations, a number of approaches are considered.
It is these approaches that we shall be focusing on, in the subsequent segment of this unit.
Exercise How do you describe the relationship between security sector and public relations in the management of security?
3.3 Approaches to Public Relations Management in Security Sector There are several approaches adopted by security sector to do its public relations task.
In spite of the “closed system” philosophy being operated in security sector, various security organizations still realize the need to ensure public awareness about their activities, and also to seek collaborative partnership with the public for mutual benefits.
Public relations activity usually begins with effective planning.
That is the reason why it is necessary to have qualified people as public relations officers.
But how do we identify people who are qualified?
Should we appoint people into PR position based on their academic qualifications in public relations and related field like Journalism and Communication Arts?
Or should we basically consider the experience of the prospective candidates in public relations rather than their academic qualifications?
These questions and more will come to our minds when we discuss the issue of appointing people into public relations positions in any security organization.
Most times, during the recruitment exercise, none of the public security organizations actually shortlists any particular candidates for public relations.
May be, the idea is that any officer can perform the task of public relations.
Knowing that there is a lacuna to be filled in the management of public relations, I presume, is responsible for the use of external public relations experts by law enforcement agencies in Nigeria, to help in laundering their image.
Nevertheless, security sector does not rely on a single PR approach but considers a quite number of approaches in the management of PR activity.
These approaches include: (a) Audience Targeting: The main targeted audience of the security sector is the 160  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management public.
It will be mischievous to say that all the people in a given society belong to the same public.
This is because every society is stratified, and people don’t belong to the same class.
Therefore, in targeting the audience, there is need to identify which of the publics we design a particular PR activity for.
Within the context of opinion making, there are three basic forms of public: the decision making (e.g.
party chieftains, etc), attentive (e.g.
human rights activists, security consultants, academics etc), and the mass public (i.e.
those who are phlegmatic or lukewarm or non-active in opinion making process.
Apart from the general public relations designed for the generality of people in the society, security organizations should also endeavour to segmentalize the audience in such a way that it can provide opportunity in attaining the organizational goals.
By doing this, you will also be able to tailor each message in such a way that it will be appealing to each audience target.
Again, it will be ridiculous for police authorities to place an advert in a newspaper, advising the people against patronizing illegal (unregistered) car dealers in the purchase of their luxury vehicles.
They may claim that it is such patronage that is responsible for the growing incidence of car-snatching in the country.
The word ‘people’ is used here to mislead the people because it is only ‘rich people’ that can patronize the so-called unregistered car dealers.
‘Poor people’ don’t buy luxury cars.
Therefore, it is expected that security organization should identify which of the publics a particular message is designed for, so that the PR activity will be able to achieve the goals, it was created to actualize; (b) The Use of Lobby Groups: Using lobby groups is another approach of public relations, which enables the security sector to influence the opinions of the people.
Lobby groups as interest groups don’t only help to influence the opinion of the public but also persuade the government in decision making.
Several Non Governmental Organizations have really helped to launder the image of the Nigeria police in recent time by sensitizing the public on the need to cooperate with the force; © Spin: This is an approach which involves presentation of information in a manipulative manner.
Sometimes, you will hear a series of allegations being leveled against the Nigeria Police.
If you ask the Police PRO in any of the states commands or at the Headquarters about the issue of collection of N20 on the roads by policemen, the response of this officer (PPRO) will be framed in a way that such allegation will lose its factual merit.
The police PRO will also go further to (deceptively) inform the public that most of the people collecting N20 on the roads are not likely to be members of the Nigerian Police.
The point is that the police authorities are aware that some bad eggs in the police are really perpetuating the shameful act of collecting N20 but in building a good reputation, the authorities may decide to deny the allegation.
This is the act of spinning.
161  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Spin also includes the act of cherry picking, which means a method of selecting, facts and quotes to buttress one’s argument.
This assists in drawing the attention of the people away from issues or events that are considered capable of putting the name or image of the security organization in disrepute.
Whenever the public accuse the police of non-performance, the next day, you will see police patrolling some suspects in the media, most of whom usually claim innocence of the allegations leveled against them by the police.
Though, in most cases the action of the police is genuine, because periodic patrol of suspects in its nets before the public is a regular routine in Nigeria Police.
Occasionally, the police use diversionary techniques to draw the attention of the public from the news that can damage the reputation of the institution.
This act is also exemplified in the Nigerian Army, if the force is alleged of sending some of its men to disrupt peace in a neighbourhood, what you will hear the authorities (of the Army) say is that those people that invaded the place in question are “unknown soldiers”.
Knowing the damaging effects that actions taken by some members of a security organization on the reputation and the image of the organization, spin is usually adopted by denying the allegation(s), not basically to allow the culprits go unpunished but to protect the name of the organization.
Later, there may be in- house investigation into the matter as it is done in the police and elsewhere to punish the culprits.
But authorities of the security organization will first adopt the principle of “non-denial denial” to avoid negative public perception about their organization(s); (d) Talk show Circuit: Security sector especially the police in recent time make use of several talk shows to project the good image of their organization, sensitize the public on security and safety, getting response from the public in the form of questions, suggestions, commendation etc.
This approach also enables the security sector to get (useful) information from the public; (e) Direct Communication: Security organizations also make use of direct communication with the public.
They perform this task through several means like the distribution of newsletters, addressing assembly of people, the use of public address system, among others; (f) Community Development Activities: Security organization(s) can also conduct public relations by carrying out a number of activities aimed at development of community.
One of the ways through this task is performed is cleanness exercise.
Here, you find some of the personnel of a security organization, carrying out some environment sanitation exercise, including sweeping the streets, removing the dirt in the drainage etc.
Such exercise helps to sensitize the public on the need to keep their environment clean and, more importantly, to build a good public relation with the public.
162  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management (g) The Books: Security organization can carry-out laudable public relations activity through writing of books, which explain its operations, its mission and goals.
The books may also show how the security organization aims to accomplish her overall goals for the mutual benefits of the public and her.
If the public is aware that it is also going to benefit from the success of any security organization, it will definitely arouse her interest in such organization; (h) Informal Communications Channels: The use of informal channels or means of communication is very important in societies like Nigeria.
People rely more on informal channels to gather information about events that happen around them.
The problems of high rate of illiteracy, epileptic power supply, high cost of newspapers etc are responsible for the popular patronage of informal channels of communication.
Security organization(s) can also disperse its “foot soldiers” all over the place to undertake some public relations task(s).
But these security personnel must blend with the civilians and hide their identity for effective communication flow; (i) The use of seminars, publicity events, mass media, personnel approaches, among others can be very useful in the management of public relations by any security organization.
Exercise Discuss approaches to public relations.
4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of public relations is so germane to the success of any security organization.
This is because the ability of security organizations depends largely on how they are enable to build mutual understanding, (effective) and communication relation between her and the public.
Through the public, security organizations get vital information, which can help them to meet their organizational goals.
Therefore, there is need for security organizations to take public relations activities seriously.
In fulfilling public relations task(s), a number of approaches can be considered.
A single approach cannot be sufficient, and it is pertinent to adopt a variety of approaches.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to demonstrate the great roles that public relations plays in security management.
First, to provide ourselves with conceptual energy, we defined the term public relation, knowing that by doing so, other areas of discourse could have meaning to us.
We also explained the relationship between security sector and public relations.
Thereafter, we drew our attention on various 163  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management approaches that can be adopted by security sector in the conduct and management of its public relation.
Thank you very much for your attention.
6.0 TUTORED MARRIED ASSIGNMENT (i) What is public relations?
(ii) Discuss any four approaches to public relations 7.0 REFERENCES AN FURTHER READING Center, Allen H. and Jackson, Patrick (1995), Public Relations Practices, 5th Edition, Upper Saddle, N.J: Prentice Hall.
Cutlip, Scott M., Allen H. Center & Glen M. Broom (1994), Effective Public Relations, 7th Edition, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc. A Simon and Schuster Company.
Ewen, Stuart (1996), PR!
A Social History of Spin, New York: BasicBooks.
Levy, Stuart (2007), Public Relations and Integrated Communications, Lotus Press Okere, Ethelbert (1991), Nigeria: Agenda for A Modern Police Force, Lagos: New Concept Media Limited.
Seib, Patrick and Fitzpatrick, Kathy (1995), Public Relations Ethics, Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace and Company.
Wilcox, D.L., Ault, P.H., Agee, W.K., & Cameron, G. (2002), Public Relations Strategies and Tactics, 7th Edition, Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_relations.
Retrieved on April 20, 2008.
164  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management MODULE 4 Unit 1: Operational Management and Capacity planning in Security Sector Unit 2: Issue of Asymmetric Aggression in Strategic Planning Unit 3: Guerrilla Warfare and Tactical Measures to Counter-Guerilla Unit 4: Relevance of Fortification Tactic in Security Management Unit 5: Maneuver Tactic in Defence and Security Management Unit 1 OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND CAPACITY PLANNING IN SECURITY SECTOR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Defining Operations Management 3.2 Principles of Operational Management 3.3 Capacity Planning in Security Sector 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Security business involves a wide range of issues and activities.
Security includes providing services for safety and protection of life and property of the customer(s).
In the context of public security sector, the customers are the people while private security outfits deliver their services to their private customers.
Whether public or private, security organizations need to channel considerable energy on operational management and capacity planning.
Thus, the two concepts determine the productivity level of any security organizations especially as it relates to service delivery.
Apart from management of its personnel, every security organization needs to develop strategies for effectiveness and efficiency in its operations.
Effective capacity is also important in security business.
Through planning, you will know if there is need to increase the number of personnel within your organization.
Introduction of new tips and ideas may assist in improving your services.
165  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management In this unit, we shall be focusing on operational management and capacity planning in security sector and how they affect the productivity and effectiveness in service delivery in security management.
Let us browse through what we hope to achieve in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define operational management; Explain the priniciples of operational management; and Describe capacity planning in security sector.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Defining Operational Management Operational management is an age long practice.
It is a key element of security management.
It can be described as “…an area of business that is concerned with the production of goods and services, and involves the responsibility of ensuring that business operations are efficient and effective.
It is the management of resources, the distribution of goods and services to customers, and the analysis of queue systems” (see .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_management).
According to APICS Dictionary in its 11th edition, operational management involves: ……..the effective planning, scheduling, use, and control of a manufacturing or service organization through the study of concepts from design engineering, industrial engineering, management information systems, quality management, production management, inventory management, accounting, and other functions as they affect the organization (see .en.wikipedia.org/wiki/APICS).
166  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management In security sector, operational management is very essential.
It involves the effectiveness of security activities aimed at achieving the overall organizational goals.
Every security agency must definitely have an organizational policy, which defines its tasks, mission and the vision it seeks to accomplish.
For any security outfit to attain its organizational goals, there must be effective operational management system that ensures functionality in planning and operational control and capacity-building.
Exercise Define the term operational management.
3.2 Principles of Operational Management Planning There is a popular saying which goes thus “those who fail to plan, plan to fail”.
This aphorism forms an essential element of the philosophy of security practice.
Even, considering the nature of security business, you may agree with me that planning is crucial to security operations.
Every security task must be planned well before implementation.
Definitely, adequate planning will assist security organization(s) to identify ways through which it can accomplish its overall goals.
Lack of proper planning has been responsible for the failure of law enforcements in Nigeria in arresting the growing security threat in the Niger Delta region.
Security personnel are being sent to the region without planning adequately on the possible ways to achieve the operational goals in the area.
Little attention is given to the terrain or topography of the area to determine who among their personnel can explore the difficult terrain to the advantage of the security organization(s).
However, it is wrong to send police personnel who don’t know how to swim to go and maintain security and order in a riverine society.
If the Nigeria Police does not have enough personnel that can swim well, it is therefore necessary to send many of its men and officers on a course in swimming.
It is by doing this that the drowning of security personnel drafted to the area can be reduced drastically.
Risk Management Attitude It is essential for every security organization to cultivate the habits of managing.
Risk management is an element of security business.
For effective risk management, it is pertinent to have a separate unit within the organization to be charged with responsibility of carrying out technical documentation of possible risks and provide guidance for security operations.
167  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management There should be framework which will assist in profiling the existing risks and those that can emerge later, to provide consistent safeguarding measures to guide operations.
This principle appears to be lacking in the operations of most law enforcement agencies in Nigeria.
The Nigeria Police’s failure to regularly conduct risk assessment is responsible for its ineffective risk management.
Many of our policemen and officers have been killed through surprise attacks from hoodlums.
In the United States and other developed nations, police personnel are adequately kitted by the government while virtually all of them are given bullet-proof vests.
The rationale behind such idea is to equip the security personnel against any unexpected attack.
Therefore, it is pertinent for security organization to observe regular risk management.
Risk management in security sector actually includes such activities like Threat and Risk Assessments, Privacy Impact Assessments, security investigations, Vulnerability Assessments, self-assessments among others.
Operational Personnel Security organization is a network of personnel who perform different tasks for the functionality of the organization as well as working towards attaining the overall goals of their employer.
In security organization, we may have various units like account unit, general administration unit, intelligence unit, among others.
All these units have various operational assignments.
For instance in the Nigeria Police, there is Special Anti-Robbery squad fondly known as SARS.
The basic task to be performed by this unit is to make arrests and check the activities of armed robbers within their respective jurisdictions.
Some of the tasks performed by operational personnel may include the following: i.
Observing security procedures and suggest measures that can be taken to improve those procedures; ii.
Rapidly responding to security incidents; iii.
Assessing and installing security patches; iv.
maintaining or upgrading security facilities such as vehicles, armoury, communication gadgets, information systems etc; and v. preventing or guiding against electronic attacks and communication interception etc Threat and Risk Assessment 168  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Threat and Risk Assessment enables security organization to identify necessary conditions, which must be considered in making security decisions.
Threat and Risk Assessment also helps in evaluating identified security threats as against the vulnerability level of the organization.
By carrying out vulnerability assessment, any security organization will appreciate the need to draw interventions and frameworks, which can assist in preventing or mitigating the effects of threats to its operations.
The Threat and Risk Assessment can be short but must be concise.
It is also necessary to rank various threats identified according to the damaging impact each of them can have on the organization.
It is only when that is done that we may come up with the methods that can be adopted to limit the negative effect that any threat can pose to the security organization and its operations.
Incident Management Incident management involves the activities aimed at managing incidents from when they are discovered to the execution of interventionist solutions to the problem or measures that can be applied to arrest the threat situations.
This is a fundamental element of strategic planning.
Vulnerability Assessment and Management There is growing awareness among the security experts on the need to conduct on regular basis vulnerability test on its operations.
Through vulnerability assessment, security organization will be able to discover possible threats.
After identifying the possible threats, the next step will be to fathom ways to address the problem.
A number of approaches and methods will be considered to solve the problem.
Having a wide range of proposed solutions, it is imperative to subject each of them to impact assessment to know how effective they are in addressing the target threats.
A quite number of security outfits regularly simulate exercise to identify their areas of vulnerability as well as the level of each identified vulnerable area.
In the United States, vulnerability assessment is a routine activity among the various public security agencies.
It is only when you discover your problem that you will find ways to solve it.
But what vulnerability management is making us to understand is that you don’t need to wait for a threat to emerge before you plan.
It is better that you prepare ahead.
Patch Management Prompt application of security-related patches is very essential in security management.
Therefore, there must be systematic and well articulated patch 169  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management management process.
Necessary security-related patches should be brought to bear timely.
The success of patch management depends largely on how it is effectively articulated.
Division of Responsibilities Security personnel should be mandated to specific functions.
Different functions should be assigned to different personnel.
Again, no individual should be allowed to perform a task alone.
Some other individuals should be assigned the same task not only for completing purpose(s) but also as a security measure to prevent or check system vulnerability.
If a task is performed by only one individual, there is possibility that enemy will unleash threat on the system, even without being aware.
It is even easier to buy an individual within a system than a whole group of people.
Exercise Explain the principles of operational management in security sector.
3.3 Capacity planning in Security Sector Capacity planning can be described as “the process of determining the production capacity needed by an organization to meet changing demands for its products” .scrc.ncsu.edu/public/DEFINTIONS/C.html.
It allows the management of a security organization to identify the discrepancy between the capacity of an organization and how the demands of its customers can lead to inefficiency on its part.
This is because if adequate capacity is not built to meet the growing demands of the custormers, there is likelihood that the security organization will experience inefficiency in its operations.
The growing incidence of security threat in Nigeria and the inability of the law enforcement agents to arrest the situation has brought a wide spectrum of criticisms about the competence and efficiency of the public security agencies.
The main purpose of capacility planning is to address any deiscrepancy that may emerge resulting from the growing demands of security services from the custormers.
Considering the increasing security threat in Nigeria, there is need for capacity planning.
It is therefore important to increase the number of security personnel, so that the problem of inadequate staffing can be addressed.
After that, adequate training must be provieded for the personnel to improve their skills and physical fitness.
Capacity planning also includes activities that are designed to improve services and overall equipment efficiency.
170  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management The ways to increase capacity in security sector include effective information systems management, purchase of new equipments and materials, improved intelligence collection and analysis, quality training of personnel, effective personnel management, effective public relations and public awarenes, among others.
Exercise How do we carry out capacity planning in security sector?
4.0 CONCLUSION Operational management and capacity planning are very crucial to the production of goods and services.
The goods and services within the security context are different from the ones provided in non-security organizations.
Some of the tasks or functions performed by security personnel may include protecting the lives and property of their employers’ customers, putting in place safety measures, responding rapidly to emergency situations, management of disasters, counter insurgency, policing, defence planning and management, intelligence reporting for policy formulation among others.
None of the foregoing security functions can be adequately accomplished if there is no efficient operational management and effective capacity planning.
It is very important for security organization to adopt effective planning approach by studying its information systems management, service quality, general administration, personnel management, quality control initiatives, inventory management, equipment management among others.
More importantly, it is advisable for security organization(s) not to always day- dream or rely on fortune-telling syndrome that characterize the operational behaviour of most security outfits.
It is no surprising that such security outfits experience inefficiency in production and inadequate service delivery.
Therefore, there is need to always conduct risk assessment and management, putting effective operational personnel strategies, patch management, capacity planning among others.
These processes will afford any security organization a great opportunity to identify its areas of weakness or vulnerability and assess the impact or effectiveness of each of the available solutions in addressing (possible) threats.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, our attention was drawn to the relationship between operational management and effective securioty management on one hand, and the impact of capacity planning on the operational service delivery on the other.
We bagan our task in this unit by looking at some of the definitions of the term operational management.
Thereafter, we explained various principles of operational 171  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management management.
The third and last area of discourse was capacity planning in security sector.
Thank you for your attention.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is operational management?
ii.
Explain any four principles of operational management.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Gunther, Neil J.
(2007), “Guerrilla Capacity Planning”, Springer.
Krajewski, Lee J., & Ritzman, Larry P. (2005), Operations Management: Processes and Value Chains, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall Lazowska, Edward D (1984), Quantitive System Performance, Prentice-Hall WIlson, James M. (1995), “An historical perspective on Operations Management” Production and Inventory Management Journal.
://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacity_planning .
Retrieved on April 30, 2008.
.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operational_management .
Retrieved on April 30, 2008.
.scrc.ncsu.edu/public/DEFINTIONS/C.html.
Retrieved January 10, 2006.
172  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 2 ISSUE OF ASYMMETRIC AGGRESSION IN STRATEGIC PLANNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Meaning of Asymmetric Aggression 3.2 Features of Asymmetric Aggression 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Owing to the growing threat that asymmetric aggression constitutes to inter (national security, it is pertinent that we discuss it, so that we will be able to see its impact on internal security.
According to the Dictionary of Military Terms, asymmetric aggression or warfare includes “threats outside the range of conventional warfare and difficult to respond to in kind (e.g., a suicide bomber)”.
Asymmetric warfare involves an armed conflict between two or more parties where one party is considered as inferior while the other is perhaps seen as superior.
The parties in conflict are not on the same level with each other, in terms of quality and quantity of military power relation.
This form of aggression has emerged as the greatest security threat in post-Cold War era.
When going into war with Iraq, the US and allies could not have believed that the greater military challenge would come from dissidents rather than the regular troops of the Iraqi government under Saddam.
Asymmetric aggression has been of great concern in international politics.
It permeates every level of conflict ranging from international war to intra-state insurgency.
In this unit, we shall focus on the asymmetric aggression and tactical impact on strategic planning and security management.
I have no doubt that you will find this unit very interesting.
So, fasten you seat belt!
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able: 173  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Describe the meaning of asymmetric aggression; and Explain the features of asymmetric aggression.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Asymmetric Aggression Asymmetric aggression is basically that violent struggle between two or more state/non state actors, or groups of actors, who possess a considerably level of unequal relation in the power equilibrium.
It is a form of hostile relationship between two or more parties where a party is regarded as inferior, while the other is superior.
This kind of relationship has dominated every aspect of international relations where countries are accorded influence and respect according to their status in the power equilibrium.
This is instructive in the leadership role being played by Nigeria, not as a black nation per se but as a regional power, which every African nation looks up to.
Are we to consider its (Nigeria’s) contribution to the anti-colonial struggle on the continent of Africa?
or the amount it contributes both in human and material terms towards keeping peace in Africa?
or the leading role it plays in the popularization of African culture?
or its kind gestures to sister nations who are in needs both in financial, technical, spiritual and cooperative terms?
It is important to note here that it is not only the military superiority that determines the status of a country in relation to any other nation(s).
It is just one of the elements that determine the weight a nation possesses among the comity of nations.
For instance when we talk about consistency of African nations as regards stable experience of democratic governance to allocate power and international influence to nations on the continent, Nigeria cannot be among the ten leading countries due to its checkered history of military rule.
But in the determination of power and sphere of influence in international relations, many other variables must come into reckoning such as population, resources (both in tangible and intangible terms), technology, level of military capability and mobility among others.
Nigeria, being the largest in population on the continent and considering the strength of its military in the region and the various natural resources (in human and material terms) it is endowed with, one is not making any mistake to say, truly that Nigeria is a power to reckon with on the continent of Africa.
However, asymmetric aggression is that type of aggressive action in which at least one of the parties in violent relationship may be regarded as partisans.
Partisan was derived from the Tuscan word, “partigiano”, which denotes a member of a group of less professional or irregular troops that are assembled to engage and launch a military assault on the enemy-party, which is more likely to 174  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management be superior to it in conventional terms.
Here, what we mean is that the former is weaker than the latter either in quality and quantity in terms of military capability and mobility, or even in both variables.
What we should note here is that the recent experience in the modern warfare has shown that population (quantity) is a determinant of military power relations in international po litics.
And military technological advancement as well as trained military personnel with sound advantage in military strategy (quality) can even play more prominent role in the determination of a country’s status in international military power equilibrium.
An example is China and the US where the former enjoys population advantage while the other enjoys military superiority in terms of technology and mobility.
This view dominated the violent proceedings that characterized the Korean War where the US and its allies through the backing of the United Nations supported the South Korea while China gave its military support to North Korea.
Here, the population of China played a very critical role, which forced the US and its allies to sue for peace in the affected peninsula.
It was a ceasefire arrangement that temporarily ended the war, even till present.
In asymmetric aggression, the weak party usually adopts non-conventional tactics and strategy to engage the strong party in arms struggle.
Most times, the weak parties usually adopt guerilla tactic in the perpetuation of their violent actions against the enemy-party which is actually stronger.
A good example is the Israeli- Palestine armed conflict where the former, a strong party is engaged in violent hostilities by the latter, a weak party not in the open battlefields per se but through unconventional means like “terrorism” and guerilla engagement.
The example of the Israelis and Palestinians is a classic case of asymmetrical aggression.
As a matter of fact, the Palestinian dissidents and insurgents notable among them is the Hamas which do not have a regular army in the real sense of it.
Meanwhile, these insurgents launch their offensives with small arms and light weapons like Qassam rockets on Israeli targets, both civilian and military.
On the other hand, Israel has a standing (professional) army or military, which also attacks the military and civilian formations in the Palestinian region.
What is important here is that the Palestinian insurgents usually engage the State of Israel in violent hostilities through unconventional and asymmetric methods like suicide bombing, ‘hit and run’ strategy and other guerilla approaches.
Israel, rather than adopting conventional war plan, it adopts counter-insurgency approach to deal with the dissidents and the Palestine at large.
But our recent experience in the conflict between the Israel and Hezbollah insurgents (from Lebanon) in recent time has brought a new dimension to asymmetric aggression.
Despite the asymmetric relation between the two sides, one thing to note is that Israel is a State while Hezbollah is a group of non-state actors, demonstrating their displeasure over the continued military superiority that Israel enjoys in the 175  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Middle-East and the Israeli persecution of the Palestinians and the entire Arab race.
Again, these insurgents are not in any way members of the Lebanese Armed Forces, yet they waged an international war against Israel in 2006 with high casualty rate from the side of Israel.
They fired Katyusha rockets persistently into Israel and also engaged the Israeli forces in open and conventional battles, which forced Israel to adopt air raids, hitting some targets (incidentally, civilian locations suffered more from the aerial bombings by Israel ) in Lebanon.
On the battlefield, Israel suffered a military fiasco in the hands of the Hezbollah militants, which forced Israel to change its war strategies.
Moreover, military theorists have now articulated the need to widen or broaden the conceptual meaning of asymmetric aggression or warfare to include a military situation where two combatant-parties who possess unequal power relate and endeavor to take advantage of their opponents' weaknesses.
This interaction often involves strategies and tactics outside the boundaries of conventional warfare.
The heart of this grand design is that "weaker" combatants will strive to use strategy to make up for the deficiencies (in quantity or quality) it has.
As we have mentioned in the early part of this unit, the outcome of aggression is often determined by quality and quantity of belligerent forces or the parties.
One of the parties may be mindful of the consequences of the violence and its cost.
Thus, one of the parties, after weighing the strength and weakness, gains and losses that it is likely to derive from the aggression, a new strategy may be adopted.
A good example was the military offensive perpetuated against the Nigerian forces on the Bakassi Peninsula by Cameroon.
In 1981, Cameroon launched an offensive against the Nigerian forces on the peninsula where five Nigerian soldiers were killed while three other sustained serious injury (Day, 1982:97).
However, Cameroon later had a deep thought about its military offensive against Nigeria, considering the asymmetric relation that dominated the power attributes between her and Nigeria (a stronger party) and the consequences she may face in the outcome of any eventual outbreak of conventional war.
Cameroon had to change its strategy to win the possession of the disputed peninsula from the military campaign to legal combat at The Hague, which worked in her favour consequent on the ICJ ruling on 10th October, 2002 (Kasali, 2003: 78-83) Exercise Describe asymmetric warfare.
3.2 Features of Asymmetric Warfare (a) If the lesser party finds itself in a position of self-defense.
And where its rights 176  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management are (or about to be) abused or its territorial sovereignty is being undermined by a superior-imperial party, the weak party is more likely to adopt unconventional tactics to defend itself.
A good example was the activities of local insurgents in Iraq against the US led Coalition forces.
In the mid-July, General John Abizaid, Commander of the US-Central Command (USCENTCOM), described the volcanic violence that greeted the post-war Iraq as a guerilla war.
According to him: (we are) picking up a lot of information that indicated that there were significant terrorist groups and activities that we were having to be concerned about, as well; most of all happening in what we call the Sunni Triangle, that area vaguely described by Tikrit, Ramadi, Baghdad, but often stretching up into Mosul.
…we’re fighting remnants throughout the country.
I believe there’s mid- level Ba’athist, Iraq Intelligence service people, Special Republican Guard people that have organized at the regional level in cellular structure and are conducting what I would describe as a classical guerilla-type campaign against us.
It is low intensity conflict, in our doctrinal terms, but it is war, however you describe it.
(Cordesman, 2003:518) The local dissidents particularly Republican Guards that worked under Saddam felt that the military superiority of the US and its allies could not be matched by them considering the casualty rate of the Saddam army in the face of military assault by the US led coalition forces on the battlefield.
Thus, new tactic was adopted by the local insurgents to continue the violent hostilities against the coalition forces in Iraq.
Nevertheless, one would have thought that the capture of Saddam would mark the end of the war, but even after the death of Saddam, the post war violence in Iraq has claimed more lives in the ranks of the US army than recorded in the conventional or open war that took place earlier.
Pervasive insecurity has dominated the entire post Saddam Iraq.
Guerilla strategy was adopted by the local dissidents particularly the Sunni insurgents who have succeeded to reduce drastically the anticipated military success of the US led Coalition forces in the jingoist invasion of Iraq under the pretext of waging war against the development of weapons of mass destruction by Saddam Hussein regime, in which the allegation has proved to be false.
The local insurgents have continued to protest militarily against the continued presence of the US led Coalition forces in their country (Iraq), which they regard as a slap on Arab nationalism.
The Sunnis who were favoured by the Saddam regime are disfavoured by the new American arrangement and construction in Iraq, and the death of Saddam Hussein 177  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management in the hands of gallows-men in the name of justice was like adding salt on an injury.
The event precipitated a violent relations not only between the Saddam sympathizers and the US led Coalition forces but had also overblown the violent hostilities between the Sunni and Shiite Muslim blocs in the country.
It is quite imperative to note that the former has the larger followership in the Muslim world than the later.
Many Arab-Muslim countries detest the latter based on ideological assumptions and religious philosophy.
Meanwhile, the latter enjoys more popular support in Iran than elsewhere.
This is evident in the support the Sunni insurgents are enjoying in the Middle-East in their violent articulations.
(b) Another feature that dominates asymmetric warfare is that one of the warring parties has a significant amount of technological advantage over the other, where party A uses its technological advantage to offset any numerical advantage that the enemy-party might be enjoying.
For example, the vast numerical superiority of the Chinese forces dur ing their initial involvement in the Korean War weighed down the technological superiority of the United Nations forces.
(c)The use of terrain also features in asymmetric warfare.
Terrain can be used as a force multiplier by the smaller force and as a force inhibitor against the larger force.
Difficult terrain can be great obstacle to any military campaign by (strong) party against the other (weak) party that is more familiar with the terrain where the armed confrontations is taking place.
This is evident in the problem, the US faced in the Vietnam War and presently in Afghanistan where the Taliban still engage the US and its allies in a guerilla battle.
The terrain of any country can serve as an opportunity to a weak party and to the disadvantage of the strong party.
(d) Training and tactics as well as technology can prove decisive and allow smaller forces to overcome forces much larger than they are.
Training and tactics play very important roles in any military operations.
For instance, the British soldiers are not so many but they enjoy adequate training and have tactical advantage more than virtually all the great powers in the world today.
This is instructive, in the change of strategy in the prosecution of Iraq invasion by the Coalition forces in 2003 where the coalition met strong resistant soldiers from the side of Iraq, which almost broke the military hegemony of the Coalition forces on the (ground) battlefield, but the British tactical superiority saved the day for the Coalition forces.
The war in Iraq confirmed the importance of training, tactics and technology in the determination of success in conventional wars.
After the liquidation of Saddam’s draconian regime in 2003 due to the defeat of his army, Saddam went into hiding.
The remnants of his Gestapo and Guards removed their uniforms and blended with the civilian population to escape the military offensives of the coalition forces, which had already occupied the territory of Iraq.
The dimension of the military campaign by the coalition forces was phenomenal, such that: 178  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management the importance of speed, and the ability to get inside the enemy’s decision cycle and strike before he is able to mount a coherent defense.
the importance of jointness, and the ability of US forces to fight, not as individual de-conflicted services, but as a truly joint force-maximizing the power and lethality they bring to bear; the importance of intelligence-and the ability to act on intelligence rapidly, in minutes, instead of days and even hours; and the importance of precision, and the ability to deliver devastating damage to enemy positions, while sparing civilian lives and the civilian infrastructure (Cordesman, 2003: 2) However, the war in Iraq moved into a different form of asymmetric aggression where the coalition's use of superior conventional warfare training, tactics and technology were of much less relevance in the prevailing post-war atmosphere.
The Coalition forces particularly from the side of the US troops, almost on daily basis, face a huge military challenge from the various insurgent groups particularly the Shiites.
Indeed, the Iraqi insurgents have become increasingly sophisticated, with fatal consequences on the Iraqi civilians and coalition troops.
(e) Tactics that are usually adopted by weak parties in Guerrilla warfare are often used in asymmetrical aggression.
In both cases, the forces and/or law enforcement agents may need the support of a cooperating population that is ready to supply useful information and intelligence about the difficult terrain for cover and escape.
According to Mao Zedong the guerrilla forces must move amongst the people as a fish swims in the sea.
The population and terrain are often well-known to local forces, who can use both to escape reprisal from conventional forces.
A number of insurgent groups in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria often use this tactic to undermine counter-insurgency tactics of the government forces.
The use of asymmetrical tactics by outside forces often requires extensive investigation to make use of terrain characteristics.
The weak forces take more interest in regions that provide a lot of cover and concealment, especially heavily forested and mountainous areas.
This tactic takes advantage of the relative immobility of a larger army in such terrain.
In urban areas they will mix with the population and sometimes the weak forces rely on people’s support to conceal their identity and hide-outs to prevent any reprisal attacks from the stronger or/and larger forces.
(f) If the smaller power is in an aggressive position, however, and/or turns to tactics prohibited by the laws of war-jus in bello, its success will largely depend 179  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management on the greater power's abstaining from similar tactics.
For example, the Law of land warfare forbids the use of a flag of truce or clearly-marked medical vehicles as cover for an attack or ambush, but an asymmetric combatant using this prohibited tactic depends on the superior power's obedience to the corresponding law.
Similarly, laws of war bars fighters from using civilian settlements, populations or facilities as military bases.
But when a weak party uses this tactic, the justification for such tactic will depend largely on whether the other (strong) is also culpable of such unlawful and criminal tactic.
Exercise How do you describe features of asymmetric warfare?
4.0 CONCLUSION Asymmetric aggression has been phenomenal in contemporary global system.
Africa has had its own share in global history of asymmetric aggression or warfare.
In Zimbabwe, the ZANU party engaged the colonial authorities in asymmetric aggression to the country’s independence.
The violent attacks perpetuated against the imperialist formations as well some other variables led to the eventual transfer of power from the colonizer to the colonized where the local elites therefore replaced the colonial rulers.
Similarly, this tactic was also adopted by nationalist insurgents in Angola, Guinea Bissau, Mozambique among others in their anti-colonial struggles.
In post colonial Africa, asymmetric aggression is still experienced particularly in intra- state armed conflict or civil war where the rebels or perhaps the so-called marginalized people take to arms against the government and its forces.
The examples include the UNITA rebels vs. MPLA-Government in Angola; LURDS Rebels vs. Government in Uganda; among others.
The violent activities of the ANC during the apartheid regime in South Africa were a true reflection of asymmetric aggression between the ANC insurgents and the apartheid government.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss extensively on the concept and practice of asymmetric aggression.
Our discussion illuminates on the concept of asymmetry as a tactic in modern conflict and its impact on (inter)national security.
We however began our discussion in this unit by describing asymmetric aggression.
We also examined various features of asymmetric aggression.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the features of asymmetric aggression?
180  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING Arreguin-Toft, Ivan (2005), How the Weak Win Wars: A Theory of Asymmetric Conflict, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barnett, Roger W (2003), Asymmetrical Warfare: Today's Challenge to U.S. Military Power, Washington D.C: Brassey's.
Cordesman, Anthony H (2003), The Iraq War: Strategy, Tactics and Military Lessons, Washington DC: Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS).
Day, Alan J (ed.)
(1982), Border Territorial Disputes, in Kessing’s Reference Publication.
Kasali, Monsuru Adegboyega (2003), “The Pacific Settlement of International Dispute in International Law: Origin and Dynamics of Diplomatic-Legal Maneuverings to Bakassi Question”, M.SC Dissertation, Department of Political Science, University of Ibadan.
Unpublished.
Poole, H. John (2004), Tactics of the Crescent Moon: Militant Muslim Combat Methods, Emerald Isle, NC: Posterity Press.
Mack, Andrew J.R. (1975), "Why Big Nations Lose Small Wars: The Politics of Asymmetric Conflict", World Politics, Vol.
27, No.
2 (January).
Mackey, Robert R. (2004), The UnCivil War: Irregular Warfare in the Upper South, 1861–1865.
Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
181  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 182  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 3 GUERILLA WARFARE AND TACTICAL MEASURES TO COUNTER GUERILLA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Meaning of Guerrilla Warfare 3.2 Tactics and strategy of Guerilla Warfare 3.3 Features of Guerrilla Warfare 3.4 Ethical Problems of Guerrilla Warfare 3.5 Counter-Guerrilla Tactics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Guerrilla warfare is generally referred to low intensity war.
The word guerrilla was derived from a Spanish word guerra, meaning war.
The word was coined in Spain to describe the kind of resistant aggression against the French Empire under Napoleon Bonaparte.
Its meaning was broadened to mean any similar-scale armed resistance.
By 1809, the guerrilla had become part of the English vocabulary, which basically explained guerrilla warfare in terms of the fighters, not minding the tactics that characterize its (guerrilla) operation.
In this unit, our search light shall be centered on the guerilla warfare, its impact on security and measures that can be taken to counter it.
So, let us go to the next segment of this unit, the objectives the unit seeks to achieve, to actually look at what the unit requires and its coverage areas.
It is quite imperative to know that, it is advisable for the student to engage himself/herself in further reading because there is no way, we can exhaust all aspects of the subject matter in this course material.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 183  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Explain the meaning of guerrilla warfare; Discuss the tactics and strategy of guerrilla warfare; Describe the Features of guerrilla warfare; Evaluate the ethical Problems of guerrilla warfare; and Examine the counter-guerrilla warfare.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Meaning of Guerilla Warfare It is a type of warfare, which involves an irregular and independent band of partisan soldiers.
It is a type of war tactic, which is asymmetric in nature.
It is often adopted by inferior parties to armed conflict who might have weighed the cost of engaging their opponent party(ies) who they consider superior in the military power equilibrium, resolving that engaging such superior powers in open or conventional warfare may seem to be a suicide mission.
A good example is Isreali-Palestinian conflict, where the latter has been waging a guerilla-type of insurgency against the former.
The reason for this is that if an insurgent movement like Hamas leads the Palestine to engage Israel in conventional warfare, it is not likely that the outcome of such tactical decision will favour Palestine.
This is because the Israel enjoys quality and quantity military advantages over Palestine.
Thus, it is not surprising that the guerrilla tactic has been the most effective tactic for Palestine, which has enabled it to enjoy international public attention and sympathy on one hand, and military successes through their ‘hit and run’ tactic, which has had huge adverse effect on the psychology of the Israeli civilians and military formations.
The people of Israel live in perpetual fear on daily basis, boarding a bus, a visit to supermarket, sleeping at home, toasting a lady on the street, attending a place of worship, going to school, even going to public toilet, among others have become dangerous tasks in Israel because you don’t where, when and how the Palestinian insurgents will strike.
Therefore, this violent strategy has made Israel very unsafe and which military victory is greater than making your enemy to live, eat, drink, walk, sleep in perpetual fear, where he becomes a victim of eternal trauma?
The strategic relevance that guerrilla warfare enjoys in breaking the ranks of the enemy-party cannot be under-estimated.
This view was shared by William Wordsworth, a Poet as demonstrated in his pamphlet on the Convention of Cintra.
According to him: It is manifest that, though a great army may easily defeat or disperse another army, less or greater, yet it is not in a like degree formidable to a determined people, nor efficient in a like degree to subdue them, or to 184  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management keep them in subjugation–much less if this people, like those of Spain in the present instance, be numerous, and, like them, inhabit a territory extensive and strong by nature.
For a great army, and even several great armies, cannot accomplish this by marching about the country, unbroken, but each must split itself into many portions, and the several detachments become weak accordingly, not merely as they are small in size, but because the soldiery, acting thus, necessarily relinquish much of that part of their superiority, which lies in what may be called the engineer of war; and far more, because they lose, in proportion as they are broken, the power of profiting by the military skill of the Commanders, or by their own military habits.
The experienced soldier is thus brought down nearer to the plain ground of the inexperienced, man to the level of man: and it is then, that the truly brave man rises, the man of good hopes and purposes; and superiority in moral brings with it superiority in physical power.” (Wordsworth, 1988: 177-8).
T. E. Lawrence also known as "Lawrence of Arabia," adds his voice to our conceptual exploration of guerrilla warfare in his theory of guerrilla warfare where he describes the guerrilla fighters by comparing them to a gas.
The fighters disperse in the area of operations more or less randomly.
They or their cells occupy a very small intrinsic space in that area, just as gas molecules occupy a very small intrinsic space in a container.
The fighters may coalesce into groups for tactical purposes, but their general state is dispersed.
Such fighters cannot be "rounded up."
They cannot be contained.
They are extremely difficult to "defeat" because they cannot be brought to battle in significant numbers.
The human and material cost that would be involved in any attempt o destroy a significant number of them is prohibitive in every sense.
Mao Zedong’s work on guerrilla warfare has attracted global interest among the war strategists.
Mao explained the tactics adopted by the People’s Liberation Army during the Chinese Civil War.
According to him, guerrilla principles involve a tactical system whereby (when): The enemy advances, we retreat.
The enemy camps, we harass.
The enemy tires, we attack.
The enemy retreats, we pursue.
Mao in his analysis also distinguished between Mobile Warfare (yundong zhan) and Guerrilla Warfare (youji zhan), but they were part of an integrated continuum aiming towards a final objective.
Exercise What is guerilla warfare?
3.2 Tactics and Strategy of Guerrilla Warfare 185  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Guerrilla tactics are centered on intelligence, ambush, deception, sabotage, and espionage, where an inferior power dislocates the power-base and psychology of the superior power through a long and low-intensity confrontation.
It can be quite successful against an unpopular, foreign or local regime, as evident in the Vietnam War.
During the Vietnam War, Maoist guerrilla tactic was optimally put into application, and it proved very effective in decimating the enemy (US) troops.
Another was the war between the Boers and the British imperialists where guerrilla tactics played prominent role in the war and to the advantage of the former, as Britain was later forced to make some concessions.
A guerrilla army may increase the cost of maintaining an occupation or a colonial presence above what the imperial power can bear.
Against a local regime, the guerrilla fighters may make governance impossible with terror strikes and sabotage, and even combination of forces to depose their local enemies in conventional battle.
These tactics are useful in mutilating the psyche of the enemy camp, while raising the morale of the guerrillas.
In many cases, guerrilla tactics allow a small force to hold off a much larger and better equipped enemy for a long time.
Mao Zedong proposed three-phase approach in the articulation of guerrilla tactics.
The first phase involves developing strategies by the guerrilla fighters to win the people’s support by manipulating their feelings and actions through a viable and constructive machinery of propaganda as well as attacking organs of government.
Thereafter, in the second phase the insurgents will now adopt more violent strategy by increasing attacks on government forces and essential public facilities like the radio stations, communication facilities, official buildings like the parliament building among others.
The third phase assumes a new dimension, where the tactics are somehow at variance to the asymmetric methods that underlie guerilla warfare.
Here, the insurgents will go out to engage the government forces in an open and conventional combat to seize cities, overthrow the government and take over the mantle of leadership.
But caution must be taken here, insurgents often times meet serious resistance from the government forces as was evident in the fight between the MPLA government forces and UNITA rebels led by Savimbi.
3.3 Features of Guerilla Warfare A) Operations Guerrilla operations usually involve a variety of attacks on transportation routes, individual groups of police or military, installations and structures, economic enterprises, and targeted civilians.
Attacking in small groups, using camouflage 186  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management and often captured weapons of the enemy, the guerrilla force can persistently torment the enemy forces psychologically through its level of invisibility in the conduct of violence.
Through continual violent attack on the enemy force, it decimates the ranks of the enemy and the guerrilla escapes with very low casualties.
More casualties are often more recorded on the side of the enemy camp than the side of the guerilla fighters.
The guerrilla insurgents carry out their operations not only to achieve military advantage but also to fulfil their political goals.
They use violence to tell the government or the enemy-camp of the need to make valuable concessions.
They also attack civilian targets in order to force the masses to take drastic measures such as public demonstration, election, memoranda , and criticism to prevail on their government to make concessions to the insurgents by suing for peace.
A good example was the terrorist attack that forced the citizens of Spain to prevail on the home government to withdraw its troops from Iraq.
Operations vary from place to place.
The issue of suicide bombing is peculiar to the Middle East.
The 9/11 incident that took place in the United States is still very fresh in our memory where commercial air bus became weapon of mass destruction.
It was a suicide mission by the guerrilla insurgents that piloted the planes.
B) Application of Terror Sometimes, the use of terror can play an important role in guerrilla military campaign.
Terror has become a veritable tool to attract international attention and sympathy towards the cause of the guerrilla fighters.
For example, Niger-Delta of Nigeria had never enjoyed huge local and international attention until the recent eruption of guerrilla warfare in the region.
The insurgent youths of the region kill government forces and security agents, engage in hijacking of oil facilities, blow up facilities, extort cash from targets, intimidate the general population, and resort to other acts of economic sabotage in an attempt to bring the marginalization of the region by successive administrations to local and international attention.
To some extent, guerrilla tactics employed by the Niger-Delta militants have begun to yield fruits.
This is evident in the political relevance the region is currently enjoying in Nigeria.
They have now produced the Vice President of the country as the development of the area has become second most popular song after the National Anthem in Nigeria.
C) Surprise and intelligence For successful operations, surprise must be achieved by the guerrilla fighters.
If the operation has been betrayed or compromised it is usually called off immediately.
Intelligence is also extremely important, and detailed knowledge of the target's dispositions, weaponry and morale is gathered before any attack.
187  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Intelligence can be harvested in several ways.
Collaborators and sympathizers will usually provide a steady flow of useful information.
If working clandestinely, the guerrilla operative may disguise his membership in the insurgent operation, and use deception to ferret out needed data.
Employment or enrollment as a student may be undertaken near the target zone, community organizations may be infiltrated, and even romantic relationships struck up as part of intelligence gathering.
Public sources of information are also invaluable to the guerrilla, from the flight schedules of targeted airlines, to public announcements of visiting foreign dignitaries, internet access etc D) Population Support Most times, guerrilla fighters usually build cordial relationship with the mass public in particular.
But this is not always the case, if the civil population is found to be hostile.
A friendly population is perhaps a great access to the guerrilla fighters.
They are likely to assist the insurgents not only financially, they also assist in the provision of shelter, sexual partners (or wives), information among others.
A guerrilla force always strives to win the sympathy of the people because people determine their success and their safety in the face of counter-insurgency attack by the enemy force.
Thus, mass public remains the lifeline and engine room of any guerrilla movement.
If a civil population has a hostile and uncooperative attitude towards the guerrilla fighters, it is a great challenge to the insurgents who endeavour to win the support of the public at all cost, even it will need to adopt intimidation strategy to win the masses support, the movement will not hesitate to do so.
E) Withdrawal Guerrilla fighters always plan for escape in the conduct of their violence.
They do this strategic planning where they draw their withdrawal tactic after each operation has been carried-out or when there is difficulty in perpetuating the planned violent campaign.
The stage of withdrawal is very critical in guerrilla operation.
Insurgents often get trapped by the enemy camp superior firepower, and withdrawal tactic will determine the fate of the insurgent.
Insurgents usually have some withdrawal tactics that include mixing with the civilians, evidence- cleanup, disguise or self-murder (in rare cases) among others.
F) Logistics Guerrilla operations usually take similar logistical character unlike the conventional warfare.
They often get their finances through bank robberies, banditry, hired killing, kidnapping, bunkering, car snatching among others.
The guerilla insurgents sometimes get their finances through family support, 188  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management membership dues, donations, investments among others.
Civil population provides support to the guerrilla force if there is a cordial relationship between the public and the insurgents.
A good example is African National Congress (ANC) led by Nelson Mandela during the apartheid regime where the ANC conducted a series of guerrilla hostilities against the apartheid government and its forces.
The insurgent group enjoyed wide support among the Blacks in the country and elsewhere.
In considering the logistics, insurgents appreciate the relevance of speed and mobility in the conduct of their operations.
G) Terrain Terrain is also very important in guerrilla warfare.
Most time, guerrilla fighters prefer rural location as their abode where they usually retire after they have conducted their operations usually in the cities or any other target locations.
They prefer places like thick forests, mountainous environment, and borders, which can create a platform for the insurgents to have access to easy escape routes in case of any surprise offensive from the enemy camp.
Examples include the activities of the Mujahadeen of Afghanistan against the Russians, the Taliban movement against the coalition forces in the continuing war in the country.
Similarly, FRELIMO conducted a series of guerrilla attacks against the Portuguese colonial authorities in Angola prior to independence in that country.
The urban guerrilla movements usually have the attitude of blending into the civil population.
H) Foreign support and sanctuaries More often than not, guerrilla groups get support from foreign countries or organizations.
They get foreign assistance in the form of soldiers, weapons, sanctuary, or statements of sympathy.
Foreign governments often give covert assistance to the guerrillas, which can substantially increase the victory of the insurgents.
Foreign diplomatic support may bring the guerrilla cause to international attention, putting pressure on local opponents to make concessions, or garnering sympathetic support and material assistance.
I) Guerrilla initiative and combat intensity Guerrillas normally choose the time and place to strike.
Guerrilla fighters will usually possess the tactical initiative and the element of surprise.
Planning for an insurgent operation often take weeks, months or even years.
They always analyse and examine the possible outcome of their planned strikes and operations.
If they sense that problem is likely to crop up, they change strategy.
Exercise What are the features of Guerilla warfare?
3.4 Ethical Problems of Guerilla Warfare A.
Intimidation 189  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Guerrilla fighters usually articulate policy of intimidation where they find it difficult to win public support, knowing fully well the strategic importance of the civil population in the operation of guerilla warfare.
Civilians are often attacked or killed as punishment for having sympathy towards the enemy camp.
The insurgent may also carry out bestial action against civil population to force people to support their cause.
B.
Irresponsible Attack on Civilian Population This attitude dominates the conduct of guerrilla warfare in Africa.
Civil wars, may also involve deliberate attacks by the belligerents against civilians, with both guerrilla groups and organized armies committing atrocities.
The UNITA rebels did similar thing during the civil war in Angola till the death of its leader, Savimbi in the hands of government forces.
Savimbi-UNITA guerillas committed a lot of atrocities against the innocent and armless civil population in that country ranging from mutilation, arson, sexual slavery to murder.
C. Transferred Aggression Guerrillas often direct their aggression against civilians when they see that the enemy camp is too powerful for them to conquer or if the superior fails to bend or make any concessions in spite of their (guerrilla’s) attacks on government targets.
Frustration may set in on the part of the insurgents.
For instance, the insurgents in Iraq when they are subdued by the superior firepower of the coalition force have often resorted to direct their anger against the civil population.
They go about bombing civilian locations.
D. Disobedience of the Laws of war Article 44, sections 3 and 4 of the 1977 First Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions, "relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts", recognizes combatants either militia or regular soldiers by the virtue of the nature of the conflict, as belligerents either in uniform or not, inasmuch as they carry arms and weapons openly in the prosecution of military operations, they are both accorded the same status in the international criminal law.
Guerrillas are barred by the Laws of War from conducting guerrilla offensives on armless civilians but the situation has been that the insurgents pretend that the Conventions on the Laws of War do not recognize them as military elements, and as such their military activities are not subject to the Conventions.
The recent development in Uganda where the leadership of the Lord Resistance Army (LRA) has been alleged to have committed war crime and they are to face justice at the War Crime Tribunal.
In Rwanda genocide, several civilians that 190  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management participated in the dastardly act have been made to face justice both in the local courts in Rwanda and at the International Criminal Court over various war offences.
Whether one is in uniform or not when perpetuating violence against non-combatants, war crime is war crime.
3.5 Counter-Guerrilla Tactics The guerrilla movement can be very difficult to crush by any power either superior or inferior.
Its tactical methods and modes of operation perform the magic.
How can one kill an invisible enemy?
It is pretty difficult!
Nonetheless, right from the 1950s, attempts have been made at developing a strategic framework to contain the activities of guerrilla groups.
Several scholars have presented a plethora of principles in form of counter-insurgency warfare.
One of such noble and influential works was done by Sir Robert Thompson.
Thompson is a popular counter-insurgency expert in Malaysia.
He offers some measures, which can be taken to contain guerrilla insurrection.
Thompson however criticised extreme counter-insurgent attitude of state and non-state actors, which have had great adverse consequences on innocent civilians, which somehow has created opportunity to insurgents in winning the support of the civil population both locally and internationally.
He however charged the state or superior party to always adopt moderate approach to counter-guerrilla warfare.
These measures include: 1.
People’s Oriented Vision A viable vision should be articulated in government policy to gain people’s support.
A clear and popular vision can serve as counter measure to play down the guerrilla vision.
In doing this, government can grant political and/or economic autonomy and embark on development projects in the affected region as evident in the activities of the Federal Government-established NNDC to take a number of development initiatives in the oil producing areas of the country.
2.
Concessions Necessary concessions can be made to satisfy the aggrieved people in order to achieve peace.
Through concession efforts, the guerrilla insurgents may see the need to reconsider the need to work for peace by dropping their weapons and create avenue to engage government in negotiation.
Hard-stand posture is inhibitor of peace and there is need for warring parties to embrace dialogue and joint-problem solving philosophy.
Thus, the cheapest war is costlier than the most expensive peace.
3 Economy of force 191  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management The counter-insurgent regime must carry out its counter guerrilla with some level of decency.
Total military violence should be avoided because such action has the tendency to force the guerilla to adopt more destructive methods to retaliate the government’s offensive.
The security institutions should be people friendly, and official brutality should be discouraged.
4.
Intervention of the Armed Forces In a situation whereby the police cannot contain guerrilla harassment, the military should be brought in to quell the crisis but should be made to discourage recklessness from the side of government forces.
The guerrilla structures should be brought down and the insurgents should be subjected to hot pursuit in order to reduce their ranks and put their operations in disarray.
5.
Mobility Mobility and aggressive small unit action is extremely important for the counter- insurgent regime.
Heavy formations must be lightened to aggressively locate, pursue and fix insurgent units.
The military formations should adopt holistic approach in combating the guerrillas, through tactics like continual ground battle, aerial bombardment, sea raids, border-combing, among others.
6.
Systematic Intelligence Effort Information is essential in any form of warfare.
Adequate resources should be chanelled towards developing a viable data system and spy intelligence technology to monitor the activities and movement of the insurgents.
Conducting regular and voluntary questioning of people and create avenue through which people can render information to government without publicly declaring their identity, while such information should be treated with absolute confidentiality.
The use of modern information gathering systems like internet should be put in place.
7.
Constructive Investigation and Intelligence The security operatives should map out the conflict area like an "ink spot".
This area should therefore be divided into various parts and allocate each part its priority.
The parts with high priority index shall be given the greatest attention.
Then, the counter-insurgent party will then spread out its control of the conflict area outward like an ink spot on a paper.
The strategic implication of this action is that in the process, the entire area will be combed and the insurgents will need to run away.
8.
Establishment of Mass Forces 192  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management In inaugurating non-regular combatants or vigilante to complement the activities of the regular armed forces to destroy the guerrilla structures, caution should be taken in the selection process so that wrong people are not recruited.
This group will include hunters, retired security agents, paramilitary group, vigilante group, socio-cultural associations, among others.
There will also be specialist units that will monitor the activities of this mass force, so that its institution will not be counter-productive.
With this, the guerrilla insurgents will be choked and it will be difficult to carry-out their insurgent attack without being strongly challenged.
9.
Foreign assistance Limited foreign assistance will be quite helpful, particularly technical suppo rt where the security personnel can have advanced training, which is useful in improving their tactical understanding.
Supply of security gadgets is also helpful.
Exercise Explain any five ways to check guerilla warfare.
4.0 CONCLUSION Guerrilla warfare has remained a very unique form of warfare in modern theatre of war.
It is usually adopted by the weak or inferior party to break the power-base of the superior party because the former does not possess the military credentials to engage the latter in any open and conventional warfare.
If the former does adopt open war, it is likely to be at its own peril.
History has shown that guerrilla warfare has remained a viable vehicle for the inferior party to force the superior party to make concessions.
This was evident in the eventual acceptance by the British imperialists under the tutelage of Kitchener to make some concessions to the Boers to end hostility and by 1902, the Boer guerrilla insurgents finally gave up the struggle, which demonstrated the strategic importance of guerrilla tactic in modern armed conflict.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to treat the topic, guerrilla warfare extensively.
We began by explaining the meaning of guerrilla warfare.
We went further to discuss the various tactics and strategies that characterize the guerrilla warfare.
We also described the features as well as the ethical Problems of guerrilla warfare.
Finally, we examined various counter-guerrilla measures that can be taken to limit or contain any guerrilla uprising.
Thank you for your patience.
I hope you have found the topic very interesting?
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT 193  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Describe Guerrilla Warfare.
And what are the possible measures that can be taken to counter guerilla aggression?
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Asprey, Robert B.
(1994), War in the Shadows, The Guerilla in History, William Morrow.
Bing, Stanley (2004), Sun Tzu Was a Sissy: Conquer Your Enemies, Promote Your Friends, and Wage the Real Art of War, New York: Harper Collins.
David, Steven R. (2002), "Fatal Choices: Israel's Policy of Targeted Killing", The Begin-Sadat Centre for Strategic Studies, Bar-Ilan University.
(September).
Encyclopaedia Britannica, "Warfare Conduct Of, Guerrilla Warfare," 1984 edition.
Giap, Vo Nguyen (2001), People's War, People's Army, Honolulu: University Press of the Pacific.
Guevara, Ernesto "Che" (1998), Guerrilla Warfare, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Mackey, Robert R. (2004).
The UnCivil War: Irregular Warfare in the Upper South, 1861–1865.
Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press.
Smith, Rupert (General Sir) (2006), The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World, Allen Lane, 2006.
Wordsworth, William (1998) Selected Prose, Penguin Classics.
.baader-meinhof.com/stude nts/resources/pr int/minimanua l/manua ltext.html ://www.freepeoplesmovement.org/fpm/page.php?149 .marxists.org 194  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 4 RELEVANCE OF FORTIFICATION TACTIC IN SECURITY MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Meaning of Fortification Tactic 3.2 Evolution of Fortification Tactic 3.3 Branches of Fortification 3.4 Obstacles of Permanent Fortifications 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Fortification is a form of tactic in which military constructions and structures are put in place for security reasons.
These structures, perhaps, serve to provide defense for the belligerents in time of war and inhibit the movement of enemies in security management.
This tactic dominates every aspect of security and defence.
In the last unit, we discussed guerrilla and tactical measures that can be taken to counter it.
What I want to bring out here is that fortification is another tactic that can be adopted by counter-insurgent party to put the activities of the insurgents in check.
This is done through provision of military constructions or fence to edge-out the guerrillas as well as limiting the insurgents’ movement flow, which will deny the guerrilla fighters free access to the party’s camp.
This unit will discuss extensively on fortification as a viable tactic of security management.
So, fasten your seat belt and let’s cruise.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Explain the Meaning of Fortification Tactic; Discuss the Evolut ion of Fortification Tactic; Describe the Branches of Fortification; and Examine the Obstacles of Permanent Fortifications.
195  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Meaning of Fortification Warfare The term fortification is derived from the Latin fortis ("strong") and facere ("to make").
If we consider the two Latin words in our definition of fortification, we are not wrong to say that fortification tactic involves constructive initiatives ‘to make strong’ one’s side in the face of security threat through provisions of defense or security buildings and installations to create artificial impediment to the enemy’s movement or seek to prevent enemy’s attack.
The word fortification can also refer to the practice of enhancing or improving an area's security with defensive works.
City walls are fortifications but not necessarily called fortresses.
Looking at the subject matter from the home-front, we see almost every household erecting fences and burglary-proof iron gates all over the place.
The aim of doing this is not basically to prevent burglars’ visit but to prevent their easy access to the house.
By doing so, not every common criminal can gain access to the house.
Even, if sophisticated bandits are to visit the neighbourhood, they consider first, the house with easier access, not without exceptions.
One of the exceptions is that if it is the major plan of the bandits to visit a particular house, no matter the forts available or security structures put in place, they will strive to gain access to the house.
But this effort, not in all cases, is fruitful.
Thus, the bandits may experience strong fight from the occupants of the house they are visiting and they (bandits) may decide to retreat or remain resilient, engaging the house occupants in continued aggression until they gain access to the house.
By and large, the point we are trying to make here, is to create an aggression scenario from our civil (domestic) experience.
What we are driving at here, is that countries often adopt fortification strategy to prevent any form of surprise attack or invasion by enemy-party, and to give the defensive party an opportunity to have a strategic advantage over the offensive party on the scale of military probability.
Fortification helps to alert the defensive party of the aggressor’s (offensive) or security threat.
If the defensive party is aware of the enemy’s offensive, it equips itself adequately for the task ahead.
Fortification can also serve as temporary cover for belligerents in open confrontation.
In military context, fortification is defensive tactic against any attack from the enemy’s camp.
Fortification basically involves putting in place strategic defensive system.
Several military installations are known as forts, some of which are not always fortified.
Fort is the common military term for a detached fortified building or enclosure of moderate size occupied or designed to be occupied by 196  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management troops.
Fort can be permanent or temporal.
There are two forms of fort.
The first is the larger fort, which is known as fortress.
The second form is smaller fort, which is also known as fortalice.
Fortress is that form of fortification, of extraordinary size and strength, regarded as permanent.
The art of laying out or construction of a military camp, particularly an army camp is known as castrametation.
The art and science of laying siege to a fortification aimed at destroying it can be regarded to as siege-craft.
Fortification is a tactical form of security management where building of military structures and constructions or fence can serve as strategic scheme to impede the movement of the enemy-aggressor party.
Forts are built in anticipation to prevent any external attack from the enemy.
Fortification has proved to be very effective as counter-guerrilla war strategy to contain the activities of enemy-guerrilla insurgents as evident in the Boer War.
The war was between the British and Boer who were white settlers in South Africa over imperial interests.
War broke out in 1899, and after two and a half years of armed hostility between the two, the Boers were defeated (Strayer et al, 1961:392).
Their capitals such as Pretoria and Bloemfontein were thereafter occupied by the British.
After the defeat of the Boers by the British in conventional warfare, the former sought to continue the military campaign this time, not through conventional method, but by unconventional way-guerrilla tactic.
Guerrilla method really worked to the advantage of the Boers, particularly the successes recorded by such insurgent units like the one led by Christian de Wet.
The insurgent operations against the British nonetheless attracted high casualty rate among the British troops.
In response to the incessant guerrilla attacks from the Boers, the Kitchener led British imperial forces had to adopt fortification tactic as alternative approach for counter-insurgency.
The British began by confining the Boer civilians into concentration camps, and hundreds of houses were built all over the Transvaal and Orange Free State.
Then, Kitchener endorsed a scorched earth policy where the Boer homes and farms were destroyed, bringing the insurgents to a bend.
Exercise What is fortification tactic?
3.2 Evolution of Fortification Tactic Fortification has been in existence, even from pre-historic era in human history.
From one period to another, human beings have continued to put in place various 197  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management types of defensive works of varying degree to protect themselves from any external attacks.
Simply put, people construct forts to prevent enemy from carrying out a surprise attack.
In modern era, fortification involves creating a ‘special territory’ or space within the larger territorial configuration of a state by government for a permanent military facility, which includes military barracks, administration, intelligence or medical services.
These facilities may not likely have any concrete fortifications.
In medieval ages, the strategic importance of fortification as a defence tactic was challenged by the introduction of cannons in the 14th century war terrain.
Cannon is a large tubular weapon for discharging a heavy shot, particularly one that is mounted on carriage.
It is a big artillery gun.
Fortifications in the Age of Blackpowder changed into much lower structures with greater use of ditches and earth ramparts, which would reduce the efficacy of cannon fire.
Walls open to direct cannon fire were very vulnerable, so were crushed into ditches fronted by earth slopes.
This placed a heavy emphasis on the geometry of the fortification to allow defensive cannonry interlocking fields of fire to cover all approaches to the lower and thus more vulnerable walls.
Fortifications also extended in depth, with protected batteries for defensive cannonry, to allow them to engage attacking cannon to keep them at a distance and prevent them bearing directly on the vulnerable walls.
The result was star shaped fortifications.
The introduction of explosive shells in the nineteenth century propelled a need to further develop the artistry of fortification as a war tactic to stand the challenges of modern warfare.
The shaped fortifications of the cannon era became less effective in modern theatre of war, considering the damaging effects of highly destructive explosives on the fortress.
Thus, the cannon-age fortress became obsolete due to high degree of vulnerability to explosive shells.
In addressing this challenge, military engineers then developed the polygonal style of fortification.
Here, the ditch became deep and vertically sided, cut directly into the native rock or soil, laid out as a series of straight lines creating the central fortified area that gives this style of fortification its name.
The fortification is now large enough to be an obstructive blockade for attacking troops.
Due to its narrowness, it has been pretty difficult for enemy’s explosive shell to hit the target.
By 20th century, the use of steel and concrete fortifications became popular.
The experience of the two world wars has undermined the strategic importance of fortress in modern warfare.
Only underground bunkers are still effective to provide a defense against enemy shell-fires.
3.3 Branches of Fortification 198  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Fortification is usually divided into three branches, namely permanent fortification, field fortification and semi-permanent fortification.
Permanent fortifications are constructed at leisure and not during eruption of aggressive attack from the (external) enemy.
The party provides necessary or adequate resources both in material and technical terms for the constructions of fortifications.
The construction often takes months, if not years.
Some may even take decades to build.
Field fortifications are erected by troops in the field who may be assisted by local labour and tools.
This type of fortification does not require much resources to prepare and it is temporal and less complex.
Semi-permanent fortification is between the permanent and field fortifications.
It is intermediate branch of fortification, which is applied when it becomes paramount during the war, to protect a particular location for long term defense of the warring state or party.
Skilled civilian workers may be brought in to give support to the military in the constructions.
Exercise Explain branches of fortification.
3.4 Obstacles of Permanent Fortifications In this segment of the unit, we are to look at various factors that are responsible for the less effective nature of fortifications in modern warfare.
Though, fortification can still be effective in checking the activities of the guerrillas but can prove ineffective in modern conventional warfare due to the nature of modern war itself.
Some of the obstacles bedeviling the strategic importance of fortifications may include: 1) Problem of Permanency: The first problem of Permanent fortification is its very permanency.
The nature of modern day aggression makes it very vulnerable and susceptible to demolition through the destructive military hardware that pervades the modern war terrain.
Again, due to easy access to fortification, arising from its permanency, it is easy for enemies to ruminate on the effective way to destroy it.
The rise of mobile warfare since World War II has further subjected permanent fortification to vulnerability because the might of the offensive party really determines the fortification level of the defensive party.
The offensive party could channel its power to advance a breakthrough by breaking the ranks of a segment of the defensive lines.
Well, the main motive behind the adoption of fortification is not to totally prevent enemy’s attack but to delay it, so that the defensive party will have at least time to develop counter-attack measures to stop enemy’s invasion.
199  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 2) The second obstacle of permanent fortification in modern battlefield is that the level of military technology has gone sophisticated.
The cold-war era contributed in no small measure to proliferation of weapons, many of which are very destructive, which no permanent fortification can withstand.
Considering the cost of production of siege weapons and construction of permanent fortification in modern warfare, siege appears to be much cheaper.
3) The development of war jets and missiles has adversely affected the strategic importance of permanent fortification in modern battlefields.
The powerful shell- fires from the air can crush any permanent fortifications.
Thus, war is now conducted not only through the land or sea but also by air.
Aerial bombings and the destructive nature of some bombs and missiles makes permanent fortifications vulnerable.
Exercise Explain the obstacles of fortification tactic.
4.0 CONCLUSION Fortification tactic has continued to enjoy relative relevance in modern-day security practice.
Despite the challenges the lethal and destructive nature of modern weapons and the emergent mobility in warfare and logistics as well as war plane development, add to the strategic relevance of fortification, it has remained a viable defence tactic.
A great example is Iraq war where Saddam and some of his senior aides escaped the ferocious air raids carried out by the US, by hiding in the underground tunnels to escape the air onslaught, which left the country with collateral casualty among the civilian and military population.
Fortification may prove very effective as a counter-guerrilla measure.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to focus on various aspects and issues of fortification tactic.
We explained the meaning of fortification tactic.
We also discussed the evolution of fortification tactic.
Thereafter, we pointed our search light on the branches of fortification.
Finally, we examined the various obstacles of permanent fortifications 6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is fortification warfare?
ii.
Describe the branches of fortification.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Duffy, Christopher (1996), Fire & Stone: The Science of Fortress Warfare (1660– 200  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 1860), Second Edition, New York: Stackpole Books.
Keegan, John (1999), The Battle of the Frontiers and the Marine: The First World War, New York: Random House.
Montague, Ashley (1976), The Nature of Human Aggression, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mueller, John (1989), Retreat from Doomsday: The Obsolescence of Major War, New York: Basic Books.
Strayer, Joseph R.; Hans W. Gatzke; and E. Harris Harbison (1961), The Course of Civilization (Volume Two), NewYork: Harcourt, Brace and World.
201  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Unit 5 MANOEUVRE TACTIC IN DEFENCE AND SECURITY MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Meaning of Manoeuvre Tactic 3.2 Differences between Maneuver Tactic and Attrition Tactic.
3.3 Elements of Maneuver Tactic 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutored Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Manoeuvre is the term used by military theorists and tacticians, which means an attempt or attempts where a party embarks on actions or measures to gain positional advantage over the other party in armed conflict.
These actions are designed purposely to contain the movement of the enemy as well as to destroy its fire-power such that the enemy will have very little or no military resources or hardware to prosecute (further) aggression.
This form of tactic is referred to as theory of shock and awe.
This unit shall focus on various issues in maneuver tactic.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Describe Maneuver Tactic; Discuss the differences between Maneuver Tactic and Attrition Tactic; and Explain elements of Maneuver Tactic.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Meaning of Maneuver Warfare Maneuver is a form of tactic where one of the (or both) parties in aggression seeks to gain military advantage over the other not basically by attacking the enemy but by destroying the armoury of the enemy-party before conducting any offensive against the enemy-party.
By do ing so, the enemy’s aggressive frequency must have a subject of tactical interception from the other party.
A good example is a 202  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management brutal conflict between two families.
Each of the families has a father, a mother, and four children who are of the same height and weight (or, simply put, the same size).
The only difference is that one of the two families has three male children while the other has two male children.
The law of nature says that men should be stronger than women physically (but not in all cases).
Thus, the second family is disadvantaged strategically by having two boys.
If you belong to the second family, what are you going to do to turn your strategic disadvantage into advantage.
Here, what the maneuver tells us is that we should pay more attention on the enemy’s power-base rather than the enemy herself.
A maneuver tactician may decide not to engage the advantaged party first in any physical battle.
The first plan will be to set fire on the advantaged party’s house, causing the entire household psychological defeat while its members run helter- skelter to escape being consumed by fire.
The initially disadvantaged family may take advantage of the breakdown in the command structure of the enemy party.
Through strategic ambush, a substantial number of the previously advantaged family may be killed, and cleansing operation will then follow.
In this case, the former disadvantaged party gained a military advantage over the superior party.
Any tactical miscalculation in security management can be very risky and costly.
And that is why nations now pay greater attention on strategic intelligence.
Superb security initiatives not backed by intelligence are nothing but actions in futility.
Maneuver involves any action(s) that is designed specifically to drain and crumble the power base of the enemy like destroying its armoury and weaponry.
This will undermine the enemy’s capability to further aggression.
This is because the enemy will no have any sufficient weapons to continue its aggression.
In military context, the United States is popular in maneuver tactic.
The US will always begin its military offensive by first destroying the armoury and the military hardware of its enemy-state.
This is done mainly through air raids and aerial bombings.
Thereafter, the infantry and tanks are called upon to do the finishing.
In the Iraq war, the US was very innovative and novel in putting ‘unprecedented combination of speed, precision, surprise and flexibility’ into play while ‘turning difficulties into opportunities’ (Cordesman, 2003).
Cordesman further explains that: Another lesson is that in the twenty-first century “overmatching power” is more important than “overwhelming force”.
In the past, under the doctrine of overwhelming force, force tended to be measured in terms of mass-the number of troops that were committed to a particular conflict.
In the twenty-first century, mass may no longer be the best measure of power in a conflict.
After all, when Baghdad fell, there were just over 100,000 American forces on the ground.
General Franks overwhelmed the enemy not with the typical three-to-one 203  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management advantage in mass, but by overwhelming the enemy with advanced capabilities in innovative and unexpected ways (Cordesman, 2003:2).
Maneuver tactic is basically aimed at gaining positional advantage over the enemy-party.
The American philosophy about maneuver is that aggression is targeted against the enemy by smashing and destroying the solidity and cohesion of the enemy-party.
This will affect enemy-party psyche and the loss of bearing.
Conducting rapid and surprise attacks on the enemy can be tactically helpful in security management.
The Iraq experience has been able to present the strategic and tactical importance of maneuver in modern warfare.
The Iraq forces that were substantially larger and had a geographic advantage.
This is because the war was taking place at their home front.
They were supposed to be more familiar with the terrain than the foreign enemies.
Nobody could have thought that Iraq would be defeated very early unlike the case of the Gulf war of 1991.
“Shock and Awe” tactic dominated the whole maneuver proceedings.
The cohesion as well as the communication system of the Iraqi military had already been destroyed by the US bombings before ground battle commenced.
Their arms facilities were destroyed to the extent that the Iraqi forces could not put up any strong challenge or resistance against the US troops.
Jointness of the force, speed, communication command, computers and intelligence play fundamental roles in maneuver.
This is not to say that firepower is not relevant in modern security management.
Meanwhile, firepower is also important to the conduct of maneuver aggression.
We will apply the use of fires and forces at critical points to demolish enemies when there are prospects and when it fits our larger purposes.
In fact, maneuver is both strategic (when and where to fight) and tactical (how to fight the battle he chooses).
In maneuver aggression, air raids, missile shelling, and geographical amputation can adequately subject enemy to perpetual confusion in the conduct of armed hostilities.
Maneuver is not new, it has been in existence from time immemorial.
In the Biblical narration of man in the Garden of Eden, we noticed here that after Lucifer had fallen and lost the grace of God due to his disobedience to his Creator-God.
The demon knowing fully well that God had special love for man, he (the devil) lured Adam and Eve to eat the forbidden fruit.
That event marked the beginning of earthly maneuver in the celestial hostility between the good and bad or evil.
Satan used that strategy to score a point against God, such that if God can overlook the sin committed by man, similar grace should also be extended to him-Satan for the sake of justice.
But God too, was very smart by decreeing that evil men will be subjected to eternal punishment-hell fire along with Satan.
This view is popular among Christians and Muslims.
Maneuver has remained prominent from one period to another.
In the Franco- 204  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management Prussian War, it was clear that Napoleon had repositioned the French forces to a stronger one army, which could destabilize the enemy-party through its speed, precision, and cohesive control.
Napoleon as a war general also arranged his forces into what today we would refer to 'Battle-Groups' of combined arms formations to enable faster reaction time to enemy action.
Advancement in technology has really increased the role played by maneuver in modern security management and defence.
The lethality and destructive nature of modern weapons have increased the interest of nations in maneuver tactic.
Mobility, technology and intelligence have become basic elements of maneuver tactic in modern time.
States now adopt maneuver strategies and tactics to gain advantage over the enemy-parties.
In the Nigerian Civil War, hunger became a viable weapon of warfare.
The cut off of supply of foods and weapons to the Biafran side by the Nigerian government really contributed in no small measure to the defeat suffered by the Biafran forces Exercise What is maneuver warfare?
3.2 Differences between Maneuver Tactic and Attrition Tactic a) Attrition is centered on attaining desired victory through killing or capturing an adversary while maneuver supports the view that defensive aggression should always involve both maneuver and attrition; b) Maneuver is usually conducted by smaller forces, which appear more cohesive, better trained, or more technically sound while attrition forces are often larger, less trained or less technically sound.
The term maneuver denotes any aggressive articulation that involves actions and movement aimed at gaining positional advantage of the enemy; c) Attrition is associated with moving masses of men and material against enemy strong-points.
The military success is determined by a number enemy forces killed, the enemy’s infrastructure destroyed, and amount of territory occupied.
Maneuver is pre-occupied with rapid movement and advanced capabilities to contain the enemy’s mobility, crushing the enemy’s fire-power arsenals and complete the aggression with attrition elements; d) Maneuver involves decentralized command structures with greater tactical artistry while the attrition usually has more centralized command with less tactics; e) Attrition deals with attempts of hitting and destroying the totality of the enemy- parties.
It includes destruction of enemy troops as well other social facilities while maneuver is primarily concerned with destroying the power-base of the enemy like bombing of the armoury, military complex, air base, submarine, war ships without necessary destroying the social facilities; and 205  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management f) Attrition can hardly be successful without employing maneuver tactic.
No aggression either defensive or offensive can be complete without employing both attrition and maneuver tactics.
Exercise What are the differences between maneuver tactic and attrition tactic?
3.3 Elements of Maneuver Tactic War theorist, Martin Van Creveld identifies six main elements of maneuver tactic: a) Sustaining the aggression tempo as the military quest to achieve a positional advantage over the enemy is maintained; b) Decentralization of the command structures for effective containment of the enemy’s offensive and proper coordination of the destruction of the enemy’s power base; c) Scoring vital points by attacking most important and weakly defended military facilities of the enemy at the right time.
Maneuver is sustained by the synergy of Intelligence, communication, speed, precision, control, computers and advanced military capabilities; d) Surprise attacks form the basic part of maneuver tactic.
Sometimes, surprise attacks can be counter-productive.
Risk assessment must be conducted before embarking on surprise attacks; e) Jointness of the forces is also a very important element of maneuver tactic; and f) Maneuver also involves high degree of flexibility.
Exercise What are the elements of maneuver tactic?
4.0 CONCLUSION Precision, communication, command, flexibility and intelligence are fundamental elements of maneuver tactic.
These determine the success of every defensive or offensive aggression.
The change in technology has made the application of maneuver tactic very important in modern security management and defence.
There is a paradigm shift from measuring the capability of any force by its mass to the security technology and mobility of any force.
The competition that dominates the acquisition of weapons among the nations and the growing security threat posed by non-state actors, has further expanded the frontiers of maneuver in modern time.
Maneuver tactic plays a very important role in the technical dislodgment of the enemy-party by attacking its military materials rather than 206  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management personnel (or troops).
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has been to treat a variety of issues as regards the maneuver tactic.
We began by looking at the meaning of maneuver.
Thereafter, we discussed the differences between Maneuver tactic and Attrition tactic.
We also explained the elements of maneuver tactic insecurity management and defence.
Mind you, you are advised to engage yourself in further reading to complement what you have studied in this unit.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Describe the term, maneuver tactic; and ii.
Explain any four elements of maneuver tactic.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Boyd, John (1986) Patterns of Conflict, on .d-n-i.net/boyd/pdf/poc.pdfm Cordesman, Anthony H (2003), The Iraq War: Strategy, Tactics and Military Lessons, Washington DC: Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS).
Lind, William S (1985), Maneuver Warfare Handbook, Westview Special Studies in Military Affairs.
Boulder, CO.: Westview Press Inc. Limpkin, Richard E. (2000), Race to the Swift: Thoughts on Twenty-First Century Warfare.
Brassey's.
Van Creveld, Martin, ‘Air Power and Maneuver Warfare’ on ://www.au.af.mil/au/aul/aupress/Books/vanCreveld/vanCreveld.pdf .
Retrieved on April 2, 2008.
.cfc.forces.gc.ca/Profreading/myers.pdf .
Retrieved on April 6, 2008.
207  CSS 243 Principles of Security Practice and Management 208
