 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: CSS 246 COURSE TITLE: LEGAL AND SOCIAL FRAMEWORK OF PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES IN NIGERIA.
1 COURSE GUIDE CSS 246: LEGAL AND SOCIAL FRAMEWORK OF PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES IN NIGERIA.
Course Writer/Developer Dr. Niyi Adegoke NOUN Course Coordinators Dr. Niyi Adegoke NOUN Mr. Igwe, D. O. NOUN Mr. C.A .C.
Chukwunka NOUN Course Editor Dr A. Ikuomola - AAU Programme Leader Dr. N.Nwabueze - NOUN 2 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@non.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-949-X All Rights Reserved Printed by ………………… For National Open University of Nigeria 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS page Introduction ………………………………………………….……….ii Course Aims ………………………………………………..................ii Course Objectives …………………………………………….………ii Working Through This Course ……………………………….………iii Course Materials ……………………………………………….…… iii Study Units…………………………………………………………...iii Assessment …………………………………………………….……..iv Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA)………………………………......iv Final Examination and Grading …………………………...................iv Course Marking Scheme ……………………………………….…….iv Course Overview/Presentation Schedule ………………….….…..….v How to get the most from this course ………………………….…….vi-vii Tutors and Tutorials ………………………………………….………vii Summary ……………………………………………………….…….vii 4 Introduction This course is a three-credit unit course for undergraduate students in the arts and social sciences.
The materials have been developed within the Nigerian context.
It serves as an overview of what you will be taught and also provides you with information on the organization and requirements of the course.
Course Aims The aims are to help you to understand the nature of crime, theories of crime and crime control and the practical implications of crime in society.
It also empowers you in understanding of the preventive mechanism put in place by government and civil society in combating crime as well as to appreciate the sophisticated trends of crime prevention strategies from a global perspective.
These broad aims will be achieved by: (i) Introducing you to the general concept of crime, and its crucial precursors, consequences (cause and effect), cost implication and prevention mechanisms.
(ii) Expatiating on the theories of crime and crime control.
(iii) Extrapolating the trends in crime theorisation to crime reduction.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, CSS 246: Legal and Social Framework of Private Security Services in Nigeria has been divided in several different modules, each with its own specific objectives.
It is advisable that you read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check your progress).
Here are the wider objectives for the course as a whole.
By meeting the objectives, you count yourself as having met the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: a) Define the term security b) Appreciate the place of crime in society c) List the attributes of the criminal justice system d) Explain some theories of crime and crime control e) Identify sources of crime and their consequences f) Differentiate between different types of crime g) Be able to apply crime theories to reality h) Know the crime preventive methods used in Nigeria and other countries i) Differentiate between psychological and sociological theories of crime j) Discuss the shortcomings of crime theorising k) Discuss the future of crime theorizing l) Have a broad understanding of crime control methods in Nigeria and other countries.
5 Working through this Course To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
You will also need to undertake practical exercises for which you need a pen, a note – book, and other materials listed below.
The exercises are to aid you in understanding the concepts being presented.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: (i) Course guide.
(ii) Study units.
(iii) Assignments file.
(iv) Relevant textbooks including the ones listed under each unit (v) You may also need to visit the varied arms of the criminal justice system.
(vi) As a beginner, you need to read newspapers and interact with other mass media as often as possible.
Study Units In this course there are twenty units, divided into four modules, (five in each module).
Below are the units: Module 1 Unit 1: Definition of Security Unit 2: Types of Security Unit 3: Meaning of Types of Private Security Unit 4: Origin and Development of Private Security Unit 5: Reasons for the growth of Private Security Sector Module 2 Units 1: Legal framework of Private Security Company Units 2: Organisation of Private Security Company Units 3: Prospect and Limitations of the Private Guard Companies Act (1986) To the Effective Operations of Private Security Companies In Nigeria.
Units 4: Training and Development Units 5: Equipments and Other Accessories Module 3 Unit 1: Functions of Private Security Unit 2: Risk Analysis and the Security Survey Unit 3: Challenges and Problems of Private Security Service Unit 4: Computer and Information Security Unit 5: Nigerian Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC ) ACT NO 2 of 2003 Module 4 Unit 1: List of Private Security Companies in Nigeria Unit 2: Conflict Management in Private Security Service Unit 3: Relationship between Police and Private Security Operatives in Nigeria Unit 4: Regulation and Recommendation of Private Security Service in Nigeria 6 Unit 5: Specific Security threat Textbooks and References Certain books have been recommended in the course.
You may wish to purchase them for further reading.
Assessment File An assessment file and a marking scheme have been made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the assignments you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the tutor marked assignment (TMA) and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) You will have to submit a specified number of the Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs).
Every unit in this course has a tutor marked assignment.
You will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) will be used for your continuous assessments (C/A) which is 30%.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor Marked Assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submissions.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless in exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a test of three hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Find time to read the unit all over before your examination.
The final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflects the kinds of self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignment you have previously encountered.
And all aspects of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments (Best Three Assignments out of Four) = 30% 7 Final Examination = 70% Total = 100% Presentation Scheme The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date for the examinations.
Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Unit Title of work Weeks Activity Course Guide Module 1 Unit 1 What is Security Week 1 Assignment 1 2 Types of Security Week 1 Assignment 2 3 Meaning and Types of private Security Week 2 Assignment 3 4 Origin and Development of Private Week 2 Assignment 4 Security 5 Reasons for the growth of Private Week 3 Assignment 5 Security sector Module 2 1 Legal framework of Private Security Week 4 Assignment 1 Company 2 Organisation of Private Security Week 4 Assignment 2 Company 3 Training and Development Week 5 Assignment 3 4 Week 6 Assignment 4 5 Equipments and Accessories Week 7 Assignment 5 Module 3 1 Functions of Private Security Week 7 Assignment 1 2 Risk Analysis and the Security survey Week 8 Assignment 2 8 3 Challenges and Problems of Private Week 8 Assignment 3 Security Service 4 Computer and information security Week 9 Assignment 4 5 Nigerian Security and Civil Defence Week 9 Assignment 5 Corps ( NSCDC) Act No 2 of 2003.
Module 4 1 List of Private Security Companies of Week 10 Assignment 1 Nigeria 2 The Conflict and Conflict Management Week 10 Assignment 2 in of Private Security Service 3 Relationship between Police and of Week 11 Assignment 3 Private Security Service in Nigeria 4 Regulation and Recommendation of Week 11 Assignment 4 Private Security Service in Nigeria 5 Specific security threat Week 12 6 Revision Week 13 Assignment 1 7 Examination Week 14 Assignment 2 9 How to Get the most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through the designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor for help.
Always remember that your tutor’s job is to help you when you are in need of assistance.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit I, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is 10 returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Courses Guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor- marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • You have difficulty with the exercises • You have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary The course guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches you the basic principles of news reporting and writing, and how these principles can be applied.
It also acquaints you with the legal and ethical rules guiding your job as a reporter.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
11 MODULE 1 Unit 1: What is Security?
Unit 2: Types of Security Unit 3: Meaning and Types of private Security Unit 4: Origin and Development of Private Security Unit 5: Reasons for the growth of Private Security sector UNIT 1: WHAT IS SECURITY?
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The issue of security remains important to the continued socio-economic survival of any people (Hyden, 1995).
It is for this reason that there have been different efforts by stakeholders especially government to develop frameworks in advancing the security of people and mitigating various threats both human and non-human that can undermine the wellbeing of the people in any community.
The issue of security management has nevertheless experienced a shift from its traditional conception as an exclusive function of government (Hobbes, 1962) to a more accommodating security sector that encourages participation of private security organization and citizens in security planning and practice.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define the term security • Examine concepts in security • Discuss importance of security 12 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Security The word security emanated from the Greek word se-cura, meaning to be in a state of no fear.
Security is the protection of life and property of a person.
The concept of security keeps changing from its original conceptualization.
Traditionally, the state is the custodian and ultimate beneficiary of the monopoly use of violence especially if we consider the intellectual view(s) of some theorists like Thomas Hobbes (1962), Max Weber etc.
Thomas Hobbes (1962) argued that the essence of a state is to guarantee the security of lives and property and ensure law and order through its political sovereignty and monopoly of violence.
Security is the degree of protection against danger, damage, loss, and criminal activity.
Security as forms of protection is structures and processes that provide or improve security as a condition.
The Institute for Security and Open Methodologies (ISECOM) in the OSSTMM defines security as "a form of protection where a separation is created between the assets and the threat".
This includes but is not limited to the elimination of either the asset or the threat.
Security as a national condition was defined in a United Nations study (1986), so that countries can develop and progress safely.
But in contemporary times, the definition of security goes beyond the traditional military ways of protecting the state against internal and external aggression.
The fact is that since the end of the cold war, security management has assumed a new dimension.
External threat to security resulting from international hostilities and aggression that characterized the cold war era has been replaced with non-traditional security threats like information warfare, drug trafficking, nuclear pollutions, disease epidemics like HIV-AIDS, corruption, human trafficking (internal) insurgency, among others (Kasah, 2009).
Although the term security has been used in previous pages without question, there is no universal agreement on a definition.
But there is basic meaning of security among them, simply denoting the protection of lives and property.
The following definitions of security considered important: (1) It is an all-encompassing condition in which individual citizens live in freedom, peace and safety; participate fully in the process of governance; enjoy the protection of fundamental rights; have access to resources and the basic necessities of life; and inhabit an environment which is not detrimental to their health and well being (South Africa while Paper on Defence, 1996).
13  (2) It is also the degree of protection against danger loss and criminals.
(3) It is the protection of a person, property or organization from an attack.
There are people who have distorted motivations to perform such attacks.
The types of protection include prevention, response and pre-emptive attacks.
Security concepts Certain concepts recur throughout different fields of security: • Assurance - assurance is the level of guarantee that a security system will behave as expected • Countermeasure - a countermeasure is a way to stop a threat from triggering a risk event • Defence in depth - never rely on one single security measure alone • Exploit - a vulnerability that has been triggered by a threat - a risk of 1.0 (100%) • Risk - a risk is a possible event which could cause a loss • Threat - a threat is a method of triggering a risk event that is dangerous • Vulnerability - a weakness in a target that can potentially be exploited by a threat security THE IMPORTANCES OF SECURITY 1.
The objective of human security is to protect the vital core of all human lives.
(instead of the word ‘protect’ we can also use shield, guarantee, defend, maintain, uphold, preserve, secure, safeguard, etc).
2.
The objective of human security is to protect the vital core of all human lives from critical pervasive threats in a way that is consistent with long-term human fulfillment.
(initial definition was this).
3.
The objective of human security is to guarantee a set of vital rights and freedoms to all people, without unduly compromising their ability to pursue other goals.
4.
The objective of human security is to create political, economic, social, cultural, and environmental conditions in which people live knowing that their vital rights and freedoms are secure.
14 5.
The objective of human security is to keep critical pervasive threats from invading the vital core of human lives (Alkire, 2003).
4.0 CONCLUSION From this unit, student of criminology should have a broader knowledge of what is Security.
The concept of security has undergone a change from its original conceptualization.
Traditionally, the state is the custodian and ultimate beneficiary of the monopoly and usage of violence as a form of security.
The use of violence by the state however has proved less effective in the management of security, as focus in now being shifted to providing empowerment for the people as an alternative strategy which guarantees a wider range of security.
5.0 SUMMARY We have been able to explain the meaning of security.
We highlighted various definitions of security as given by different scholars and both concepts and importance of security were explained.
6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment Explain three of the following security concepts: a) Assurance, b) Risk, c) Exploit, d) Vulnerability, e) Threat , f) Counter measure.
7.0 References / Further Reading Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia last modified on 5 April 2011 Alkire, S. (2003) A Conceptual Framework for Human Security Centre for Research on Inequality, Human Security and Ethnicity, CRISE Queen Elizabeth House, University of Oxford 15 UNIT 2: TYPES OF SECURITY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Security is the requirement to maintain the survival of the state through the use of economic, military and political power and the exercise of diplomacy.
The concept developed mostly after World War II.
Initially focusing on military might, it now encompasses a broad range of facets, all of which impinge on the military or economic security of the state and the values espoused by the society.
In order to possess national security, a nation needs to possess economic security, energy security, environmental security, etc.
Security threats involve not only conventional foes such as nation-states but also non-state actors such as terrorist organizations, narcotic cartels and multi-national organizations; some authorities including natural disasters and events causing severe environmental damage are in this category.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: Understand the various types security.
.
There are different types of security as listed below: IT realm • Application security • Computing security • Data security • Information security • Network security 16 Physical realm • Airport security • Port security/Supply chain security • Food security • Home security • Hospital security • Physical security • School security • Shopping centre security • Infrastructure security Political • Homeland security • Human security • International security • National security • Public security Monetary • Financial security 1.
Physical Security Physical security concerns itself with those means by which a given facility protects itself against theft, vandalism, sabotage, unauthorized entry, fires, accidents and natural disaster.
A faculty means a plant, building, office, institution or any commercial or industrial structures and functions that are part of integrated operations.
It is defined as the measures used to provide physical protection of resources against deliberate and accidental threats.
It can be defined as the protection of personnel, hardware, programs, networks and data from physical circumstances and events that could cause serious losses or damage to an enterprise, agency or institution.
This includes protection from fire, natural disasters, burglary theft, vandalism and terrorism.
In this century, it is very clear that old devices may be functional but the use of the burglar alarm and padlocks may not be enough in a good security program.
Good systems combine access controls with advanced security technologies such as intrusion detection, video monitoring, smart cards 17 and biometrics which are integrated systems within a company’s computer network.
These give an excellent total asset protection program.
Physical security planning includes protection of (1) the grounds around the building (2) the buildings perimeter (3) the building’s interior and (4) its contents.
2.
Information Security Information security can be defined as a means of protecting information systems from any illegitimate access and use, theft, amendment or malicious attacks or penetration.
It can also be described as the process by which an organization protects and secures its systems, made and facilities that process and maintain information vital to its operations.
The increasing complexity of the modern state and sophisticated nature of contemporary business environment and corporations underscore the importance in mounting relevant mechanisms towards the protection of information and information system.
3.
Infrastructure Security Infrastructure security can be described as that aspect of security designed purposely to provide protection for specific infrastructure particularly those infrastructure considered critical.
The examples of critical infrastructure may include airports, seaports, railways, network communications, general hospitals, banks, central banks, armoires, dams, oil refineries, highways and bridge.
It is important to note that any damage done to these critical infrastructures will have far-reaching effects on the economy and overall security of a country.
Threats which can damage infrastructure are (1) sabotage, (2) terrorism (3) natural disaster (4) information warfare.
With the events of September 11, 2011, the U.S. and world community became aware of the power of terrorism as a tool of war.
The magnitude of the attack on the world trade Centre has proved that there is need for protection of critical infrastructure.
In the Niger- Delta areas of Nigeria, adequate infrastructural security provided for the pipeline and refineries by the federal government have reduced subsequent threats and attack.
18  4.
Computer System Security Along with computer software, the security of hardware and its components is also essential for overall data protection.
Even if the computer is not in use or plugged into a network, as anyone can access the hard disk, which can later be used on some other computer for the theft of data 5.
Economic security Assured basic income: access to employment and resources.
6.
Food security Physical and economic access to food for all people at all times: Hundreds of millions of people in the world remain hungry either through local unavailability of food or, more often, through lack of entitlements or resources to purchase food.
7.
Health security Access to medical treatment and improved health conditions: Poor people in general have less health security and in developing countries, the major causes of death are infectious and parasitic diseases.
8.
Environmental security Living in a healthy physical environment, spared from desertification, deforestation and other environmental threats that endanger people’s survival.
9.
Personal security Individual security from physical violence: Threats can take several forms, for example: threats from the State, foreign states, other groups of people (ethnic tension), individuals or gangs; threats directed against women or children based on their vulnerability and dependence; threats to self (e.g.
suicide, drug use, etc.).
10.
Community security Most people derive their security from membership of a social group (family, community, organisation, political and ethnic group, etc.).
Tensions often arise between these groups due to competition over limited access to opportunities and resources.
11.
Political security Living in a society that guarantees basic human rights and freedom of expression.
19  4.0 CONCLUSION From this unit, students of criminology are expected to know the types of Security.
During the cold war, majority of war at that time were international but now political strife, insurgencies and civil wars plague most of the countries.
The truth is that most of these internal wars are created by economic deprivation; inter religious violence, ethnic rivalry, maladministration among others.
5.0 SUMMARY From this unit, students of criminology should be able to know the various types of Security ranging from Computing security, Data security, Information security, Network security, Airport security, Port security/Supply chain security, Food security, Home security, Hospital security, Physical security, School security, Shopping centre security, Infrastructure security, Homeland security, Human security, International security, National security, Public security, and Financial security.
6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment List all types of Security and discuss only four of them.
7.0 References / Further Reading http://www.suite101.com/content/different-types-of-computer-security- a293034#ixzz1J09yNMxi 20 UNIT 3 MEANING AND TYPES OF PRIVATE SECURITY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The private security industry comprises those actors who provide security for people and property under contract and for profit.
Worldwide, the industry is experiencing a period of rapid growth, with valuable contribution to the provision of security.
It is important to understand the term private security and the different types therein.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define the term Private security Mention types of Private Security companies 3.0 Main Content There is no universal agreement on the definition of private security, although several attempts have been made to give acceptable definitions.
Private security includes those self-employed individuals and privately funded business entities and organizations providing security-related services to specific clientele for a fee, for the individual or entity that retains or employs them, or for themselves, in order to protect their persons, private property or interests from varied hazards.
It is argued that the profit motives and the sources of profits are basic element of private security but it hardly seems acceptable as a general definition.
Private security according to Howe (1998) is a board grouping.
It is an industry that operates only on a global market, organized along corporate lines and showing signs of growth rather than 21 contraction (Small, 2006).
In other words, private security is an industry that operates along corporate lines and provides security services that are largely independent of the state.
Private security seeks to protect against hazards which are commonly divided into man-made and natural.
Natural hazards may include fire, windstorm, flood, earthquake and other acts of nature that could result in building collapse, equipment failure, accidents and safety hazard.
It should be noted that fire is also quite often man-made, intentionally or unintentionally, while man-made hazards may include crimes against the person (for example, robbery or rape) or crimes against property (theft and pilferage, fraud and embezzlement).
In addition, man also creates problems through espionage and sabotage, civil disturbances, bomb threats, fire and accidents.
The term private security refers to security services provided to clients by non-state agencies.
It is a new concept in Africa and its growth has been facilitated by the desire to reduce the burden on state agencies of protecting their citizens.
Inadequate resources to equip state organs for their principal role of protecting the security of their citizens have also been a major decision driver in the growth of the sector.
Another reason has been the increase in numbers of the propertied class that need a secure environment in order to continue investing.
An examination of the circumstances of the growth of the private security sector reveals that private security has benefited only wealthy people and business that can afford to pay the bills of the forms or personnel that provide the security.
People in rural area are still exposed to the security dangers and risk that prevailed before its privatization.
The privatization of security has now become a global phenomenon.
From the beginning of the 21st century the world has witnessed an accelerated break down of the nation state monopoly on violence and the emergence of market place purveyors of armed forces (Shreier and Caparin, 2005).
This is owning to a number of factors, including general human insecurity, the end of the cold war, the globalization phenomenon, the marketisation of the public sphere, the downsizing of armed forces, the professionalization of armed and police force, the drive for profit maximization, the liberalization of the arms trade, the general unending African conflicts and the events of 9/11.
In the contemporary world, the privatization of security has swept throughout the globe to an unprecedented magnitude that is no longer possible to ignore, let alone comprehend.
22 Types of Private Security The Private Security Sector is divided into two categories Private Military Companies (PMCs), sometimes referred to as Privatized Military Firms (PMFs) and Private Security Companies (PSCs).
According to Small (2006:14), PMCs and PSCs represent the contemporary forms of private security.
Schreier and Caparini (2005:2) define PSCs as ‘companies that specialize in providing security and protection of personnel and property including humanitarian and industrial assets.
To Small (2004:7), PSCs may be defined as having the ability to provide a proximate capacity for violence, that is, they provide defensive security service, equipment and training to (mostly) Multinational Corporations, businesses humanitarian agencies and individuals.
Singer (2003:8) who prefers to call them ‘Corporate Warriors’ defines PMFs as ‘business organizations that trade in professionals services intricately linked to warfare’.
PMFs therefore constitute private business-oriented and profit driven warriors who offer diversified professional services bordering on security issues.
Schreier and Caparini (2005:2), PMCs are private companies that specialize in military skills, including combat operations strategies planning, intelligence collection, operational support, logistics, training, procurement and maintenance of arms and equipment.
Small (2008:8) further argues that PMCs ‘possess an’ immediate capacity for violence, that is, they offer more active offensive or tactical military and security service, equipment, advice and training.
Furthermore, they are more combat oriented and are contracted mainly by states or recognized governments to augment their national military capabilities and specialization.
Wairagu et al (2004:17) state that PMCs are better described as private mercenary contractors, which are corporate entities comprising military and intelligence entrepreneurs whose activities incorporate the provision of multi-purpose security-related products and services.
PSCs are sometimes subsidiaries of PMCs, and the relationship between firms is interwoven.
Small (2006:8) contends that the division between the services offered by PCSs and PMCs is somewhat flexible because they are often affiliates of one another.
For the reason PSCs and PMCs are frequent treated as one grouping, the private security industry, which is capable of operating at domestic and international level independent of the state.
Therefore PSCs cannot be treated in isolation from PMCs.
What determines their specific nametag is their level of engagement and the common dominator remains the promotion of security.
By the same token, as soon as the 23 common denominator ‘flips’’ they become something else, as the promotion of security is no longer present.
The private security sector is also characterized by what many writers refer to as private policing.
In an attempt to shed some light on what private policing entail.
John (2005: 378-279) divides it into four categories: protective policing; intelligence policing; publicly contracted policing and corporate policing.
Mercenaries This is another type of private security.
A mercenary is a person who takes part in an armed conflict or hostilities essentially by the desire for private.
It is defined as anyone who, not being national of the state against which his actions are directed; is employed, enrols or links himself willingly to a person, group or organization.
Contract and Proprietary Services Private security can also be divided into contract and proprietary services.
Proprietary security operations are those that are “in-house” or controlled entirely by the company establishing security for its operations.
For example, most state and federal government corporations operate private security services.
Contract security services, on the other hand, are those operations provided by a professional security company that contracts its services to a company.
For example, banks enter agreement with the private security companies to provide specific security services.
There is another type of private security called hybrid systems.
Hybrid system is the combination of propriety management and contractual line services.
For hybrid programme to be successful according to Fischer and Green (2004), all parties to the contract must be willing to communicate openly with each other.
A good hybrid security operation consists of four components.
(1) incorporation (2) consistent contract management support (3) periodic reviews (4) accurate quality measurements.
The choice between the first two types of services (proprietary security operations and contract security services) can be made by considering the advantages of each of them.
24 Advantages of Contract Services 1.
Cost It is economical compare with proprietary security services.
Liability insurance, payroll taxes, uniforms and equipment and the time involved in training, sick leave and vacations are all extra cost factors that must be considered in deciding on whether to establish a proprietary force.
Contract guards generally received fewer fringe benefits.
2.
Administration Hiring contract guards helps in the development and the administration of a recruitment program, personnel screening procedures and training programmes.
Hence there is little question that the administration chores are substantially decreased when a contract services is employed.
3.
Staffing In-house forces rarely have flexible staffing.
But it easier to have contract guards and lay them off when the need arises.
4.
Unions Contract guards do not have union and not likely to go out on strike, are less apt to sympathize with or support striking employees but most unionized guards are proprietary personnel.
5.
Impartiality It is often suggested that contract guards can more readily and more effectively enforce regulations than in-house personnel.
Hence it produces a more consistent and impartial services.
6.
Expertise When clients hire a guard service, they also hire the management of that service to guide them in their overall security program, thereby providing expertise advice to the management.
Advantages of Propriety Guards 1.
Quality of Personnel Proponents of proprietary guards systems argue that the higher pay and fringe benefits offered by employers as well as the higher status of in-house guards attracts higher-quality personnel.
2.
Control Managers have much greater degree of control over personnel of in-house guards especially when they are directly on the firm’s payroll.
The presence of contract supervisors between 25 guards and client management can interfere with the rapid, accurate flow of information either up or down.
3.
Loyalty It is argued that in-house guards develop a keener sense of loyalty to the firm they are protecting than do contract guards.
4.
Prestige Many managers simply prefer to have their own people on the job.
They feel that the firm gains prestige by building its own security force to its own specifications rather than by renting one from outside.
4.0 CONCLUSION Inability of the government to adequately provide for the security of all and sundry brought about the development and the growth of private security companies.
Although the main motive of Private Security Companies like other business ventures is to make profit.
It has become a global phenomenon although its growth reveals that it has benefited only the wealthy people and business empires that can afford to pay the bills of the personnel or companies that provide the security.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to define the term private security.
We also mentioned the types of private security companies.
Attention was given to the advantages of the contract services and that of propriety guards.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Mention and explain some types of private security.
7.0 References/Further Readings Richards A and Smith, H. (2007) the role of private security companies with Security Sector Reform Programmes Journal of Security Sector Management.
26 Fischer, R. J and Green, G. (2004) Introduction to Security.
Burlington, Butter worth Heinemann.
Shreier, F and Caparini, M (2005) Privatising Security, Law, Practice and Governance of Private Military and Security Companies: Geneva Centre for the Democratic control of Armed Force.
Occasional paper No 6 (march 2005) 27 UNIT 4 ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION “Security is now the second largest money-spinner in Nigeria, surpassed only by oil and gas”.
This statement by a long-standing observer of Nigerian politics is striking, especially given that Nigeria is Africa’s most populous country and the world’s seventh largest oil producers.
While a lack of statistics and information make this claim impossible to verify completely, there is no doubt that the private security industry has grown rapidly in recent years.
Private security personnel are highly visible around the country, guarding businesses, homes and neighbourhoods and advising transnational companies and embassies on risks and dangers to their assets and employees.
Security has thus become a major part of the nation’s economy (Abrahamsen and Williams 2005).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to give brief history and development of private Security Service in Nigeria.
3.0 Main Content The Development of Private Security Service in Nigeria.
The involvement of private players in the management of security locally and internationally has become phenomena in recent times.
Considering the historical development of private security companies in Nigeria, one will not agree that the presence and activities of private security guards laid the foundation for the emergence of private security companies in Nigeria.
The use of guards working individually or those commissioned by unregistered private security companies had been in existence prior to the nation’s independence.
The use of thugs or some party members for private security became noticeable at independence and this habit has continued till 28 date in Nigeria.
Nigeria Investigation and Security Company (NISCO), the first private security outfit providing uniformed guards in Nigeria came into being in 1965, and since then the number of existing private security firms has drastically increased.
The recruitment of party thugs as personal security by politicians prior to 1966 coup (led by Major Kuduna) and their brutal operations ( excessive use of force) necessitated the clamour to dissolve them.
Ohonbamu (1962) describes the situation thus “in the Western Region there were mass recruitment into the local force of party thugs and stalwarts for security people against the police whom were supposed to be giving protection to law abiding citizen’’.
The expansion of private property in Nigeria and African generally is a key factor in the growth of private security in both size and profile, as property owners have recognized the commercial benefits of employing their own security forces.
They are not only able to specify the functions performed by the security staff, but to empower them to uphold conditions of access to their properties and to exclude any unwanted visitors.
This is permitted in common law countries as the law bestows on property owners the right o decide who may have access to their properties or premises.
For the mass private property owner, efficient use of private security services can be made due to economies of scale and a relative immunity to a free rider effect in their investment in security.
Apart from this, as Stemming (1988) argues, for the commercial user of private security, any policing strategy must be proven cost-effective, since a business will not adopt a security solution more costly than the problem.
In general, therefore, corporations will seek to prevent a loss rather than try to recover the loss after it has occurred and to change the situation in which any problems occur rather than to draw on the slow and costly criminal justice process in pursuit of sanctions.
Thus, private security personnel and the security hardware that they have at their disposal (such as radio communication and closed circuit television (CCTV) technology), have become fundamental to the successful governance of such territories, enabling a pre- emptive approach to security in contrast with the reactive style of state police agencies.
The demand for security and inability of the public security agents to meet the security needs of various segments of the public have necessitated the growing acceptance being enjoyed by private security guards in the country.
The services of private security guards have continued to be sought by individuals and corporate bodies to safeguard the security of their lives and 29 properties.
Paucity of funds has made it difficult for government in Nigeria to have adequate size of police and armed forces.
The size of police personnel is highly insufficient to meet the security needs of the people.
This situation has led to the privatization of public security agents especially the police.
The commoditization of police services in the country has further complicated the problem of inefficiency of the police in the discharge of their duties.
This situation reinforces the disconnection between public safety and policing in Nigeria.
The interest and security of the elite, a few wealthy individuals and organizations have remained basic preoccupations of Nigeria police.
It is worrisome that despite government ban on militia groups, they have continued to be popular among several ethnic groups especially in South-Western Nigeria; proving for the security needs of the people.
Many wealthy individuals, organizations and communities often seek the services of Oodua Peoples Congress (OPC) guards to provide alternative security for them when the public security sector has failed to live up to expectations.
It was even an indictment on Nigerian Police and Federal Government by a former Lagos State Governor, Bola Tinubu.
In reacting to the armed robbery attack of retired Justice Fatai Williams, declared that ‘if Nigeria Police Could not address the problem of rising incidences of violent crime, particularly armed robbery and assassination, he would have no choice other than employing the services of Odua Peoples Congress to Mitigate various activities of Criminals (The Post Express, June 14, 2000).
Nevertheless, security has thus become a major part of the Nigerian economy and it is estimated that there are currently between 1500 and 2000 Private Security Companies (PSCS) in Nigeria, with more than 100,000 on their pay roll serving as guards (Abrahamsen and Williams, 2005).
As it were, there is no adequate official record concerning the number of Private Security Companies existing in the country till date.
The reason is that many of the existing private security outfits are not registered and their activities are not regulated.
Statistically, the major private security companies in Nigeria include prudential security (having almost 9000 guards with operation covering the entire country).
Halogen security (having nearly 4, 000 guards) as well as few other companies like Bemil security and Corporate Guards.
The largest non-indigenous or foreign Private Security Company in the country is group 4 securicor’s partner Outsourcing Services Ltd (OSL) having its operation in all states of the federation with 30 staff strength of about 3, 000 guards.
Apart from the large retinue of police and armed forces, many oil companies often contract the services of number of private security guards from both within and outside the country to argument the activities of public security agents, with the aim of adequately reducing the impact of the risks that may emanate from any unforeseen attack that can pose a threat to the general security of these companies.
The importance of the complementary roles being played by private security guards is emphasized by many of these oil companies.
For instance, oil companies like Exxon Mobile and Shell usually employ a sizeable number of private guards who are trained by the Nigeria Police as Spy police (Abrahamsen and Williams 2005).
Apart from intelligence activities, trained guards may be mandated to perform some other tasks including security of infrastructural facilitates of their employers.
The spy police in Shell, Exxon Mobile and Chevron Texaco alone are more than two thousand.
Due to non-permission of private security guards to carry arms like gun in Nigeria, a number of clients often employ the services of public security agents to the relevant authorities, so that they can have armed-unit that will fortify the activities of private security.
Many embassies, oil companies and other organizations complement the services of private security guards (which do not involve the use of arms) with that of the police.
Often they also seek the services of mobile police to provide armed support for the general security operations.
For instance, in Shell alone, there is nothing less than 600 Mobile Policeman in its operations to complement activities of private security guards on its pay-roll (Abrahamsen and Williams, 2005).
The growth of Private Security Companies as well as the number of personnel therein is very much evident not only in Nigeria but also in other part of the globe particularly in Eastern Europe, Middle-East and other Africa countries (Howe, 1998).
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been agreed globally that the development of private security companies in world has been beneficial to most people, corporate bodies and civil societies.
This is not to say that the security situation has improved drastically.
Security is therefore a continuous process.
5.0 SUMMARY From this unit, students of criminology should be able to give brief history and development of private Security Service in Nigeria .The development started with use of guards 31 working with individual to the current status of registered private security companies in Nigeria today.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the development of private security services in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abrahamsen R. and Williams, M. C. (2005), The Globalisation of Private Security.
A Country Report of Nigeria.
Globalisation of Security Research Project (Department of International Politics, University of Wales, Aberyswyth) and the New Security Challenge Programme (ESRC, U. K.).
Keku, P. and Akingbade, T. (2003) Industrial Security in Nigeria, Challenges and Prospects for the 21st Century, (Lagos).
Ohonbamu, O.
(1972) The Dilemma of Police Organisation under a Federal System: The Nigeria Example The Nigeria Law Journal (6): 73-87 The Post Express, June 14, 2000.
32 UNIT 5: REASONS FOR THE GROWTH OF PRIVATE SECURITY SECTORS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last decade, commercially organized security personnel have become an increasingly common sight around the world, from protecting shopping malls, to providing convoy security for banks and other financial companies.
They are increasingly visible in major companies in urban centres.
They form a complex web of commercial providers of protection services, operational support in combat, intelligence, interrogation.
In this unit we will deal with special aspect of private security service, the reason for the growth and increasing expansion of private security.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Give reasons for the growth of private Security Service in Nigeria 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Reasons for the Growth of Private Security Sector The forces behind the growth of the private security industry are many.
The following are the factors responsible for the rapid growth of the private security sector: (1) Human Insecurity General human insecurity has been one of the major factors that have been a serious threat to Africa society.
A lot of threats have always rendered African society insecure such as colonialism, tribal conflicts, border conflict, disputes over mineral resources, terrorism genocide, 33 wars, foreign domination, post-colonialism, apartheid etc.
General insecurity at the domestic level is usually in the terrain of PSCS while the PMCS addresses insecurity at the international level.
(2) The End of The Cold War Human insecurity was intensified after the end of the cold war.
Many shared the sentiment that the dramatic growth of the private security sector in Africa is an aftermath of the cold war.
Singer (2003:9) declared that “the resultant effect on the supply and demand of military services created a ‘security gap’ that the private market rushed in to fill.
(3) Globalization Globalization according to Tyetzlaff (1998) is widely seen as the expansionist takeover of the present-day developing countries by the Western Market-Model in the course of which traditional cultures disappear, the systems associated with a capitalist market-economy and formal democracy are disseminated and the less developed economies are forcibly integrated into a world market dominated by the industrial countries.
Globalization allows the rich nations and corporation to get richer because they have the capital and power to enforce trade agreements that favour their interest and which further the emergence of a new order from which many countries in Sub-Sahara Africa are excluded because they cannot compete effectively.
Hence capital, power and the need for profit maximization that characterize the notion of globalization apply equally to the unprecedented growth within the Private Security Sector.
(4) The Marketization of the Public Sphere In the contemporary climate, there is a growing trend for marketization of the public sphere.
Many governments opt to outsource some of their responsibilities for a number of reasons.
For instance, learner governments engendered by policies associated with World Bank and International Monetary Fund, find themselves obliged to adopt a marketization of public sphere approach.
Further, governmental departments may be incapable of undertaking some of their responsibilities or they may opt to outsource because of economic viability.
By marketing their responsibilities in this way, governments are seen to be ineffective in terms of the delivery of services to their citizens.
The private security addresses the ability or neglect of the state to provide protection for its citizens.
(5) The Downsizing of Armed Forces 34 Schveler and Caparini (2005:4) stated that, owing to financial constraints, many western forces have focused on redefining and maintaining only core competencies and resort to outsourcing non-core activities to the private security sector.
This trend has been followed in Africa especially where the state lack the technical know-how so far as security matters are concerned.
The practice of outsourcing services meritably leads to the armed forces being downsized.
The downsizing of the armed forces to a large extent has inevitably affected the military structure in some countries.
In the South African Defence Force (SADF), for instance, a considerable number of white defence personnel were left unemployed and were later absorbed into the private security sector.
(6) Profit Maximisation The private sector is organized along the capitalist mode of production.
The purpose of any private security company or any private institution is first and foremost the concern on how to ensure profit maximisation.
But public security has sharp contrast, from Private Security Company, which is normally paid through the collection of income tax, among other things.
Zedner (2006:84) notes, ‘vast security companies seek to exploit market opportunities, expand their turnover and maximize returns to their shareholders.
For this reason, some Marxian approaches have focused on the private security sector as an industry that provides ‘a legitimating’ or “buffer” function for the bourgeois state and the fiscal crisis of the state is thus considered to result in recrudescence of policing for profit.
Jones and Newburn (2002:129) refer to the private sector as commercial policing since their activities are strictly commercialised, as opposed to mainstream policing.
Rigado and Greener (2000:150) note that large corporate entities thus become legally responsible for the safety and security of “denizens” passing through their particular “bubbles of governance”.
If these large corporations did not provide security to their customers, business would crumble.
The more secure their premises the more business they get.
The use of the Private Security Sector therefore, considerably increases their profit margins.
(7) The Liberation of the Arms Trade Another important reason for the growth of Private Security Sector is that of arms trade liberation.
International arms trade has opened up to an increasing number of buyers and sellers, which has not only permitted a larger number and broader variety of actors to access weaponry, but has also provided more and easier ways for PNICS to profit from conflicts through their involvement in the arms trade, thus facilitating arms proliferation.
35 Private security industries have often been accused of supplying weapons to African countries, participates and takes sides in conflicts (as supporters of state government or rebels in opposition).
Others, participates in rendering humanitarian assistance to the victims, participates in the peacekeeping process and also readily avail themselves in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes.
The involvement of the private security industry in conflict zones thus become a vicious circle with far reaching implications as a force of destruction or rather fostering insecurity in many countries i n Africa and other developing countries.
(8) Insecurity for humanitarian aid Workers The private security industry provides services to numerous organizations, one of which is aid.
PSCs plays a major role in giving support to humanitarian aid workers in conflict zones.
The greater the involvement of aid workers in humanitarian crisis situations (which are seldom safe), the greater the need for private security companies to ensure the security of humanitarian personnel and their property.
The security threat that aid workers normally face in conflict zones has led public and private aid organizations and the UN organizations such as UNCHCR UNICEF, UNDP and WFP to have PMCs and PSCs to ensure the protection of their operations and personnel in unstable areas.
(9) Events of 9/11 The events of 9/11 not only changed the world but also fuelled the growth of the Private Security Sector in general.
Within the discourse initiated by the US on foreign policy and the consequent campaign against terrorism, brought about the need for the reinforcement of the Us military forces in fighting wars in the name of combating terrorism.
As a result of this, private security organisations are partnered with to enhance the US effort in combating terrorism as well as governmental-militated operations.
(10) Weak State Capacity One of the most important enabling factors for the emergence of Private Security Sector is supposedly weak state capacity and the Concomitant Security Vacuum in large parts of Africa.
This means that PSCs can be seen as to product of long-term historical development rather than a phenomenon of relatively recent origin.
Weak state capacity is due largely to both indigenous and colonial project of territorial statehood.
The Weberian model of the modern, territorial 36 nation-state with its monopoly over the legitimate use of force has not always proved to be an appropriate way of providing security to the citizens of African states.
Further reasons for weak state capacity and its decline from the late 1980s onward and throughout the 1990s are the failure of economic liberalization and structural adjustment programmes that were imposed by international donors such as the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) on developing countries.
When state capacity is lacking and country’s legitimate security forces are unable to provide security, alternative security structures must be put in place.
( 11) Oil Boom With oil boom in 1970s, a lot of private properties were acquired by individuals and private organizations.
Since then, many people have become involved in economic activities.
Crime increased in such an environment and the need to protect lives and properties intensified.
Fear of crime has driven the demand for private security services.
Analysis has proved that companies using the services of PCSs have a lesser chance of being victims of burglary.
The police population ratio remains very low.
( 12)The Police It has been seen that numbers of the police and population ratio is below the international ratio which is 1:400.
With such a ratio coupled with inadequate resources in the police force, crisis of police inefficiency and ineffectiveness were rife, especially from the property owners.
It was therefore necessary to relinquish some police functions to private security organizations as one way of addressing the problem.
( 13 )Supply and Demand Dynamics Supply and demand dynamics are fuelling the growth of the private security sector.
As crime remains a high priority issue, many turn to PSCs for their protection.
PSCs currently protect private homes, airports, harbours, banks, transport systems, industries and other critical areas.
Given its growing dependence on the sector, as it is no nation can survive without it.
4.0 CONCLUSION Recent years have seen growing concern over the proliferation and growth of the private security sector.
Africa was familiar with isolated colonial mercenaries who were hired by colonial regimes to fight against liberation movements.
The Post-Cold War era has awaken the reality of 37 highly organised, corporate type companies that provide military and police services to any entity with the financial muscle to pay for their services.
This reality dawned in tandem with the post-Cold War liberalisation and privatisation processes.
African states, like any other state, had enjoyed a degree of control over the means and resources of violence hence are now challenged directly by the proliferation and growth of the private security sector.
As a result of this development that has caught Africa napping and without a functional legal framework to curtail it, serious efforts are being made to determine the causes of this proliferation and growth as well as innovative ways to regulate it.
The present study focused on how weak states and their rulers have deliberately invited the private security sector to be part of their innovative strategies for survival and compensation for weakness.
5.0 SUMMARY This chapter looks at the reasons for the proliferation and expansion of the private security sector in Africa.
It focuses on general human insecurity, the end of the cold war, globalization, and the commercialization of the public sphere.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give reasons with examples for the growth of private Security Service in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abrahamsen, R and Williams, W C (2005).
Country report: Sierra Leone: the globalisation of private security.Project on the globalisation of Private Security, Department of International Relations, University of Aberystwyth.
Sabelo J Ndlovu-Gatsheni (2007) Weak states and the growth of the private security sector in Africa: Whither the African state?
Monograph No 139: Private Security in Africa, Manifestation, Challenges and Regulation, Institute for Security Studies 38 MODULE 2 Unit 1: Legal Framework of Private Security Company Unit 2: Organization of Private Security Company Unit 3: Prospect and Limitations of The Private Guard Companies Act ( 1986) To The Effective Operations Of Private Security Companies In Nigeria Unit 4: Training and Recruitment Unit 5: Equipments and Other Accessories UNIT 1: LEGAL FRAMEWORK OF PRIVATE SECURITY COMPANY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This module examines the extent to which Private Security Companies (PSCs) are currently controlled by national regulation.
In Nigeria there has been disregard for the Private Guard Companies (PGCs) Act (Cap 367) of 1986 which guides the licensing, control and administration, and Prohibited Activities, Offences and Penalties regarding PGCs.
More than two decades ago, the government of Nigeria set in a motion, and passed an Act that regulates the establishment of the private guard company.
Various elements of the current Act concerning the licensing process, staff identification, the weapons used and general requirements for PSC owners and staff.
are obsolete and have not been reviewed.
2.0 Objectives On completion of this unit students should be able: • To examine legal framework guiding the licensing of PSCs • To develop an understanding of the features of the PGCs Act 39 3.0 Main Content Most private security companies are like any other corpotration, they have conventional corporate structures, operate as legal entities, and maintain Registered Office Address(es), Internet sites and corporate ties.
The frequency with which concerns are raised about the legitimacy of PSC operations signals a seemingly instinctive reluctance to relinquish the state’s role as the provider of security.
In the words of former UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, ‘the world may not yet be ready to privatise peace’.
The roots of that scepticism cannot, however, simply be reduced to knee-jerk protectiveness about state power and sovereignty.
Apprehensiveness about the provision of private security services relates in principle to two legitimate and interrelated concerns.
First, state dominance of security relations has been challenged by a variety of non-state actors, the impact of private security actors on the state’s primacy in the provision and guaranteeing of security raises new questions.
States have not recognize and increasingly accept that they are not the only actors to address international and national security threats; nor is it perhaps fruitful for them to retain a monopoly in this realm.
Efforts to tackle ‘new threats’—such as transnational crime, environmental hazards or the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction—require states to act largely through or with international or regional organizations and NGOs within a broader structure of security governance.
This has taken place without a fundamental redefinition of state capacity.
States still enjoy the leading role in the national/international system and are seen as the sole source (if no longer the sole object) of legally binding international regulation.
In the realm of security affairs, states still claim the prerogative of creating and judging political legitimacy.
If the state is undercut or marginalized in this respect, there is a risk that one of the traditional cores of security governance—states’ collective as well as general control of the use of force—will be destabilized, affecting not only the state actor but also the international system itself.
For the role of the state in security affairs to be maintained in the face of ongoing ‘privatization of security’, the use of private security providers needs to take place within agreed structures and processes designed to safeguard legitimacy and accountability in security affairs.
Multinational Companies (MNCs) such as Shell and Chevron have contracted private security firms in Nigeria.
At present the legal structures are not effective and efficient; this is visible in 40 the disregard of the PGCs Act Cap 367 laws of the federation by Multinational Companies in the restive Niger Delta Region and other parts of the country.
Second, the private provision of security sector functions strikes at the core of the debate about security sector reform (SSR).
In striving to uphold the role of the state as the guarantor of security, the question of what kind of security is to be upheld is crucial?
The establishment of functioning law-and-order and security institutions (military, police and intelligence) is often cited as a minimum requirement for stability in states.
However, when the objective is broadened to ensuring an equitable distribution of security, the democratic credentials of security institutions becomes central, recognising that ‘security’ is not merely a question of protecting the state but also of protecting its citizens.
In this sense, the use of private sector actors for providing security services represents a particular challenge.
PSCs are responsible to shareholders rather than to voters and making fundamentally apolitical actors contribute constructively to the establishment of democratic and accountable security institutions is a tough circle to square.
The extent to which private security providers can fit into new forms of national security governance will ultimately depend on the extent to which their capacities can be directed towards a higher, long-term goal—one that is governed by politics and law rather than simple economics.
The crux of the private security sector’s capacity to be a legitimate actor on the national scene thus lies in the relative capacity of states to manage the use of private companies and to ensure that it is compatible with the promotion of good governance, both domestically and internationally.
The effective use of private security companies remains partially blocked as long as this challenge is unresolved.
The need to take account of the context in which private security actors operate also arises from the basic, significant point that the ultimate consumers of the services at the end may not be the actual contract holders or clients of private security firms, but rather the local populations.
The consequences of the provision of security by the private sector are global, involving the formulation of basic premises of international security politics.
3.1 Understanding what constitute a private security company Private Security Company (PSC) is taken to refer to companies offering defensive services, intended mainly to protect individuals and properties.
Private security services fall into two 41 categories: (1) proprietary or corporate security; and (2) contract or private security firms.
Corporate security generally refers to the security departments that exist within businesses or corporations.
Contract security firms by contrast sell their services to the public, including businesses, homeowners, and banks.
Private security is not a monolithic entity.
Just as differences exist between state and local law enforcement, private security performs functions that are differ considerably.
IACP’s (2004) summit report notes that “A security practitioner could be an experienced director of security at a major multinational corporation, a manager of contract security officers at a client site, a skilled computer crime investigator, an armed protector at a nuclear power plant, or an entry-level guard at a retail store.
However the legitimacy of any private security company is defined by the Private Guards Companies Act Cap 367 of 1986 Laws of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Section 1(1) of the Private Guard Companies Act which states that: As from the commencement of this Act, no organisation shall perform the service of watching, guarding, patrolling or carrying of money for the purpose of providing protection against crime unless the organisation concerned – (a) is registered as a company under or pursuant to the Companies and Allied Matters Act; (b) has applied for and has been granted a licence by the Minister in accordance with the provision of this Act; and (c) is wholly owned by Nigerians in accordance with the Schedule to the Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Act.
This implies that any organisation which performs the services of watching, guarding, patrolling or carrying of money for the purpose of providing protection against crime and meets with the requirements of subsection of the Act is free to operate.
However, the statue of a private security companies is further clarified by the Part IV – Supplementary Section 36 subsection 3 which states that: (1) This Act shall not be construed as requiring any of the following persons to hold a licence under or to observe any of the conditions of this Act, that is to say – (a) any legal practitioner while acting in the ordinary course of his profession or any of his employees while acting in the ordinary course of his employer’s profession; 42 (b) any inspector, guard, watchman or other person employed to do inspecting, guarding, watching or inquiring work for one employer only (such employer not being a private guard company) in respect of inspecting, guarding, watching or inquiry, work done for that employer for the protection of persons or property arising out of the function or business exercised or carried on by the employer; or (c) any person whose duties when employed by a private guard company consist of no more than clerical or secretarial work, the giving of information over the telephone on request on matters obtained from existing records of the company or the receipt in the office The “proprietary or corporate security” has been exempted by subsection 1b of the Act for the definition of “Corporate security generally refers to the security departments that exist within businesses or corporations” matches the criteria of exemption in the subsection 1b.
It should be noted however that new security structures and legal regimes are potentially evolving, yet traditional structures are slow to adapt.
The security framework is more sophisticated today than in the past.
It has been observed that the Nigerian Police Force could not always guarantee Nigerians security as an important part of proactive crime prevention because of inadequate manpower, advanced technological and programmatic means for fear reduction; therefore the continuous agitation for Corporate Private Security Organisations to assist the Nigeria Police in safety business (Ekhomu, 2004).
Reasons are not farfetched as evidences are bound showing the technological means under their kitty for proactive crime control such as intruder alarms, close circuit monitors, access control to mention just a few.
There is the need to review the legal framework of the Private Security Companies.
3.2 Legal framework guiding licensing of PSCs Currently, the Act regulating the licensing of Private Security Companies (PSC) in Nigeria is the Private Guard Companies Act Cap 367 Laws of the Federation 1986.
The Act is divided into four sections namely: Part I – Licensing of Private Guard Companies Part II – Control and Administration Part III – Prohibited, Offences and Penalties etc.
Part IV – Supplementary 43 The regulation and licensing of PSC fall under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Interior.
However, the recommendation of licensing of PSC has to be made by the Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps as stated in its Mission by the enactment of the Act called “the Corps” to: a) recommend to the Minister the registration of private guard companies; b) inspect the premises of private guard companies, their training facilities and appliance designed for their use; c) supervise and monitor the activities of all private guard companies and keep a register for that purpose; The stipulated requirement for the licensing of Private Guard Companies is stated in Section 1 subsection (1) and (2) of the Private Guard Companies Act that: 1.
(1) As from the commencement of this Act, no organisation shall perform the service of watching, guarding, patrolling or carrying of money for the purpose of providing protection against crime unless the organisation concerned – (a) is registered as a company under or pursuant to the Companies and Allied Matters Act; (b) has applied for and has been granted a licence by the Minister in accordance with the provision of this Act; and (c) is wholly owned by Nigerians in accordance with the Schedule to the Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Act.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this Section, where on the coming into operation of this Act, any company in carrying on private guard business in Nigeria, such company may apply within 6 months thereafter to be licensed but shall cease to carry on private guard business of any description in Nigeria after the expiration of 12 months from the coming into operation of this Act unless, prior to the expiration of the said period such company, being a registered company, is licensed to continue the particular class or classes of private guard business in respect of which application had been made by the company concerned.
The core of the application for licensing is elaborated in Section 2 subsection (1), (2), (3) and (4) which states that: 2.
(1) An application for licence shall be made in writing through the licensing authority to the Minister in the manner and giving such particulars as specified in Form A in Schedule of this Act.
44 (2) The Minister may, before considering any such application require from the applicant – (a) further evidence, as the Minister may specify, concerning the good character, competence and integrity of any director or other person responsible for or in charge of the operation of the company concerned; (b) where Alsatian or other guard dogs are to be employed in the services of the company, sufficient evidence that all existing regulation relating to animal health and certification have been complied with; and (c) such further information as the Minister may specify.
(3) An application for licence shall be accompanied by such fee as the Minister may prescribe.
(4) An application for a licence shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the conditions of service (including salaries) of the employees or prospective employees of the company making the application.
3.3 To develop an understanding of the features of PGCs Act The last quarter of this century is characterised by a widespread outsourcing of many policing activities.
Many policing tasks have been picked up by privatised ‘policing’ agencies, a world- wide phenomenon that has attracted no little academic attention in recent years.
Today, private sector employees are globally recognised as vital players in preventing, detecting and investigating crime.
The commercial demand for private contract security specifically, and private policing more generally, thus grows steadily upwards, and there is no part of the globe that has not been affected.
This aspect of the legal framework of Private Security Companies examines the present and the future issues to be covered in Private Guard Companies laws in order to encourage and sustain an integrated, efficient and workable security system management.
Given the rapid expansion of the presence of private personnel in policing activities, one might assume that careful attention would have been paid to the legal framework within which these cooperative activities take place.
Sadly, this has not been the case.
The consequence of this neglect is that the legal authority, rights and powers of private security providers is determined more by a piecemeal array of legal privileges and assumptions than by clear law.
True, there has been legislation passed concerning the registration, licensing, identification and training of private legal personnel.
However, the main aim of this legislation is 45 to regulate those who operate within the industry, and to check those who wish to enter it against certain criteria and minimum training standards.
The legislation does not deal with powers per se.
There is very little in Nigerian legislation, and even less in the common law, that permits security guards, even licensed guards, to wield specific powers.
Indeed, in two jurisdictions this fact is specifically mentioned in security licensing legislation.
Section 1 of the Private Guard Companies Act 1986 (PGC) says that the holder of any licence can carry out the functions authorised by the licence.
The lack of legislation is confusing for security personnel and the public alike.
Nowhere do specific ‘policing’ laws directly and consistently focus on the way that private security personnel are empowered to act or to be given immunity from civil suit or criminal charges.
Moreover, there are few legal decisions and precedents emerging from the courts.
Hence it is difficult for anyone to find a satisfactory body of law on the subject.
In contrast, public police have coercive and intrusive powers that are delineated ‘in more or less clearly defined circumstances.’ These delineations reveal distinct differences between the powers of public and private officers and agents.
For example, public police are given statutory immunity from civil suit in circumstances where their beliefs and acts are ‘reasonable.’ Private personnel are afforded no such luxury.
Indeed, private security remain vulnerable and constantly run the risk of being sued in the torts of assault, false imprisonment, intentional infliction of mental distress, defamation, nuisance and trespass to land and to person.
This is not to say that police do not run these risks, but because they have immunities in place, the police are far less likely to find themselves on the losing end of a civil suit brought by an aggrieved person.
Moreover, public police may act to prevent the commission of an offence before it actually happens (acting upon a suspicion).
This concession is not granted to private security personnel (or anyone else for that matter).
Public police powers, duties, rights, responsibilities and immunities have been so often debated in the courts that there is now a large and continually expanding body of law on these issues.
The same cannot be said for private security law.
Legal Authority The legal powers, rights and immunities of private security personnel are obscurely and confusingly located across a range of fields: the criminal law; the law of property; the law of 46 contract (both in terms of contracts of employment, and the contracts that apply to paying customers whenever they enter a private sports or entertainment venue); and employment law.
The consequence of this is that there are many bits and pieces of common law, general law and legislation that come together to form what could loosely be referred to as ‘the law of private security.’ The law of property, for example, grants to the owner of private property the power to require visitors to leave the premises (using reasonable force if necessary), or to subject visitors to stipulations (such as a search) prescribed and advertised by the property owner.
Similar powers exist for employers over employees.
Each of these powers can be delegated to agents (private security) who are entitled to wear uniforms, and even to carry a firearm if they have the correct training and licence.
Other possibilities for confusion emerge from the common law rights of persons to sue others for breach of their rights of liberty.
For example, store detectives who detain shoplifters and thieves upon reasonable suspicion of theft have had damages awarded against them (paid to wrongly accused suspects) in some cases, but not in others.
The outcome, it seems, depends upon the level of restraint, the length of time involved, and the extent to which the accused person was given an opportunity to allay suspicion.
Sometimes the courts protect the public against invasions of privacy by private sector security personnel, but in other circumstances they do not.
The legal reasoning is often unclear.
The confusion generally stems from the fact that the laws that apply to private personnel have developed over the years to apply not to those doing similar work to the police but to private citizens, landowners and employers.
They translate into something potentially quite different in the hands of the agents of these individuals.
There are thus some justifiable concerns such as ‘If private security personnel are in reality no different from ordinary citizens, a law which treats them alike seems most appropriate.
But if in reality they are not, and the law still treats them as they are, it becomes inappropriate.’ Private security personnel are different from the public in general.
On a daily basis they search bags, forbid entry, bar exits, ask probing questions, detain people, confiscate property, carry out inquiries and operate covert surveillance equipment, most significantly CCTV.
Yet the powers under which they operate were designed for other purposes.
Is there another way forward that can remedy the malaise?
These are questions for thought.
47 Manifestations of Empowerment There has been, in the past decade or so, some attempts by governments to grant powers to persons other than to the sworn officers.
Some of these may be able to provide a model of legislation that could settle some ambiguities.
A common manifestation of empowerment is where a parliament or legislative body creates specific legislation giving the right to certain trained operatives, who have been employed for specific tasks, to engage in a particular state- sponsored task or role.
These tasks carry with them specific, albeit limited, powers.
There are a number of current examples that come to mind internationally as well as nationally.
4.0 Conclusion As policing moves more and more into private hands, the traditional legal powers that apply to ‘policing’ are becoming outdated.
The powers and immunities of private security personnel are often unclear and inconsistent, dependent upon fine distinctions and differ remarkably from those of the public police even though they are often carrying out many of the same tasks.
What should be done to remedy this situation?
There is a good argument to continue to explore the development of private security laws with specific powers and immunities granted to certain personnel who have been suitably trained, whether Community Support Officers or Contracted Protective Security Officers.
Whatever path is chosen, the exercise in making the choices and debating the required legislation would, arguably, lift the profile of private operators and their associations, bolster training standards and accountabilities, improve public confidence, and enhance policing effectiveness and cooperation generally.
5.0 Summary Private security personnel and private operatives are now undertaking some of the roles previously and solely in the realm of public policing, but the laws that apply to empower and restrict them are not in the same league.
They are, for the most part, vague and inconsistent.
Private security/ legal issues rarely come before the courts and there is little legislation that applies.
This situation creates a rather opaque ‘policing’ world.
There is no broadly based legislation giving specific powers to all licensed guards.
Parliaments have avoided legislation other than to set up licensing regimes.
They have not specifically set out immunities, preferring to infer that they apply once the powers under legislation have been exercised appropriately.
It is 48 a difficult task to specify private guard powers across the board, given the many forms and varieties of private operatives and the multitude of activities in which they may be engaged at any one time or over a period of time.
The most common option for private guards is the ‘do nothing’ option.
There are common law provisions and ad hoc legislation that applies to issues such as use of force, trespass to land, defence of property, search and seizure, and breach of privacy which apply now to all people including security personnel.
Leaving these areas legally ambiguous encourages fewer suits against ‘private’ police, forcing those aggrieved to negotiate more and litigate less.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment a.
The Control and Administration of Private Guards Companies lies with the Ministry of Interior.
Define and Examine the Sections of the Private Guards Companies Act that empowers it.
b.
Examine the licensing procedure of the Private Guard Companies vis-a-viz the role of National Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC).
c. Discuss issues in the present features of Private Guard Companies and propose the way forward.
7.0 References/further readings Ayoob, M. 1997.
Defining Security: A Subaltern Realist Perspective.
In K. Krause Williams.
M. C.
(eds.)
Critical Security Studies, Minneapolis Mn.
University of Minnesota Press.
Button, M. 2007, “Security Officers and Policing: Powers, Culture and Control in the Governance of Private Space”.
Ashgate Ekhomu, O.
2004.
“Outsourcing Non Core Police Functions to Private Security Companies: Lessons from Elsewhere.
Crime and Policing in Nigeria: Challenges and Options.
E.O.
Alemika and I.C.
Chukwuma.
Eds.
Ikeja: NOPRIN.
128-139 Johnston, L and Shearing C.D.
2003, “Governing Security: Explorations in Policing and Justice” Routledge Jones, T and Newburn T. 2006, “Plural Policing: a Comparative Perspective”.
Routledge McLaughlin, E. 2006, The New Policing (Sage, 2007) 49 Odinkalu, C.A.
2004, “Changing Roles of Civil Society in Nigeria: Crime and Policing in Nigeria: Challenges and Options”.
Eds.
Ikeja Malthouse Press Limited.
Chapter 20: 349- 366.
(ed.)
Nigeria.
Private Guard Companies Act, CAP 367 of 1986 by the Law of the Federal Republic of Nigeria Sarre, R. 1995, “Keeping an Eye on Fraud: Proactive and Reactive Options for Statutory Watchdogs” Van Steden, R. 2007, “Privatizing Policing”.
BJU Legal Publishers Wakefield A.
2003, “Selling Security: The Private Policing of Public Space”.
Willan Publishing.
Zedner, L. 2006, “Liquid Security: Managing the Market for Crime Control” (2006) 6(3) Criminology & Criminal Justice 267 50 UNIT 2: ORGANIZATION OF PRIVATE SECURITY COMPANY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Private security is different from public security in several significant ways.
Private security is provided to clients for a fee, and except in special circumstances, has its jurisdiction limited to the property owned by the client.
Rather than service provided in the interests of the public, security is provided to protect the interests of the client.
Traditionally, legislation in Nigeria has recognized these differences and has not extended the same powers of detention, arrest, search and seizure to security service providers as the police.
Private security includes measures taken by individuals, partnerships and corporations designed to protect their interests.
Generally speaking, these measures involve the protection of property (such as the things produced by the client and the facilities and equipment used in its production), personnel (including both the people that work on the site and members of the public having access to it), and information about the products, property, facilities, process and so on (industrial security is rapidly becoming one of the most important aspects of private security).
Companies wishing to have private security without the costs associated with developing their own security unit will often choose to contract the services of an outside security company.
By contracting the services of these agencies, a company avoids incurring the costs associated with managing and administering the function.
For example, the costs associated with monitoring the performance of individual security guards, training, providing benefit packages, and so on, are avoided.
These administrative and other costs are divided among all of the clients of the security firm, decreasing the cost of providing these services to any one client.
Companies choosing to employ contract security also can avoid any difficulties that may be encountered through union 51 and employee contract negotiations.
These concerns remain with the owners of the private security firms.
Private security firms also operate independently of the politics of the host company.
Employees may feel that they can trust a security guard from outside the company, and therefore the employee may be more cooperative during investigations than they would be if internal agents were used.
Finally, independent security companies may be able to develop expertise beyond the range of experiences usually associated with in-house security operations.
Depending on the nature of the security needs of the host company, it may be more beneficial to go to the experts rather than use in-house or general contract personnel.
The organisation and category of Private Security differs from organisation to organisation.
2.0 Objectives The aim of this unit is for student to: • Understand the structural organisation of PSCs • Understand the job specialisation • Understand Staff Overturn and Job Equalities 3.0 Main Content Organizing is the process of structuring human and physical resources in order to accomplish organizational objectives, which involves dividing tasks into jobs, specifying the appropriate department for each job, determining the optimum number of jobs in each department, and delegating authority within and among departments.
One of the most critical challenges facing security managers today is the development of a responsive organizational structure that is committed to quality.
The framework of jobs and departments that make up any organization must be directed toward achieving the organization’s objectives.
In other words, the structure of a security business must be consistent with its strategy.
Managers give structure to a security firm through job specialization, organization, and establishment of patterns of authority and span of control.
The Organizational chart describes the command structure and responsibilities of officers of a limited-service security firm.
As their client grow in size, security managers are faced with the need to specialised jobs in order to ensure efficient coordination and control of activities.
These 52 job groupings are usually called departments.
In general, departments might be grouped as Office (those departments in which employees have contact with client, such as supervisory staff), and field (where employees have little client contact, such as mechanical and electronic unit).
However, separating departments by function is the most common method of organizing a security business.
Figure 1a and 1b outlines the departmental structures of a limited-service security firm and a multi-service security firm with more than 500 operational staff.
There may be as few as 2 or as many as 50 employees in a particular department.
Chairman/ Managing Director Secretary / Supervisory Operations Unitary Subordinate Records Keeping Department Department Staff Staff Figure 1a: Limited-Security Service Firm Structure The Wage Structure of the Private Guard The wage structure of the private guard is determined by the company they work for.
The minimum wage has not been adhered to in the security industry.
However, since the NSCDC took control of regulating the sector a structure of N10,000 minimum wage is currently been worked on, no matter how low the client company is paying.
Besides bonuses for time spent with the company, a further series of additional payments are expected to be added to the basic salary package: Danger Escort bonus Armoured car bonus Bonus for surveillance or transport team leader Bonus for night work Additional overtime Bonus for weekends and public holidays.
53 Chairman/Chief Executive Officer Managing Director Director Director Director Director M&E Unitary Subordinate Administrative Supervisory Operations Security Staff Staff Department Department Department Department Monitoring Guarding Scheduling Patrolling Head, Human Head, Marketing Head, Head, Technical Response Escorting Resource and Sales accounting and Maintenance Surveillance Department Department Department Department Recruitment Training Labour relations Payroll Benefits Figure 1b: Multi-Security Service Firm Structure 54 There are also provisions made for transport and clothing maintenance of.
In this way, for the categories mentioned, the total salary package, i.e.
basic wage plus adjustments for danger, armoured vehicle, activity, transport and clothing are: Health and Safety Uniforms are compulsory.
The carrying of arms is not authorised.
It is reserved for public police in certain cash or valuables in transit operations and for surveillance and protection of high-risk facilities.
Shooting practice is compulsory for public police.
3.1 Structural Organisation of Private Security Companies The structural organisation of security firms can be classified depending on service/function in 7 categories.
a) Administrative Department Coordination is bedrock of the Administrative department.
The administrative department has subunits such as Human Resources, Marketing and Sales, and Accounting.
The human resources department serves no customers, guard no post, and prepares no proposal, yet it plays a vital role in a security firm’s efficient operation.
As shown in Figure 1b, the three functions of the human resources department are employee recruitment, benefits administration, and training.
The head of human resources is also expected to be an expert on federal and state labour laws and to advise managers in other departments on these topics.
The human resources department’s major challenge is in its interactions with other departments.
Although the human resources department recruits, interviews, and screens prospective employees, the final hiring decision rests within the department in which the potential employee will be working.
The same is true of promotion and disciplinary decisions; the human resources department’s input is, in most cases, limited to advice and interpretation of legal questions.
The human resources department’s effectiveness depends on its head’s ability to form effective working relationships with heads of other departments.
The primary responsibility of the heads that make up the marketing and sales department is sales, or the selling of the security equipment and services to individuals and groups.
Sales managers sell equipment and services to potential clients through advertising, attendance at association and conference meetings, and direct contacts.
The marketing and sales department is also removed from most of the day-to-day operational problems faced by other departments.
55  In many security firms, the accounting department combines staff functions and line functions, or those functions directly responsible for servicing clients.
The accounting department’s traditional role is recording financial transactions, preparing and interpreting financial statements, and providing the managers of other departments with timely reports of operating results (line functions).
Other responsibilities, carried out by the assistant controller for finance, include payroll preparation, accounts receivable, and accounts payable (staff functions).
Another dimension of the accounting department’s responsibilities deals with various aspects of operations, cost accounting, and cost control throughout the firm.
b) Supervisory Department Typically, the supervisory Staff in a limited-security firm includes principally Chairman and a team.
Responsibilities of the supervisor include monitoring, staffing and recruitment, training and orientation.
However, in multi-security service firm the sole responsibility of the supervisory department is to monitor the fielded security guards as well as electronic surveillance unit.
The department has subunits such as monitoring, scheduling and response unit.
The heads of these units need a good interaction with the heads of operations department to effectively function.
c) Operations Department The operations department carries the core responsibility of a security firm.
The operation of the guards is their key function.
Their main responsibility is to field specialized and trained guards for all purposes including general guarding, patrolling, escorting, surveillance and responses to alarm breaking and entering.
Other responsibilities are to draft a detailed operation and scheduling/duty shift for fielded guards, and to liaise with the public police whenever the need arises.
d) Mechanical and Electronic Security Department Typically, the mechanical and electronic security department’s responsibilities include preventive maintenance; repair; replacement; improvement and modification to equipment; and ensuring uninterrupted provision of alarm and tracking system.
Other responsibility includes the notification of the operations department in events of alarm breaking and entering as well as GPS tracking of properties or persons and CCTV monitoring.
e) Unitary Staff (Staff with various positions) This includes secretaries and other generally staff who do not belong to specific department but assist in the day-to-day running of the organisation.
They are labelled secretaries, 56 personal assistant and public relations officers.
Their responsibilities are diverse; however, they usually assist the top management with secretarial, records and communication issues.
f) Subordinate staff The primary function of subordinate staff is clerical and cleaning jobs.
g) Managing Director In addition to being in charge of overseeing all of the departments that have been discussed, the Managing Director (MD) is responsible for defining and interpreting the policies established by top management i.e.
the Owner/Chairman/Chief Executive Officer.
The general manager serves as a liaison to the owner or corporate parent, sets (or communicates) the overall strategic course of the firm, sets goals, coordinates activities between departments, and arbitrates interdepartmental disputes.
The MD also has corporate-level responsibilities, participates on civic boards and committees, and engages in industry-related activities such as serving on the association.
In addition to possessing a high level technical skill (i.e., a thorough understanding of each operating department in the firm), the general manager must also be decisive, analytical, and skilled with both computers and people.
He or she must be able to see the big picture and ensure all of the parts of the firm fit into the overall organization.
3.2 Job Description and Specialisation There are as many degrees of job specialization within the security industry as there are types of organizations.
This ensures total control over a project from beginning to end, and many people find it motivating to see the results of their efforts.
However, as the demand for additional services increases (i.e., if additional clients are added or another area of security service), it becomes more and more difficult for an individual to do his or her job well.
One benefit of the increased workload is increased revenue.
As a general rule, specialization increases workers productivity and efficiency.
On the other hand, delegating jobs increases the need for managerial control and coordination.
A crucial element of security management is coordinating the many specialized functions within and outside the firm so that the organization runs smoothly.
Specialization has its own set of problems; it can result in workers performing the same tasks over and over again.
A point can be reached where the degree of specialization narrows a job’s scope that the worker finds little or no satisfaction in it.
Signs of overspecialization include workers’ loss of interest, lowered morale, increasing error rate, and reduction in service and product quality.
One solution to this problem is to modify jobs so that teams can 57 perform them.
Instead of a single security post attendant being assigned to a post, a work team might be assigned to the post.
Some establishments use teams regularly throughout the organization; others use teams more selectively.
Teams can be directed by a head or can be self-headed.
The idea behind self-headed work teams is for workers to become their own managers, which increases their self-reliance as well as develops a talent pool.
This brings about the concept called ‘quality circle’-which emphasizes the belief that the people, who actually do the work, rather than their managers, are the ones who are well informed in identifying, analyzing, and correcting problems in the course of operation.
The idea originated in Japan in 1962.
The quality circle is a group of employees, usually fewer than ten, who perform similar jobs and meet once per week to discuss their work, identify problems, and present possible solutions to those problems.
For example, a quality circle might be formed among front desk agents.
The group forwards its findings and proposals to management for evaluation and action.
Quality circles are most successful when they are part of an organization-wide improvement effort.
Nigerian business organisations picked up on the quality circle concept in the mid-1990s.
3.3 Pattern of Authority The delegation of authority creates a chain of command, which is the formal channel that defines the lines of authority from the top to the bottom of an organization.
The chain of command consists of a series of relationships from the highest position in the organization to the lowest.
The chain of command specifies a clear reporting relationship for each person in the organization and should be followed in both downward and upward communication.
Following the chain of command enables new employee, no matter what his or her position, to know exactly for whom and to whom he or she is responsible.
Managers consider the distribution of authority in this manner.
Authority defined simply, is the organizationally sanctioned right to make a decision.
Authority can be distributed throughout an organization or held in the hands of a few selected employees.
Decentralization is the process of distributing authority throughout an organization.
In a decentralized organization, an organization member has the right to make a decision without obtaining approval from a higher-level manager.
Centralization is the retention of decision-making authority by a high- level manager.
Traditionally, security management has been very centralized, probably due to its roots in small, owner-operate management style.
In recent years, as the security industry has expanded, decentralization has become a more frequent style of operation.
Decentralization 58 has several advantages.
Managers are encouraged to develop decision-making skills, which help them advance in their careers.
The autonomy afforded by this style of operation also increases job satisfaction and motivation, especially when employees are encouraged with free hands to perform their duties.
In this case the profitability of the organization is bound to increase.
Many security organizations have begun to empower employees and supervisors to make decisions that typically have been made by managers.
Additional challenges, control of the process, and quality assessment become part of everyone’s job, and each employee is given the authority to take positive actions that will lead to high quality and improved performance.
Span of Control Span of control refers to the number of people who report to one manager or supervisor.
A wide span of control results in a flat organization— that is, a large number of employees reporting to one supervisor.
A narrow span of control results in a tall organization, in which a small number of employees report to a supervisor, necessitating a larger number of supervisors.
Note that these different controls can be implemented with the same number of employees.
No formula exists for determining the ideal span of control.
The following factors determine the most appropriate span of control: task similarity, training and professionalism, task certainty, frequency of interaction, task integration, and physical dispersion.
When a large number of employees perform similar tasks, the span of control can be increased.
When the employees perform very different tasks, the supervisor must give each subordinate more individual attention in order to keep in touch with the different types of tasks; this requires a narrower span of control.
For example, the supervisory department manager might easily manage the electronic surveillance agents and fielded operational staff until the increase in complexity and the standards for the various types of services provided increase.
At this time, the supervisory department manager’s span of control must be narrowed.
The better trained and more skilled a subordinate is, the less supervision is required.
Task certainty refers to the predictability of a task.
Routine tasks allow management to devise standard procedures for subordinates to follow, minimizing questions about the job and widening the span of control.
On the other hand, close supervision is called for when tasks are ambiguous and uncertainty is great.
4.0 Conclusion The most important strength of a functional organization is efficiency.
The performance of common tasks allows for work specialization, which increases overall productivity.
Workers develop specialized skills and knowledge more rapidly.
Training is easier because of the 59 similarity of tasks and the resulting opportunities for inexperienced workers to learn from experienced workers.
This helps new employees to quickly learn the skills and behaviour that lead to success and promotion in an organisation.
Coordination of activities within functional departments is easier than in more broad and complex organizations.
A functional organization fosters efficiency, teamwork, and coordination of activities within individual units.
However, the functional organization’s most important strength is also the source of its greatest shortcoming.
The success of security provision as a business is measured by its overall performance and not by the performance of any one department.
It is sometimes difficult for each department to fully appreciate its role in the overall success of the organization.
Some means must be found to coordinate the activities of functional departments and to set strategies and goals.
This suggests that a functional organization demands strong leadership.
5.0 Summary The four basic components of organizational structure include job specialization, departmentalization, patterns of authority, and span of control.
Job specialization includes increased workers productivity and efficiency, the need for managerial control and coordination.
Work teams can be used to alleviate the routine caused by job specialization.
A similar concept, the quality circle, can also enhance employee productivity.
The department heads report directly to the managing director.
In smaller security firms, all departments might report directly to the Chairman.
While patterns of authority remain centralized in many security businesses, increasingly employees have become empowered to make decisions that typically have been made by managers.
Decentralization is the distribution of authority throughout an organization.
Centralization is the retention of decision-making authority by a high-level manager.
Span of control refers to the number of people who report to one manager or supervisor.
In a narrow span of control, fewer subordinates report to each supervisor, resulting in a tall organization.
In a wide span of control, a larger number of subordinates report to each supervisor, resulting in a flat organization.
Staffing is an ongoing challenge in the security industry because of the high percentage of employee turnover.
Successful staffing depends on providing adequate job descriptions, including job specifications, as well as realizing that job descriptions must be flexible.
In some cases, it becomes necessary to redesign jobs; this can involve job rotation, job enlargement, job enrichment, and flex-time.
Employees must be properly trained; effective training includes problem solving, problem analysis, quality measurement, feedback, and team building.
60 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 1.
Compare and contrast the concepts of centralization and decentralization in a security organisation.
2.
Examine the relationship between span of control and chain of command a security organization?
3.
List the principal functions of each department in a Multi-service Security firm.
4.
A customer notifies the management that the security officers are not at their post and during which a force entry was made and goods stolen.
List the departments to which this information must be conveyed and the actions they must take.
7.0 References/further readings Abrahamsen, Rita / Williams, Michael C. 2005.
The Globalisation of Privatised Security.
Country Report Nigeria.
Barton Cunningham J. and Ted Eberle, “A Guide to Job Enrichment and Redesign,” Personnel (February 1990): 56–61.
Brian Dumaine, “The New Non-Managers,” Fortune, February 22, 1993, pp.
80–84; and “A Checklist of Qualities That Make a Good Boss,” Nation’s Business (November 1984): 100.
Bruneau, Thomas C. / Tollefson, Scott D.
(eds.).
2006. Who Guards the Guardians and How: Democratic Civil-Military Relations.
Austin, University of Texas Press.
Dann D. and Timothy Hornsey, “Towards a Theory of Interdepartmental Conflict in Hotels,” International Journal of Hospitality Management, 5 (1986): 23.
Frank D. Borsenik and Alan T. Stutts, The Management of Maintenance and Engineering Systems in the Hospitality Industry, 4th ed.
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1997).
Frank Shippes and Charles C. Manz, “Employee Self-Management Without Formally Designated Teams: An Alternative Road to Empowerment,” Organizational Dynamics (Winter 1992): 48–61.
John M. Ivancevich, Peter Lorenzi, and Steven J. Skinner, with Philip B. Crosby, Management: Quality and Competitiveness (Boston: Richard D. Irwin, 1996), 254.
Raymond J. Aldag and Timothy M. Stearns, Management (Cincinnati: Southwestern, 1987).
61 Richards, Anna / Smith, Henry.
2007.
Addressing the role of private security companies within security sector reform programmes.
Journal of Security Sector Management.
5:1.
Robert D. Dewar and Donald P. Simet, “A Level-Specific Prediction of Spans of Control Examining the Effects of Size, Technology, and Specialization,” Academy of Management Journal (March 1981): 5.
Schreier, Fred / Caparini, Marina.
2005.
Privatising Security: Law, Practice and Governance of Private Military and Security Companies.
DCAF Occasional Paper, 6.
Singer, Peter W. 2003.
Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry.
Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.
Tom Peters, Thriving on Chaos (New York: Knopf, 1988).
Vines, Alex.
2000.
Mercenaries, Human Rights and Legality.
In: Abdel-Fatua Musah / J.
‘Kayode Fatemi.
Mercenaries: An Africa Security Dilemma.
Sterling, Pluto Press.
169-197.
62 UNIT 3: HUMAN RIGHT AND PRIVATE SECURITY COMPANY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content Fundamental Human Rights & Its Abuse 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Traditionally, state has monopoly and the legitimate use of force.
But sometimes beyond the state’s control of particular circumstances, private security organisations become more helpful especially when it comes to providing security for corporate persons or entity.
Because these private security are big business and sometimes it becomes easier for state to give up those responsibilities.
The implications of this proliferation of private security companies for international law and human rights are only beginning to be appreciated, as potential violations and misconduct of their employees have come to light in Africa.
This Unit examines risk posed by private security company’s activity with respect to violation of human rights.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to : • explain the term Human Rights • describe the types of Human Rights • explain various ways in which human rights are violated by private security companies.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HUMAN RIGHTS There is no definite definition of Human rights but we shall consider some of them.
According to Prof. Osira Eze, “Human right represent demands or claims which individuals 63 or group made on society, some of which are protected by law, while others remain aspirations to be attained in future.
It also means the freedoms, immunities and benefits that according to modern values, all human beings should be able to claim as a matter of right in the society in which they live.
Human rights means no more than that: a) All states have a duty to respect the fundamental rights and freedom of all persons within their territories.
b) States have a duty not to permit discrimination by reason of sex, ethnicity, religion or language and c) States have a duty to promote universal respect for human rights and to cooperate with each other to achieve this objective.
The struggle for fundamental human rights dated back to the period of the great Magna Carta of England (1215) the United State Declaration of Independence (1776), the French Declaration of the Rights of man and the citizen (1789) and the American Bills of Rights of 1791, Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948).
The essence of these is the revolution against authoritarianism, tyranny, slavery, discrimination and all other ways by which rights, which are innate to all human beings have been suppressed.
In Nigeria, the rights recognized by the constitution in Chapter IV are: 1.
Right to life: Every person has a right to life and no one shall be deprived intentionally of his life, save execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal offence of which he has been found guilty in Nigeria – Section 33 2.
Right to dignity of human person: Every individual is entitled to respect for the dignity of his person and accordingly:- a.
No person shall be subjected to torture or to human or degrading treatment b.
No person shall be held in slavery or servitude and c. No person shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour – Section 34.
3.
Right to personal liberty: Every person shall be entitled to his personal liberty and no person shall be deprived of such liberty save in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure permitted by law – section 35.
4.
Right to fair hearing: In the determination of his civil rights and obligations, including any question or determination by or against any government or authority, a person shall be entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by a court or other 64 tribunal established by law and constituted in such manner as to secure its independence and impartiality – section 36.
5.
Right to private and family life: The privacy of citizens, their homes, correspondence, telephone conversations and telegraphic communications is hereby guaranteed and protected – section 37.
6.
Right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion: Every person shall be entitled to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, including freedom to change his religion or belief and freedom (either alone or in community with others and in public or in private) to manifest and propagate his religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice and observance – Section 38.
7.
Right to freedom of expression and the press: Every person shall be entitled to freedom of expression including freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impact ideas and information without interference – section 39.
8.
Right to peaceful assembly and association: Every person shall be entitled to assemble freely and associate with other persons and in particular s/he may form or belong to any political party, trade union or any other association for the protection of his interests – section 40.
9.
Right to freedom of movement: Every citizen of Nigeria is entitled to move freely throughout Nigeria and to reside in any part thereof and no citizen of Nigeria shall be expelled from Nigeria or refused entry thereto or exist there from – section 41.
10.
Right to freedom from discrimination: A citizen of Nigeria of a particular community, ethnic group, place of origin, sex, religion or political opinion shall not, by reason only that he is such a person – section 42.
11.
Right to acquire and own immovable property anywhere in Nigeria: Subject to the provisions of this constitution, every citizen of Nigeria shall have the right to acquire and own immovable property anywhere in Nigeria – section 43.
12.
Protection from compulsory acquisition of private property: No movable property or any interest in an immovable property shall be taken possession of compulsorily and no right over or interest in any such property shall be acquired compulsorily in any part of Nigeria except in the manner and for the purposes prescribed by a law that among other things (a) requires that prompt payment of compensation therefore and (b) gives to any person claiming such compensation a 65 right of access for the amount of compensation to a court of law or tribunal or body having jurisdiction in that part of Nigeria - section 44 Types of Private security companies Private Security companies Private Military Companies 1.
Industrial/Commercial site protection 1.
Military training 2.
Humanitarian aid protector 2.
Military intelligence 3.
Embassy/Mission protection 3.
Offensive combat 4.
VIP/close protection 5.
Surveillance and investigation 6.
Risk assessment and analysis In Nigeria, the private Guards Act of 1986 prohibits private security companies from carrying firearms.
But private security companies are nevertheless able to provide an armed component to their services through various arrangements with the Nigeria Police and most PSCs of any size and standard have a number of mobile police officers (Mopol) permanently seconded to their operations.
Mopol Officers are equipped with fully automatic weapons usually AK-47s or FNs.The reliance on Mopol for armed private security raises a number of operational and ethnical challenges.
1.
Right to life: The use of armed guards present particular risks in terms of legitimate (i.e.
in lawful self defence), illegitimate (e.g.
use of excessive force and accidental (e.g.
negligent discharge), killing of local people and/or employees.
2.
Right not to be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman and/or degrading treatment or punishment: Many private security companies have poor human right records; they run a serious risk that they may be complicit in acts of inhuman treatment or torture.
Often times personnel of private security companies have been found wanting in detaining and subjecting criminal suspects to torture before they are handed over to the police.
3.
Right to a fair treatment: Private security companies are likely to detain individuals in the course of carrying out their duties.
Sometimes, the detainee’s rights are likely to be violated if they are held and placed in an inhuman environment or condition, for example without food or water, or in extreme heat or cold environment.
4.
Right to freedom of movement: In some cases, security companies may infringe on people’s right to free movement.
For example, illegitimately obstructing access roads 66 using check points and road-blocks, thereby making land inaccessible to the local population.
This could constitute an infringement to human rights.
5.
Right not to be subjected to slavery, servitude or force labour (including sexual and economic exploitation): In extreme case, private security companies may forcibly enlist the local people, either for their own purposes (for example the provision of food, domestic services or sex) or for purposes that indirectly benefit a company (for example land clearance and other forms of unskilled labour).
Private security companies may also be posted to ensure that company’s employee are unable to leave the factory, creating a situation of forced labour.
4.0 CONCLUSION This Unit sees fundamental human right as the freedom, immunities, and benefits that according to modern values, all human beings should be able to claim as a matter of right in the society they live.
Hence government has a duty to respect the fundamental rights and freedom of all persons within their territories.
And no person or persons have right to violate these rights.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have discussed the meaning of the term Human Rights as well as the various types of rights and how not to violate this rights as enshrined in the nation’s constitution.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the relevance of fundamental human rights to private security.
2.
How best can these rights be ensured by security companies?
7.0 REFERENCES Brooks, D. (2002) Protecting People.
The PMC Potential, comments and suggestions for the UK Green paper on Regulating Private Military Services (Alexandria International Peace Operations Association).
Constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria Sokefun et al (2008).
Human Rights Law Lagos: National open University of Nigeria 67 UNIT 4: TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Training is intended to provide persons with the occupational and behavioural skills and attitudes necessary to professionally function as a security guard as required by provincial acts, regulations and in accordance with other legislation.
Successful completion of basic training should provide security guards with the concepts and knowledge that they may function effectively and efficiently as security staff.
The subjects covered should be intended to provide security guards with a sound basis on which to deal with a myriad of on-the-job- responsibilities in an appropriate manner.
Many tasks performed are quasi law enforcement in nature, where good public relations and awareness of the limits of legal powers and the use of force are extremely important.
On the successful completion of training, security guard candidates should be able to properly: a. deal with the public in a professional and ethical manner; b. arrest/detain people within the limits specified under the Criminal Code (Nigeria), and be aware of the rights and freedoms of individuals; c. communicate effectively, both verbally and in writing; d. present verbal and material evidence in Court; e. write reports, protect evidence and conduct themselves appropriately in court; f. direct traffic; g. detect or prevent thefts and vandalism; h. report and deal appropriately with perimeter protection systems, intrusion, fire, carbon dioxide, water, smoke, alarms, etc.
; i. react and take appropriate measures in all emergency situations; j. respond to bomb threats; and k. perform other duties as required of security guards 68  2.0 Objectives This unit will help the students: • Understand the training criteria in security operation, • Understand terminologies and content of training course for private security guards • Examine the importance of basic training for private security guards in general 3.0 Main Content In Nigeria, private security legislation is in place defining several criteria which must be fulfilled before an individual is allowed to perform guarding activities and private security services.
Once these criteria are fulfilled, this individual is officially authorised by a competent authority to perform such activities.
One of these prerequisites is basic training for private security guards, exclusively conducted by an officially licensed or recognised training institute.
This basic guard training covers chapters related to the basic legal framework, security procedures, health and safety provisions, conflict management, customer care and communication, quality, first aid and other indispensable information and skills.
A second prerequisite includes a background screening of criminal records.
Both criteria ensure that private security staff performing private security services are equipped with the relevant skills and know-how and to be familiar with the basic ‘rules of engagement’ when accessing the profession.
They also ensure that private security guards comply with public expectation of how they should serve society as a whole.
In addition to basic guard training, a great number of additional specialised training requirements exist, depending on the specific environment in which a private security guard carries out his/her duties, e.g.
shopping centres, alarm receiving centres, airports, ports etc.
In order to be able to perform private security services in these specific areas (often part of national critical infrastructure) most of these additional specialised training courses are also obligatory by law.
The reasons thereof can be multiple.
Accordingly, the national legal systems, ‘regular’ private security guards operate under the governance of the Ministry of the Interior.
In the same way, the Ministry of the Interior, is responsible for ‘regular’ private security services, which may decide that the basic guard training does not apply to those segments of the security industry that are already governed by specific and detailed Regulations.
3.1 Training Criteria 69 In addition to providing the framework for effectively selecting private security officers, the Ministry of Interior and NSCDC on Guidelines calls for a formal mechanism to establish minimum training requirements certified by a regulatory body.
Although the regulatory body should mandate the minimum training requirements, there should be cooperative efforts by these companies to mandate consistent requirements.
All entities or persons providing security officers training should also be certified by a regulatory body.
Training Criteria are the proposed training topics considered essential for proprietary or contract security agency to consider in the training of their private security officers.
This guideline prescribes specific recommended hours of training and acknowledges different ways in which a security officer may receive this training or demonstrate proficiency to perform the duties of a private security officer.
For example, training may be computer based, classroom, self-study, or other methods of delivery.
Consideration should be given to providing the appropriate length and content of pre-and-post assignment training dependent upon each officer’s assignment.
It is further recommended that all training be accompanied by an appropriate assessment and evaluation to measure the security officer’s knowledge of the training subject.
Further, testing should be appropriate to subject matter, that is, written or performance.
The following outlines are some of the envisaged criteria: • Entry qualifications For security guards: – Primary education certificate, Secondary Education Certificate, Vocational Training Certificate Level 1, or other equivalent or higher level qualifications.
– Meet the necessary requirements for carrying and using firearms.
For security supervisors: – Secondary Education Certificate, completion of A levels, Vocational Training Level 2, professional technician qualifications, or any qualifications which might be required, or equivalent or of a higher level.
• Basic training Both theoretical and practical is compulsory for security guards.
They must work through a series of vocational training modules in cycles.
Once they have passed official knowledge and skill tests, the relevant regulatory bodies confer the correct authorisation.
Continuing Vocational Training The law sets down the provision whereby security companies have to guarantee the organisation of refresher courses and the attendance of their staff in areas which have been 70 modified or substantially changed, or those in which a greater degree of specialisation is advisable.
In-house vocational training or through registered training centres For security guards, refresher or specialisation courses must be 20 study hours minimum.
Every security guard must do at least one course per year.
This regulation is still to be approved by the Ministry of Interior.
• Training bodies Training centres (which can be set up by security companies themselves) must have the necessary authorisation from the Ministry of Interior and State Security Department.
The centres must meet a series of requirements in terms of infrastructure and teaching staff qualifications.
Vocational training during or outside working hours Private security companies are obliged to pay their staff for hours spent on vocational training outside working hours and these may not be compensated through reductions in the number of hours worked.
• Financing training Prior training is usually organised and financed by companies in the sector.
In the case of training carried out in registered training centres, the costs of training are met by the trainee.
• Training recognition/evaluation There are official titles of security guard and security manager.
3.2 The content of training course for private security guards There is need for private guards to know the basics so that they can work safely and carry out duties in a professional way.
The law in Nigeria states that they must receive adequate training.
This unit outlines all the important areas needed for this basic training.
Training courses are designed to help private guards pass the provincial exam and earn security guard certificate.
The course is written directly to trainees, the user.
This means that trainees should actively work with their books.
Feel free to underline important ideas, write comments in the white spaces, and answer questions right in the book.
This will help remember the information better than if it is just read for the sake of it.
The course workbook should be written in plain language, have a number of study aids that will help trainees learn faster and absorb the content in the material.
Before the content of each unit: 71 • a list of the objectives for the unit should be outlined.
These are the main things that will be learnt in the unit; • in some chapters a pre-test is designed so that trainees can already know about the material in the unit; • an outline of what’s coming up in the unit.
At the end of each unit: • a review of the important points from the unit.
Content Outline and Proficiency Certification For the various personnel to be properly certified in order to be enhanced in terms of promotion and elevation, certificates, diplomas and degrees have to be awarded to trainees.
Researchers recommend the award of a bachelor degree, or master degree or even a doctor of philosophy for anyone who occupies the position of Director of Security Management and Head of Planning and Coordination division.
In addition to these the award of a diploma and certificate to any of the above personnel, through long-term courses and short-term courses may be an added advantage.
Conversely, private guards in law enforcement section, patrolling, traffic control, monitoring units, schedule planning, design coordination and customer care unit may have a bachelor degree from a relevant discipline or its equivalent.
Additional certificates and diplomas from long-term and short-term training courses may be added advantage.
The Security Guard and the Legal System An Introduction to Criminal Law The Common Law and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms Powers of Arrest Use of Force Common Offences Common Defences Access Control and Alarm Systems Access Control Systems Technology Used to Control access and Egress Materials Access Alarm Systems General Operating Procedures Traffic Control 72  Legal Authority to Control Traffic Principles of Traffic Control Correct Hand Signals Note Taking, Reports and Evidence Observation Skills of the Professional Security Guard Powers of observation How to Improve your Senses Taking Notes Introduction to Reports Evidence Protecting a Crime scene Response to Immediate Crisis Fire Safety Fire Classification Symbols Fire Extinguishers Methods of Alarm Activation Bomb Threats Bomb Threats by Telephone Written Bomb Threats Evacuation General Patrol Tactics and Techniques Patrolling What to watch for while on patrol Liability for breach of duty Labour Disputes What is Labour Dispute?
Duties of a Security Guard During a Strike Common Terminologies in Security Operations Armed – As used in this guideline, armed refers to a private security officer who is equipped with a weapon (firearm), such as a pistol or rifle, from which a shot can be discharged when necessary.
73 Armoured Car Company – A company which, for itself or under contract with another, transports currency, securities, valuables, jewellery, food stamps, or any other item that requires secured and insured delivery from one place to another with armed personnel.
Armoured Car Personnel – An armed employee of an armoured car company who is engaged exclusively by that company, and is liable for the safe transportation, care, and custody of valuables.
Background Verification/Check – The process of checking an individual’s character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living for consideration of employment, promotion, access to sensitive assets (such as national information), or for continued employment.
Elements of a background verification/check can vary widely, and may include information from credit bureaus, courts records repositories, departments of motor vehicles, past or present employers and educational institutions, governmental, occupational licensing or registration entities, business or personal references, and any other source required to verify information that was voluntarily supplied.
Computer Based Training – Any training that uses a computer as the focal point of instructional delivery.
Training is provided through the use of computer hardware and software that guides the learner through an interactive learning program.
Contract Security Service – Protective services provided by one entity, specializing in such services, to another entity on a compensated basis.
Criteria – The individual (criterion) or collective stated qualifications (criteria) to be compared with an applicant’s or employee’s actual credentials, experience, or history in determining suitability for an employment decision (hiring or otherwise).
Critical Infrastructures – The sophisticated facilities, systems, and functions, which include human assets, physical and cyber systems, that work together in processes that are highly interdependent to provide the foundation for national security, governance, economic vitality.
Electronic Medium Based Training – Any training that uses an electronic technology as a method of effectively conveying instruction and/or information.
Electronic technology includes but is not limited to video or audiocassettes and video conferencing.
Homeland Security – often referred to as internal security.
This is the federal government efforts, in partnership with state, local governments and the private sector, to develop, coordinate, fund and implement the programs and policies necessary to detect, prepare 74 for, prevent, protect against, respond to, and recover from terrorist or other attacks within Nigeria.
Private Security – An independent or proprietary commercial organization whose activities include safeguarding the employing party’s assets, ranging from human lives to physical property (the premises and contents), responding to emergency incidents, performing other functions as outlined by the PSCs Act.
Private Security Officer – An individual, other than armoured car personnel or a public employee (federal, state, or local government), employed part or full time, in uniform, hired to protect the employing party’s assets, ranging from human lives to physical property (the premises and contents).
The definition excludes individuals who are not employed in the capacity of a private security officer.
Public Safety – Support mechanisms that sustain the life and vitality of a community’s health, safety, and social stability by performing such services as law enforcement, fire prevention, personal and facility security, disaster preparedness, and emergency medical assistance.
In some instances, public safety may refer to law enforcement officers, fire-fighters, rescue squads, and ambulance crews.
In other instances, public safety properly encompasses private security officers, as well.
Regulatory Body – Any state board, commission, department, or office, except those in the legislative or judicial branches, authorized by law to conduct adjudicative proceedings, issue permits, registrations, licenses, or other forms of authorization to offer or perform private security officer services, or to control or affect the interests of identified persons.
Selection – The act or process of choosing individuals who possess certain characteristics or qualities.
Threat – An indication of something impending that could result in damage or injury.
Training – An act, method, or process of instruction; to teach so as to make fit, qualified, or proficient.
3.3 Underlining the Importance of Basic Training for Private Security Guards In General From the outset, private security training has been a central concern for Civil defence.
Continuously training is one of the key components in raising workers’ performance, quality standards, professionalism and also employment in the private security industry.
The Federal Government is determined to continue to build a professional service industry, providing 75 high-quality services to customers and high-quality employment to private security guards.
It is particularly crucial for an industry committed to a high level of quality that all entrants into the private security profession receive at least a minimum level of basic training, which provides them with the relevant skills required to adequately carry out their function.
These minimum training standards must be made compulsory and integrated into a sound regulatory and licensing framework at the national level thereby ensuring that all private security companies and employees meet acceptable quality standards.
Specialised training courses allow private security personnel having already acquired a solid basic skill set to further fine-tune and expand their knowledge and expertise.
In the interest of fair competition, based not solely on price, but equally on considerations of professionalism and the right level of service, it is also vital that the same rules and thus the same costs in relation to high-quality training apply to all companies active in the private security industry within a single national market.
High-quality training standards must be safeguarded against ‘free riders’ benefiting from the investments made by others in private security training, but refraining from investing in training themselves.
The Government therefore calls upon the Association of Private Security Practitioners of Nigeria (APSPN) and Security Institutions to take these elements into consideration and reiterate and support the essential role of basic guard training in general and for private security guards operating in the country.
4.0 Conclusion Effective security today requires workers who are familiar with all aspects of a facility’s security system for assessing and containing potential threats.
Security officers are required to be well versed in emergency procedures and able to work with an organization to ensure that emergency procedures can be implemented successfully.
They are also required to be able to work closely and effectively with public safety and police personnel.
The ability of Nigeria companies to protect the nation’s critical infrastructure and contribute to homeland security efforts depends largely on the competence of private security officers.
Therefore, private security officers and applicants for private security officer positions should be thoroughly screened and trained, in accordance with outlined courses.
5.0 Summary Private security officer selection and training criteria vary from company to company ranging from comprehensive training requirements for every private security officer to basic training.
One of the main goals of the private security officer selection and training is to develop and 76 encourage the adoption of minimal national selection criteria for security officers.
The development of such minimum criteria has become essential for enabling the private security industry to effective perform their duties to clients as well as meeting the demands associated with new ever changing security initiatives.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment a.
List and explain five core aspects of the private security guards training curriculum.
b.
Examine the role of National Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC) in the training of Private Security Guards.
7.0 References/further readings Anderson, Teresa.
‘‘Affairs of State.’’ Security Management.
May 2001, pp.
83–84.
Castle, Reed A.
A Study of the Security Officer.
Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Criminal Justice Services: Schroeder Measurement Technologies, Inc., April 2002.
Conn. Gen. Stat.
§ 29-534 (2001).
Private Detectives, Guard Services and Security Personnel.
Web site: http://www.cga.state.ct.us/2001/pub/Chap534.htm Cunningham, William C., Taylor, Todd H. Private Security and Police in America: The Hallcrest Report I. Portland, OR: Chancellor Press, 1985.
Cunningham, William C., John S. Strauchs, and Clifford W. Van Meter.
Private Security Trends 1970–2000: The Hallcrest Report II.
Boston, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1990.
Goodboe, Michael E. ‘‘The Development of an Entry-Level Model Curriculum, Optimum Training Methodology, and Implementation and Evaluation Plans for Unarmed Contract Security Officers.’’ Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Nova Southeastern University, 1966.
Johnston, Les.
‘‘Regulating Private Security.’’ International Journal of the Sociology of Law, Academic Press Limited.
1992, 20, pp.
1–16.
Ledward, A 2007, Private Investigator and Security Guard Training Manual Pinkerton’s Center for Professional Development.
Advanced Certification Training (ACT), Volumes 1, 2, and 3.
Arlington, VA: Pinkerton, Inc., 1997–2002.
Vocational-Technical Education Consortium of States.
A Catalog of Performance Objectives and Performance Guides For Security Guard.
Detroit, MI: Wayne State University College of Education and Michigan Department of Education Vocational-Technical Education Service, 1978.
77  UNIT 5: EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The demand for safety and the security industry in most urban centres, remains strong with the increasing levels of insecurity by the population and the priority of improving commercial and public safety.
On the same vein demand for security and safety equipments in industrial plants, commercial buildings, public facilities, oil/gas fields and mining operations, airports and seaports has increased substantially.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to know the types of security equipment and accessories in demand.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TYPES OF PRIVATE SECURITY EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES There are many different types of private security equipment, and the equipment carried by a particular officer depends on the policies of that officer’s agency and his or her role within the organisation.
A security officer often carries basic equipment such as a handgun, handcuffs, a flashlight, handcuff keys, other restraining devices, pepper spray, a baton, and other basic gear such as tape for roping off a crime scene and a radio for communicating with other officers.
More specialized security equipment might be carried by a tactical officer (MoPol) and can include more powerful firearms, body armour and a battering ram.
Security equipment carried by a particular officer often varies, and includes items that he or she is required to carry due to agency policies, as well as any items he or she may find helpful.
One of the most basic pieces of security equipment restricted by law is the firearm that a police officer carries.
This is usually worn on the hip of the officer, though some officers may wear a firearm in a shoulder holster.
78  The specific gun used by an officer depends on the standard practices and policies of a police department and the preferences of the officer.
Common security officer equipment also includes various types of restraining devices, including handcuffs and zip ties, as well as handcuff keys and a pocket knife.
This is usually a folding knife that requires only a single hand to use.
Private security officers also wear or carry a badge that identifies them as officers of the law, and the officer may be required to wear a standard uniform as well.
Many officers that are in multi-national companies or organisation also have secondary weapons such as batons, often collapsible batons, and pepper spray.There are also pieces of security equipment that officers might not carry on their person, but which many officers have in their vehicle.
This includes equipment for maintaining a crime scene, such as tape, road flares, and portable barricades.
Private security officers also usually carry radios to communicate with other officers, often worn on the shoulder or belt.
Equipment Restricted to Private Security Some pieces of police equipment are more specialized and typically worn or utilized only by tactical officers.
These include body armour, heavy firearms such as automatic rifles and tear gas guns, and shields used for pacifying participants in a riot.
Battering rams are also frequently used by tactical officers, and these can be single or two-person rams.
Such police equipment is typically utilized by officers in special units such as the special weapons and tactics (SWAT) team.
The Nigeria private security companies are not allow to use, some of these sophisticated weapons but they are usually accompanied by law enforcement agents that are equipped.
Category and Descriptions of Equipment and Accessories Used by Private Security Companies in Nigeria.
Accessories: Includes Batteries, Battery Packs, AC Chargers, DC Chargers, SD Cards, Camera Clamps, Camera Mounts, Little Jo-Mount, Connectors, Power Supplies, Replacement PV500 buttons and Remote Controls, Telephone Audio Cord Splitter, and Adapters.
Audio Equipment: Includes Analog and Digital Recorders, Phone Recorders, Dictation Pens, Watch Recorders, Audio Device Accessories, Digital MP3 Players Recorders, 79 Listening Devices and Microphones, Voice Changers, and White Noise Generators.
Cameras: Includes Body Worn Cameras, Bullet Cameras, Covert Cameras, Infrared, Internet Cameras, Low Light Cameras, Nanny Cams, Night Vision Cameras, Photographic Cameras, Pinhole Cameras, Security and Dome Cameras, and Wireless Cameras.
Detection Devices: Includes Bug Detection, Debugging Kits, Telephone Analyzer, Hidden Camera Detectors, Metal Detectors, RF Signal Detectors, TSCM Equipment, Wire Tap Detectors and Phone Security.
Personal Protection: Includes Detection Kits, Drug Test Kits, Infidelity Test Kits, Diversion and Hidden Safes, Self Defence, M2 Flashcam, and MII Flashcam.
PI Kits: Includes DVR Kits, Surveillance Kits, Sunglass Kits, Hidden Camera Kits, and Camera Detection Kits.
Phone Security: Includes Telephone Accessories, Telephone Recorders, Wire Tap Detection, PI Audio, Voice Changers, and two-way Caller ID.
Recorders: Includes Audio Recorders, DVRs, Digital Video Recorders, Phone Recorders, VCRs, Video Tape Recorders, and Time Lapse Recorders.
Spy Gear: Includes Novelty Gadgets, Specialty Items, Spy Gadgets, Computer Monitoring, and Reverse Peep Hole Viewer.
GPS Trackers & Tracking Devices: Includes Live GPS Trackers, Real time GPS Trackers, Passive GPS Trackers, GPS Datalogger, Waterproof cases, Extended battery Cases, and GPS Antenna.
Hidden Video Systems: Includes DVRs, Digital Video Recorders, Video Monitors, Motion Activated Recorders, Quads, Multiplexers, Security Systems, Video Transmitter and Video Receivers.
Wireless: Includes Wireless Cameras, Wireless Microphones, Wireless Video Transmitters, and Wireless Video Recorders.
80 GPS Tracker, Passive GPS Logging, iTrail w/ Magnetic Case Introducing the Sleuth Gear iTrail:.
A passive GPS logger, simply place the small iTrail unit wherever you like - your car, children backpack, virtually anywhere!
At only 1.5"x1.5" small, the logger records location, speed, time, and displays this information on an easy-to-use interface powered by Google Maps and Google Earth.
The H6001 includes both the iTrail and the Magnetic Car Case (Item #PGE1060) Simply turn on the unit, and place it where you would like.
The unit will constantly record up to 120 hours of data.
To retrieve the information, plug the unit into your computer via the included USB charging cable.
You can then download the information to a detailed printable report and view in Google Maps or Google Earth.
The iTrail is water resistant, meaning it can be mounted outside as well.
Strong magnetic box is available for vehicle mounting.
When not in use, an on-board motion sensor puts the unit to "sleep" to conserve battery power.
LED status lights also indicate when the unit is powered on, when it is tracking, and when the battery is low or the memory is full.
Features: • SMALL size (only 1.5" x 1.5") • Motion detection to conserve battery life • Up to 120 hours of data • Multiple report formats (HTML, PDF, MS-Word, CSV, and more) • Water resistant for outdoor use System Requirements: • PC with Windows 2000, XP, Vista, or 7 • USB 1.1 or 2.0 81 Specifications: • Built-in motion detection • 64MB memory • Built-in rechargeable 750mAh Li-ion battery • Cold start satellite acquisition time: <35 sec • USB 1.1 and 2.0 compatible • 2 LED indicators for power/status notifications • Product size: 1.5" x 1.5" x 0.5" • Product weight: 1.3oz • Package size: 8.8" x 6.5" x 0.7" • Package weight: 5.1oz Includes: • iTrail GPS Logger • Magnetic Car Case • Installation Mini-CD • USB charge/transfer cable Cell Phone Spy, Record Text Messages, Cell Phone Monitoring Device The Cell phone Recon software allows you to covertly monitor all of the activities on your cell phone.
Log incoming and outgoing calls, incoming/outgoing text messages and emails, and track phone location.
Features: • Record all incoming/outgoing SMS messages • Record incoming/outgoing/missed call log • Record and track location of cell phone • Record all incoming/outgoing emails • Easy to install • Secure control panel 82 • Possible to monitor multiple phones The software has been designed to provide 100% confidentiality and to ensure that nobody discovers that you are monitoring them.
Specifications: • Cell Phone Recon is compatible with most smartphones, including phones using following operating systems: - Symbian OS 9.x - Symbian OS 8.x - Windows Mobile 6.x - Windows Mobile 5.x/2003SE - Android - Blackberry 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit shows that private security personnel need essential equipments to function effectively.
It includes simple equipment such as a handgun, handcuffs, a flashlight, handcuff keys, other restraining devices, pepper spray, a baton, and other basic gear such as tape for roping off a crime scene and a radio for communicating with other officers.
Hence with equipments the duties of providing securing lives and properties can be more efficient.
5.0 SUMMARY We have been able to discuss the types and dimension of different security equipments and accessories that are useful to private security.
The types discussed here are not exhaustive.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and discuss 10 security equipment mainly used private security guards.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Frank Shippes and Charles C. Manz, “Employee Self-Management Without Formally Designated Teams: An Alternative Road to Empowerment,” Organizational Dynamics (Winter 1992): 48–61.
John M. Ivancevich, Peter Lorenzi, and Steven J. Skinner, with Philip B. Crosby, Management: Quality and Competitiveness (Boston: Richard D. Irwin, 1996), 254.
Raymond J. Aldag and Timothy M. Stearns, Management (Cincinnati: Southwestern, 1987).
83 Richards, Anna / Smith, Henry.
2007.
Addressing the role of private security companies within security sector reform programmes.
Journal of Security Sector Management.
5:1.
Robert D. Dewar and Donald P. Simet, “A Level-Specific Prediction of Spans of Control Examining the Effects of Size, Technology, and Specialization,” Academy of Management Journal (March 1981): 5.
Schreier, Fred / Caparini, Marina.
2005.
Privatising Security: Law, Practice and Governance of Private Military and Security Companies.
DCAF Occasional Paper, 6.
Singer, Peter W. 2003.
Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry.
Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.
Tom Peters, Thriving on Chaos (New York: Knopf, 1988).
Vines, Alex.
2000.
Mercenaries, Human Rights and Legality.
In: Abdel-Fatua Musah / J.
‘Kayode Fatemi.
Mercenaries: An Africa Security Dilemma.
Sterling, Pluto Press.
169-197.
84 MODULE 3 Unit 1: Functions of Private Security Unit 2: Risk Analysis and the Security Survey Unit 3: Challenges and Problems And Private Security Service Unit 4: Computer and Information Security Unit 5: Nigerian Security and Civil Defence Corps ( NSCDC) UNIT 1 FUNCTIONS OF PRIVATE SECURITY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Private security firms are hardly likely to disappear, and have secured a substantial role, they will need to be accommodated.
Indeed, most security practitioners expect the role of private companies to grow overtime.
More thoughtful members of the industry argue that it needs to prepare for these changes by providing better service to all communities.
From the statement above, if we all agreed that the private security has come to stay and in fact growing rapidly, therefore it is important that we focus our attention at the functions, advantages and disadvantages of private security companies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Discuss the functions of the private security companies.
Explain the advantages and disadvantages of private security companies.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF PSCs 1.
Security officers are not required to make arrests but have the authority to make a citizen’s arrest or otherwise act as an agent of law enforcement at the request of a police.
Security personnel enforce company rules and can act to protect lives and property.\ 85 2.
Security officers are often trained to perform arrest and control procedures (including handcuffing and restraints), operate emergency equipments, perform first aid, take accurate notes, write detailed report and perform other task as required by the contract they are serving.
3.
Many trained security officers carry weapons such as batons, firearms and pepper spray.
4.
Many security officers are required to have bomb threat training and/or emergency crisis training especially those located in soft target areas such as shopping malls, schools, and any other area where the general public congregate.
5.
The presence of security personnel tends to diminish theft, employee misconduct and safety rule violation, property damage or even sabotage.
6.
Security personnel also perform access control at building entrances and vehicle gates, meaning they ensure that employees and visitors display proper possess or identification before entering the faculty.
7.
Security officers are often called upon to respond to minor emergencies (lost persons, lockouts, dead vehicle batteries etc) and to assist in serious emergences by guiding emergency responders to the scene of the incident inclining to redirect foot traffic to safe locations and by documenting what happened on an incident report.
8.
Armed security officers are frequently contracted to respond as law enforcement until a given situation at a client location is under control.
9.
Patrolling is usually a large part of a security officer’s duties.
However, regular patrols are, less accepted as an industry standard, as it provides predictability for the would-be criminal, as well as monotony for the security officer on duty.
Random patrols are easily programmed into these systems, allowing greater freedom of movement and unpredictability.
10.
Armoured car guards (usually wear bullet proof vests) protect money and valuables during transit.
They pick up money or other valuables from businesses to transport to another location.
Advantages of the Private Security Industry a.
It is an additional crucial resource in the fight against crime.
b.
It is possibly more efficient than the police.
c. It has access to superior equipment.
d. It is a source of foreign direct investment.
e. It is an employer and therefore indirectly alleviates poverty.
86 f. The flow of skills transfer and skills upgrading and expertise can be transferred to the local market.
g. They can indirectly be a source of intelligence gathering.
h. It has enhanced public security service especially where close working relationships, formal or informal have been established.
i. PSCs have possibly assisted in stabilizing if not reducing, crime levels, though empirical data is difficult to find.
j. PSCs have created another sector of the economy that makes a taxable turnover of close to billions of naira per annum.
k. PSCs and PMCs as sources of employment generation may well have helped lowering the unemployment rate in the country.
Disadvantages of the Private Security Industry a.
Dependence on private security, industries breed state complacency.
b.
It can withdraw at any moment if profit margins do not favour its existence in business, which could leave a security vacuum.
c. Private security companies contribute to the indiscriminate use of force and availability of firearms in a society.
d. Criminal networks can penetrate the PSCs sector far more easily than state sector, which has government intelligence vetting procedure.
e. Sometimes, PSCs take law into the hands and civilian populations are vulnerable to any use of force.
f. The reputation of the country may be at risk from their activities.
g. Sometimes, their involvement in certain operations may contravene the foreign policy position of the country.
h. There may be complete disregard for legal provisions in their day to day affairs in certain contexts.
i. PSCs have enhanced a sense of profit maximization.
They lack sense of public safety, in real sense but they are concern with the motives of profit making.
Functions and Roles of PMCs They provides specialized services that include military advice and training, arms procurement, intelligence gathering, logistical and medical support, combat and military support and humanitarian action.
List of other services that PSCs and PMCs provide 87 1.
Security guards (industrial and commercial) 2.
Security guards (cash in transit) 3.
Bodyguards 4.
Security consultants 5.
Reaction services/response for business 6.
Venue control/special events 7.
Manufacture of security equipment 8.
Private investigators 9.
Training 10.
Security equipment installation 11.
Locksmith/key cutters 12.
Security control room 13.
Rendering security services 14.
Car watch 15.
Insurance 16.
Security and loss control 17.
Fire prevention and detection 18.
Consulting engineer 19.
Alarm installation 20.
In-house security PMC Services include a.
Military advice and training b.
Operational support c. Logistical support d. Site/personal/personnel security e. Crime prevention/intelligence f. More direct mercenary-style operations 4.0 CONCLUSION The future of the private security companies is bright.
The more efficient private security companies are in performance of their functions and duties, the greater the professional 88 development of the occupation since it is obvious that the state law enforcement agencies cannot solely provide all the security needed in society.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss the functions of private security companies.
We explained advantages of private security companies, after which we critically examined the disadvantages.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Discuss the functions of private security companies in Nigeria.
b.
Explain the advantages and disadvantages of private security companies.
c. 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Abrahamsen, R & Williams, M.C.
(2005).
The Globalisation of Private Security: A Country Report of Nigeria.
Globalisation of Security Research Project (Dept of International Politics, University of Wales, Aberystwyth) and the New Security Challenges Programme (ESRC, UK).
Gumedze, S. (2007).
The Private Security Sector in Africa: The 21st Century’s Major Cause for Concern.
Institute for Security Studies Occasional Paper 131 (December).
89 UNIT 2: RISK ANALYSIS AND THE SECURITY SURVEY 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNEMNT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Among the hierarchical structure of a company is the security director.
As a security director, the responsibilities of protecting properties of company lie on him.
Before the security master plan is created, it is important to identify potential areas of loss and to develop and install appropriate security counter measure.
In this Unit, we will explain the need for security risk assessment and security survey.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Explain Risks Management Discuss Security Survey Analyse Security Risk Explain Security check list 3.0 RISK MANAGEMENT Risk management are principally concerned with the protection and conservation of corporate assets and resources.
Risk management may thus be defined as making the most before the lost arrangement for an after the loss continuation of business (Fisher and Green 2004).
The concept of risk management presents a sensible approach to this complicated problem.
It allows risks to be handled in a logical manner using long-held management principles.
Insurance in and of itself is no longer able to meet the security challenges faced by major corporations.
The task of protection continues to be a mere single complex one in a time when technology is creating new products at an explosive rate aggravated by domestic and international terrorism (Broder 2006).
90 A good risk management program involves four basic steps: 1.
Identification of risks or specific vulnerabilities.
2.
Analysis and study of risk, which includes the likelihood and degree of danger of or at an event.
3.
Operationalization of risk-management alternatives a) Risk avoidance b) Risk reduction c) Risk spreading d) Risk Transfer e) Self-assumption of risk f) Any combination of the above 4.
Ongoing study of security programs THE SECURITY SURVEY A security survey is essentially an exhaustive physical examination of the premises and a thorough inspection of all operational systems and procedures.
Such an examination or survey has as its overall objective the analysis of a facility to determine the existing state of its defences, to determine the degree of protection required and ultimately to lead to recommendation for establishing a total security programme.
The survey may be conducted by staff security personnel or by qualified security specialists employed for this purpose.
Some experts suggest that outside security people could approach the job with more objectively and would have less of a tendency to take certain areas or practices for granted, thus providing a more complex appraisal of existing conditions.
It is also important at least some members of the survey team be totally familiar with the facility and its operation.
Without such familiarity, it would be difficult to formulate the survey plan.
There is need for check list by survey team in preparation for the actual inspection.
Risk is defined as (1) the possibility of suffering harm or loss and (2) the danger or probability of loss occurring to one’s insured assets.
Most of the risks affecting a given enterprise or organization can be readily identified and therefore predicted.
Risk should not be confused with perils which are the causes of risk – such things as fire, flood and earthquake.
Nor should risk be confused with a hazard, which is a contributing factor to a peril.
While risk analysis is a management tool, the standards which are determined by 91 whatever management decides it wants to accept in terms of actual loss.
To proceed in a logical manner to perform a risk analysis, it is first necessary to accomplish some basis tasks: 1.
Identify the assets in need of protection (people, money, manufactured products and industrial process, to name a few).
2.
Identify the kinds of risks that may affect the assets involved (internal theft, fire, external theft).
3.
Determine the probability of risk occurrence.
4.
Determine the impact or effect on the organization in monetary values when possible if a given loss does occur.
Risk assessment analysis is a rational and orderly approach, as well as comprehensive solution to problem identification and probability determination.
It is also a method for estimating the expected loss from the occurrence of an adverse event.
It provides management with information on which to base decisions.
The goal of risk analysis is to strike an economic balance between the impact of risk on the enterprise and the cost of implementing prevention and protective measures.
The benefits of risk analysis according to Broder (2004) are as follows: 1.
It shows the current security posture profile of the organization.
2.
It will highlight areas in which greater (or lesser) security is needed.
3.
It will help to assemble some of the facts needed for the development and justifications of cost effective countermeasures (safeguards).
4.
It will increase security awareness by assessing and then reporting the strengths and weaknesses of security to all organizational levels from management to operations.
Risk analysis is not a task to be accomplished once and for all, it must be performed periodically.
The major resources required for performing a risk analysis is trained man power.
The time allocated to accomplish the risk analysis should be compatible with its objectives.
RISK IDENTIFICATION Risk identification is to make the task of risk analysis more manageable by establishing a base from which to proceed.
When the risks associated with the various systems and 92 subsystems within a given enterprise are known, the allocation of countermeasures (resources) can be more carefully planned.
SECURITY CHECKLIST Security checklists are used to facilitate the gathering of pertinent information.
It takes different forms: (1) Simple lists of Yes or No, questions (2) Open and questions (3) Narrowly focused on the specific operations or activity.
(4) Broader in scope and cover security concerns common to all the company’s operation.
The checklist is usually the backbone of the security survey.
According to Momboisse (1977), “A security survey is a critical, on-site examination to ascertain the present security status, identity deficits or excess, determine the protection need and make recommendations to improve the overall security of the operation”.
Sennewald also defined security survey as “The primary vehicle used in a security assessment is the survey.
The survey is the process whereby one gathers data that reflects the who, what, how, where, when and why of the client’s existing operation.
The survey is the fact-finding process”.
Enlightened student of criminology have come to learn that the most predominant and most costly form of business crime is employee or internal theft in its various forms.
Asset misappropriation accounts for the majority of employee theft, bribery (corruption) and fraudulent statements, although not as frequent, run second and third.
FACILITY EVALUATION When analyzing security risks according to Fischer and Green (2004) the security manager should look at a number of aspects of the company, giving consideration as potential security problems to the following: (1) The perimeter (2)The parking lot (3)All adjacent building windows and roof tops (4) All doors and windows less than 18 feet above ground level (5) The roof (6)The issuance of main entrance keys to all tenants in a building (7) Any shared occupancy, as in office building (8) All areas containing valuables (9) The off-hours when the facility is not in operation and all nighttimes hours (10) The control and supervision of entry into the facility (11) keys and key control (traditional or electronic) (12) Fire (13) Computer access (14) video surveillance (15) Computer systems.
93 The above list should contain some of sample questions that must be asked when conducting a survey of any facility.
GENERAL DEPARTMENTAL EVALUATIONS It is the duty of security manger, to evaluate each department in the organization separately in terms of its potentials for loss.
These departmental evaluations will eventually be considered into the master survey for final recommendation and action where particular risk predominate, special attention must be paid to providing some counteraction to remove them.
The following questions might be asked: 1.
Is the departmental function such that is vulnerable to embezzlement?
2.
Does the department have cash funds or negotiable instruments on hand?
3.
Does the department house confidential records?
4.
Does the department have heavy external and/or internal traffic?
5.
Does the department have target items in it such as drugs, jewelleries or furs?
6.
What is the special fire hazard in the department or from adjacent areas?
A typical company has the following departments: a) Personnel Department b) Accounting Department c) Data Processing Department d) Purchasing Department e) Shipping and Receiving Department REPORT OF THE SURVEY The report of the survey is important before a security plan can be drawn up.
The report of the survey should indicate those areas that are weak in security and recommend measures that might reasonably bring the security of the facility up to acceptable standards.
It is important to the security directors, that they may not get all they need to do their work, when they are denied extra personnel, they must find hardware that will help to replace people, where a request for more coverage by closed-circuit television (CCTV) is turned down, they must develop inspection procedures or barriers that may serve a similar purpose.
If at any point they feel that security costs have been cut to a point where the stated objective cannot be achieved, they are obliged to communicate that opinion to management who will then determine whether to diminish the original objective or to authorize more money.
It is 94 important, however, that security directors exhaust every alternative method of coverage before going to management with an opinion that requires this kind of decision (Fischer and Green 2004).
4.0 CONCLUSION Security managers or directors must be adequately informed about risk management.
It is the basis upon which the security plan is developed.
It reduces the money spent in the protection of company assets.
Assets which are vulnerable to destruction, theft or other vulnerabilities are taken into consideration during the process of risk analysis and the security survey.
5.0 SUMMARY From this Unit, we have learned that risk analysis is in management tool, the standard for which are determined by whatever management decides it wants to accept in terms of actual loss.
While a security survey is essentially an exhaustive physical examination of the premises and thorough inspections of all operational systems and procedures.
We also learnt what risk identification, security checklist is and how a security director can evaluate facility and departments in terms of security risks.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the following concepts (a) Risk Management (b) Security survey (c) Risk analysis (d) Risk identification (e) Security checklist.
7.0 REFERENCES Broder, J. F. (2006) Risk Analysis and Security Survey, Butterworth Heinnemann.
Momboisse R. M. (1977) Industrial security for strikes, Riots and Disasters, Charles C. Thomas Publisher Sennewald, C. A.
(2004) Security Consulting Boston, M. A. Butterworth – Heinemann Elservier.
95  96 UNIT 3: CHALLENGES AND PROBLEMS OF PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Inability of the state to adequately provide security for all and sundry and the global economic crisis as brought about the witnessing of significant growth in private security companies.
Private Security industry is considered one of the fastest growing industries in the world, with an expected growth rate of 17 percent by 2016 according to the U.S Department of labour and crime.
Despite its growth and profitability, private security companies are facing many challenges such as lack of adequate training, the problem of poor wages and working conditions, the cost of registration among others.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the challenges and problems facing private security services.
.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Challenges Confronting Private Security Guards in Nigeria There are numerous challenges facing Private Security Guards in Nigeria.
Some of these problems are discussed below: a.
Lack of Adequate Training One of the challenges of private security guards in Nigeria is lack of adequate training.
Most private security companies are always in the habits of recruiting people as guards with very little or no training.
Many of the private security guards undergo only physical fitness as training while they have no knowledge of several other aspects of security training including intelligence collection and analysis, martial arts, crowd control, riot control, data mining and automated data analysis in crime mitigation, to mention a few.
This problem is not peculiar to unregistered private security firms but also many 97 registered and big security outfits show little interest in periodical training of their guards all they care for is profit maximization.
This problem has been responsible for the incompetence and inefficiency in the activities of many private guards in Nigeria.
b.
The Problem of Poor Wages and Working Conditions It appears to be one of the leading factors militating against efficiency in private security activities in the country.
In spite of high cost of living, many private security guards earn salaries as low as N6,000 per month (Abrahamen and Williams, 2005).
It is unfortunate that government has not considered in its regulation of private security activities the importance of prioritizing the welfare of guards commissioned by various private security companies in the country.
Though, one cannot but agree with government if it argues that it can prevail on all private security firms to improve the welfare of their guards because it is not all of them that are registered, but the truth of the matter is that both unregistered and registered companies are culprits of pauperization of guards.
The decisions of most unregistered private firms to “pay guards according to the value of individual contracts, so that in effect guards at the same level and with the same experience earn different wages depending on where the company deploys them” (Abrahamen and Williams; 2005).
Poor working conditions confronting a large number of private security guards in the country are making many of them having low job satisfaction, which has led to low job performance and lack of commitment of the job among them.
c. The Cost of Registration The cost of registration is another challenge facing not only the private security guards but also quite a number of private security companies.
According to the NSCDC Act 2003 as amended in 2007, which has authorizes the NSCDC as the regulatory agency; to perform functions of registering private security companies operating in Nigeria.
The Act mandates every private security firm wishing to be registered to have a minimum capital of N10 million (Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps Act No.
2 of 2003 and Amendment Act of 2007).
The high cost of getting a Private Security Company has made many private security providers to be operating without being registered, making it difficult for government to regulate the operations of all private security outfits in the country.
Thus, inadequate regulation of all existing private security companies may attract some risk because the activities of various guards commissioned by the unregistered firms cannot be adequately monitored.
And in a situation where a security 98 guard commissioned by unregistered private security firms errs, it will be difficult for the regulatory agency to communicate with such organization.
d. Risk of Violent Attacks This is another challenges being experienced by private security guards in Nigeria.
The Private Guard Companies Act (1986) has made the stand of government known on non- permission of private security guards to provide armed services in the country.
Private security guards are not permitted to carry specific weapons like guns in Nigeria and in performing their duties; the lives of many of them are usually at risk.
This is because the criminals are often equipped with more dangerous weapons like Ak47 raffles and grenades thus the private guards face the risk of losing their lives in confronting the armed criminals.
This situation has led to untimely deaths of many private security guards in Nigeria.
e. Politics of Dichotomy Politics of dichotomy that exists between the local and foreign private security companies in Nigeria is another challenge worth-mentioning.
There is rivalry between indigenous private security firms and the foreign private security companies due to the belief by the former that their guards are under-engaged because of the preference that most multinational corporations have for the latter in seeking for private security services.
This problem rages on as many local private security players have continued to call on government to deregister all existing foreign Private Security Companies operating in the country as a way of developing the indigenous private security firms.
If the wish of the local private security players comes to fruition, security guards commissioned by these foreign firms face the threat of losing their jobs.
f. The Problem of Overzealousness and Brutality It poses a huge challenge to private security activities in Nigeria.
There have been cases where activities of some private security guards have been criticized especially where guards infringe on the fundamental rights of innocent civilians in providing the security needs of their clients.
This problem is more visible among guards commissioned by unregistered companies particularly the ethnic militias.
The habits of brutality among some OPC guards have become a subject of national debate in recent times.
Many innocent citizens have been killed with charms and/or guns and other dangerous weapon by some guards, situation which has led to public repudiation and criminalization of the private security activities of this militia group.
99 Similarly the unlawful activities of Bakassi Boys in the eastern part of the country have made the public acceptance of their role in security dwindle, making the public to doubt its relevance in the management of people’s security.
There is no doubt that when this group first emerged it had good intentions but politization of the group has led to the disbarment of its activities and it has no longer enjoyed any popular support in the country.
The guards working for registered companies have been accused of being reckless in the discharge of their duties.
For instance, many commuters and innocent civilians have either been injured or killed by the reckless driving and overzealousness of bullion van drivers and policemen attached to some Private Security Companies.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, there are ways to solve or reduce the challenges facing the private security companies.
Probably one of the ways to go would be that private security companies start minding other people’s business for a change and leave their own non security business to professionals while taking security more seriously by raising the hiring criteria, initiating communication with clients and employee and providing employees with proper training and adequate working conditions.
.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss challenges of private security companies.
Various challenges such as lack of adequate training, the problem of poor wages and working conditions, the cost of registration, risk of violence attacks, politics of dichotomy, the problem of overzealousness and brutality were adequately explained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT There are several challenges facing private security companies in Nigeria, one of which is inadequate training among others.
Discuss others.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Grant, B.D.
(1998) U.S Military Expartise for sale : private Military Consultants as a tool of Foreigh Policy.
Strategy Essay.
Institute for National strategy Taulbee, J.L.
(2000) Mercenaries, Private Armies and Security Companies in Contemporary Policy, Internal Politics 100 Abrahamen, R and Willam, M.C.
(2005) The Globalization of private Security: A country Report of Nigeria Globalization of Security Research Project ( Department of International Politics, Aberystwyth and the New Security Challeges Programme 101 UNIT 4: COMPUTER AND INFORMATION SECURITY 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUCTION The essence of computer and information security is to prevent and detect the unauthorized use of computer.
It goes beyond this, computers have made possible video monitoring in the area of facial recognition, fire and smoke detection and advanced alarm monitoring.
In recent times computers are used to process and store vast amounts of increasingly important information.
Hence there is need for computer data protection, which is of greater importance for the security professional.
2.0 OBJECTIVES .At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Explain the concept of computer security and system protection Discuss the need for computer security Examine methods of computer crimes 3.0 MAIN CONTENT COMPUTER SECURITY Computer security is the protection of information and property from theft, corruption, or natural disaster, while allowing the information and property to remain accessible and productive to its users.
The term computer system security means the collective processes and mechanisms by which sensitive and valuable information and services are protected from publication, tempering or collapse by unauthorized activities or untrustworthy individuals and unplanned events respectively.
(Wikipedia).
The major technical areas of computer security are usually represented by the initials CIA: Confidentiality, Integrity, and Authentication or Availability.
Confidentiality means that information cannot be accessed by unauthorized parties.
Confidentiality is also known as secrecy or privacy.
Integrity means that information 102 is protected against unauthorized changes that are not detectable to authorized users; Authentication means that users are who they claim to be.
While confidentiality, integrity and authenticity are the most important concerns of a computer security manager, privacy is perhaps the most important aspects of computer security for everyday internet users.
Chief Information Officer (CIO) is saddled with responsibility of managing and controlling of information but it is the Chief Security Officer (CSO) who is concerned about the integrity of the information disseminated throughout the company system.
Cooperation between these two key positions is critical for adequate protection of company intellectual property.
Examples of cooperation between IT and security department are many.
New electronic surveillance systems require technology elements that call for technical expertise beyond that of most security managers, such as computers and databases, Local Area Networks (LANS) Wireless Local Area Network (WLANs), Wide Area Networks (WANs) and the internet.
The CSO has little choice but to learn the IT industry operations.
The need for increased security and safety while containing costs is obvious.
Perceived security threats such as terrorism, personal safety, asset protection and risk reduction cannot be ignored.
THE NEED FOR COMPUTER SECURITY 1.
Computer security not only to protect computers and information from some type of theft but also deal with natural disaster like fires, floods, accidents and so forth.
2.
It protects the company internet services from hackers, from disgruntled employees or competitors (The number of hacks in 2002 reached 87,000 worldwide with the United States being the biggest target, followed in number of attacks is Brazil, Britain, Germany and Italy (Fischer and Green 2004).
3.
It secures thefts of proprietary information, insider abuse of computing systems, sabotage of data networks, denial of service attacks, virus, system penetration and telecom fraud.
4.
E-Commerce online retailers also suffered losses from the cost of purchases made with stolen credit cards (Identity theft).
METHODS OF COMPUTER CRIME The following are the wide range of methods available to disrupt system activity or to observe, steal or destroy information: 1.
Data Manipulation or theft 103 Anyone associated with or having access to data on the computer can change the data.
Changing of data during or after operation into a computer system is the simplest, safest and most common method of committing computer crime.
Sometimes, insider often sells data files to an individual who then uses the information to steal identities.
2.
Salami Technique This descriptive term implies trimming off small amount of money from many sources and diverting these slices into one’s own or an accomplice’s account.
This form of crime is most common in banking environments with a large number of savings and/or checking accounts and automated financial processing.
By creating a new program or altering an existing one, an employee can randomly deduct one to five kobo from a few thousand different individual accounts.
The accumulated sums can then be withdrawn by normal methods from his or her receiving account.
3.
Computer Viruses They are computer programs that can replicate themselves and harm the computer system on a network without the knowledge of the system.
They are sets of unwanted instructions executed on computers.
Presently, there are appropriately 500 core virus and about 3,000 variations (Fischer and Green 2004).
Viruses spread to other computers through network file system, through the network, internet or by the means of removable devices like USB drives and CDs.
Computer viruses are all forms of malicious codes written with an aim to harm a computer system and destroy information.
There are four categories of viruses (a) Innocuous viruses (b) Humorous virus (c) Altering viruses (d) catastrophic viruses.
It is a criminal act to write computer viruses that can crash computer system, thereby destroying all or greater amounts of critical data.
4.
Hacking It is an unauthorized access or intrusion into a computer system.
The act of defeating the security capabilities of computer system in order to obtain an illegal access to the information stored on the computer system is called hacking.
5.
Identify theft: This is one of the most serious frauds as it involves stealing money and obtaining other benefits through the use of false identity.
While using false identification is an old method of criminal activity.
The ability to access all types of information on the computer has given this old problem an entirely new life.
Identity cloning is the use of another user’s information to pose as a false user.
Illegal migration terrorism and blackmail are often made possible by means of identity theft.
104 The types of criminal activity caused by the identity theft are the following: (1) Cash theft using ATM Machine (2) Electronic check fraud (3) Denial of credit (4) Financial services charges for overdraft (5) Lost time in dealing with the aftermath.
(6) Criminal investigation, arrest.
6.
Worms: Worms and viruses are very different although some people regarded as the same type of program.
Both worms and viruses have replication mechanisms, activation mechanisms and objectives.
While viruses just infect programs, worms take over computer memory and deny its use to legitimate programs.
7.
Trojan Horse: This is a destructive program that masquerade as a benign application.
The software initially appears to perform a desirable function for the user prior to installation and/or execution but steals information or harms the system.
Unlike viruses or worms, Trojan horses do no replicate themselves but they are destructive.
A Trojan may allow a hacker access to a target computer system.
In reality, Trojan horse program are not software but viruses designed to penetrate a computer system so that a program of the penetrator’s choosing can become active.
It can inflict a computer system with a virus, worm, bomb or trapdoor, etc.
8.
Electronic Eavesdropping: Tapping, without authorization, into communication lines over which digitized computer data and messages are being sent is electronic eavesdropping.
By using technologically advanced listening devices, eavesdropping can be done on traditional telephone lines and even satellite transmission networks.
If data transmitted are not encoded, capturing and transforming the data is equivalent to using a clandestine tape recorder to record a standard telephone conversation.
(Fischer and Green 2004).
9.
Software Piracy: The companies or consultants who provide software make big profit, this is because software programs cost from a few thousand naira to millions of naira.
Hence, some people are willing to copy software and resell it or give it away.
This unauthorized copying of copyrighted computer programs is referred to as software piracy.
These set of people deny vendors and software developers profits that they should have accrued legally.
COMPUTER SYSTEMS PROTECTION Our society is highly reliant on information technologies.
Industrial production, financial flow, commercial exchange and even the security of citizens depend more and more on information technologies.
Hence, these systems must be protected.
Most security systems are 105 based on a perimeter protection (Firewalls, intrusion detection system etc.).
Depending on the circumstances, the security perimeter can be of a company, a group, an information system or simply a personal computer.
Perimeter protection, while being globally useful, does not bring any protection against certain types of attacks.
With the connection of IT Systems to networks, the out sourcing of services, or even internal reorganization, it has become extremely complex to define and secure perimeter.
Perimeter security solutions are a partially inaccurate vision of security, believing that a threat necessarily comes from the outside.
Today, threats have become extremely diversified (indiscreet co-workers, Trojans, operating systems…etc).
For the board, the operator or the manager of a site, infrastructure or activity, the danger can come from both the inside and the outside of the perimeter being managed.
Security professionals therefore must protect information contained within the computer system from damage or loss.
Regardless of the type of system, the security professional’s dilemma is how to balance convenience in using the system and from protecting the system from disasters, systems failures, or unauthorized access.
Disaster – recovery planning, identification and access control of software and data, encryption and physical security are the four facets of computer protection.
1.
Disaster-Recovery Planning: Disaster such as fires, floods and earthquakes are potential hazards to essential computer systems.
Those threats are not predictable hence there is need for businesses to develop contingency or disaster-recovery plans.
Recovery planning or contingency planning must cover all business functions such as personnel resources, hardware back up, software and data file backup etc.
2.
Identification and Access control of Software and Data: With increase in computer knowledge, individual possessing basic computer skills can break into a computer system.
Hence, there is need for organization to protect their software and data.
Computer systems can use three methods to determine if a person has a legitimate right to access the system.
The three categories are: 1.
What a person has: Cards, keys, and badges 2.
What a person knows personal identification numbers (PINs), passwords and digital signatures.
3. Who a person is, physical traits 3.
Encryption 106 According to security expert, the best way to protect any type of data is to encrypt it.
Encryption scrambles the information so that it is not usable unless the changes are reversed.
There are five different methods for encrypting data: a) Data Encryption Standard (DES) b) Algorithm c) Skipjack d) Capstone (Clipper chip) e) Privacy Enhanced Mail (PEM) 4.
Physical security.
It describes measures that are designed to deny access to unauthorized personnel (including attackers) from physically accessing a building facility, resource or stored information and guidance on how to design structures to resist potentially hostile acts.
Physical security is not a modern phenomenon.
It essentially exists in order to deter persons from entering a physical facility.
The use of technology for physical security has changed things.
There are passive infrared (PIR) based technology, electronic access control system, or video surveillance system (VSS), Good physical security is a combination of defensive principles designed to (a) deter (b) delay (c) detect (d) respond (and ultimately, deny access) to intrusion to critical physical spaces.
There are three main components to physical security.
1.
Obstacles can be placed in the way of potential attackers and sites can be hardened against accidents and environmental disasters.
Such measures can include multiple locks, fencing walls, fireproof safes and water sprinklers.
2.
Surveillance and notification systems can be put in place, such as lighting, heat sensors, smoke detection, intrusion detectors, alarms and cameras.
3.
Methods can be implemented to apprehend attackers (preferably before any damage has been done) and to recover quickly from accidents, fires or natural disasters.
5.
CONTENT MONITORING AND FILTERING With the wide spread use of the internet, companies cannot ignore looking at who is using the service and what they are doing.
While on the network, employers have a right to monitor their own systems, they have the right to be informed regarding such monitoring activities.
4.0 CONCLUSION 107 The progress achieved in this dynamic field has improved the general state of the world; there are always those who use the technology for personal gain or criminal activity.
The Chief Security Officers must work hard to protect the companies and the individual that they serve.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we dealt with introduction to computer security, the need for computer security, methods of computer crime and computer system protection.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
What are the needs for computer security?
b.
Discuss the methods of computer crimes.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Levine, D. E. (2003) Content Monitoring and Filtering Security Technology and Design.
Fischer R. J. and Green G. (2004) Introduction to Security Burlington, Elsevier.
.
108 UNIT 5: NIGERIA SECURITY AND DEFENCE CORPS (NSCDC) 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Security implies a stable, relatively predictable environment in which an individual or group may pursue its ends without disruption or harm and without fear of disturbance or injury (Fischer and Green 2004).
To secure anything is to protect it from being unlawfully tampered with or destroyed.
It is the duty of some agencies of government to protect national infrastructures.
Protecting these infrastructures is essential to a nation’s security, public health and safety as well as economic vitality.
The particular focus of this unit is on the efforts being made by the Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC) in safeguarding national infrastructures in Nigeria.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Explain the historical background of Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC) - State the functions - Explain the organization structure 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Background of Civil Defence The origin of the Civil Defence Corps dates back to the era of Emperor Nero who reigned in and ruled the Roman Empire.
This marked the period when the Roman Empire ascertained her political powers in the world with colonies scattered all over the world.
This historical development which brought about expansion of the Roman Empire coupled with acute shortage of citizens of military age to carry out essential services such as defence, provide for civilians affected by wars especially the aged, woman and children invariably demanded for addition manpower, hence the creation of an organization charged with safeguarding the civil populace (Abolurin 2003).
Abolurin further said, that the periods of the First and Second 109 World War, saw various names such as, home-guards and Body of Air Road and Disaster Protection etc.
The name “Civil Defence” was adopted by the organization after the First and the Second World War.
Since this period, civil defence has attained the status of an international organization embraced by many countries of the world, with similar function, based on the needs, aspiration, interest and functional capability of host countries.
For example, the Swiss Federal Civil Defence is part of the Country’s National Defence saddled with the responsibility of protecting, rescuing and providing relief for persons in complex emergencies, including armed conflict situations.
The Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC) was established in Nigeria on May 23rd, 1967 during the Civil War, it was initially referred to as the Lagos Civil Defence Committee with fundamental responsibility during the civil war.
The charter of April 6, 1968, however, made it possible for states that may wish to establish the corps within their jurisdiction to do so.
Hence the Lagos Civil Deference Committee was integrated and renamed Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC) under the supervision of Federal Ministry of Internal Affairs ( Abolurin, 2008).
NSCDC is now a full fledged paramilitary organization established statutorily under the Federal Ministry of Interior.
The Corp has undergone changes after attending paramilitary training in various federal security agencies training institute throughout the federation.
The former civilian president chief Olusegun Obasanjo (GCFR) transform it from voluntary organization to full fledged paramilitary organization through the Act of 2003 and as amended in 2007.
Functions of Nigeria Security and Civil Defence CCORPS (NSCDC) The act of 2003 and as amended in 2007 bestowed upon the corps the following responsibilities and functions, to: 1.
Assist in the maintenance of peace and order and in the protection/rescuing of the civil population during the period of emergency.
2.
Recommend to the minister, the registration of private guard companies.
3.
From time to time, inspection of the premises of private security guard companies.
Their training facilities and approve same if it is up to standard.
4.
Supervise and monitor the activities of all private guard companies and keep a register for that purpose: i.
Periodically organize workshop and training courses for private guards companies and ii.
Seal up any private guard company which operates without a valid license.
110 5.
Maintain twenty-four hour surveillance over infrastructures, sites and projects for the federal, state and local government.
i.
Enter and search any premises and seize any material suspected to have been used in vandalization or suspected process of vandalization.
ii.
Enter and search premises of any suspected illegal dealer in petroleum products or material used by Power Holding Company of Nigeria, Postal Services, Nigeria Telecommunication or for any other public utility or infrastructure.
6.
Have power to arrest with or without a warrant, detain, investigate and institute legal proceedings by or in the name of the Attorney-General of the Federal Republic of Nigeria against any person who is reasonably suspected to have committed an offence under this Act or is involved in any: I.
Criminal activity II.
Chemical poison or oil spillage, nuclear waste, poisoning III.
Industry espionage or fraud IV.
Activity aimed at frustrating any government programme or policy V. Riot, civil disorder, revolt, strike or religious unrest or VI.
Power transmission lines or oil pipelines, NIPOST cables, equipment, water board pipes or equipment vandalization.
7.
Monitor the activities of religious bodies and trade association.
8.
Monitor, investigate, and take every necessary step to forestall any planned act of terrorism particularly: i. Cult and ethnic militia activities ii.
Cult and ethnic militia activities iii.
Criminal activities aimed at depriving citizens of their properties or lives iv.
Syndicate activity aimed at defrauding the federal state, or local government.
9.
Monitor, investigate and take every necessary step to forestall any act of terrorism and report same to appropriate federal security agency.
10.
Provide necessary warring for the civilian population in times of danger.
11.
Evaluate the civilian population from danger area.
12.
Provide and manage shelters for civilians during period of emergency.
13.
Assist in the decontamination and in the staking of precautionary measures during any period of emergency.
111 14.
Carry out rescue operations and control volatile situations.
15.
Assist in the provision of emergency medical services, including first aid, during any period of emergency.
16.
Detect and demarcate any danger area.
17.
Assist the federal and state fire service in fire-fighting operation.
18.
Assist in the distributions of emergency supplies.
19.
Provide assistance to restore and maintain order in distressed area in any period of emergency.
20.
Assist in repairing indispensable public utilities during any period of emergency.
21.
Provide intelligence information to the ministry on any matter relating to: i.
Crime control generally ii.
Riot, disorder, revolt, strike or religions unrest iii.
Subversive activity by members of the public iv.
Industrial action and strike aimed at paralyzing government v. Any other matter as may be directed by the minister vi.
Have power to arrange and mediate in the settlement of disputes among willing members of the public.
Organizational Structure of NSCDC Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps is headed by the Commandment General who is the Chief Executive and the According Officer.
The Commandant General is assisted by a number of Deputy Commandments General (DCGs), in charge of: (1) Directorate of Administration (2) Directorate of Operations (3) Directorate of Intelligence/investigations (4) Directorate of Technical Services There are Assistant Commandants General called Zonal Commandants in-charge of state commands nationwide.
Area Commandants are in-charge of senatorial district within the state controlling about three, four or five divisional areas as the case may be.
Divisional officers in the state take charge of the 774 Local Government Areas.
There are District Heads or Officers who are in charge of all the districts within the division and reports to the divisional officers of the local government.
Lastly, the cells officers are in charge of the grassroots who take control of the various ward and report matters to the district officers.
112 ORGANOGRAM OF THE NIGERIA SECURITY AND CIVIL DEFENCE CORPS Commandant General (CG) Dep.
Commandant Dep.
Comm General Dep.
Commandant Dep.
Comm Gen. General Int.
and Administration General operations Int.
Technical investigation Service Asst.
Commandant General Commandant Area Commandant Division officers District Heads Calls Heads 113 4.0 Conclusion This study unit has showcased NSCDC as one of the organizations for ensuring collective security in Nigeria.
Although there are several other agencies involved at ensuring that the security of Nigeria is bettered.
With proper management, it leads to drastic reduction in crime, and effective disaster management.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with historical background of civil defence, and its functions.
Specific attention was given to the organizational structure of Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC).
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Describe the historical background of civil defence b. Enumerate the functions of Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abolurin, A.
(2008) the role of NSCDC in safe guarding collective Security in Nigeria Abuja.
The National Conference of the Society for peace studies and practice (SPSP) 2008 Annual Conference.
114 MODULE 4 Unit 1: List of Private Security Companies in Nigeria Unit 2: Conflict Management in Private Security Service Unit 3: Relationship between Police and Private Security Operatives in Nigeria Unit 4: Regulation and Recommendation of Private Security Service in Nigeria Unit 5: Specific Security threat UNIT 1: LIST OF PRIVATE SECURITY COMPANIES IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Security is now the second largest money-spinner in Nigeria, surpassed only by oil and gas”.
This statement by a long-standing observer of Nigerian politics is striking, especially given that Nigeria is Africa’s most populous country and the world’s seventh largest oil producer.
While a lack of statistics and information make this claim impossible to verify completely, there is no doubt that the private security industry has grown rapidly in recent years.
Private security personnel are highly visible around the country, guarding businesses, homes and neighbourhoods, and advising transnational companies and embassies on risks and dangers to their assets and employees.
Security has thus become a major part of the Nigerian economy, and according to the best informed estimates, there are currently between 1,500 and 2,000 private security companies (PSCs) in Nigeria, employing in about 100,000 people (Abrahamen and Williams 2005 ).
It is difficult to estimate the size of the private security sector in Nigeria with any degree of accuracy.
No reliable figures exist for either the number of companies or employees, as many companies are unlicensed and unregistered.
The most frequent estimates put the number of PSCs at between 1,000 and 1,500, with the majority being small, individual, owner-managed companies operating in only one town or locality.
In personnel terms, the largest companies 115 are Prudential Security, which operates countrywide and employs nearly 9,000 guards, and Halogen Security with approximately 4,000 guards.
Other major companies include Bemil Security and Corporate Guards.
The major ‘foreign’ PSC, Group4Securicor’s partner Outsourcing Services Ltd. (OSL), also operates nationally and has a total of approximately 3,000 personnel.
While there is a long tradition of employing so-called ‘mai-guards’ as watchmen in Nigeria, the first company providing uniformed guards was Nigeria Investigation and Security Company (NISCO), founded in 1965 and still in business.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Mention key private security companies in Nigeria.
b.
Discuss Halogen Security Company Limited as one of numerous private security companies in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 List of Private Security Companies in Nigeria 1.
Ace Cop Security Limited.
2.
Adaptive Guards Limited.
3.
Afamos Security & Safety Nigeria Limited.
4.
Afri-De Alarm Nigeria Limited.
5.
Agbas Security Services.
6.
AGL Alpha Guards Limited.
7.
Aims Security Company Limited.
8.
Alert Security Service.
9.
Alfasine Security & System Limited.
10.
Allatek Holdings Security Limited.
11, Alpha-Mega Security Agents.
12, Anderson Guards Limited.
13.
Barona Security Company Nigeria Limited 14.
Bemil Security Services 15.
Beta Guards Limited 16.
Beverly Cops & Security Services Limited 17.
Bon-Douglas Security Services Limited 18.
Burglary Alarm Security Services & Comm.
Limited 19.
Capital Security & Surveillance Limited 20.
Cardinal Security Services Limited 21.
Centurion Security & Safety Consults 22.
Chakel Security Limited 23.
Chilex Security Products Limited 24.
Chuhenchu Security Company Limited 25.
Concorde Security Services Limited 26.
Consolidated Safeguards & Security Company 116 27.
Continental Guards Limited 28.
Corporate Guards Limited 29.
Crest Security Outfit Limited 30.
Damog Nigeria Limited 31.
Daniel's Security Systems Limited 32.
De Jaram Kong Security Limited 33.
Destiny Electronic Security System Nig Ltd 34.
Divine Security & Telecoms Limited 35.
Doos Security 36.
Douglas Veterans Security Limited 37.
Dromour Guards Limited 38.
Effanti Ltd 39.
Eva Guards Limited 40.
Express Security & Co. 41.
Fap-Legend Security Services Limited 42 Flare Security (Nig) Limited 43.
Foremost Security Systems 44.
Fortifiers Protection Services Ltd 45.
Fortress Guards & Security Services Limited 46.
Frontier Guards Services Limited 47.
Geekos Security Nigeria Limited 48.
Gideon Guards Limited 49.
Global Security Solution 50.
Great Hope Security Limited 51.
Grekos Security Nigeria Limited 52.
Halogen Security Company Ltd 53 Hi-Tech Electrical & Security & Survellance Limited 54 Highcom Security Limited 55 Hogan Guards (Former Guardsmark) 56 Home Automation Security System Limited 57 Initial Security Nigeria Limited 58 Innovations Security Systems 59 Integrated Systems Devices Limited 60 Integrity Guards Limited 61 Inter-Falcon Security Services Limited 62 International Mechandise & Security Limited 63 J.S.H.
Security Industries Nig.
Limited 64 K-9 Security Limited 65 Kage Security Limited 66 Kal Security Limited 67 Kifha Guards 68 King David Security Limited 69 Kings Guards Nigeria Ltd 70 Kingsland Security Surveillance Limited 71 Kuban Security & Management Consultants 72 Kingstech Network Ltd 73 Lagen Systems & Security Limited 74 Lai Security & Investigation Services Limited 75 Lasis Security & Investigation Services Limited 76 Link-Stride Security Systems Limited 117 77 Mac Lion Security Services 78 Marksmen Security Company Limited 79 Markjacko Security Systems 80 Megaforce Security Limited 81 Mega Guards Services Limited 82 Men in Black Security Limited 83 Metropolitan Guards Limited 84 Mikado Security Services Limited 85 Molamak Security Services Limited 86 Montgomery Security Services Limited 87 Network Guards Limited 88 Niger Guards Security Company 89 Nigerian Investigation and Safety Company Limited.
90 Nogees Security Systems Equipment & Services Ltd. 91 Olart Security Services 92 Olasco Company Nigeria Limited 93 Omega Security Services Limited 94 Octagon Guards Limited 95 OTI Guards Limited 96 Pahek Security Services Limited 97 Papyrue Security & Communications 98 Pinnacle Investments Limited (Security & communications consultants) 99 Portcullis Security Nigeria Limited 100 Prime Guards Nigeria Limited 101 Profile Security Services 102 QED Advanced Technology Security Limited 103 Quality Electronic Security Systems 104 Rapid Vigil Security Company Limited 105 Reliance Security Solutions Nigeria Limited 106 Richie's Security Limited 107 Riggs Securites Ltd 108 Royal Guards 110 Samos Security & Services Limited 111 Santana Security Agency Limited 112 Secmek Security System Limited 113 Security & Allied Technology 114 Security Hazards Experts Limited 115 Security Swaps Limited 116 Serendipity Security 117 Servtrust Prudential Guards 118 Sheiksafety & Security Company Limited 119 Skilpak International Security Limited 120 Technocrime Security Limited 121 Trends Ventures Limited 122 Top Flight Security Company Limited 123 TTC Mobile Limited 124 Unache Security Services Limited 125 Unique Security & Investigation Service Limited 126 Utro Guard Security 127 Vanni International Security System 118 128 Villeworth Security Services Limited 129 Vision Security Services 130 Zitadel Security Among the listed security companies, Halogen Security Company Limited is discussed in details.
3.2 HALOGEN SECURITY COMPANY LIMITED Halogen Security Company Limited was incorporated in July 1992 as a Private Limited Liability Company and granted licence to operate in November of the same year as a reaction to a yawning gap in quality of guard service delivery in Nigeria.
The company started business immediately and showed from inception that it was poised to revolutionize security services in the country which has resulted in making it the leading security services provider in the nation.
Having been in operation for over 19 years, it has been able to attract and retain a selected group of clients some from inception till date.
It has acquired vast experience in virtually all facets of security and protection of lives and property.
Halogen Security possesses the managerial, financial and administrative infrastructure enabling operations to be totally performance related, customer needs driven with a high degree of customer communications.
It is committed to working in partnership with customers to provide an excellent and cost effective security service that complements their own standards of customer service.
They honour and support this commitment by selective recruitment, thorough training, competent supervision, constant management input and accurate billing system.
Their reputation rests on professionalism, integrity and service excellence to which they are equally committed.
Halogen Security belongs to several professional associations'.
These Associations include: (cid:1) Institute of Industrial Security and Safety of Nigeria (cid:1) Nigerian Institute of Safety Professionals (cid:1) Association of Private Security Practitioners of Nigeria (APSPN) Halogen Security’s Mission Statement Is to consistently provide superior security solutions using the most modern technology, well- trained and properly motivated staff and to make them the most sought-after security company in Nigeria, as well as the West Coast of Africa.
119 Vision Is to remain the number one provider of professional security solutions in Nigeria, using competent personnel and superior resources.
Halogen Security has different categories of operatives which includes but not limited to guards, post leaders, supervisors and site managers spread across the country.
They possess a minimum qualification of Senior School Certificate and a considerable number of them are Diploma Certificate and Degree holders.
No matter their qualifications, they ensure they all undergo basic and/or advanced security training in order to adequately equip them for the new career they have chosen before deploying them to their various beats.
In place is well defined on-the-job training programme which ensures that their operations become adapted to specialized safety.
Their aim is to ensure that Halogen security operatives are the best security officers in the industry.
They are meticulously selected, extensively trained, motivated and supervised by experienced officers.
They provide well-trained security operatives for residences, factories and corporate businesses all over the federation.
Our guards are trained to correctly interpret and effectively implement operating procedures peculiar to their areas of responsibility.
The number of guards to be deployed to each location is determined by the result of security survey conducted by experts or as determined by the client through a mutual agreement.
Services rendered are in three broad categories: (cid:1) Corporate- PLATINUM (cid:1) Industrial/Manufacturing - RANGER (cid:1) Domestic (Residences/Estates)- HOMMIE Platinum This is the offering for Corporate Offices whereby their operatives are kitted to reflect the image and ambience available within the guarded premises.
The minimum entry qualification for this category of operative is National Diploma or Equivalent.
Ranger Our operatives also work in warehouses, Manufacturing plants, beverages and food related conservation and processing companies, confectioneries and the likes.
The doggedness required on such facility determines the kind of personnel that would suit this category.
120  Special Events They provide Security Cover for social events such as Musical Concerts, Wedding Ceremonies, Launching, Funeral, Promotional Events, and Annual General Meetings (AGMs) across various industries.
Guard Dogs They make use and deploy security Dogs and Handlers to premises that require them.
They are trained to deter intrusion and are very useful for crowd control at events.
Technology Halogen security is found effective in providing modern, reliable electronic alarm systems backed by highly trained security specialists.
This service covers the field of corporate, industrial and domestic concerns.
It involves installation, monitoring and maintenance of a wide range of electronic security devices linked to 24-hour, state of the art control rooms where distress signals received are processed and react teams dispatched to swiftly counter the incident and ensure subscribers safety.
They have developed an excellent working relationship with the leadership of Nigerian Police through a bilateral agreement of cooperation and mutual assistance for the enhancement of their collective ability to effectively deal with crime within areas of interests in their jurisdiction.
24 Hour Armed Response and Monitoring As crime does not keep business hours, neither does Halogen companies so they offer alarm monitoring every second of every day, to be assured that if something goes wrong they will always be the first to know.
Nigeria’s biggest Armed Response fleet – at your service Halogen features Nigeria’s largest Armed Response Fleet.
With vehicles across the nation, Halogen has a high level of presence on the roads – an attribute that is, in itself, a deterrent.
GPS Live Tracking for the fastest Armed Response 121 When things go wrong, you need armed response - fast.
Halogen is the only home security service in Nigeria to feature GPS live tracking in every response vehicle.
This innovative satellite technology ensures that they know the exact location of every armed response vehicle, so that in the event of an emergency they can easily send the nearest vehicle to its rescue.
122 Integrated Services Halogen combines Guarding, Armed Response, Electronic estate security systems and individual pre-installed alarms with ongoing communication and liaison.
Halogen Estate Security offers a complete, integrated security solution.
State-of-the-art Technology With Halogen most estates are said to enjoy the benefits of a wireless network, state-of-the- art access control, an electronic occurrence book, electronic fencing, dual monitoring, and CCTV.
And when a response is needed, Satellite Tracking allows to verify where the closest Halogen patrol vehicle is, ensuring the fastest response times.
Outsourcing Outsourcing has been identified as one of the ways to address business challenges.
The goal is to outsource the management of support and ancillary categories of staff such as secretaries, drivers, truck drivers, receptionist, control room operator, protocol personnel, cashiers, bank tellers, technicians and many more.
This has helped in strengthening client or organisation’s ability to concentrate on its area of core competence and relieve it of the burden of managing employees whose services are only peripheral to its core activity.
Obviously, this would require committing the management of such support and ancillary staff to a competent and experienced team of outsourcing service providers.
Competence Their strategic outsourcing service focused on advancing organisation’s business goals.
They have comprehensive and thorough process and procedures for finding the right people for the right jobs.
Recruitment process They provide a specialized service using expertise and proprietary tools in the identification, assessment and selection of quality professionals.
The process begins from the development of the job descriptions until the personnel have been place.
They invite corporate organizations and individuals to enjoy their outsourcing services by allowing them take over their burden.
Protocol Escort and VIP Protection 123 They provide secure escort services for the movement of people and assets from source to the destination, anywhere within the country.
This is to give adequate protection to customers’ valuables without attracting unnecessary attention.
This service includes airport pick-up and drop-off functions as well as dedicated armed escort services across major cities in Nigeria to borders towns.
The provision of close protection to important dignitaries and other key people remained a specialized security function.
Staff with extensive close protection experience handle the training of officers they deploy for such specialized service.
They are well trained to effectively neutralize any form of attack during travels which may include car jack, disruption by hoodlums who specialize in attacking passengers especially expatriates suspected to be on overseas trips.
This service includes Meet and Greet which involves meeting the passenger at the luggage area and endeavour to assist to ease off the bottlenecks associated with airport clearances.
It is most useful when the passenger is a first time traveller to Nigeria.
Their armed escort services are normally customized to suit the client’s requirements and peculiar circumstances.
Convoy Movement They are also disposed Convoy Movement in the following ways: (cid:1) Lead Team only (cid:1) Back-up Team only (cid:1) Lead and Back-up as a whole unit (cid:1) Armed security personnel aboard a chauffeur-driven vehicle (Salon or SUV) only or in conjunction with any of the above (cid:1) Chauffeur-driven vehicle only or with any of the first three methods above For covert movement, they could deploy unbranded vehicles for this service.
The services of armour vehicles are also available for severe security situations when required.
Event Security and Crowd Control They provide security cover for important social events such as Musical Concerts, Jamborees, Weddings, Launchings, Funeral, Annual General Meetings (AGM) etc.
Successfully they have provided Security coverage for Benson & Hedges Concerts in the ‘90s as well as other major outdoor promotional events organized by Nigerian Breweries Plc (Star Mega Jamz & Star Trek) among other notable events.
Their experience and versatility in Access Control, 124 Crowd Control, Traffic/Car-Park Management, VIP/Close Executive Protection, Guest Management and Surveillance is unsurpassed in the industry.
Scope of Services They are committed to working in partnership with special events managers to provide an excellent and cost effective security coverage that complements their own standards of service delivery.
They honour and support this commitment by selective and thorough training, competent supervision, constant management input and accurate deployment of personnel.
The essence is for customers to value their contribution, respect their judgement and have peace of mind while the programme is ongoing.
Their scope falls within: (cid:1) Events Security Guard Services (cid:1) Events Guard Dog Services (cid:1) Crowd Control Services (cid:1) Security Surveillance (cid:1) Body Guard Services (cid:1) VIP Protection (cid:1) Provision of Armed Policemen Investigations Background check is due diligence.
It is about looking up and compiling critical records, commercial and financial records of an individual.
It is crucial for any company desiring to avoid hiring individual with a criminal record.
Mission Statement of Halogen Background Checks (cid:2) Promote Honesty and Integrity in the Workplace (cid:2) Increase efficiency and Productivity (cid:2) Improve Margin Gains (cid:2) Engender reliable Workforce (cid:2) Entrench Loss Prevention Orientation (cid:2) Positive Employee Socialization Security Skill Development and Manpower Training The Halogen Training Academy is one of the foremost organs of Halogen Security Company.
The Academy is central to the operational activities of the company, because effective training is key to excellent performance of any security operative in the field.
They 125 provide excellent consultancy services in virtually all areas of security to corporate bodies and individuals.
Their expert advice to numerous customers has proved to be timely, effective and professional.
Their investigative competence is second-to-none as most of their investigators are able to unravel crime using sophisticated and modern analytic techniques with forensic backup.
Similarly they also involved in: (cid:2) Conducting security surveys, inspection and checks on facilities, installations, equipment and utilities to identify the risk they are exposed to and offer professional solutions to obviate the risks.
In this regard, they conduct background checks and vetting procedures on client’s personnel to weed out undesirable elements from the staff.
(cid:2) Moreover, their seasoned instructors and facilitators have over the years offered excellent and superlative security training and drills for corporate personnel at different levels including internal guards, middle level managers and top management staff.
All their services are discreet, confidential and highly classified to prevent any unauthorized disclosures.
(cid:2) Their Training Academy was set up in September 1992, after the parent company was incorporated in July 1992.
It is located in Palmgrove Estate - Lagos.
Risk Management Risks are facts of life and every business enterprise is exposed to one risk or the other.
Risks can come from accidents, natural causes and disasters as well as deliberate attacks from an adversary.
In businesses, risk management entails organized activity to manage uncertainty and threats and involves people following procedures and using appropriate tools in order to ensure conformance with risk-management policies.
Halogen is said to be adroitly positioned to offer unequalled and up to speed Risk Management services to all highly discerning clients.
This entails identifying, monitoring and limiting risks profile in a particular enterprise.
In the public sector, they engage in activities to identify and mitigate risk to critical infrastructure such as oil pipe lines, flow stations, power stations, military installations, Earth stations, sea ports, airports and other public utilities of high vulnerabilities and impact.
Risk Management Process For all round value added proposition they offer risk management services using modern approaches, time tested and proven methodologies.
These methodologies consist of the following elements, performed more or less, in the following order: 126 (cid:1) Identify assets and identify which are most critical (cid:1) Identify, characterize, and assess threats (cid:1) Assess the vulnerability of critical assets to specific threats (cid:1) Determine the risk (i.e.
the expected impact of specific types of attacks on specific assets) (cid:1) Identify ways to reduce those risks (cid:1) Prioritize risk reduction measures based on a strategy.
The strategy include transferring the risk to another party, avoiding the risk, reducing the negative effect of the risk, and accepting some or all of the consequences of a particular risk products below are the various products they have in their offerings: Enterprise Risk Management Deals with risk associated with possible event or circumstance that can have negative influences on the enterprise in question.
Its impact on the very existence, the resources (human and capital), the products and services, or the customers of the enterprise, as well as external impacts on society, markets, or the environment.
Risk in Project Management In project management, risk is handled through the following activities: (cid:2) Planning how risk will be managed in the particular project.
Plans include risk management tasks, responsibilities, activities and budget.
(cid:2) Assigning a risk officer - a team member other than a project manager who is responsible for foreseeing potential project problems.
(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) Maintaining live project risk database.
Each risk would have the following attributes: Opening date, title, short description, probability and importance.
Optionally a risk may have an assigned person responsible for its resolution and a date by which the risk must be resolved.
(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) Creating anonymous risk reporting channel.
Each team member would have possibility to report risk that he foresees in the project.
(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) Preparing mitigation plans for risks that are chosen to be mitigated.
The purpose of the mitigation plan is to describe how this particular risk will be handled – what, when, by who and how will it be done to avoid it or minimize consequences if it becomes a liability.
127 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) Summarizing planned and faced risks, effectiveness of mitigation activities, and effort spent for the risk management 4.0 CONCLUSION It is difficult to account for actual number of private security companies in Nigeria.
No reliable figures exist for either the number of companies or employees, as many companies are unlicensed and unregistered.
The need for its regulation becomes paramount for effective security operations in the 21st century.. 5.0 SUMMARY We have been able to discuss the list of numerous private security companies in Nigeria.
We have also been able to take an in-depth look at Halogen Security Company Limited as one the private security companies at its best in the nation as well as appraising their operations and services rendered.
.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
List 20 private security companies operating in Nigeria b. discuss the services rendered by Halogen Security Company 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abrahamsen, R & Williams, M.C.
(2005).
The Globalisation of Private Security: A Country Report of Nigeria.
Globalisation of Security Research Project (Dept of International Politics, University of Wales, Aberystwyth) and the New Security Challenges Programme (ESRC, UK).
128 UNIT 2: CONFLICT MANAGEMENT IN PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Conflict is endemic to all social life.
It is an inevitable part of human beings, community and organisation (public or private), because it is related to situations of scarce resources, division of functions, power relations and role-differentiation.
Conflict in Private Security Service (PSC) refers to more than just overt behaviour.
Concentrating only upon its behavioural manifestation is an extremely limiting exercise.
The three-dimensional conception of conflict emphasizes the need to consider the situation in which PSC come to possess incompatible goals, their structure of interaction and the nature of their goals with other security operatives.
It is important to consider emotion (e.g.
trust and distrust) and cognitive orientations (e.g.
stereotyping) that accompany a conflict situation as well as the range of action undertaken by any party in a situation of conflict.
Both conflict management and a satisfactory solution are easier to attain when it is accepted that what we normally call conflict is a complex, multidimensional phenomenon.
It is not caused by "inadequate" structures, nor is it undesirable.
It is natural and inevitable and, when properly managed, it is productive, relevant and creative.
The effective management of conflict events, including scenario planning and risk assessment is crucial to the running of public and private organization systems like private security service.
The process of conflict management consists of the following stages • Identification of potential conflict • Prioritisation of risks • Conflict avoidance planning and risk forecasting • Contingency planning • Conflict recognition 129 • Containment and response • Resolution The conflict management approaches which should be adopted by different organisations vary significantly between industries.
The process of risk identification needs to take account of all the potential sources of significant unplanned disruption to the organisation’s operation, whether or not these constitute a risk to public safety per se; however, events like these are not the only ones which may require conflict management strategies to be used, as adverse media coverage or other external events may pose similar challenges.
Within industries like PSCs, there are specific requirements for disaster management protocols to be established (frequently in co-operation with emergency services) which specify responses in mass casualty and other major incidents, and the effective operation of these procedures is clearly of great importance.
3.0 Objectives This unit aims at understanding key issues such as: a. sources of conflict in PSCs b. and management of conflict in PSCs 3.0 Main Content Conflict in an Organisation (PSC) PSCs are living systems consisting of interacting units performing a task in a mutually dependent manner within a structure of scarce resources.
It seems commonplace to suggest that conflicts would be present in such a setting.
The parties in an organization may have a conflict about the distribution of resources, or they may have a more fundamental conflict about the very structure of their organization and the basic nature of their interaction.
Once the parties are in a situation of goal incompatibility, their conflict develops in a dynamic fashion, initiating valuable and much-needed constructive changes or leading to escalating strategies and destructive consequences.
As there is nothing pre-determined about its course or development, it seems erroneous to view conflict from a negative perspective only — as destructive or dysfunctional.
Most of the PSCs change and innovation does not just happen, it requires a stimulant.
Administrators must accept the need to influence the developmental dynamics of a conflict, so that the parties' attitudes and actions will lead to better coordination and a more appropriate interdependence.
The challenges administrator’s face is to utilize such conflict management techniques that would ensure that as a conflict passes 130 from a latent to a manifest phase, it proceeds towards its potential and realizes its constructive values.
Analyzing Organizational Conflict Three distinct criteria define the role of an administrator in an organization: planning, resource allocation and conflict management.
There is no doubt that managing conflict in PSCs permeates every aspect of the administrative role.
Awareness of the various forms of conflict management that can be employed at different stages of conflict is vital, if administrators are to organize efforts towards influencing the conflict situation positively.
In addition effective conflict management requires recognition of the sources that generate a conflict.
What, then, are the sources or bases of organizational conflicts?
Sources of Conflict in Private Security Company Private security company conflict appears in a variety of forms and has varying causes.
These can generally be separated into several categories.
Katz identifies three sources of conflict.
These are: (1) Structural conflict (conflict arising out of the need to manage the interdependence between different organizational sub-units).
(2) Role conflict (conflict arising from sets of prescribed behaviour).
(3) Resources conflict (conflict stemming from interest groups competing for organizational resources).
Robbins identifies three sources of organizational conflict and indicates that an understanding of the source of a conflict improves the probability of effective conflict management.
The main factors which serve as sources of conflict were identified as: (1) Communicational (conflicts arising from misunderstandings etc.)
(2) Structural (conflicts related to organizational roles) (3) Personal (conflicts stemming from individual differences).
3.2 Types of Conflict 3.2.1 Intrapersonal Conflict Intrapersonal conflict is internal to the individual (though its effects can profoundly influence PSCs functioning) and is perhaps the most difficult form of conflict to analyze and manage.
Intrapersonal conflict is basically a conflict between two incompatible tendencies.
It arises when a stimulus evokes two different and incompatible tendencies and the individual is required to discriminate between these tendencies.
In such a situation it is common for individuals to experience frustrations and to allow their conflict situation to be expressed in a range of behavioural strategies ranging from apathy and boredom to absenteeism, excessive 131 drinking or destructive behaviour such behavioural consequences are to be avoided, then it is essential to diagnose individual perception and utilize some techniques that would reduce anxiety-eliciting stimuli and increase consonance between individual behaviour and organizational requirements.
3.2.2 Interpersonal Conflict Interpersonal conflict emphasizes the interaction of human factors in an organization.
This form of conflict is concerned with the factors as they appear in a dyadic relationship.
We can broadly suggest two classes of factors as conflict sources.
These are: a.
Personal.
Individuals are not identical, constant or consistent.
When two individuals are brought together and kept together, each with a peculiar character, qualities, needs and skills, obviously a conflict may ensue if their attributes are not meshed together in a coordinated way.
Interaction between individuals with different attitudes, values and needs can produce conflict behaviour and affect PSCs performance.
b. Functional PSCs have roles which are expected sets of behaviour associated with their position.
In theory, individuals are not expected to engage in any discretionary behaviour.
Such specification would be consistent with organizational preferences for consistency and predictability.
In practice, however, role specifications tend to be ambiguous and incomplete, and in their interaction with others, some individuals often feel dissatisfied with their role or position, or they may feel that their aspirations for higher positions are being frustrated.
Interpersonal conflict can be accounted for, to a great extent, in terms of the incumbent’s roles and their expectations in particular situations.
3.2.3 Interdepartmental Conflict The third major cause of PSCs conflict is structural.
Most of the PSCs in Nigeria are designed around potential, physiognomy, or technical specialities.
These activities are assigned to departments that often have mutually exclusive structured interests and goals and that interact within a framework of scarce resources and task dependence.
When resources are relatively fixed and also when one department's gain is at the expense of another, conflict should be expected.
If two sub-units in an organizational system have differentiated goals and are 132 functionally interdependent, conditions exist for conflict.
Interdependence produces the need for collaboration, but it also presents occasions for conflict.
Other contextual factors which affect the interaction structure between departments and create the conditions for interdepartmental conflict include: different attitudes between line and staff units, organizational size (directly related to level of conflict) and standardization (inversely related to conflict), physical or communicational barriers between departments, unequal access to authority, rewards or organizational resources and ambiguity or uncertainty in assigning tasks or rewards to different departments.
These are the sources of conflict situations in PSCs.
How a conflict situation will change over time, how its interrelated components will alter the environment in which it occurs, and how it will respond, is dependent upon the administrator's efforts to manage or influence it.
This, in turn, is related to one's understanding of the sources of a specific conflict situation.
133 134 3.3 Conflict Management Ways of managing organizational conflict are as varied as its causes, origins and contexts.
The purpose of conflict management, whether undertaken by the parties in conflict or involving the intervention of an outside party, the major issue is for it to affect the entire structure of a conflict situation so as to contain the destructive components in the conflict process (e.g.
hostility, use of violence) and help the parties possessing incompatible goals to find some solution to their conflict.
Effective conflict management in any PSC succeeds in (1) Minimizing disruption stemming from the existence of a conflict (2) Providing a solution that is satisfactory and acceptable.
All PSCs, however simple or complex they may be, possess a range of mechanisms or procedures for managing conflict.
These are built into the organizational structure and are consciously employed by administrators to influence the course and development of a conflict.
The success or effectiveness of such procedures can be gauged by the extent to which they limit conflict behaviour and the extent to which they help to achieve a satisfactory solution.
It is the contention of this article that strategies of conflict avoidance, conflict prevention or institutionalization of conflict will change or replace coercive behaviour, but that only the injection of a behavioural social scientist, acting in a facilitative, non-directive and non evaluative fashion, will achieve a resolution with respect to the basic issues, attitudes and structure of interaction.
If administrators care for optimal methods of conflict management, they should give their strongest support to a strategy that can end a conflict in a satisfactory and self perpetuating manner.
3.3.1 Managing Intrapersonal Conflict Intrapersonal conflict is predicated upon an incongruity between individual needs and organizational requirements.
Intrapersonal conflict unfolds over time and manifests itself in a complex and multiform range of attitudinal and behavioural consequences.
These may vary from psychosomatic consequences (e.g.
frustration, emotional instability) to physical consequences (e.g.
absenteeism, destructive behaviour).
As such consequences are obviously correlated with decreased performance and work-motivation, managing intrapersonal conflict will help the individual to promote his capacity for adaptation and attain equilibrium in his relationship with the organization.
Personal existence is, inevitably, punctuated by conflicts and other emotionally 135 charged experiences.
When a person experiences an inner conflict and feels that he cannot master his situation, or change his environment, a number of methods of conflict management can be employed.
These are conveniently divided into (1) Cognitive strategies (2) Behavioural strategies.
Cognitive strategies, often called defence mechanisms, help an individual to falsify, distort or deny a particular conflict.
Cognitive strategies represent an attempt to control or manage negative and disturbing feelings associated with conflict and to allow an individual to carry on with his normal activities.
Cognitive strategies include repression (an attempt to push conflict out of existence), rationalization (hiding the truth from oneself), fantasy or even denial of reality.
Behavioural strategies for coping with intrapersonal conflict include escape, withdrawal and aggression (especially against convenient targets).
These strategies cannot resolve intrapersonal conflict in any permanent way.
They can be successful in the short-run.
They can help an individual to reduce his level of anxiety and diminish his tension.
They can prevent or avoid disruptive behaviour, but they cannot generate solution.
This can come about through the involvement of an expert consultant, acting in an accepting manner and encouraging the individual to evaluate his situation rationally and decide upon more effective responses.
Interventions in intrapersonal conflicts entail consideration of substantive issues, discussions and self-observations, helping an individual to unload his burdensome thoughts and reactions and reorienting his thinking towards a more benevolent and self-maintaining pattern of behaviour.
The strength of this approach to conflict management is that it helps an individual to concentrate on his situation and on ways to evaluate alternatives that may have gone unnoticed.
The consultant remains detached from an individual, but his intervention, listening, probing, interviewing and explicit confrontation of the conflict issues, sets the basis for self-diagnosis and improved performance.
It eliminates distortion and increases self-knowledge.
It is a method which seeks not merely an amelioration of the surface symptoms, but a successful change in the situational (e.g.
re-evaluating a conflict situation), attitudinal (e.g.
reduced anxiety, increased self-esteem) and behavioural (e.g.
stimulate productive behaviour) components of a conflict.
136  Consultants may be internal to an organization, or they may be introduced by an administrator when circumstances require it.
They have several roles to play, all intended to aid a person to be more effective in his organization.
What characterizes all these roles is that they are enacted in an informal and flexible fashion and in a facilitative and diagnostic manner.
Techniques which are congruent with implementing the consultant's role include (1) facilitative techniques (e.g.
facilitating individual exploration and self-observation, giving information, advice, reassurance and encouragement), (2) behavioural modification techniques (e.g.
establish, through negative or positive reinforcement, contingencies of behaviour that should be decreased) and (3) cognitive techniques (e.g.
learn to undo old values and acquire a new perception of the self).
When organizations experience difficulties as a result of intrapersonal conflicts, administrators should be well-advised to manage such conflicts by leading their organization to seek professional help from persons who are trained to fulfil the role of organizational consultants.
Successful organizational change does, after all, depend upon a strong commitment to conflict resolution.
3.3.2 Managing Interpersonal Conflict Interpersonal interactions are extraordinarily complex.
Individuals are brought together and kept together because of personal attraction or complementary needs.
A great deal of individual behaviour takes place in organizations (university, hospital, factory) in which they occupy various positions.
Such positions are interlocked or interdependent so that the attitudes and behaviour of one individual affect the attitudes and behaviour of another.
Indeed, we may describe organizations as networks of repetitive, reciprocal and predictable interactions between individuals.
Although persons in an organization interact in a relatively consistent way along a stable-cooperative dimension (organizations develop norms to ensure stable interactions), interpersonal conflict is an essential aspect of organizational life.
The causes of interpersonal conflict in organizations can be ascribed to personal differences (interaction between dissimilar people maximizes conflict potential), perceptual differences (individuals perceive an unfair allocation of organizational resources) and functional differences (conflicts arising from incompatible role requirements).
On the whole interpersonal conflict generates new ideas and work patterns, but when it is augmented by personal distrust, misperception and competition, it can easily be transformed into destructive and costly behaviour.
To avoid detrimental effects on 137 individual as well as organizational functioning, administrators need to identify the causes of interpersonal conflict and take appropriate action to deal with it.
Under the prevailing influence of behaviourism, interpersonal conflict management has been directed mainly towards the behavioural components of a conflict situation.
Attitudes and perceptions have been considered beyond the realm of conflict management.
As a result of this, conflict management has tended to force individuals to choose between fixed and simplified behavioural alternatives, defined in terms of two rigid behavioural goals, winning or losing.
The choices and incentives associated with this orientation of victory versus defeat were strongly constrained, forcing individuals into relatively primitive modes of interaction and providing administrators with an untrustworthy vehicle for potential conflict management.
Of the five methods of managing interpersonal conflict it appears that problem-solving is the only method that is directed towards the attitudinal, situational and behavioural components of conflict.
It is the only method that does not focus on relatively automatic, unthinking responses.
It is the only method which seeks to utilize higher mental processes to achieve a high-quality, integrative and satisfying outcome.
Organizations that can increase the use of problem-solving method in interpersonal conflict can offer a better working experience, more constructive consequences and a more creative conflict resolution.
Problem-solving as a method of conflict management is not a common experience.
A number of elements or conditions have to be present if problem-solving is to be realized.
These conditions appear to be as follows: Situational requirements (e.g.
informality and flexibility of interactions, absence of time pressures, power symmetry etc.).
Attitudinal requirements of the officers and management (e.g.
trust and confidence in each other, belief in conflict resolution rather than conflict avoidance etc.)
Perceptual requirements (e.g.
individuals do not perceive threats or need to win or dominate the other) and Behavioural requirements (e.g.
free information, definition of issues, discussion of alternatives, exhaustive search for solutions etc.).
138  In contrast to other methods of conflict management, the intervention of a behavioural consultant accentuates the positive and highlights commonly held views of the actors.
Applications of this approach in the interpersonal sphere rest upon the following assumptions: 1.
Deficiencies in perception are the main cause of interpersonal conflict.
2.
Barriers to improved information prolong and aggravate a conflict.
3.
Inadequate interactions between individuals prevent them from management of their conflict constructively.
Techniques of intervention in interpersonal conflict are closely related to these assumptions and include perceptual, informational and interactional procedures.
Perceptual procedures involve: (1) Identifying conflict issues (2) Defining alternative issues (3) "Reality-testing".
Informational procedures involve (cid:1) Clarifying issues (cid:1) Encouraging and gathering information (through interviews, meetings or other instruments) (4) Increasing frequency, openness and accuracy of communication.
Interactional procedures entail: (cid:1) Regulating the pace of interaction (cid:1) Offering "process" observations to help individuals see how to be more effective (cid:1) Injecting inputs in the form of concepts, models or principles which might be useful in understanding a conflict and (5) Helping in the design of implementation steps through which conflict resolution would be possible.
Through his interventions a behavioural consultant becomes the information-gathering instrument and a "resource person".
Administrators who are concerned about organizational change and more productive results would be well advised to be aware of the strengths — as well as limitations — of this approach to interpersonal conflict management.
3.3.3 Managing Interdepartmental Conflict Conflict between departments is a natural consequence of organizational activities.
As organizations move towards greater differentiation and complexity, as they change or adapt to 139 new circumstances, the stage is set for incompatibility of goals or competition for scarce resources.
The resulting conflict between departments may have ambivalent consequences for an organization.
On the one hand it may have a dysfunctional and counterproductive effect on the organization, and on the other hand it can be highly functional and stimulate intra-organizational creativity.
For conflict to be a vehicle for PSCs growth and creativity there must exist an appropriate method of conflict management between departments.
An administrator should know when he is faced with interdepartmental conflict and be informed of the processes for coping with it or resolving it.
Before exploring the methods and techniques for managing interdepartmental conflict, it is pertinent to examine briefly the attitudes and behaviours which characterize interdepartmental conflict.
These can be described in terms of the following categories: 1.
Effects within each department.
When departments are in conflict, individual members tend to bury their differences and display greater loyalty to their department.
Departments become more cohesive, more formal in their behaviour and more insistent upon individual conformity and accomplishment of prescribed tasks.
2.
Effects between departments.
Each department begins to experience perceptual distortions and to develop a strong self-image and a negative stereotype of the other.
With the rise of prejudicial attitudes between departments there is an increase in hostility and a decrease in communication.
Each department strives to enhance its own image and performance and to downgrade the other's.
Under such conditions a conflict becomes a matter of victory or defeat, winning or losing.
The fundamental significance of a win-lose dynamic is that it is, to some degree, intrinsic to any complex and stratified organization, but those feelings of in-group versus out-group are especially strong in conflict situations.
The attitudinal characteristics of such a pattern include a competitive orientation, the evaluative characteristics include antagonistic feelings and the behavioural characteristics include circumscribed interaction and distorted communication.
The structural attributes of a conflict relationship must be taken into account in proposing a strategy of conflict management.
140 Traditional approaches to managing interdepartmental conflict emphasized such methods as (1) Conflict avoidance (separating departments by relocating them physically) (2) Regulating a conflict by introducing new rules and procedures.
(3) Seeking a form of "legalistic" solution (by appealing to higher organizational authorities) (3) Using departmental representatives to reach a compromise agreement or (4) Seeking mediation or arbitration from an outside body.
Such conflict management methods may indeed produce an agreement.
They may reduce the level of conflict behaviour between departments and even legitimize new levels of performance.
They cannot, though, achieve a genuine conflict resolution because they merely reflect, perpetuate and occasionally aggravate a win-lose pattern of interactions.
Separation, withdrawal, institutionalization, bargaining or legal approaches are essentially forms of a win-lose confrontation.
They all start with a polarized, adversary orientation, in which each department tries to attain as much as possible by outsmarting the other.
They bury a conflict, ignore it, produce power-based decisions or allow departments to withdraw from it.
They do not stimulate a search for conflict resolution.
A range of new approaches to managing interdepartmental conflict may be suggested.
These approaches acquire new significance because they become integral parts of an interaction process between departments, because they move away from win- lose type of strategies and make the need for conflict resolution more effectively.
Blake and Mouton accept that the most important aspect of a successful conflict management strategy is the attempt to shift the behavioural and attitudinal components of a relationship from a competitive to a cooperative orientation.
They do, however, suggest that both the common enemy and the super-ordinate goal approaches fall short of the need to achieve a genuine conflict resolution.
This is because both can be seen as (cid:1) Being mainly temporary in character (cid:1) Both are primarily defensive and (cid:1) Both strategies may widen a conflict by externalizing it.
They offer an approach which emphasizes consultation-based interventions, openness of communication, and greater participation in decision-making and problem-solving interactions.
Blake and Mouton accept that traditional conflict management strategies can only deal with the behavioural component in conflict and bring about a patchwork solution.
They suggest an 141 approach to conflict management which involves interventions by organizational consultants (usually applied behavioural scientists), who have no vested interest in the conflict itself, but who have the competence and experience to generate a productive mode of conflict management.
They avoid the pitfalls of adjudicating or evaluating which department is "right" or "wrong" (so often the hallmark of traditional conflict management).
Nor do they seek to impose a solution.
They intervene in order to generate creative thinking and to establish a problem-solving attitude.
Consultation-based approaches to interdepartmental conflict accept conflict situations as inevitable and see them as useful occasions which permit departments to disagree and to work out the disagreements and ultimately to understand each other better.
The general functions of a consultant usually consist of (cid:1) Avoiding power-based outcomes (cid:1) Providing knowledge and skills regarding conflict processes (cid:1) Inducing an emotional-cognitive change as a prelude to collaborative interactions and (cid:1) Providing a supportive, informal and learning environment well-suited to creating the requirements conducive to problem-solving.
The technologies of consultation consist of educational activities and techniques, laboratory training observations, survey-feedbacks, questionnaires and interviews etc..
The structure of consultation activities is so designed as to engage individuals as whole persons, not merely as segmented individuals striving to cope with their role demands.
3.4 Security and Conflict in the Niger Delta The deteriorating security situation in the Niger Delta is likely to ensure a continued and expanding role for private security companies.
While the provision of security for the oil industry is clearly essential for the Nigerian economy, as well as for the companies themselves, it is important to note that the fundamental causes of conflicts and insecurity in the Delta cannot be resolved by security professionals, but requires instead a political solution.
In this regard, there are some limited grounds for optimism.
Following decades of resistance and criticism as well as rising costs to their operations, many oil companies are gradually placing re-oriented development initiatives and improved community relations at the centre of their security strategies.
Similarly, the return to democracy in Nigeria may over time improve the situation and 142 allow local communities a greater say in the exploration and use of oil resources - although as of yet there are few signs of positive change in policies towards the Delta communities or in the ‘politics of plunder’ more generally.
Only 13 percent of oil revenues are directed back to the communities in the Delta and the Niger Delta Development Commission (NDDC) has still to prove its effectiveness.
As such, Karl Maier’s description of Nigeria as a country where the population “live in a criminally mismanaged corporation, where the bosses are armed and have barricaded themselves inside the company safe”, still captures the political landscape.
Until these larger, underlying political causes of conflicts is resolved, the Nigerian state will need the continued services of international private companies to ensure its own survival in the face of domestic resistance.
4.0 Conclusion Organizations are social entities segmented into hierarchies of departments and individuals.
The basic realities of organizational life cannot but stimulate comparisons, competitions and conflicts between departments and individuals.
Conflict is an omnipresent feature in any organization.
Since conflict may have functional as well as dysfunctional consequences, it is essential that administrators explore various methods and techniques of conflict management.
Effective conflict management is indispensable if coordinated efforts and productive achievements are to result.
As it was suggested above that the planned intervention by behavioural scientists represents the most effective method since it can produce organizational change and a sense of personal accomplishment.
Conflict management as an integral part of the administrative process, administrators should be able to ascertain the presence of a conflict, its basic sources, the level at which it manifests itself, its degree of intensity and the ways of furthering the objectives of conflict resolution.
From a pragmatic viewpoint administrators should direct their attention to four issues: Is there a conflict?
Where is the conflict?
Does it require to be managed?
How best to implement an effective conflict management strategy?
With this in mind conflict is easily managed in any organisation.
5.0 Summary 143 Conflict management — and indeed all forms of organizational behaviour — is determined by the interaction of information, skills, values and situation.
Each of these factors acts as a precursor for consultation-based conflict management activities.
Behavioural consultants provide parties in conflict with more information and an understanding of the complexities of conflict interactions.
They promote social interaction skills (which should be recognized as important as technical skills).
They promote values of cooperation and help to create a situation in which people can interact freely and feel that they are as important to an organization as are its resources or products.
The sequence of consultation activities commences with upgrading individual skills and abilities, moves on to team-building activities and then to restructuring intergroup and interdepartmental activities.
The institutionalization of these activities consists of four steps.
The first step bringing in the consultant — represents an administrative response to a felt need for effective conflict management.
The second step — entry — is associated with various information-giving activities.
The third step is aimed at attitudinal change through data-feedback, team-training, sensitivity and T-Group training or Grid development.
The final step involves a structural change in the relationship between departments and a move towards integrative interactions and conflict resolution.
Effective conflict management is quite a major undertaking.
There are not too many guideposts to indicate where we are or how to move towards conflict resolution.
It is, therefore, a task which demands attention to attitudinal and behavioural elements, to outcome and emotional needs and to interpersonal as well as interdepartmental requirements.
The intervention strategies of a behavioural consultant can, we have argued, move us towards that direction.
We cannot be certain that the intended effects will always be achieved.
We can suggest, with some certainty, that such interventions move us forward in the direction of effective conflict.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 1.
What are the major causes of conflict in an organisation?
2.
List and explain various types of conflict.
3.
Explain the traditional approaches to managing interdepartmental conflict in PSCs 7.0 References/further readings 144 Abrahamsen, R. and M. Williams, (2006) Security Sector Reform: Bringing the Private In, Conflict, Security & Development, 6:1 April.
Adejumobi, S., (2001) ‘Guarding the Guardian?
The Obasanjo Regime and Military Reform in Nigeria’, Development Policy Management Network Bulletin, Vol.
XIII, No.
3 (September), pp.
17-19.
SDA (2006) ‘The Private Security Phenomenon: Policy Implication and Issues’.
Security and Defence Agenda (SDA) Roundtable, 7 December, Brussels.
145 UNIT 3: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POLICE AND PRIVATE SECURITY OPERATIVES IN NIGERIA.
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It has been noted that no government has the wherewithal to provide one hundred percent security for nation; hence the need for corporate or private security organisations to supplement efforts of state actors not only in petty crime prevention but also in the emerging acts of violence.
It is in this regard that criminologists and other experts in the field of security and conflict studies have agitated for more advanced mechanisms of intelligence that place premium on prevention of security crisis rather than post-hoc detection and responses.
(Odinkalu, 2004).
As a result the scope of security needs include governmental, non-governmental, industrial, civil, economic, communications, general infrastructural and environmental security within the new security challenges which must be prioritise.
Governmental security agencies face many challenges today in accomplishing their missions and in providing value to their stakeholders.
What was once achievable by developing and implementing sound strategic and financial plans is no longer guaranteed in a world where intimidation is fast spreading to all nooks and corners.
Instead, security organizations must join hands together to consider how best it is going to succeed in the face of increasing organizational and technical complexity and in an ever- changing risk environment.
Many significant PSCs in Nigeria have an armed police component seconded to their operations, resulting into the 'privatisation' of public security forces to some extent.
In the oil sector, the privatisation of public security is so extensive that it can be difficult to distinguish public policing from private security.
Military forces are increasingly used to protect oil operations, and 146 are maintained by oil companies.
The extension of private security, particularly in the oil sector, alongside the privatisation of public forces, offers the possibility for a more professionalised security structure.
However, it also raises issues regarding PSCs involvement in complex political struggles and the division of authority between PSCs and public security forces.
While there are some overlapping functions in the mission of public law enforcement and private security operatives, yet the two groups are not the same.
To explain how public law enforcement and private security can better protect the country, this section starts by clarifying the difference between public and private security.
“Public policing” consists of services offered by local, state, and federal agencies, i.e., local and state police as well as civil defence officers.
These agencies provide the bulk of policing services across the country.
“For the most part, they are not concerned with corporate internal problems; they are concerned primarily with street crimes (Connors, 1999).
Private security services, on the other hand, fall into two categories: (1) Proprietary or corporate security: Corporate security generally refers to the security departments that exist within businesses or corporations.
(2) Contract or private security firms: Contract security firms by contrast sell their services to the public, including businesses, home-owners, and banks.
Private security is not a monolithic entity.
Just as differences exist between state and local law enforcement, private security performs functions that can differ considerably.
IACP’s (2004) summit report notes that “A security practitioner could be an experienced director of security at a major multinational corporation, a manager of contract security officers at a client site, a skilled computer crime investigator, an armed protector at a nuclear power plant, or an entry-level guard at a retail store.
For local police and civil defence, some or all of these classes of private security might be appropriate to incorporate into their homeland security strategies, depending on the characteristics of their jurisdictions.
Law enforcement and private security have strengths and weaknesses that must be considered to form realistic expectations of what each can bring as partners.
Private security is often criticized for absent or inadequate pre- employment screening, training, standards, certification, and regulation, and high turnover rates.
However, recent findings indicate that private security has made gains in these areas 147  (Cunningham, 2003.
).Private sector security also has significant strengths.
The sheer number of private security officers makes it an important force.
Often it is able to protect small geographic areas with large numbers of officers or guards, something law enforcement cannot afford.
Some private security officers, moreover, possess specialized technical capacity, including the knowledge and ability to protect computer networks, chemical plants, financial institutions, health care institutions, and retail establishments.
Public Law enforcement officers often do not possess this knowledge.
Generally, the large and growing security industry “is armed with considerable and often sophisticated resources to deter crime and prevent other losses.
The public law enforcement community is substantially smaller in size.
Yet it is strong where private security is weak.
To begin with, public law enforcement powers are far greater than those of private security.
The selection process for becoming a deputy or police officer, moreover, is vigorous and includes a thorough background investigation.
Law enforcement officers are well trained, receiving academy, field, and in-service instructions.
Officers tend to stay at the same agency for the duration of their careers, and officers in agencies that practice community policing are likely to have established rapport and trust with local citizens and business groups that can share information with them.
Trust and information are invaluable for preventing terrorist acts.
Law enforcement agencies, however, like private security, have limitations.
They sometimes lack the financial resources of private firms because of tight budgets.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1. explain the benefits of law enforcement and private security partnerships 2. explain the relationship between private security and the MOPOL 3. know the relationship and differences in the operations of public security forces and PSCs.
3.0 Main Content Global security intelligence is an emerging need.
Changes in technology, societal organization, and the security challenges and arrangements within and among states demand novel approaches and structures to ensure human security.
Terrorism, insurgency, and trans-national crime 148 challenge traditional security and intelligence structures.
New security structures and legal regimes are potentially evolving, yet traditional structures are slow to adapt.
The security framework is more sophisticated today than in the past.
It has been observed that the Nigerian Police Force could not always guarantee Nigerians security as an important part of proactive crime prevention because of inadequate manpower, advanced technological and pragmatic means for fear reduction.
For these reasons, the continuous agitation for Corporate Private Security Organisations to assist the Nigeria Police in safety business has soared (Ekhomu, 2004).
Reasons are not farfetched as evidences are bound showing the technological means under their kitty for proactive crime control such as intruder alarms, close circuit monitors, access control to mention just a few.
Another issue is the common knowledge of the ratio of the Nigeria Police to Nigerians, which is put at 1:600.
This has been found to be inconsistent with United Nations standard ration of 1:400 (UN, 2000).
Thus the vacuum created by this inadequacy alone for government to provide security will certainly be filled by private individuals, the private sector and ethnic militias in some cases.
The inability of the organised private sector to completely fill in the gap has been attributed to their legal prevention from carrying arms.
While the Corporate Private Security Officers (CPSOs) are clearly here to stay, their existence and growth have created new opportunities and challenges.
For instance the mushrooming of private security groups with inadequately trained personnel has the capacity of complicating the present security scenario.
This might be further compounded by the fact that unlike state actors, CPSOs are not directly accountable to the public or the electorate but to a combination of weak regulators and the corporate companies.
3.1 Benefits of Law Enforcement and Private Security Partnerships The advent of radical terrorist groups in Nigeria has placed great pressure on the law enforcement community.
Specifically, agencies have been searching for a way to balance national security, traditional crime control and other responsibilities.
Limited and sometimes scarce resources must be allocated based on need, leading some chief executives to acknowledge that they are having considerable difficulty conducting this balancing act.
Private security officials are experiencing a similar phenomenon.
While their traditional responsibility to protect 149 people, property, and information has continued, they are now also expected to be active participants in the national effort to protect the country’s infrastructure.
Clearly, law enforcement and private security have much to gain from each other.
Law enforcement can: • Prepare private security to assist in emergencies.
• Coordinate efforts to safeguard the nation’s critical infrastructure.
• Obtain free training and services.
• Gain additional personnel and expertise.
• Use the private sector’s specialized knowledge and advanced technology.
• Obtain evidence in criminal investigations.
• Gather better information about incidents (through reporting by security staff).
• Reduce the number of emergency calls for service.
Private security can: • Coordinate plans with the public sector regarding evacuation, transportation, and food services during emergencies.
• Gain information from law enforcement regarding threats and crime trends.
• Develop relationships so that private practitioners know whom to contact when they need help or want to report information.
• Build law enforcement understanding of corporate needs (e.g., confidentiality).
• Boost law enforcement’s respect for the security field.
• Working together, private security and law enforcement can realize impressive benefits: • Creative problem solving.
• Increased training opportunities.
• Information, data, and intelligence sharing.
• “Force multiplier” opportunities.
• Access to the community through private sector communications technology.
• Reduced recovery time following disasters.
Obstacles to Law Enforcement-Private Security Partnerships 150 The benefits of law enforcement-private security partnerships are many; a chief executive must know that these partnerships are not without obstacles such as: i. barriers to information sharing, ii.
lack of trust, iii.
misinformation are the primary problems 3.2 Private Security: A Perspective in Today’s Anti - Violence Campaign There is compelling evidence that improvement in security requires changing old perceptions and defining new targets.
In today’s campaign against violence the evolution of security as a practice is highly dependent on the approaches and solutions that take into consideration the dynamism and complexity of human beings and organizations.
Clearly, the days of security generating sole from government, traditional sources and IT departments being controlled and managed from an IT advantage point are beginning to fade.
Instead, security must be repositioned as the by-product of wider ranging efforts that aim to make the security organization, outfits or agencies more resilient to its ever-changing risk environment.
These are some of the major reasons why a lot of private security companies and other governmental paramilitary bodies are all agitating for permission or licences to carry arms like the police and soldiers.
Some of the arguments for the carriage of arms are as follows: (cid:3) Self defence: it is a well known fact that any security agents in the wild are first target of any terror attack, armed bandit or any criminal attack.
For instance in the case of Nigeria Security and civil defence corps (NSCDC) with the mandated to provide protection in public places, detain, investigate and institute legal proceedings, and yet without the permission to carry arms calls for worry as this will be risky to their lives in cases of violent attack or reprisal.
(cid:3) Crime combat: private security officials once registered should be properly ready in combating crime, as said there are usually no notice whenever a particular crime will surface it is therefore necessary in combating crime for them to be combat ready at all time without arm this becomes impossible.
(cid:3) Escort/Public Security: Escort of dignitaries and protection of lives and properties without arms and sophisticated gadgets in recent times is risky.
151 (cid:3) Riot and conflict resolution: most communities and groups often engage in riots and wanton destruction of properties and killings.
In such cases it becomes necessary to use arms in dislodging the rioters, and resolving conflict.
(cid:3) Modern age necessity: belonging to this modern era where small and heavy arms are not difficulty to come-by as in the case of Niger-Delta Militants.
There is therefore the need for associating members of security organisations to be well prepared in the usage of more sophisticated arms.
(cid:3) Joint operations and assistance: since it has been established that anti–terrorism campaign cannot be effective without the collaboration of other security agencies, then there is no way such organisations can combine with organisations that are armed in fighting terrorism.
On the contrary, the argument has always been one - sided regarding that the private security providers and personnel are not well trained in handling of arms.
Others have also mentioned the incessant accidental discharge for the conventional security officers, notwithstanding these premises.
It is therefore important to ask at this point, for how long are we going to remain on these arguments, without giving the private security providers and other paramilitary agencies a trial before being crucified.
3.3 Private Security and Mobile Police (MoPol) Given the generally high level of violence and insecurity in Nigeria, most leading PSCs find it necessary to offer armed protection for certain key contracts, as well as the possibility of armed response in cases of emergency.
In order to be allocated Mobile Police, PSCs must apply to the Inspector General of Police for a specific number of officers, which they can then utilise for guarding at key locations, armed response, escort services, etc.
MoPol officers are equipped with fully automatic weapons, usually AK-47s or FNs.
Most PSCs regard the secondment of MoPol officers as a necessary, but expensive arrangement.
The exact costs are difficult to establish, as no receipts are given and prices also appear to vary somewhat between companies and contracts.
The reliance on MoPol for armed private security services raises a number of operational and ethical challenges.
The MoPol has often been accused of using undue force, and while in the company of PSCs, the exact division of authority between private security guards and the police 152 is difficult to establish.
While the PSCs supervisor is in principle responsible for operations in relation to clients, the police remain answerable to their commander and retain legal authority.
As one commander interviewed was eager to emphasise, “the police do not take orders from anyone.
We run our own operations”.
Although many PSCs commend the MoPol for their professionalism, not without some avoidable tensions which are curtailed through informal arrangements between the two parties.
The ability of PSCs to manage police officers depends to a large extent on informal arrangements and their capacity to develop well-integrated procedures, joint training, and close operational coordination with the MoPol.
4.0 Conclusion The Private Guards Act of 1986 prohibits private security companies from carrying firearms.
Private security companies are nevertheless able to provide an armed component to their services through various arrangements with the Nigerian Police, and most PSCs of any size and standard have a number of Mobile Police officers (MoPol) permanently seconded to their operations.
This has resulted in a general ‘privatisation’ of the public security forces, seen in the day to day operations of PSCs and more extensively in the security operations in most of private establishment.
5.0 Summary The residential market is as yet much more limited, and tends to be the preserve of smaller companies and traditional night-watchmen or ‘gate swingers’ due to its relatively low profitability.
The main exception is the protection of the residences of employees of transnational companies, embassies and international organisations, which are frequently part of commercial contracts to secure business premises.
The residential market is, however, undergoing rapid change, and a number of companies are currently in the process of developing more extensive residential security services, introducing panic buttons and rapid armed response services in defined areas.
At the moment, these services are limited to a relatively small number of customers, but the introduction of more sophisticated technology and rapid response capacities along the model found in many part of the country is perceived by many in the industry to provide important new business opportunities.
PSCs that are able to offer this service may in the 153 future be able to compete more effectively on price against the lower-end manned guarding companies, while providing a superior service through an armed response capability.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 1.
Explain some of the arguments for the carriage of arms by PSC officers.
2.
Explain in three sentences the relationship and differences between private security and law enforcement agents 7.0 References/further readings Jehn, K. A.
1997.
Qualitative Analysis of Conflict: Types and Dimensions in Organisational Groups.
Administratively Quarterly No.
42, Vol.
3, pp.
421–618.
Rahim, M. A.
1992.
Managing Conflicts in Organizations.
In: P. Fenn and R. Gameson eds.
), Construction Conflict Management and Resolution.
London: E and FN Spon.
154 UNIT 4: REGULATION AND RECOMMENDATION OF PSCs IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The need to regulate the operations of private security providers, including private military companies (PMCs) and private security companies (PSCs), has become a major policy concern across the globe, which has in turn generated growing academic discourse since the turn of the millennium.
This concern has centred essentially on how to make sure that the private security sector industry (comprising both PMCs and PSCs) does not threaten human existence (regimes and citizens) in the course of their operation.
Though these companies and their personnel are legally authorised to carry out security functions nevertheless there are cases of misused of power, which make them both a potential and real source of threat to human security This concern is well placed because the mandate of the sector is to supply additional security traditionally provided by the state.
This threat is most ominous in Nigeria and some countries in Africa, where human security falls far below the rest of the world, and where the bargaining strength of the state in relation to the more powerful (Western) corporate security actors is considerably weak.
Thus regulating the sector in the country is essential to bringing the delivery of private security into conformity with the overall goal of human security, by making their corporate activities more transparent, accountable and subject to public control.
3.0 Objectives Students are expected to understand the need to maintain standard in private security through adequate regulations, guidelines and policies; with the ultimate aim of fostering unity and trust between security operatives.
3.0 Main Content 155 3.1 Regulation of the Private Sector As mentioned earlier, current efforts to regulate the private security sector has virtually treated the sector in isolation and has approached regulation from a technical perspective through legal control.
Three main existing options for regulation are banning activities that are deemed illegal; licensing of individual firms and sometimes approving particular contracts; and self-regulation either by individual firms or industrial associations through self-imposed codes of conduct and standards in the implementation of contracts.
The first problem with regulation in Nigeria is that governments are not necessarily unwilling to regulate the sector.
Apart from Nigeria, deliberate regulation of the industry as a state policy is not very much known to have taken place elsewhere in the continent.
It has been rightly observed that, under such conditions regulation may be of low priority for regimes with more pressing concerns and limited capability for legislation.
This is because the weakness and instability of the state makes most regimes insecure and some of them have even sought the assistance of PSCs to strengthen their relative positions of power in the context of real threats from domestic opponents.
The same weakness makes state regulation difficult, particularly when institutions are too weak to deal effectively with foreign companies originating from powerful countries.
However, most known efforts at regulating private security have tended to focus narrowly on the private sector in isolation and on the technical issues of legal control.
The broader gamut of actors involved in the provision and regulation of security as well as the central political and social context of the states in the country, within which the privatisation of security occurs have been lamentably sidelined in regulatory calculations.
The outcome of this approach has been the obvious difficulty, if not failure, to achieve appreciable results in the regulation of private security firms, particularly in Africa.
One area where this capacity deficit is most crucial is the provision of non-exclusionary, effective and accountable security for citizens.
Regulation therefore must be planned and implemented within an overall goal of making the state ensure the delivery of such security.
It has also meant that privatisation has reduced the scope of the state in the performance of its most vital functions of providing security for all of its citizens.
With this in mind the state is bound to ensure that regulation is maintained.
3.2 The Industry, Standards and Regulatory Issues 156 There is a clearly expressed view across the private security industry in Nigeria that overall standards and procedures are in need of improvement and that a higher quality service is desirable.
In a highly competitive market, this is however difficult to achieve, as contracts are frequently won and lost by undercutting competitors’ bids.
As a direct result, guards are often very poorly paid, and services and standards remain low in large parts of the sector.
The various associations in Nigeria are currently clamouring for tighter regulation, sector wide standards for training, and a minimum wage.
In particular, the associations are keen to ensure that the sector is rid of so-called ‘quacks’, that is, companies operating without licences, and without regard to standards and basic security principles.
It is a frequently expressed hope that a new regulatory authority responsible for the oversight and regulation of PSCs will be set up within the next few years.
However, given the current inability of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to adequately regulate the sector, and frequent charges that regulatory initiatives are too often linked to particular competitive interests in the industry, a degree of skepticism is warranted concerning the effectiveness and accountability of any new authority or initiative.
In the absence of effective regulation, improvement of standards is most likely to occur as a result of increased competition.
The pressures for higher standards is a sign that professionalization of the sector is underway, which is currently being spearheaded by a few leading companies.
To the extent that competitive pressure is gradually forcing a number of companies to conform to minimum required standards.
The quality of service in a matter of time will no doubt increase.
Another aspect of the industry cum associations’ effort to instigate new legislation is the pressure and continuous agitation for private security personnel to bear arms.
PSCs are currently prevented from doing their jobs properly, as unarmed guards frequently confront armed criminals with serious casualties.
Both associations regard this as a hindrance to the provision of security, and currently lobbying the Federal Government for a change to this aspect of the Private Guards Act.
Such pressures might gain renewed force if the provision of MoPol armed response services by a few leading companies succeed in limiting the share of the residential market for the lower-end, manned by guarding companies.
Crucially, any move towards arming the private security sector is likely to be detrimental in the absence of an effective regulatory framework, and it is important to stress that many industry participants as well as major clients 157 are strongly opposed to such legislative change, arguing that it would be seriously detrimental to the general security situation in the country.
3.2 Policy Options and Recommendations The privatisation of security in sub-Saharan Africa is a symptom of the weakness of the state as it is the most formidable challenge to SSR in the region.
As far as improving the provision of public security for citizens remains the central security predicament in the region, addressing the roots of private security and enhancing state regulation of the private sphere must be seen as crucial concerns for SSR.
Domestic and external efforts at promoting the goals of SSR in the region must therefore begin with helping the region to make that vital transition from weak to stable and effective states.
This is because privatisation of security betrays the failure to build bureaucratic capacity for effective service delivery in the state-making process.
The attainment of democracy requires that both the public and private security services accountable and responsive to citizens, and this can only be achieved through an inclusive process of government that integrates private security providers within the security sector.
The context of Nigeria requires specific solutions that are suitable to the realities of security and private engagement.
The following recommendations are suggested for planning and implementation of private security regulation into reforms that seek to improve access to effective and accountable security for all: (cid:1) Rethinking the notion of regulation is a crucial step in dealing with the problems discussed in this paper.
A more appropriate concept would be integration.
This means that rather than expending efforts on an inefficient approach to the private security sector, the security sector should be redefined not only in theory, but most critically in practice.
This would require taking a broader view of the sector in a way that integrates corporate actors into on-going SSR work in such places as Sierra Leone, Liberia and the DRC, and into future SSR and parallel programmes in the region.
(cid:1) Reforming states must ensure the principles of transparency and parliamentary oversight are applied to the private security industry.
Regulation has emphasised executive control and neglected parliamentary scrutiny, which is vital for ensuring transparency in the industry 158 (cid:1) There is need for states to negotiate a division of labour that would allow private and public actors to specialise in their areas of competence.
Within such arrangements, the core security functions of the state must not be privatised.
These include combat duties, intelligence work, criminal interrogation, detention, and prosecution.
The capabilities of the private sector in training and advising security forces as well as in providing protection and needs are to be harnessed by the state to bolster security provision.
The sector cannot be approached simply in terms of regulation, but needs to be regarded instead as part of a wider network of security provision, involving the state, private actors and the civil society.
The details of such specialisation must be left to local actors to work out through dialogue.
(cid:1) Reforming states also need to strengthen their monitoring of the private security sector.
This can be done by setting up independent public complaints bodies that can entertain and investigate allegations of misbehaviour on the part of private security companies.
(cid:1) At the federal level, there is need for formulation of a framework that provides strong incentives for good governance in the security sector of its member states.
This is mainly because it is only when a state is ready to reform its security sector that the regulation of private security becomes a viable option.
In addition, the federal government needs to establish regional enforceable standards for all security firms operating in the region and codes of conduct for assessing firms and sanctioning erring ones.
(cid:1) Civil society at the national and state levels is essential for stimulating dialogue aimed at fashioning innovative ways of planning the integration of private security into the mainstream security.
(cid:1) Finally, where private security companies complement public security provision, civil society organisations have a role in advising private operators on the norms of human rights and democratic accountability 3.3 Private Industry Associations There are currently at least five separate private security associations in Nigeria.
The oldest of these is the Nigerian Chapter of the American Society for Industrial Security (ASIS), a global organisation supporting private industry standards and focusing on training and education.
National associations include the National Professional Security Association (NPSA), the 159 Society of Security Practitioners of Nigeria (SSPN), the Security and Safety Association of Nigeria (SSAN) and the Association of Private Security Practitioners in Nigeria (APSPN).
The latter association was founded in April 2004, in direct response to the government’s decision to increase the licence fees for guarding companies.
The three other national associations were all founded in 2002, largely in response to the arrival of Gray Security in the country.
The Society of Security Practitioners of Nigeria (SSPN) presently appears to be one of the more active associations, with approximately 200 members (consisting of both individuals and companies) and holding regular monthly meetings.
The NPSA is also fairly visible and vocal in arguing for increased professionalization of the industry.
The SSAN currently has a smaller membership of 12, but the aim is to have three chapters, in Abuja, Lagos and Port Harcourt respectively.
The arrival of an international company in Nigeria in 2002 was presented by many local PSCs as a threat to national security and a contravention of the Private Guards Act, which stipulates that all PSCs must be wholly Nigerian owned.
The main aim of the SSPN and SSAN is to oppose and limit the activities of what they perceive as ‘foreign’ firms in Nigeria.
While the initial hostility to international involvement has subsided somewhat, and it is clear that international PSCs operate within Nigerian law, it is fair to say that the leadership of these two associations remain hostile to what they describe as “foreign infiltration”.
While this opposition is formulated and expressed in political and legal terms, it is clearly also underpinned by commercial, competitive pressures.
OSL entered the Nigerian market through a major, nation-wide contract with Nigerian Breweries, and subsequently took on several contracts with banks and industries, before signing an extensive contract with ChevronTexaco, thus acquiring several valuable and sought-after clients and a substantial share of the security market.
Local companies fear the competition from international PSCs, which provide high levels of professionalism and often have access to superior resources and technology and hence, as one local company director puts it, “they get all the plum contracts”.
According to the chairman of SSPN, ‘foreign’ PSCs should not be allowed an operational role in Nigeria, but should act only as technical partners to national business, in a support and advisory capacity.
It must be stressed 160 that the international companies in the country are Nigerian-owned, and operate through different management agreements with international companies.
They thus operate within the law and stipulations of the Private Guards Act.
The various associations also seek to promote higher standards and new legislation to regulate the sector.
The existence of large numbers of unlicensed companies is recognised as a major problem, and there is considerable concern to cleanse the sector of what are commonly referred to as ‘quacks’.
In particular, the associations would like to see the establishment of a private security regulatory authority to ensure a tighter regulation of the sector, including the establishment of guidelines and standards for training, wages and working conditions.
Similarly, the associations express concern over the lack of adequate databases to check the criminal records of potential guards, as well as the absence of any database listing guards who have previously been dismissed for misconduct by other companies.
Another lobbying issue is the right of PSCs to bear arms, and at least two of the associations are of the opinion that the private security sector should be allowed to provide an armed service.
So far, lobbying to this effect has found little favour with the federal government.
It should also be stressed that there is no uniform opinion on this issue among the companies and many fear that a move towards firearms would inevitably lead to a dangerous increase in arms in society, and to greater insecurity due to the lack of regulation and training within the sector.
Many international clients, including oil companies, are also opposed to any move towards arming the sector, a position that is reinforced by the oil companies’ endorsement of the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights.
4.0 Conclusion Finally it should be recognised that to a significant extent the number and diversity of security associations in Nigeria is representative of a multitude of competitive struggles within the sector, including the right to represent the sector to government authorities, and to advance particular interests in the process.
Past security associations have been numerous and short lived, and the sector’s persistent inability to speak through one association likely weakens its impact and effectiveness vis-à-vis legislators and regulators.
5.0 Summary Monitoring and Review There appears to be little monitoring of standards in the sector.
Licences have to be renewed by written application to the Ministry of Internal Affairs every second year, but apart from this, 161 there is little regulation or oversight of the quality of service, standards and training.
Many companies continue to operate without a licence, a problem that is recognised by the legitimate companies and the associations, but not acted upon by the Ministry.
The main exception to the relative lack of monitoring and review is the frequent inspections and audits of international private security companies by various Ministries, including Labour, Immigration and Internal Affairs, as well as the State Security Service (SSS).
These checks ensure compliance with Nigeria’s labour and immigration laws, including review of the proportion of Nigerians employed in relation to expatriates.
However, there also appears to be an element of harassment and corruption to these inspections; directors of one international security company have more than once been detained while the SSS searched office files and documents, without finding anything amiss.
Such occurrences significantly complicate the operating environment for international PSCs, and there is suspicion that these inspections are on occasions instigated by unfounded allegations and complaints by local companies hostile to international competition.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 1.
Write a comprehensive note on policy option in PSC 2.
In your own opinion, examine what can be put in place to ensure effective and efficient service delivery by indigenous PSCs.
7.0 References/further readings Abrahamsen, R. and M. Williams, (2006) Security Sector Reform: Bringing the Private In, Conflict, Security & Development, 6:1 April.
Adejumobi, S., (2001) ‘Guarding the Guardian?
The Obasanjo Regime and Military Reform in Nigeria’, Development Policy Management Network Bulletin, Vol.
XIII, No.
3 (September), pp.
17-19.
Alao, A., (2002) Privatisation of Security and Security Sector Reform in Uganda’, in Damian Lilly and Michael von Tangen Page (eds) Security Sector Reform: The Challenges and Opportunities of the Privatisation of Security.
London: International Alert.
162 UNIT 5: SPECIFIC SECURITY THREATS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Objectives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit examines several security threats common to business organisations, such as white- collar crime, burglary and robbery etc.
These crimes are capable of collapsing any business empire if adequate counter measures are not put in place.
Although, there specific program that can entirely guarantee protection against attack nevertheless business organisation can take action to lessen its attractiveness as a target.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: a.
Explain economic/white-collar crime.
b.
Discuss burglary and robbery c. Explain the effect of labour dispute on security d. Discuss espionage e. Discuss piracy ECONOMIC/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME It was first coined by Sutherland (1939).
Sutherland defined white-collar crime as “an offence committed by a person of a respectability and high social status in the course of his (or her) occupation”.
Edelhertz (1970) also defined white collar crime as an illegal act or series of acts committed by nonphysical means and by traditional notions of deceit, deception, manipulation, concealment or guile to obtain money or properties, to avoid the payment or loss of money or property or to obtain a business or personal advantage.
White collar crime therefore, overlaps with corporate crime because of the opportunity for fraud, bribery, insider trading, 163 embezzlement, computer crime, copyright infringement, money laundering, identity theft and forgery.
It is a crime which is nonviolent but the end result could be violent.
Individuals of higher economic and social status commit more harms (white collar crimes) to the companies and society than burglars and robbers but the justice system often treated them with more lenience.
Perpetrators have specialized knowledge that allows them to commit complex transactions that are often difficult to identify.
Law enforcement authorities rarely catch white- collar criminal at the onset of their activities.
In addition, the use of computers and electronic financial transaction has complicated the detection and prosecution of white-collar crimes.
A lack of standard classification and definitions coupled with limited reporting of workplace crime contributes more to the problem of accurate measurement.
For this reason in Nigeria, the economic and financial crime commission (EFCC) was set up by the federal government to curb the menace of corruption and financial crime.
BURGLARY Burglary is committing a crime through stealth by entering a building or other structure.
Burglars also commit rape and arson among other felonies.
Burglary has been observed to be most frequently occurring crime.
It is essential that every business take particular care to protect itself against this form of crime.
Burglars enter through the doors, or windows, through the roof or possibly from a neighbouring occupancy.
Most successful burglaries are made without forced entry.
The greatest numbers are made through the front door or main entrance.
While a considerably smaller number of burglaries involve the stay-in who gathers the loot then breaks out and is gone before the guards or police can respond to an alarm.
Cash is naturally the most sensitive asset and the most eagerly sought but because it is usually secured in some manner, it represents the greatest challenges to the burglar.
Blasting and carrying away of the entire safe are the methods most commonly used.
DEFENCE AGAINST BURGLARY Many methods or strategies have been devised to curb or combat this crime.
1.
Target hardening: It means that basic security precautions are applied to the facility including attention to door construction, locks, alarms and surveillance devices.
164 2.
Reducing the value of merchandise: It means marking company property with company identification tags or recording serial numbers that are easily traced.
3.
Alarms: Many houses and stores are attached with local alarm systems.
Although many police and security experts feel such alarms are ineffective because the response to the signal is only by chance, and it that serves to warn the intruder rather than aid in capture.
4.
Safes: Safes should be located in a prominent, well lighted position readily visible from the street where it can be seen easily by patrols or by the police.
It should be located in a well- secured and alarm rigged inner room and the floor and ceiling should be reinforced.
ROBBERY Robbery is the crime of taking or attempting to take something of value by force and/ or by putting the victim in fear.
In common law, robbery is defined as taking the property of another, with the intent of permanently depriving the person of that property, by means of force or fear.
Robbery differs from single theft in its use of violence and intimidation.
The elements of robbery are: (1) a trespassor (2) taking and (3) carrying away (4) of the personal property (5) of another (6) with the intent to steal (7) from the person or presence of the victim (8) by force or threat.
Robbery remains a serious crime because of the potential harm to its victim.
Private individuals, retailers’ shops and banks take the brunt of these attacks.
It has also been observed that less than a third of all robbers are arrested.
The focus of this unit is robbery of stores.
Robbers are typically criminals making a direct assault on people for cash or properties.
Their targets may be messengers or store employees taking cash for deposit in the bank or bringing in cash for the day’s receipts, or they may break into stores before opening and wait for the first employee, whom they force to open safes or cash room.
Delivery trucks and warehouse can also be targets for robbers.
Probably the major cause of robbery is the accumulation of excessive amount of cash.
Hence it is important that only the cash needed to conduct the day’s business be kept on hand and most of that should be stored in safes.
If the store has a cash room, it must be secured against unauthorized entry.
The door to the room must be secured and securely locked.
It should be equipped with panic locks and have alarms fitted to it.
It is essential to any robbery prevention programme.
For instance, storekeepers 165 and employees should be properly indoctrinated on the use of alarm as well as the need to question persons loitering in unauthorized area etc.
Also employees should be instructed to co- operate and not to do anything that would make the robber to resort to violence.
The primary goal of robbery prevention programme is to make the store less attractive to potential robbers.
LABOUR DISPUTES A labour dispute is a state of disagreement over a particular issue or group of issues over which there is conflict between workers and employers.
These issues may include conditions of employment, fringe benefits, hours or work, tenure, wages etc.
All security personnel should be aware that their role is to protect personnel and property only and in case of labour disputes, they are not to participate.
A checklist of some possible measures before and after declaration of labour dispute in order to protect properties: 1.
Secure all doors and gates not being used during the strike and see that they remain secured.
2.
Remove all combustible from the area near the perimeter both inside and outside.
3.
Remove any trash and stones from the perimeter that could be used as missiles.
4.
Change all locks and padlocks on peripheral doors of all buildings to which keys have been issued to striking employee.
5.
Recover keys from employees who will go out to strike.
6.
Nullify all existing identification cards for the duration and issue special cards to workers who are not striking.
7.
Check all standpipe hoses, fire extinguishers and other fire-fighting equipments after striking workers have walked out.
8.
Test sprinkler systems and all alarms-both fire and intrusion – after striking workers have walked out.
9.
Consider construction of barriers for physical protection of windows, landscaping and lighting fixtures.
10.
Move property most likely to be a damaged well back from the perimeter.
11.
Be certain all security personnel are familiar with the property line and stay within it at all times when they are on duty.
166 12.
Guards are not to be used to photograph, tape or report on the conduct of the strikers.
The only reports will relate to injury to personnel or property.
13.
Notify employees who will continue to work to keep the windows of their automobiles closed and their car doors locked when they are moving through the picket line.
14.
Consider the establishment of a shuttle bus to non-striking employee.
15.
Establish, in advance, which vendors or service persons will continue to service the facility and make arrangements to provide substitute services for those unwilling to cross the picket line.
16.
Keep the lines of communication open.
17.
Because functional organizational lines may be radically changed during the walkout, find out who is where and who is responsible for what.
ESPIONAGE Espionage is a crime under the legal code of many countries.
Espionage or spying involves individual obtaining information that is considered secret or confidential without the permission of the holder of the information.
Espionage is usually part of an institutional effort by a government or corporation, and the term is most readily associated with state spying on potential or actual enemies primarily for military purposes.
Spying involving corporation is known as industrial espionage (Wikidepia, The free Encyclopedia).
In this unit, we are concerned with industrial espionage.
The purpose of espionage is to gather knowledge about an organization(s).
It may include the acquisition of intellectual property such as information on industry, production, ideas, techniques and processes, recipes and formulas or it could include sequestration of the property or operational information, such as that on customer data sets, pricing, sales, marketing research and development, policies.
It may describe activities such as theft of trade secrets, bribery, blackmail and technological surveillance.
The problem of espionage is increasing more and more due to corporate competition and computer based data storage.
Industrial espionage commonly occurs in two ways.
a.
A dissatisfied employee appropriate information to advance their own interests or to damage the company.
b.
A competitor seeks information to advance its own technological or financial interest.
167 Insiders are generally considered the best sources for industrial espionage.
Insiders can be induced, willingly or under duress to provide information.
Among the notable cases, was that of Volkswagen.
In 1993, car manufacturer Opel, the German division of General motors, accused Volkswagen of industrial of espionage after Opel’s chief of production, Jose Ignacio Lopez and seven other executives move to Volkswagen.
Volkswagen subsequently threatened to sue for defamation, resulting in a four-year legal battle.
The case which was finally settled in 1997, resulted in one of the largest settlements in the history of industrial espionage, with Volkswagen agreeing to pay General Motors $100 million and to buy at least $1 billion of car parts from the company over 7 years, although it did not explicitly apologize for Lopez’s behaviour.
PIRACY Piracy as a criminal act is not a new problem.
It is the copying of copyrighted materials by unauthorized means.
It can also be defined as the theft of one’s intellectual property.
It has become a major setback in development particularly in the entertainment industry in Nigeria and world over.
Advances in technology have made possible high-speed and high quality duplication of pirates.
Compact disks (CDs) either audio or video are the medium most often copied.
Even home computer owners have the ability to download and copy their own audio and video with CD burners.
According to the Nigeria Copyright Commission, (2007), film industry loses an estimated N4.2 billion annually to illegal digital duplication, on-line piracy and unauthorized rental of video works within the country.
Piracy refers to the illegal duplication and distribution of recordings.
It takes three specific and often confused forms: 1.
Counterfeiting: The unauthorized recording of the pre-recorded sounds, as well as the unauthorized duplication of original artwork, label, trademark and packaging.
2.
Pirating: The unauthorized duplication of sounds or images only from a legitimate recording.
3.
Bootlegging: The unauthorized recording of a musical broadcast on radio, television or a live concert.
Bootlegs are known as undergo round recording (fisher and green 2004).
168 There have been series of efforts by the industry players to curb the activities of the practice in Nigeria but it is yet to record any positive result.
For instance, key players in the music and film industries keep rallying round markets and campaigning against piracy.
The cartel of pirates is domicile in big markets such as Alaba international market in Lagos, Main market, Onitsha in Anambra, and other markets in Kano and Borno.
The recent use of materials from the internet has increased the activities of pirates and the potential abuse of copyright laws.
CONCLUSION: With the growing pace of technology and the use of internet, many of these crimes are changing direction.
Hence in order to combat these crimes, security and law enforcement will need to enhance their tools by becoming proficient at monitoring and investigating crimes using computers and related information technology.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss burglary and robbery, explain the effect of labour dispute on security.
We also discussed espionage and piracy especially as they relate to the entertainment industry.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by the term piracy and what are the effort in place to checkmate the menace by the Nigeria Copy Right Commission.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Osanyintiyi, S. (2009) Effects of Piracy in Nigeria.
Fischer R.J and Green, G (2004) Introduction to Security.
Borlington, Elservier Butterworth Heinemann.
169
