 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ENG211 COURSE TITLE: HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE COURSE GUIDE ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Course Developer/Writer Dr. Innocent Chiluwa Department of English and Literary Studies Covenant University Ota, Ogun State Course Editor Professor Charles Ogbulogo Covenant University Ota, Ogun State Course Coordinator Iyere Theodore National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii ENG211 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dares Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 Reprinted 2009 ISBN: 978-058-783-7 All Rights Reserved iiiCONTENTS PAGE Introduction…………………………………………………….... 1 What you will Learn in this Course…………………………….... 1 Course Aims……………………………………….……………… 1 Course Objectives…………………………………….…………… 2 Working through this Course………………………….………….. 2 Course Materials………………………………………………….. 2 Study Units……………………………………………………….. 2 Text Books and References ……………………….……………… 4 Assignment File……………………………………….…………... 4 Presentation Schedule………………………………..…..……….. 4 Assessment……………………………………………………….. 4 Tutor-Marked Assignment ……………………………………….
4 Final Examination and Grading……………….………………….. 4 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………….…….
5 How to Get the Most from this Course…………………..……….
5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials………………………………….. 6 Summary……………………………………………………..…….
7 iv Introduction ENG211: History of the English Language is a three-unit course available for students taking BA English and BA (Ed) English programmes.
The course introduces you to the history of the development of English Language from Old English to its present status as a world language.
In doing this, you will be exposed to major changes that have taken place in the Grammar, Vocabulary and Pronunciation of English from the Old English to the Modern Period.
Major social and political events in England such as the Anglo-Saxon Conquest, the Danish Invasion and the Norman Conquest that were responsible for significant changes in the history of English will be examined.
Other very important developments such as the Rise of the Middle Class in England; the Emergence of Dictionaries; the Great Vowel Shift; the 18th Century Grammarians; the dispersal of English across the world and the Development of World Englishes will also be examined.
What You Will Learn in This Course The general aim of this course is to introduce you to the History of English Language - the various stages in the development of English and the fact that social events, political changes and scientific developments usually leave their marks on the language especially in the vocabulary.
This is an on-going process because as the world experiences changes, new words and expressions are bound to evolve as part of those development processes.
And people must learn new terms to update their knowledge and express their new experiences.
This is the case with the English people.
You are going to see how socio-political changes in England influenced the language.
You will also be exposed to those factors that have been responsible for the growth and spread of English across the world.
Course Aims There are twenty units in the course and each unit has its objectives.
You should read the objectives of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
In addition to the objectives of each unit, the overall aims of this course include: (i) to introduce you to the history of the English language from its earliest development to its present status as a world language (ii) to highlight to you some significant events that influenced the emergence and growth of English (iii) to acquaint you with the major changes in the Grammar, Vocabulary and Pronunciation of English from the Old English to Modern English; and (iv) to prepare you for further studies in English as a world language.
ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Course Objectives Based on the general aims of this course, some objectives as a whole are set out.
These are the things you should be able to do by the time you complete the course.
If you are able to meet the objective, you would have achieved the aims of the course.
Therefore on your successful completion of this course, you should be able to: (a) trace the history of English language from old English period to the present (b) identify some major landmarks and stages in the development of English (c) describe the events that were responsible for the emergence and development of English (d) explain the factors that influenced the growth of English as a world language (e) discuss major changes in the Grammar, Vocabulary and Pronunciation of English form old English to the modern period; and (f) participate in further studies and research in the development of English as a world language Working through This Course You have to work through all the study units in the course.
There are twenty study units in all.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Units Module 1 Unit 1 English Language: the Roots; the Language Situation in England before English; the Roman Conquest Unit 2 Anglo-Saxon Conquest; the Origin and Status of Old English; some features of the Old English ii ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Unit 3 Influences on the Old English: Religion; the Danish Invasion and the Vikings Age Unit 4 Middle English Period: the Norman Conquest (1066- 1200): The Ascendancy of French; The Fusion of French and English; Re-establishment of English Unit 5 English and French in the 13th Century; the Decline of French; the Rise of the Middle Class; General Adoption of English Module 2 Unit 1 Some Characteristics of Middle English: Grammar; Vocabulary; Spelling and Speech Sounds Unit 2 The Rise of the Standard English; the Spread of the London Dialect Unit 3 Early Modern Periods (1500-1750): Some Characteristics; The Renaissance English; Changes in Grammar Unit 4 The Problem of Spelling; the Inkhorn Controversy; the Vocabulary Question Unit 5 The Emergence of Dictionaries; Shakespeare and the World of Words; the King James Bible Module 3 Unit 1 Changes in Pronunciation; the Great Vowel Shift; Some Features of Grammar Unit 2 The 18th Century English; An English Academy; Johnson’s Dictionary Unit 3 The 18th Century Grammarians; the Rise of Prescriptive Grammar Unit 4 English since 1900 Unit 5 Sources of New Words; the Oxford English Dictionary; the Spelling Reform; Functional Varieties of English Module 4 Unit 1 Varieties of Modern English Unit 2 English across the World Unit 3 Reasons for the Growth of English as a World Language Unit 4 The American English Unit 5 English in Nigeria iiiENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Text Books and References Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
You may wish to read further by making use of as many of the textbooks listed as possible.
The textbooks and materials are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and a final examination which you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignment Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit them for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select three which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignments may be presented to you in a separate file.
Just know that for every unit there are some tutor-marked assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination which will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination which shall last for two hours, you will be requested to answer three questions out of at least five questions.
iv ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and what your text materials or set books are.
You are provided exercises to do at the end of every sub-section of the units, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you complete the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment you finish a unit, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the further reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organise a Study Schedule.
Design a “Course Overview” to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available from the study centre.
You will need to gather all information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to vENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1; read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you submit an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before you start on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
vi ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Facilitator/Tutors and Tutorials The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important; therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
Summary English is just like any other language that struggled for existence for many centuries.
But today it has become a world language.
A course on the History of the English Language is indeed a worthwhile academic engagement that will not only expose you to the stages of the development of the language but also the factors that led it its growth.
At the end, you should be able to say whether English will continue in its present growth and role as a world language or whether we shall expect another language to rise in the next 50 years.
Good Luck!
viiENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Course Code ENG211 Course Title History of the English Language Course Developer/Writer Dr. Innocent Chiluwa Department of English and Literary Studies Covenant University Ota, Ogun State Course Editor Professor Charles Ogbulogo Covenant University Ota, Ogun State Course Coordinator Iyere Theodore National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA viii ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dares Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 Reprinted 2009 ISBN: 978-058-783-7 All Rights Reserved Printed by: ixENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………..….….. 1 Unit 1 English Language: the Roots; the Language Situation in England before English; the Roman Conquest…….. 1 Unit 2 Anglo-Saxon Conquest; the Origin and Status of Old English; some features of Old English………….... 6 Unit 3 Influences on the Old English: Religion; the Danish Invasion and the Vikings Age………..……… 12 Unit 4 Middle English Period: the Norman Conquest (1066-1200): The Ascendancy of French; the Fusion of French and English; Re-establishment of English… 18 Unit 5 English and French in the 13th Century; the Decline of French; the Rise of the Middle Class; General Adoption of English …………………………….…… 24 Module 2 …………………………………………………….. 31 Unit 1 Some Characteristics of Middle English: Grammar; Vocabulary; Spelling and Speech Sounds………….
31 Unit 2 The Rise of the Standard English; the Spread of the London Dialect……………………………………… 41 Unit 3 Early Modern Periods (1500-1750): Some Characteristics; The Renaissance English; Changes in Grammar………………………………………….. 46 Unit 4 The Problem of Spelling; the Inkhorn Controversy; the Vocabulary Question……………… 53 Unit 5 The Emergence of Dictionaries; Shakespeare and the World of Words; the King James Bible…………..….. 62 Module 3 ………………………………………………….
…… 68 Unit 1 Changes in Pronunciation; the Great Vowel Shift; Some Features of Grammar……………..…………… 68 Unit 2 English Language in the 18th Century: An English Academy and Johnson’s Dictionary………………….
74 Unit 3 The 18th Century Grammarians; the Rise of Prescriptive Grammar……………………………....... 81 Unit 4 English since 1900…………………………………… 86 Unit 5 Sources of New Words; the Oxford English Dictionary; the Spelling Reform; Functional Varieties of English………………………………….
93 x ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Module 4 …………………………………………………… 100 Unit 1 Varieties of Modern English……………….…….
101 Unit 2 English across the World………………….…….. 109 Unit 3 The Growth of English as a World Language…… 115 Unit 4 American English…………………………..…….
121 Unit 5 English in Nigeria………………………….….….
128 xiNoneENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE MODULE 1 Unit 1 English Language: the Roots; the Language Situation in England before English; the Roman Conquest Unit 2 Anglo-Saxon Conquest; the Origin and Status of Old English; Some Features of the Old English Unit 3 Influences on the Old English: Religion; the Danish Invasion and the Vikings Age Unit 4 Middle English Period: the Norman Conquest (1066-1200): The Ascendancy of French; The Fusion of French and English; Re-establishment of English Unit 5 English and French in the 13th Century; the Decline of French; the Rise of the Middle Class; General Adoption of English UNIT 1 ENGLISH LANGUAGE: THE ROOTS; THE LANGUAGE SITUATION IN ENGLAND BEFORE ENGLISH; THE ROMAN CONQUEST CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 English Language: the Roots 3.2 The Language Situation in England before English 3.3 The Roman Conquest 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You may want to ask: where did English come from?
Was English the original language of the British people?
Were there other languages in England before English emerged?
Who really are the English people?
To answer these questions it is important you understand that every language has a root as well as a history and English is not an exception.
The history of English is divided into three broad periods namely Old English (AD 450-1100), Middle English (1100-1500), and Modern English (1500- ).
This first unit will give you background knowledge of the origin of English and the environment that gave birth to the old English.
You will get to know the language family where English belongs; the earliest people that lived in Britain and the languages they 1ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE spoke, and how a change in their socio-political situation affected their culture, because language is an important part of a people’s culture.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the origin of the English Language • mention other languages within the indo-European family • describe the language situation in England before English • explain how the roman conquest affected language in England at that time.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 English Language: The Roots English did not originate in England.
In Europe, languages are grouped into ‘families’ depending on the features of each member of the group.
English belongs to the group known as the “Indo-European Family” which includes most of the languages in Europe.
Within the Indo-European family, are other sub-groups called Italic and Germanic.
Germanic is also known as Teutonic.
Latin and French developed from Italic at different times.
The Germanic group has three branches namely North Germanic, East Germanic, and West Germanic.
It is not certain whether North, East and West Germanic represent actual languages.
The North Germanic is the group where we find language like Danish, Swedish, Norwegian and Icelandic.
The West Germanic group developed into modern German, Dutch, Frisian and English.
In this group are still other sub-groups, namely High West Germanic and the Low West Germanic due to their grammatical features.
Both English and Frisian belong to the Low West Germanic and are therefore the closest of relatives.
Frisian is spoken in North-west Netherlands.
Remember that when we say that languages belong to one linguistic ‘family’, it means that they share essential similarities in grammar and in their stock of words.
English was separated from its Germanic root when some Germanic tribes: the Angles, the Saxons and the Jutes migrated from their original home in North-western Europe to Britain, and English language began to develop into an independent language with new characteristics distinct from other Germanic languages.
You shall know more about this in the next unit.
2 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE South German Dialects High East & South Franconian West Germanic Low Franconian – Dutch and Flemish Old Saxon Low Old Frisian - Frisian Old English - English The West Germanic Language Group SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Where did English language originate from?
2.
Mention four (4) languages that belong to the West Germanic branch of the Indo-European family.
3.
What do you think are the benefits of studying the history of English Language?
3.2 The Language Situation in England before English English came to England only at about the middle of the 5th century, whereas men had inhabited Britain for thousands of years before then.
Of course you cannot imagine a place where people live without a functional language.
So there must have been at least one language and its varieties, with which people communicated with one another.
The first people known to have inhabited the island that was later to become England were the Celts and they spoke ‘Celtic’.
The Celtic language and its varieties were another branch of the Indo-European family.
The Celtic languages were the most extensive groups in the Indo-European family to be spoken in England at that time and up till today a good number of people in some parts of Wales and Highlands of Scotland still speak it.
When Latin was later introduced in Britain, Celtic remained the language of the populace, especially of the rural dwellers.
How the Celts came to England is not really known but history confirms that at the beginning of the Christian era, the Celts were found in Spain, West Germany, Italy and Great Britain.
In fact they covered some greater part of Western Europe.
Some centuries earlier they were said to have gained entry to Greece and Asia Minor.
But how the Celtic languages increasingly declined over time is still quite surprising.
3ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Today Celtic languages are found only in some remote areas of France and Britain as we said earlier.
The impact of Celtic on modern English however, has survived mainly on place-names.
Names of cities like Belfast, York, London, Glasgow or Cardiff are Celtic.
Names of rivers such as Avon, Clyde, Dee, Don, Forth or Usk also have the Celtic origin.
Others are names of regions like Devon, Glasmorgan, Kent, Cumbria, and Argyll.
The Celtic ‘cumb’ (i.e.
a deep valley) is traceable in names like Dumcombe, Holcomb or Winchcombe.
What the original Celtic meaning for these place names are cannot be said for sure.
Celtic remained the predominant language of England until the occupation of the Romans when Latin was introduced.
SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention the first Germanic tribe to inhabit the Island that later became England.
2.
Can you explain the functions of the Celtic language in the England of the 5th century?
3.3 The Roman Conquest The Romans under Julius Caesar first invaded Britain in 55B.C, but the actual conquest was in AD 43 under Claudius when the Celtic warriors could no longer resist the much stronger Roman army.
The Roman occupation of Britain lasted from about AD 43 until 410.
This was a very long period which invariably planted much of Roman occupation, civilization and culture in Britain.
Latin was the language of the Romans so it became the official language, in the Roman Britain especially in towns and cities.
Celtic was spoken in the rural areas.
In some localities outside the cities, Latin was spoken; workmen and artisans were familiar with the language as they often scratched Graffiti on tiles and some pieces of pottery.
At this time, English had not come.
Since Latin was not wide spread enough it could not survive the later Germanic invasions.
Latin began to wane around AD 410, the time the last of the Roman troops were officially withdrawn from Britain.
However, the Roman conquests have some linguistic contributions to the present day English lexicon.
For instance, the old English “Caestar” (an enclosed place) is from the Latin “casta” (camp).
Today we have some English place-names like Chester, Dorchester, Manchester and Lancaster.
The Latin ‘portus’ (gate) gave English the following names: Newport, Port sea, Portsmouth; from Latin ‘mons’ (mountain) we have Larchmont, and Oakmont, while the Latin ‘turris’ (tower) gave rise to Torrington, Torbridge.
So you can see that Latin contributed to the development of English.
4 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Mention the two languages that were spoken in the Roman Britain between AD 43 and 410?
2.
Describe the contributions of the Roman conquest to the development of the English language.
4.0 CONCLUSION You can see that English has its root from among the dialects of Germanic tribes in North-western Europe.
This is the area where you find the modern Germany, Poland, Russia or Denmark.
It belongs to the Indo-European language family and is grouped along with German, Dutch, Flemish, and Frisian as the West-Germanic.
Before English was planted in Britain, the Celtic tribes who lived in the Isles then spoke their language Celtic and that became the first language in Britain.
The Celts were defeated by the Romans and Britain came under the Roman government and for a very long time Latin, the Roman language was then planted as the language of communication and politics.
But the Celtic language still survived especially in the rural areas.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have seen where the English came from, i.e.
in North- west Europe, from a dialect of the Germanic tribes.
You will get to know more about these Germanic tribes in Unit 2.
Latin and Celtic were spoken in England before the Germanic tribes brought in English.
We can still find some of the marks of the Celtic and Latin languages in modern English place-names.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the origin of the English language.
2.
Describe the contributions of both Celtic and Latin languages to modern English.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh, A.C and Cable T (2001).
A History of the English Language.
5th ed.
London: Routledge Ogu, J.N (1992).
A Historical Survey of English and the Nigerian Situation.
Lagos: Kraft Books 5ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 2 ANGLO-SAXON CONQUEST; THE ORIGIN AND STATUS OF OLD ENGLISH; SOME FEATURES OF THE OLD ENGLISH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Anglo-Saxon Conquest 3.2 The Origin and Status of Old English 3.3 Some Features of the Old English 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You have seen from the last unit that English language was transported to England from among some tribes of Germanic people from Northern Europe of the regions comprising present day southern Denmark and Northern Germany.
These tribes were the Angles, the Saxons and the Jutes.
In this unit, you will see the process of their movement and how they eventually occupied Britain.
The Anglo-Saxon language was the Old English.
You will also see some features of the old English so that you can identify the extent of changes on its grammar, vocabulary and pronunciation as we make progress in this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the Germanic tribes that invaded Britain at the close of the 6th century • describe some features of the old English.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Anglo-Saxon Conquest The Romans occupied Britain for more than 300 years.
But the power of the Roman Empire began to decline due to series of attacks from Northern Europe and the Romans needed to protect their territories.
Consequently the Roman soldiers in Britain were withdrawn to fight 6 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE subsequent battles.
This left the Celts unprotected.
There were two tribes from Northern Britain which the Romans did not conquer, known as the Picts and Scots.
These people saw the withdrawal of the Romans as an opportunity to attack and plunder the much vulnerable Celts.
The Celts then appealed to the Germanic warriors - the Angles, the Saxons and the Jutes for help.
They came in great numbers and at different times.
The Angles from the modern state of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany came in AD547 and settled in the north and central England.
The Saxons (AD 477) also from modern Germany occupied the south of the island; while the Jutes occupied Kent.
The Jutes were the first to arrive in AD 449 driving the indigenous Celtic speaking people notably the Britons to the North and West – the present day Wales.
The Jutes were from modern Denmark or Northern Germany; their territory bordered that of Saxons.
These Germanic tribes helped the Celts defeat the attacking Picts and Scots, but then turned around to loot, and destroy their host country and eventually occupied it.
The Celts realized too late that their friends had become their conquerors.
Although wars to resist the Germanic tribes continued for the next 200 years, the Celts could not drive the Germanic tribes out.
Some of the Celts were rather driven to places like Wales, Cornwall and the Scottish highlands.
Those who remained were forced to accept the government of the new comers and became absorbed through inter-marriages.
After a few centuries, the Celts lost their identity within the Anglo-Saxon society.
The Germanic tribes had a lot of things in common: they were semi- nomadic (they moved from place to place) warlike, sea-faring but land loving.
The Angles and the Saxons were more in number than the Jutes, and were also more persistent.
The Celts called the invaders “Sassenachs” i.e.
“Saxons” regardless of their specific tribes.
By the end of the 6th century the term “Angles” was used.
During the seventh century the Latin name for the country was Angli or Anglia.
This became “Engle” in Old English, while the name of the language was called “Englisc”.
It was around the 10th century that the word “Englaland” or “Aegle-land”, (land of the Angles) appeared; this later became England.
SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Mention the Germanic tribes that invaded Britain at about the 6th century?
2.
Why did the Romans evacuate Britain leaving the Celts unprotected?
3.
Explain the methods the Anglo-Saxons used to conquer Britain?
7ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.2 The Origin and Status of Old English Old English was the language the three Germanic tribes spoke as they settled in England.
It was more of a fusion of the dialects of the Germanic tribes and it is difficult to say how much the speech of the Angles differs from that of the Saxons or that of the Jutes.
However, it was never a uniform language.
Four main dialects of the Old English were spoken during this period namely, Northumbrian, Mercian, West- Saxon and Kentish.
These dialects were spoken in different parts of Britain and Scotland.
For instance, Northumbria and Mercian were spoken in the region north of the Thames where the Angles occupied.
As you have seen in Unit1, English belongs to the low Germanic branch of the Indo-European family.
This means that English has in common certain characteristics with other Germanic languages.
For instance, it has both the ‘weak’ and ‘strong’ stress patterns in adjectives and verbs.
It shows that there is a strong stress accent on the first or the root syllable of most words.
This feature is common to all Germanic languages since it is mainly responsible for the decay of inflections in these languages.
You will know more about this in the subsequent units.
SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the origin of the Old English.
3.3 Some Features of the Old English Let me remind you once again that the period from AD450 to 1150 is referred to as Old English.
The grammar of the Old English took after the Latin grammar.
One of the features of Latin is that it is heavily inflected.
This means that the Latin words are full of inflections; what you may call affixes today.
That is why the Old English period is sometimes called the period of full inflection, because during this period, the endings of nouns, adjectives and verbs had inflections.
A noun for example is described in terms of cases, Latin has six (6) cases, Nominative (subject), Genitive (possessive), Accusative (objective), Dative (indirect object) Ablative and Vocative.
The Latin “Nauta” (sailor) for example has its singular form (nominative) as ‘nauta’, plural “nautae”.
Remember in its grammar, Old English resembled Latin.
The nouns and adjectives are inflected for up to four or five cases.
The old English “fisc” (fish) for example has the following cases: 8 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Singular Plural Nominative fisĉ fisĉas Genitive fisĉes fisĉa Accusative fisĉ fiscas Dative fisĉa fîscum Old English adjectives had separate forms of each of the three genders.
For example: gōd (good) Masculine Feminine Neuter Nominative gōd gōd gōd Genitive gōdes gōdre gōdes Dative gōdum gōdre gōd So you can see that old English takes much of Latin.
In pronunciation, Old English differs a great deal from its modern equivalent.
For example, the Old English “stan” is the modern ‘stone’ but the vowel differs.
This is the same thing in words like halig (holy); gań (go), bán- (bone) ráp (rope), cẻne (keen), fyr (fire), scẻap (sheep) etc.
The difference is also reflected in spelling.
Because the Old English represented the sound ‘sh’, by ‘sc’ the spelling of ‘sheep’ was written as ‘scẻap’.
Old English vocabulary is almost entirely lifted from the Germanic languages.
A large part of this vocabulary has disappeared today.
When the Northern conquest introduced French to England as the language of the upper classes, much of the Old English vocabulary for literature and education gave way to words borrowed from French and Latin.
Those that survived were very few, with such words as ‘mann’ (man), ‘wif’ (wife) ‘cild’ (child) ‘hủs’ (house) etc.
You can see that both in grammar, vocabulary and pronunciation, old English is distinct from modern English.
Below is a sample from a West-Saxon version of the gospel according to Saint John Chapter 1:1-3 TEXT 1 On frymthe waes Word, and thaet Word waes mid Gode and God waes thaet Word.
That waes on fruman mid Gode.
Ealle thing waeron geworhte thurh hyre; and nan thing naes geworht butan him.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God.
All things 9ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE were made by Him, and without Him was not anything made that was made.
SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Can you say why the old English conformed to the grammar of Latin?
2.
Describe at least two (2) features of old English.
4.0 CONCLUSION One of the most important events in the history of the English language is the Anglo-Saxon conquest, which is responsible for the birth of English in Britain.
Old English, which is the language of the conquering Germanic tribes, was influenced by Latin due to the long occupation of Britain by the Romans and their long contacts with the Germanic tribes.
The old English was the national language of Britain during this period, though it had other varieties or dialects.
5.0 SUMMARY The Germanic conquest brought the Angles, the Saxons and the Jutes to England.
They were initially invited to help the defenseless Celts fight their battles after the Roman withdrew from Britain.
The Germanic tribes came in their large numbers, defended the Celts against the Picts and the Scots and turned around to conquer their host.
The Celts could not match their new conquerors and were forced to be subjected to their authority.
This period is known as the Old English period because the Angles, the Saxons, and the Jutes spoke this language.
Old English was a combination of the features of the languages of the tribes and resembled Latin both in grammar and vocabulary.
About four dialects of Old English were spoken at that time.
Looking at some of the characteristics of Old English, it is obvious that most of its lexical, grammatical and phonological features have faded away, over time.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the meaning of “Anglo-Saxon”.
2.
Describe how the Germanic tribes conquered Britain and how this resulted in the birth of the English language.
10 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh, A.C and Cable T (2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th ed.
London: Routledge Jackson, H & Amuela E. (2000).
Words, Meaning and Vocabulary.
London: Continuum.
Nelson, F. (1963).
The History of English.
New York: Norton & Co. Inc. Ogu, J.N (1992).
A Historical Survey of English and the Nigerian Situation.
Lagos: Kraft Books 11ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 3 INFLUENCES ON THE OLD ENGLISH: RELIGION, THE DANISH INVASION AND THE AGE OF THE VIKINGS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Religious Influences on the Old English 3.2 The Danish Invasion and the Age of the Vikings 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 2 you were exposed to how the Germanic tribes conquered Britain in the 6th century and introduced Old English which was a mixture of the languages of the tribes and the Celtic language.
The Roman civilization, you will remember left its mark on the language.
Old English continued to receive foreign influences which affected its internal structure and vocabulary.
In this Unit you will be introduced to some of these influences.
The most important are religion (Christianity) and the Danish conquest.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • explain how Christianity influenced the Old English • discuss the effects of the Danish invasion on the English language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Religious Influence on Old English Christianity was introduced in England at about AD597.
And from this time to the close of the Old English period (around AD1100) is over 500 years.
So you can imagine how great impart this would have on language.
The dominant church then was the Roman Catholic and the religious zeal that greeted the 7th century was responsible for building churches and monasteries.
And Latin being the primary language of 12 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE religion was once again rapidly imported.
The temporary decline Latin experienced earlier with the coming of the Anglo-Saxons was overtaken by this religious revival.
The missionaries from Rome did not only introduce Christianity, they came with classical civilization, education and the Latin language, which was the universal language of the church and education.
Many of the Latin words were adopted early, while some were adopted towards the end of the tenth and eleventh centuries.
These words also found their way into the literature of the time.
Normally, it is expected that the new words would express new ideas and concepts.
So the new religion introduced words about the church, and explained its internal and external organization.
Remember that the Anglo-Saxons were not Christians, so the church and pagan ideas and customs survived side by side.
But much of paganism was absorbed by the church.
With education the Anglo-Saxons could record their tradition and poetry.
People began to express themselves in literature.
One of the first works of Literature in the Old English language is called “Beowulf.” The author is one of the earliest converts who were educated in classical literature.
He must have read some of the earliest classical writers called Virgil and Homer.
Virgil wrote Aeneid; while Homer wrote the Odyssey.
Another product of this early Christian education is a man by name Bede - Venerable Bede.
Bede was born in Northumbria and educated at the University of Warmouth.
He authored the Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation; this was just one of the thirty-six books credited to him.
He wrote in Latin.
Words Relating to Religion Some words relating to Christianity such as “Church” and “Bishop” were borrowed earlier because the Anglo-Saxon had had contact with some bishops and had plundered churches before they came to England.
But most of the words relating to religion were borrowed at the time of Christian evolution.
The following words given in their modern forms have survived over time: canon, alms, chalice, altar, angel, anthem, epistle, hymn, litany, cleric, martyr, nun, minister, organ, pope, priest, psalm, provost, shift, shrine, deacon, synod, temple, noon, ark, candle etc.
The church also influenced the domestic life of the people.
You can see this in the words that relate to clothing and household use, e.g.
cap, sock, silk, mat, sack, purple; words denoting food or food items such as beef, cabbage, lentil, millet, pear, oyster, lobster, mussel were also adopted from religion.
Some number of words that relate to education and learning show another dimension of the church’s influence.
Such 13ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE words are school, Latin, master, grammatic, verse, meter, rotary etc.
Names of trees, plant and herbs are also rooted in religion.
Examples are lily, pine aloes, balsam, fennel, hyssop, mallow, myrrh and the general word “plant’.
There are various words that one can trace to the religion of this period like anchor, fan, fever, place, sponge, phoenix, elephant, circle, giants, legion, talent and consuls.
These examples are mostly nouns but Old English also borrowed a number of verbs and adjectives which we may not cover in this study.
The most important thing is that you understand how significant impact the church had in Old English SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention some ten (10) words that are attributable to the influence of Christianity in the English language.
3.2 The Danish invasion and the age of the Vikings Towards the end of the Old English period, another invasion of England took place, this time by the Danes from Denmark.
Also called the Vikings, their contact with English constituted another major influence on the language.
Denmark, Sweden and Norway are among countries that come from the Scandinavian region.
The Scandinavians, i.e., the Swedish, and the Norwegians were actually neighbours to Anglo-Saxons and were even related in language and blood.
Their plundering activities started from the 8th century to the beginning of the 11th century.
The climax of their achievement came in the 11th century when the King of Denmark took over the throne of England, conquered Norway and rule the greater part of the Scandinavians world.
The period of the Danish activities and influence from 1014 -1039 is known as the Viking Age.
The Danish attacks were in three stages: the first early stages were characterized by plundering of towns and church facilities.
This was between AD787 and 850.
The second stage was in 850 when the Danes came in a fleet of 350 ships.
They invaded and captured Canterbury, London, York and East Anglia.
By 878 they had overrun almost the whole of Britain.
The third stage of the Scandinavian invasion was more of political adjustment and assimilation from 878 to 1042.
In 1042 the English king was sent on exile and for the next 25 years England was ruled by the Danes.
As the Vikings became permanent settlers in England they gradually got absorbed in the native population and accepted the Anglo-Saxon religion and language.
Their adoption of the language, though very similar with theirs, altered the Old English in some noticeable ways, especially its 14 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE influenced on place names.
More than 1,400 places in England bear Scandinavian names.
Their early acceptance of Christianity can also be seen in the Scandinavian names found among the Monks, Priests and Bishops.
The Danes settled mainly in Northumbria, and the West Coast of Ireland.
The relationship between the Old English and Danish (also called Norse) was more of interference.
The situation is similar to what is obtainable in many cities of the world today where people from different cultures leave and spoke different languages.
In some parts of Scotland, Norse was spoken as late as the 17th century, while in some part of England, English was generally spoken but newcomers to such districts will normally speak their own languages.
There is no doubt that many words in modern English are borrowed from the Scandinavian tongue.
For example in Old English, the modern sound of ‘sh’ (like ship) is written as ‘sc’.
In the Scandinavian sound ‘sk’ is retained in modern English.
Native words like ship, shall, fish have ‘sh’ in modern English.
Words borrowed from the Scandinavian are still pronounced with ‘sk’ e.g.
sky, skin, skill, scrape, whisk or bask.
The O.E ‘scyrte’ has become “shirt” while the corresponding O.N (Old Norse) from “skyrta” is retained “skirt”.
Also words with the retention of ‘g’ sound as in get, give, gild and egg indicate Scandinavian origin.
So you can see that the Scandinavian language enjoyed a great deal of influence on modern English.
Scandinavian Place Names You have been told earlier that one of the notable evidences of the Viking settlement is the extensive number of place names in England.
More than 600 places with names ending in –by are Scandinavian e.g.
Grimsby, Wgitby, Derby, Rugby, Thoresby etc.
Some 300 names end with – pe.
As in Althorp, Bishopsthorpe, Gawthorpe, etc.
The Scandinavian ‘thrope’ means village.
Some others contain the word ‘thwaite’ meaning ‘an isolated peace of land”.
They include Applethwaite, Braithwaite, Cowperthwaite etc.
About a hundred names bear the ending ‘toft’ (a piece of ground) e.g.
Brimtoft, Eastoft Langtoft, Nortoft etc.
Personal names ending with the suffix ‘son’ are also of Scandinavian origin e.g.
Gibson, Jackson, Johnson, Watson, Wilson etc.
The largest number of place names is found in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire, contributing about 75% of names of Scandinavian origin to the English Lexicon.
A good number is also found in Cumberland and Westmoreland; these are countries in the Northeast of England showing that the Danes had a large settlement in these areas.
This is also true of Norfolk in East Anglia.
15ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE The earliest influence of the Norse on the Old English vocabulary is words that are associated with sea-faring or sea-roving.
You know that the Danes lived an adventurous and predatory life.
The Old English scegÞ (vessel), lip (fleet), scegÞmann (pirate), dreng (warrior) etc.
are Scandinavian words.
Later, a number of words relating to law, and those relating to the social and administrative system of the Danes were also introduced to Old English.
The word ‘law’ itself is a Scandinavian word.
As a matter of fact the Danish invasions were not like the introduction of Christianity that brought the English people to a new civilization and introduced them to many things, both physical and spiritual that they never knew before.
And you know that these new things came with new vocabularies and ways of expressing them.
The civilization of the Scandinavians was very much like that of the English themselves.
Consequently the Danish loans entered the English language through the process of everyday interaction.
Scandinavian Words Some common place nouns that have the Scandinavian origin are bank, birth, bull, dirt, down, dregs, egg, fellow, gap, guess, kid, leg, loan, mire, root, scales, score, seat, sister, skin, sky, slaughter, thrift, tidings, trust etc.
among adjectives we have awkward, flat, ill, brose, low, meek, rotten, rugged, tight, and weak.
There are also some number of verbs, such as grave, call, crawl, die, gape, get, give, lift, nag, raise, scare, take, thrive.
These are some of the words that the Danish invasion and subsequent settlement introduced to English.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention five (5) words that are of the Scandinavian origin.
4.0 CONCLUSION Two major foreign influences in the Old English are the coming of the Christian religion and the Danish invasion.
Don’t forget that in this Unit we have used the terms, the Danes or Danish, the Scandinavian and the Vikings to refer to the same people.
These two events introduced foreign words to the English Language.
5.0 SUMMARY The coming of Christian civilization to England brought with it new ideas and concepts which required the right kind of vocabulary to express them.
Hence, Christianity brought into the Old English words that are associated with religion and church administration.
When the 16 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Scandinavians later invaded England and settled there, they were absorbed in the social system of the English people and many of them became Christian converts.
However, through everyday interaction they introduced their own words, which are less technical than the religious ones.
Most of the words that are Danish are everyday words and those associated with Sea-roving.
Most English place names are also attributed to the Scandinavians.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Distinguish between religious influences and that of the Danish invasion on the English language.
2.
Discuss some specific contributions of the Christian religion to the growth of the English language.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh, A.C and Cable T (2001).
A History of the English Language.
5th ed.
London: Routledge Ogu, J.N (1992).
A Historical Survey of English and the Nigerian Situation.
Lagos: Kraft Books 17ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 4 MIDDLE ENGLISH PERIOD: THE NORMAN CONQUEST (1066-1200); THE ASCENDANCY OF FRENCH; THE FUSION OF FRENCH AND ENGLISH; RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF ENGLISH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Middle English Period: The Norman Conquest (1066- 1200) 3.2 The Ascendancy of French 3.3 The Fusion of French and English 3.4 Re-Establishment of English 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION So far, we have been able to trace the origin of English and examined major events and factors that influenced its grammar and vocabulary.
Towards the close of the Old English another event occurred that had greater effect on the English language than any other in the course of its history.
This event is the Norman Conquest and indeed, it changed the course of the English language, and ushered in the period known as the Middle English.
This period runs from the beginning of the 12th century to the middle of the 15th century.
In this Unit, you will get to know how far the introduction of French language which came with the Norman Conquest influenced the English language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you will be able to: • explain the relationship between the Norman conquest and the French Language • describe the position of French in the England of the middle English period • discuss the relationship between French and English at this time • explain why the English language was re-established after French domination.
18 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Middle English Period: The Norman Conquest (1066- 1200) You may want to know who the Normans were.
The Normans were made up of the Danes and other settlers from Northern Europe that occupied Normandy in the 9th and 10th centuries.
Normandy was a district on the Northern coast of France.
The civilization of Normandy was essentially French, and the Normans were among the most progressive and advanced of the people of Europe at this time.
Before the conquest, England and Normandy had enjoyed a fair long standing relationship.
For instance, one of the English kings (Ethelred) married a Norman wife and when he was driven to exile by the Danes, he took refuge with his brother-in-law, the duke of Normandy.
His son Edward, then brought up in France was more of French than English.
In 1042, the Danish government declined in England and Edward known as the confessor was restored to the throne from which the Danes had earlier expelled his father.
He came back with his Norman friends, enriched them and gave them important positions in his government, thus a strong French atmosphere reigned in the English court during the 24 years of Edward’s government.
Edward died in 1066 without a son to succeed him.
William the Duke of Normandy was a second cousin of the late King Edward and had nursed the ambition of succeeding the king.
His relationship with Edward however, didn’t give him any right to the English throne.
So he decided to take the throne by force.
This he did, and at the battle of Hastings, his forces killed the reigning king Harold and defeated his army.
William was eventually crowned king of England on the 25th December 1066.
With the possession of the English crown, William introduced new nobility.
Most of the English higher class died in the war at Hasting and those that escaped were treated as traitors.
By 1072, the Old English nobility was practically wiped out, and their places were filled with Norman followers of the king.
What the Norman settlement in England meant to language was that French, which was the language of the Normans, was introduced as a second official language in England.
And it functioned particularly as the language of the upper class.
Unlike the Anglo-Saxons language that came to replace the existing Celtic language, French was adopted to be used side by side with English but the two languages were to perform different roles.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Describe how the French language came into England.
2.
Explain the effect of the elimination of the English nobility to the English language.
19ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.2 The Ascendancy of French Following William of Normandy’s ascension of the English throne, French strictly became the language of government.
French speaking officials of government were appointed, who in turn brought their own personal staff.
French speaking bishops and clergymen were also appointed, and for almost 20 years of the invasion of England, almost all the religious houses were under French-speaking superiors.
Large numbers of French merchants and craft men flooded England to take advantage of the commercial opportunities provided by the new regime.
The French nobles and aristocrats in England retained their links with Normandy where their estates and investments were.
For about 200 years after the Norman Conquest, French remained the language of communication among the upper and ruling class in England.
Initially only those who spoke French were of the Norman descent, but soon through intermarriages and association with the ruling class, many English speaking people found it a social advantage to learn French, and before long the distinction between those that spoke French and those that spoke English was no more ethnic but social.
To be more socially recognised, one had to learn to speak French.
Bilingualism flourished; English people needing to cross some social hurdles and gain some advantage from the aristocracy learned French.
Some junior staff of government who needed to improve their daily communication contact with the local communities however, learned English.
The language of the masses remained English.
It was the language of the inferior class.
Some of the factors that favoured the continual use of French by the English upper class were the close link between England and Europe, especially Normandy.
From the time of the conquest, the kings of England were also dukes of Normandy.
William himself was more attached to his dukedom and spent more of his time in Normandy than in England.
The English nobility were also more of French aristocracy.
Their business interests and possession were in the continent especially France and many of them spent most of their time there.
They frequently contracted marriage there also.
You can see that the Normans maintained a strict French culture and civilization in England and this raised the status of French above all other languages.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Give at least three (3) reasons why the French language became the superior language during the early years of the Norman occupation of England.
2.
Explain the status of English in the England of this period.
20 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.3 The Fusion of French and English We have already noted that the French language exerted a lot of influences on the English people’s life, socially, politically and religiously.
Most of the abbots (clergymen) and monks were Normans.
For example, the Archbishops of Canterbury and of York were Normans and spoke French.
English kings were equally dukes of Normandy.
William even considered Normandy more important that he left it to his eldest son while England was for his second son.
All English kings until Edward IV (1461-1483) made it a tradition to marry French wives.
The English nobility were equally French conscious, marrying French wives and engaging in French wars and campaigns.
Most literary works in England at that time were all written in the language and were encouraged by members of the upper class.
However, English survived in some monasteries and among church men, the ability to speak English was fairly common.
And interestingly, some notable bishops of Norman descent spoke French, English and Latin.
So we can conclude that the ascendancy of French did not eliminate English completely.
Both languages were used by the upper class and nobility.
But French was the language of social civilization and refinement.
English held a subordinate position and remained the language of the low class.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Summarize the roles of French and English during the reign of William the conqueror.
3.4 Re-Establishment of English Changing social and political conditions in Europe and England after 1200 gave rise to re-establishment of English language in the English public service.
As a result of these changes, English became more widely used among the upper classes.
The English and Normans had so lived together, doing things together and intermarrying, that the two nations became so mixed up that it became difficult to tell who was English or who was French.
And by the end of the 12th century, it was noticed that some children of the nobility spoke English as their mother tongue and were taught French at school.
French continued to be used in government and in courts.
Now what happened that raised the status of English?
From 1204 a different political and economic climate emerged.
King John of England lost his control of Normandy, because of a conflict he had with king Philip of France.
Consequently the English nobility lost their estates in France and enmity grew between England 21ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE and France.
This led to about a hundred year war (1337-1453).
The popularity of French began to decline as the spirit of English nationalism grew.
In 1362, English was used for the first time at the opening of parliament.
By about 1425, English became more popular in England and was used in speaking and writing.
Remember that when Normandy was lost, many English noblemen lost their estates and were forced to look up to England as their primary concern.
This helped the English language.
English survived more because the language in the 11th century was well established, unlike the Celtic and had a considerable written literature and strong tradition.
Don’t forget that this was what the Celtic language did not have; that was why it could not survive the Anglo-Saxon invasion about 500 years before.
The good relation of English and French lasted for about 150 years and during this period, it was speculated that the number of Normans in England were about two percent of the population.
French was mainly the language of government, law, administration, literature and the church.
Latin was also used in education, administration and worship.
By the 13th century the position of English became clearer when it was evident that a number of sermons, prayers, poems and songs were written in English language.
Finally in 14th century, major achievements in Middle English literature began to emerge, with the works of Geoffrey Chaucer.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Do you think that the loss of Normandy by King John of England helped the re-establishment of English in any way?
2.
Identify some factors that aided the revival of English.
4.0 CONCLUSION You can see that a number of factors gave rise to both the decline as well as survival of English in the 11th and 12th centuries.
The most important factor was the enthronement of French as the language of the ruling and the upper class in England, when the Normans invaded England in 1066.
Secondly French became the language of the high class, of status and pride.
In fact one of the Norman kings said it was a disgrace to be called an English man.
However, in the 12th and 13th centuries some socio-economic and political factors helped the English language again to rise.
22 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 5.0 SUMMARY The Norman conquest of 1066 under William the Conqueror introduced French and the second official language of England.
Because French became the language of public administration, law and literature, its status grew.
It became the language of the nobility and was associated with status.
A speaker of French belonged to the high class while a speaker of English belonged to the low class.
However, English remained the language of the masses and up to two third of the population used English in speaking and writing.
During the 13th and 14th centuries economic and political situations changed.
English and France became enemies and were engaged in wars for about a hundred years.
At the end, the influence of French declined and English once more rose to prominence, owing more to its long established literature, and oral tradition.
When Normandy lost to the control of England, in 1204, the English nobility lost their possessions and estates in France and were forced to concentrate their interest in England.
This again gave room to popularize the English language.
Between the 13th and 14th centuries English had again revived as the language of government, law, literature, commerce and religion.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the roles of the French language during the Norman Conquest of England.
2.
Identify some factors that led to the revival of English at this time.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh, A.C & Cable T (2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed .London.
Routledge Crystal, D. (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language.
2nd Ed.
Cambridge.
CUP Ogu J.N (1992).
A Historical Survey of English and the Nigerian Situation.
Lagos: Kraft.
23ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 5 ENGLISH AND FRENCH IN THE 13TH CENTURY; THE DECLINE OF FRENCH; THE RISE OF THE MIDDLE CLASS; GENERAL ADOPTION OF ENGLISH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 English and French in the 13th century 3.2 The Decline of French 3.3 The Rise of the Middle Class 3.4 General Adoption of English 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this Unit we want to look more closely at the relationship between English and French in the thirteenth century and the factors that led to the decline of French.
One of the most important factors is the rise of an English middle class.
You will be exposed to the reasons why English was eventually adopted as the language of government and education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • explain the relationship between English and French in the 13th century • identify factors that led to the decline of French • discuss some factors that led to the general adoption of English.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 English and French in the 13th Century In the 13th century French and English continued to function as the primary language of communication.
The upper class mostly continued to speak French, but this time, it was no longer as the mother tongue inherited from Norman ancestors but as a matter of social custom, business and administrative convention.
Meanwhile English made 24 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE steady progress.
At a point it became quite clear that English was becoming a favourite language.
When the English nobles lost their interest in Normandy and France, as we saw in the last Unit, it was no longer a surprise that English became a matter of general use among the upper class.
At this time also, there was wholesale adoption of French words into English; the reason being that those who spoke French now tried to express themselves in English.
Within this period also, literature that was intended to entertain the nobility began to be translated from French to English.
And just as we mentioned in the last chapter, there were evidences that towards the end of the 13th century, children of the upper class began to speak English as their mother-tongue, which implied that English was becoming a household language among the upper class.
Significantly, English was used in parliament, in the law courts and in public communication.
The spread of English among the upper class was making steady progress and the general attitude began to favour the use of English.
The attitude then was that the language for proper English people to know and use was English.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Describe the position of English and French in the 13th century.
2.
Explain how French loan words found their way into English at this time.
3.2 The Decline of French We must not lose sight of the fact that French began to lose its status as the official language of England in 1204 when King John lost the control of Normandy.
This affected the fortunes of the English nobles who lost their estates and began to lose their connections with the continent.
Consequently, they began to see themselves as English men and began to identify with English cultures including language.
Another contributing factor that led to the decline of French was the Hundred Year War (1337-1453).
Edward III claimed the French throne and invaded France.
England was victorious at Crecy (1346) and Poitiers (1346).
Henry V also won a significant victory over France in 1415.
This long time antagonism and hostility among the two nations contributed to the weakening of the influence of French in England and enhanced interest in learning and using the English language.
At the close of the 13th century, it was clear that French was losing its hold on England and the tendency to communicate in English was becoming increasingly stronger, even in the church and universities.
25ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Another factor that undermined the position of French was the provincial character of French in England.
French was spoken in provinces, and was particularly restricted to the ruling and upper classes.
Norman French was a mixture of dialect, which became further corrupted by contact with English.
What we may call the Anglo-Saxon French was non standard French.
So, when the opportunity came to drop the language, it was quite easy to do.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the factors that gave rise to the decline of French in England in the 13th century.
3.3 The Rise of the Middle Class You have seen so far that the importance of a language lies mainly on the importance of those that use such a language.
This is a feature that helped English to rise and de-emphasized the use of French in England, because as the living conditions and prestige of the common people improved, it also improved the position of English Language.
During the Middle English Period, there was this practice of villeinage among the rural population.
A villein was a poor farmer who got a little piece of land in return for working on the land of a rich landowner.
In 1349 precisely, an epidemic broke out in the South west of England, which soon spread rapidly to other parts of the country.
The diseases killed its victims within three days.
The spread of the epidemic and the rapidity with which it killed people were unbelievable.
Some studies said that 40% of the clergy died, and approximately more than 30% of the overall population was lost to the epidemic.
Because of the high death rate of the plague, it was referred as the “The Black Death”.
Naturally, the mortality of the epidemic was more among the villeins, the poor and the low class.
The result was a serious shortage of labour.
Many villeins (labourers) escaped England during the Plague.
For those that remained there was a rise in wages but that could not solve the burden of their poor condition.
A general spirit of discontent soon arose, which led to the Peasants’ Revolt of 1381.
Coupled with the effect of the Black Death, the importance of the labouring class was recognized.
Remember that this increased the importance of the language of the emerging class, which is English.
At this time also, another important group arose - the craft men and the merchant class.
By 1250 England had grown to about 200 towns with increasing populations.
Some places like London and York were considerably large.
These towns became free and self-governing.
The 26 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE people were engaged in trade mostly.
Some were in manufacturing crafts, with commercial groups and fraternities to secure their positions.
In these environments, each town began to have a strong wealthy class, standing halfway between the rural low class (the peasants) and the aristocracy which was then hereditary.
With such changes, you can see that the social and economic life of the English speaking population was a great advantage to the final triumph of the English language.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Do you agree that the rise of the Middle Class in the England of the 13th century aided the growth of English?
Give two (2) reasons for your answer.
3.4 General Adoption of English From the beginning of the 14th century upward, English began to gain ascendancy in England.
Popular literature of this period was primarily in English, which until a generation before had been in French.
Though the English was now understood by everyone, French did not die out completely.
It was still used in the courts although English had largely taken its place.
Those who spoke French in the 14th century were bilingual, and some people in the upper class still spoke French in the parliament when necessary but generally used English.
In 1362, the Chancellor opened parliament for the first time with a speech in English.
In 1388 parliament required all gilds (professional associations) to submit reports on their foundations, statuses, property etc.
The submissions were mostly in Latin, but about 49 of them were in English, out numbering those in French.
Towards the latter part of the century, much of the business of parliament was conducted in English When Richard II was deposed of, the article of accusation read to him was in Latin and English.
The order deposing him was also read to him in English.
Henry IV’s speeches claiming and accepting the throne was delivered in English.
In the 14th century as you can see, English was again the mother tongue of English.
To give English language its rightful place in all England, steps were taken to adopt it in the English legal system.
Hitherto, French had been the language of legal proceedings.
But in the 14th century it became necessary to reverse the trend.
In 1356 the Mayor of London ordered that proceedings in the Sheriff’s courts in London and Middlesex be conducted in English.
In 1362, “the statue of pleading” in court was enacted, stating that all lawsuits shall be conducted in English, 27ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE and the reason for this was that French was much unknown in the country.
Shortly after the Norman Conquest, French replaced English as the language of education.
The use of French in English schools became quite general.
But again, in the 14th century English began to be used in schools and by 1385 the practice had become general and overwhelming.
By the 15th century, the French language became increasingly unknown.
Many nobles could no longer speak French and the ability to communicate in French was viewed as an accomplishment.
The ability to write it was becoming less general among the ruling and upper classes.
The last significant progress which the English was to make in its growth to supremacy was its use in writing.
Before the Norman conquest, Latin was the recognized language of literature and written communication, and before the 14th century French was adopted as the first language of England and the primary language of writing and literature.
In the 14th century English replaced both.
After 1450 letters were written in English as a general rule.
Wills were also written in English.
For example, the wills of Henry IV, Henry V and Henry VI were all written in English.
English was also adopted in writing records of towns and gilds and in branches of the central government.
At about 1430 many towns were translating their ordinances and their customary books in English.
And English became general in their transactions.
After 1450s the English literature of the Middle English period showed that English had gained general adoption throughout England.
Where French had enjoyed primacy as the language of poetry and books among the nobles, English now became the preferred medium.
It was this general adoption of English by all classes in the latter part of the 14th century that triggered a new interest in literature, which gave rise to a high point of English literary achievements in the Middle Ages.
The period between 1350 and 1400 had been called the period of great individual writers.
This was the period that Geoffrey Chaucer, (13400- 1400) regarded as the greatest English poet before Shakespeare wrote, authored a love story titled Troilus and Criseyde as well as the Canterbury Tales.
Other big names of English literature of this period include William Langland, author of Piers Plowman (1362-1387); John Wycliffe, the translator of the Bible and the unknown poet who wrote one of the finest of the Middle English Romances titled Sir Gawain and the Green Knight”.
Middle English no doubt, contributed immensely to the fortunes of the English language.
28 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Describe some of the first signs that showed that English was becoming a popular language in England in the 14th century.
2.
Identify some factors that were responsible for the general adoption of English in the 14th and 15th centuries.
4.0 CONCLUSION We can say in conclusion that social and economic conditions favoured the re-establishment of English as the first language of England in the 14th century.
With the growing interest in English and a declining fortune of French, one will expect that English would peak up quickly.
And this was exactly what happened.
English men became proud of themselves and their culture and took definite steps to curtail the influence of French and promote the learning and use of English.
It was no surprise that even in law and public administration English was adopted as the language of official business.
Soon English became the popular language throughout England and used as the language of parliament, law, education, religion and general communication.
5.0 SUMMARY English made a steady advancement in the 13th century as the upper classes no longer relied primarily on French for communication.
The nobility who lost most of their fortunes with the loss of Normandy, looked up to England for hope, and began to appreciate their language.
Their children soon spoke English as their mother tongue.
French declined steadily in the 14th century, due to a general renewed interest in English and the Hundred Year War which resulted in a long time of hostility between England and France.
Some successive victories of England over France; significant interest in English in the church and universities; and the provincial character of French in England; all weakened French influence in England.
Just as these factors witnessed the decline of French, they advanced the status of English.
A major factor in the general adoption of the English language is the rise of the Middle class from the groups of tradesmen and craft men, engendered by the “Black Death” of 1349 and the rise of the living standard of the working class; the growth of English cities and their independent status to govern themselves.
Other factors were direct legislation, replacing French with English in the courts and in government, adoption of English in schools, and the acceptance and use of English in writing.
Thus English was once again re-established as the general language of all England.
29ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the factors that gave rise to the decline of French in England in the 13th century.
2.
Describe some of the first signs that showed that English was becoming a popular language in England in the 14th century.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge.
Crystal, D. (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed Cambridge: CUP.
Ogu, J.N.
(1992).
A Historical Survey of English and Nigerian Situation.
Lagos: Kraft Books.
30 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE MODULE 2 Unit 1 Some Characteristics of Middle English: Grammar; Vocabulary; Spelling and Speech Sounds Unit 2 The Rise of the Standard English; the Spread of the London Dialect Unit 3 Early Modern Periods (1500-1750): Some Characteristics; The Renaissance English; Changes in Grammar Unit 4 The Problem of Spelling; the Inkhorn Controversy; the Vocabulary Question Unit 5 The Emergence of Dictionaries; Shakespeare and the World of Words; the King James Bible UNIT 1 SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF MIDDLE ENGLISH: GRAMMAR, VOCABULARY, SPELLING AND SPEECH SOUNDS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Some Characteristics of Middle English: Grammar 3.2 Middle English Vocabulary 3.3 Middle English Spelling 3.4 Middle English Speech Sounds 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Before we go on to discuss changes in Middle English, have you ever wondered why changes occur in language at all?
Why is English, like other languages in constant state of change?
Well, language operates as a system i.e.
a group of related parts that work together as a whole.
A change in one part can cause a change in the other.
For example, the Middle English ‘trone’ changed to ‘throne ‘in Modern English and ‘tesis’ changed to ‘thesis’.
So, the first sounds being pronounced as /t/ changed to /Ө/.
Thus a change in spelling led to a change in pronunciation.
You will know more about this in Module 2 Unit 3.
You will recall that during the Scandinavian age, French and English were spoken side by side, thus these languages were in close contact.
31ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE You know that where two languages are spoken in a community, some members of the community will speak more than one language and may frequently switch between languages.
This will generally lead to mutual influence of the languages.
That is why we still have many French words in English today Another possible reason for changes in language is that speakers are likely to imitate languages they consider to be prestigious.
This was what happened when Latin and French were introduced in England.
People learned and copied French for social reasons.
Up till now French is still considered as a language of prestige and sophistication.
And very often, changes that affect our physical environment, social status, social attitudes and reflected in language, especially in vocabulary and meaning.
Let me remind you again that the boundaries that exist in the periods of the history of English, i.e., Old English (AD 450-1100); Middle English (1100-1500), early Modern English (1500-1750) and late Modern English (1750) are conventional labels which are used as a matter of convenience mainly to show the major linguistic changes as well as cultural, social and political changes that occurred in the history of the English language.
And as we said, language is in a continual state of change, and the history of English as we are tracing it in this study, shows that change does not just happen suddenly.
In this Unit, we shall be looking at how changes in Middle English are reflected in the grammar, vocabulary, spellings and speech sounds.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • identify changes that occurred in middle English grammar • describe some characteristics of middle English vocabulary • distinguish between the spellings and speech sounds of old English and middle English • explain why changes generally occur in Language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Some Characteristics of Middle English Grammar One of the major features of the Middle English is the decay of inflections which was a feature of Latin in Old English.
Inflections place stresses on the first syllable of words and it became increasingly difficult to hear them when pronounced.
Unlike most Germanic languages in which stress within a word moved according to some rules, the Old 32 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE English stress pattern was fixed and this created auditory problems.
When speakers could no longer cope with this, the system was gradually dropped.
The disappearance can be traced throughout the Middle English period.
The most important grammatical development of this period is that a fixed pattern of word order between clause elements was established.
The subject-verb-object (SVO) order that was partially evident in Old English was now consolidated.
Where the Old English would say ‘robbed they’, Middle English would say “they robbed”.
Today, we rely much on word order to enable us work out grammatical function.
In Old English this was determined by inflections.
As a result of the decay of inflections nouns lost their numerous inflectional endings or declensions.
In early Middle English, only two methods of indicating plurals remained fairly distinct: - s, - es or – en, (as in oxen).
Adjectives also lost their inflections, partly because of changes in sounds.
What this means is that rather than have a word like ‘blinde’ in Old English as “blinda - blinde and blindan” indicating singular and plural, it became simply ‘blinde’ (blind) in Middle English.
So we can easily say “blind man” or “blind Men.” In Old English it would be something like “blinde man” or “blindan men”.
With the decay of inflections nouns and adjectives were now simplified and it became necessary to depend less on gender, case, and number.
To make clear the relation of words in a sentence, word order and prepositions were now used.
Demonstratives and pronouns forms were also reduced and simplified.
For example, the various forms of sē, sēo, ðæt (i.e.
the) survived as “the” and “that” through Middle English till today.
The demonstrative “pēs” “pēos” “pis” (i.e.
this) was also reduced to “this”.
However, some personal pronouns in Old English were retained e.g.
hē (he) hēo (she) hit (it).
The same is true of some forms of accusative (objective) and dative (indirect object) which were combined e.g.
him, her (t) hem, h (it).
This means that rather than have different forms say “him” or “her” as direct object and indirect object.
The Middle English had the same form e.g.
I gave him the book (indirect object).
I love him (direct object).
This survived till Modern English.
Remember, in Old English, “him” would have different forms using inflections to show grammatical functions (i.e.
to indicate which is direct or indirect object in this case).
Some nominative (subjective) plurals were also extended to all cases of plural appearing in Modern English as “those” and “these”.
The second person pronouns in Middle English looked like this: 33ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Function Singular Plural Subjective Thou Ye (nominative) Objective (accusative) Thee You Possessive (genitive) Thy/thine Your/yours Now let’s see how verbs were affected by these changes.
An important point to note here is that like nouns, the general process has been that of simplification with the gradual decay of inflections.
In Old English, verbs generally had two forms depending on their conjugations “strong verbs” and “weak verbs”.
Strong verbs are those whose forms are changed in order to derive their past tense.
Today, we call them “irregular verbs” e.g.
write, wrote, written, or sing, sang, sung; while weak verbs (regular verbs) are those that take –d, -ed, or –en for their past tense, e.g.
walk, walked, walked.
In Middle English, almost one third of strong verbs in Old English died out.
More than a hundred Old English strong verbs were lost at the beginning of the Middle English while about thirty more became absolute in the course of Middle English.
Today, more than half have disappeared.
Some strong verbs in Old English became weak verbs in Middle English.
In Unit 4 of Module 1, we noted that English was mainly spoken by the lower class and largely removed from the influences of education and literature; naturally many speakers were already wrongly applying the pattern of weak verbs.
For example, we have come, came, come (strong verb) but drive, drove, driven; (notice “driven”) as a feature of a weak verb.
In the 13th century this trend became clear in written literature.
Verbs like burn, brew, flow, help, mourn, step, weep were then undergoing change and by the 14th century, these verbs showed weak forms.
During the Middle period however, strong forms continued to be used while the weak forms continued to grow, and in many cases the inflections for weak verbs were established.
So there were variations.
People still had the past tense of “ache” as “oke” while “ached” was used by others.
In some ways “stope” and “stepped”, “clew” and “clawed” were used side by side.
However, strong verbs still survived.
We must add here that in the Middle English, there were still inflections for simple present tense in verbs.
For example: Person Modern English Middle English Singular Ist – I Thank Thanke 2nd – you Thank Thankest 3rd – he/she/it Thanks Thanketh (-es) Plural Ist – we Thank Thanke (n) (-es) 2nd – you Thank Thanke (n) (-es) 3rd – they Thank Thanken (n) (es) 34 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Present Past tense I Turn (e) Turned (e) (thou Turnest Turnedest (he/she/it) Turneth Turned (e) (we/you/they) Turneth Turned (en) The inflections in brackets show other forms, depending on the dialect.
There were about six (6) dialects of the Middle English, namely Northern dialect, Southern dialect, West Midland, East Midland, Kentish and East Anglia.
The examples above are Midlands.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Explain why changes normally occur in language, with particular reference to English.
2.
Describe some general features of Middle English grammar.
3.
Distinguish between Old English forms of nouns and that of Middle English.
3.2 Middle English Vocabulary The most dominant influence on the Middle English vocabulary is French, though Latin also contributed a great deal.
It was estimated that about 10,000 French words came into English in the 13th century.
These words were mainly from law, administration, medicine, art, fashion, science and learning.
Over 20% were nouns.
Some were constructed using French affixes like con-, trans-, pre-, -ance, -tion, and -ment.
No doubt you are familiar with some of these words.
As new words came into English, there were cases where certain words were duplicated due to similar already existing words in Anglo-Saxon.
In that case, one either replaced the other or both remained with slight differences in meaning.
Some existed with different senses e.g.
house (O.E) mansion (F), hearty (O.E) cordial (F).
In most cases the French word replaced the Old English equivalent.
Many Old English words were lost in this way.
As I said earlier, many French loan words were drawn from the fields of administration e.g.
authority, empire, duke, crown, liberty, majesty, palace, parliament, tax, treaty, royal; can you think of other ones?
From Law we have examples like adultery, accuse, arrest, assault, execute attorney, evidence, crime, fine, fraud, indictment, judge, summons, legacy etc.
Religion – baptism, cathedral, chaplain, clergy, communion, confess, immorality, convert, prayer, salvation, saviour, sermon, temptation, theology, virtue etc.
From Military we have: ambush, army, besiege, captain, lieutenant, battle, navy, peace, retreat, sergeant, soldier, spy, etc.
From Food and Drink - appetite, beef, biscuit, cream, dinner, feast, fruit, fry, herb, lemon, orange, plate, pork, etc.
35ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Can you think of words in the fields of fashion, leisure, and the arts, science and learning and home?
Write at least ten (10) words from each of these areas.
Some general nouns such as action, affection, adventure, age, country, courtesy, labour, marriage, noise, number, ocean, opinion, sign, sound, reason, rage, river, etc are French words, while some adjectives and verbs are also of French origin.
Examples are: active, amorous, calm, certain, natural, nice, original, perfect, poor, precious, real, honest, scarce, advise, arrange, close, cry, delay, prove, prefer, receive, remember, refuse, save, travel, wait deceive, etc.
During the 14th and 15th centuries several thousands of Latin words, were introduced into English most of which came through French.
Most of these words were technical terms belonging to religion, medicine, law, and literature.
So you see that Middle English vocabulary comprises words largely borrowed from French and Latin simultaneously.
This has resulted in what we have today in modern English where some set of items all expressing the same idea but with slight difference in meaning and style are being used.
For example, rise/mount/ascend are possible synonyms.
Other sources of new words in Middle English include the Scandinavian words.
There were also a few evidences of loan words from Dutch, Russian, and Arabic resulting from commercial and maritime contacts.
The effects of this borrowing on the English lexicon were that in early Middle English over 90% of words were of native English but by the end of Middle English this has fallen to about 75%.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Give at least 15 English words that are of French origin.
2.
Write 10, words that were borrowed from Latin.
3.
Mention some professional areas from which French loan words were derived.
3.3 Middle English Spellings Let’s begin this section by trying to identify some of the factors that influenced English spelling.
First was the social and linguistic impact of the French invasion; secondly, the continued process of sound change that began in the Anglo-Saxon times and thirdly, the considerable growth and movement in population during the medieval period.
All these were responsible for the marked difference between the spelling irregularity that were evident earlier in the development of English and 36 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE the more stable system of spelling which began to appear in the 15th century, especially in the works of William Caxton.
In Middle English, there was no standard convention for spelling, which led to some variations.
A writer’s spelling reflected the dialect he happened to speak, thus, a number of spelling forms were introduced by Middle English writers.
Norman scribes in particular adopted spelling conventions of the French language.
Let’s look at a few of them: (cid:1) sh replaced sc in words like OE scip (ship) (cid:1) qu replaced cw in words like OE cwen (queen) (cid:1) gh replaced h in words like OE riht (right) (cid:1) ch replaced c in words like OE cin (chin) (cid:1) wh replaced hw in words like OE hwаet (what) (cid:1) c replaced s in words OE is (ice) (cid:1) ou replaced u in words like OE wund (wound) These changes helped some to solve problems associated with having two different sounds for one phoneme.
For example, the first sounds of ‘c’ in Old English ‘cin’ (chin) and cyning (king) were not the same, with the adoption of ‘ch’, it became easy to differentiate between ‘chin’ and cyning (i.e.
king).
Also the adoption of ‘ou’ helped to indicate a long vowel without having to use double u as was the case in Old English.
Sometimes, the scribes wrote ‘o’ for ‘u’ e.g.
love (OE luve) to bring spelling closer to pronunciation, thus making it clearer this way.
The advent of printing with William Caxton in 1476 was a significant step towards the standardization of spelling, which provided a national standard for written English.
It was an important factor that suggested the beginning of Modern English.
(We shall see more of this in Module 2 Unit 2).
Printing made it possible to promote a standard in spelling with a vast amount of reading materials.
This does not mean that all the early printers agreed on what the standard should be or were consistently applying it.
After all, Caxton chose a particular dialect which was not general to the early printers.
In some respects the printers added some strangeness to spelling.
Many of the printers were Dutch, and sometimes, Dutch spelling influenced English words.
For instance the ‘h’ in the word ‘ghost’ was not originally there in Old English.
The word was spelt “gast”.
Printers also added ‘e’ in words like “olde” (old), or doubled up consonants like “shoppe” (shop) or used “y” instead of ‘i’ for economy of space.
All these resulted in the general spelling differences in the English Language.
37ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Now look at this text, which is a part of Caxton’s Prologue to the Eneydos - a story about some merchants who tried to ask for eggs in Kent.
TEXT 2 And certaynly our langage now vsed varyeth ferre from that.
whiche was vsed and spoken whan I was borne/ for we englysshe men/ ben borne vnder the domynacyon of the mone.
which is neuer stedfaste/ be euer wauerynge wexynge one season/ and waneth and dyscreaseth another season/ and that comyn englysshe that is spoken in one shyre varyeth from a nother…” Study the spelling in this text: (i) What inconsistencies in the spelling can you find?
(ii) Can you explain why these occur?
(iii) Letters g and i; u and v are said to be interchangeable.
How true is this in the above text?
3.4 Middle English Speech Sounds As new spelling formats were emerging, a new system of pronunciation was equally emerging.
The result is that there was never a regular correspondence between phonemes or speech sounds with the letters that represent them.
But this is not totally true of the Old English period.
A word like ‘twa’ (two) was pronounced with the “w” sounding, unlike in Modern English.
Look at the following words in Modern English and try to pronounce them: sword, answer, walk, half, wreck, write, gnarl, gnaw, know, knight.
English adopted the Roman alphabet, i.e.
Latin.
Today English has over 40 phonemes, but only 26 letters represent those phonemes.
In particular there are 24 vowels sounds in English, but only five vowels letters.
Even in Old English letters were represented by pairs of letters called “diagraphs” (today we call them diphthongs) for example, sc was used to represent /S/ as in scep (sheep); cg represent the phoneme /dз/ as in ecg (edge).
The diagraph ea and eo were used as in Old English eare (ear) and beor (beer).
In the Middle English period several sounds altered.
Some took on different value, while some disappeared completely.
The Old English vowel system was reconstructed.
Original diphthongs became pure vowels and new diphthongs emerged.
Some diphthongs emerged and 38 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE certain consonants at the end of a syllable came to be pronounced like vowel as in /wei/ (way) from Old English weg.
French loan words also introduced new diphthongs like /oi/ /ui/ which can be linked to the modern /כi/ in boy, or joy.
Several pure vowels also changed their values.
Old English /a:/ as in ban was now pronounced as bon (bone), and swa became so.
Interestingly the /h/ sound, which occurred at the beginning of many Old English words like hring (ring), hnecca (neck), was completely lost in the Middle English period.
It was restored later in many words during Modern English period through influence of spelling.
The /v/ sound became important due to its use in French loan words, and began to distinguish between /v/ and /f/ sounds as in vin and film.
French influence also brought the contrast between /s/ and /z/ as in ‘zeal’ and ‘seal’.
The ng sound /ŋ/ distinguished meanings in words like thing and thin.
In Old English, this sound has always been followed by a /g/ e.g.
cyning (king), which was realized as /kyniŋg/.
The /g/ however disappeared at the end of the Old English period leaving only /ŋ/ as the only distinguishing unit.
It is not always easy to give a general description of Middle English pronunciation because of the variation that exist due to different dialects and the spellings that represent particular sounds.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Do you think spelling had some influence on Middle English pronunciations?
2.
Describe some features of Middle English speech sounds.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have examined some general characteristics of Middle English grammar, vocabulary, spellings and speech sounds.
And you can see that changes had been gradual, and whether it was social, political or economic, each had its effects on language.
Some of these effects were certainly beneficial in a way to the overall development of the English language.
The English grammar became more structured; spellings more stabilized, and vocabulary more enhanced.
5.0 SUMMARY A major grammatical feature of the Middle English is the disappearance of the inflectional system.
English nouns, verbs, and adjectives became more simplified.
And where necessary, some general rule of inflection 39ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE was applied for some classes of words.
A fixed pattern of grammatical structure was also established at this time.
Middle English vocabulary was enriched by French and Latin loan words particularly words related to administration, law, art, medicine, science and learning.
English spelling became more stabilized during Middle English period especially with the introduction of printing.
Pronunciation also underwent definite changes which led to Modern English pronunciations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe some characteristics of Middle English Grammar.
2.
In what definite ways did French influence Middle English vocabulary?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th ed.
London: Routledge Crystal, D. (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd ed.
Cambridge: CUP Culpepper, J.
(1997).
History of English.
London: Routledge 40 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 2 THE RISE OF STANDARD ENGLISH; THE SPREAD OF THE LONDON DIALECT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Rise of the Standard English 3.2 The Spread of the London Dialect 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is natural that a language often has regional varieties or dialects.
It is even possible to have entirely different languages in different parts or regions of a country.
Nigeria is an example.
The differences that may occur between different dialects of the same language may be a matter of pronunciation, or few variations in vocabulary.
In Module 2 Unit 1, we did mention that Middle English had about six dialects.
Four of them were the principal ones namely Northern, East Midland, West Midland and Southern.
The Southern dialect for example extended to Worcester, Hereford and the district south of the Thames, together with Gloucestershire.
The peculiarities of these dialects rest partly on pronunciation, vocabulary and partly on inflections.
What became known as the Standard English or London dialect is a combination of the features of these local dialects as we shall see in this Unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • describe the characteristics of the London dialect • explain the causes that contributed to the rise of standard English.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Rise of Standard English The variety that is now called Standard English came out of the local dialects of the Middle English, towards the end of the 14th century and won general acceptance in the course of the fifteenth century.
The part of England that contributed most to the development of this standard 41ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE was the East Midland district.
The East Midland English dialect was the dialect of the London metropolis.
Several factors contributed to this development: firstly, as a Midland dialect of English, it occupied a middle position between the extreme North and South.
It was said to be less conservative (i.e.
has more tendency to admit change) than the Southern dialect and less “radical” than the North.
In its sounds and inflections it represented a kind of compromise, sharing some of the communication bridge which the dialect provided between the North and South, a 14th century translator - Trevisa, in his translation of Higden’s Polychronicon (c.1387) wrote: TEXT 3 for men of Þe est wiÞ men of Þe west, as it wer vnder Þe same partie of heuene acordeÞ more in sownynge of speech Þan men of Þe norÞ wiÞ men of the souÞ; Þerfore it is Þat mercii, Þat beeÞ men of myddel Engelond as it were partners of Þe endes, vnder stondeÞ better Þe side languages, NorÞerne and souÞerme, Þau NorÞerne and souÞerne vnderstondeÞ eiÞer aÞer.
(Baugh & Cable 2001:192) Note: “Þ” = th, “v”=u, “u” =v, “y”=i; “ne”=n.
Secondly the East Midland district was the largest and most populous of the major areas.
Places like Lincolnshire, Norfolk and Suffolk within the district were significant prosperous agricultural areas.
Also the prominence of Middlesex, Oxford and Norfolk in the political affairs of England throughout the Middle English period gave the East Midland district the importance that could have enhanced its influence.
Thirdly, it was possible that the presence of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge could have had some influences on standardization process.
Cambridge in particular could have exerted some influence in support of the East Midland dialect.
In the 14th century the monasteries no more played important roles in disseminating information, while the two universities development into prominent intellectual centres.
Fourthly a regional standardized literary language evolved in the latter part of the 14th century, which tended towards the Central Midland districts, especially Northamptonshire, Huntingdonshire, and Bedfordshire.
This was evident in the large number of manuscripts by Wycliff a notable Christian writer, including sermons, prayers, poems and different versions of the Wycliffe Bible.
Though this variety was spread widely, increasing its status as standard, it could not compete favourably with the large volume of written materials from the capital London.
42 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Fifthly, the development of printing gave rise to the emergence of a Southern literary standard.
This resulted in the spread of a single norm over most of the country, so much that during the 16th century it was no longer easy to identify through some linguistic features a particular dialect in which a literary work was written.
The last but the most influential factor was the emergence of London as the political and commercial capital of the country.
Particularly the administrative offices of the London Chancery (political administrative office) were important and Chancery scribes adopted a standard practice.
These practices interacted with those used by other London copy writers and spelling gradually became stabilized, affecting other kinds of materials including literary texts.
As the seat of the judicial system, the centre of social and intellectual activities of England, London population grew rapidly with people who brought to it the traits of their local speeches to mingle with the London English.
The result was a kind of give and take, beginning as a Southern and ended up as Midland dialect.
And by the 15th century East Midland dialect had developed a fairly uniform dialect and the language of London conformed to it in all its important aspects.
SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is the meaning of dialect?
2.
Discuss at least four (4) factors that gave rise to development of Standard English.
3.2 The Spread of the London Dialect Towards the close of the 15th century, the London Standard had been accepted in writing in most parts of England.
Except in some Northern texts, it was almost impossible to know precisely a particular region from which a particular work was written.
However, variations still existed in spoken dialects.
In talking about the spread, one must admit that the introduction of printing in 1476 as we have mentioned earlier, had an immense contribution.
London had been the English centre of book publishing and Caxton, the English printer used the London dialect in his numerous works.
Most translations and that of those after him gave currency to the London English which showed that it had been adopted as the standard.
In the 16th century the use of London dialect had become a matter of precept and practice.
The author of “The Arte of English Poesie” (attributed to George Puttenham) even advised aspiring poets to use “the usual speech of the court, and that of London and the shires lying about London within 1x.
myles, and not much above”.
Though complete 43ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE uniformity was never achieved, it was certain that the foundation of what we have today as Standard English was laid by the end of 15th century.
I am sure you have been asking in your mind, what does the London English look like?
I am going to reproduce here a part of Caxton’s preface to his translation of Virgil’s Aeneid which he translated from French and published in 1490.
This translation was done in the London dialect.
TEXT 4 After dyverse werkes made, translated, and achieved, havyng noo werke in hande, I, sittyng in my studye where as laye many diverse paunflettis and bookys, happened that to my hande came a lytyl book in frenshe, whiche late was translated oute or latyn by some noble clerke of fraunce, which book is named Eneydos… And whan I had aduysed me in this sayed boke, I delybered and concluded to translate it into englysshe, and toke a penne & ynke, and wrote a leef or tweyne, whyche I oversawe again to corecte it.
And whan I sawe the fayr & straunge termes therein I doubted that it sholde not please some gentylmen whiche late blamed me, saying that in my translacycons I had over curious termes whiche coulde not be understande of comyn peple, and desired me to use olde and homely termes in my translacycons… (Baugh & Cable, 2001: 195).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What factors aided the spread of the London dialect?
2.
Look at the text above again.
Can you identify some spelling differences from what we have in Modern English?
Are there some spelling inconsistencies?
3.
Compare this text with text 3, above.
Are there any differences in grammar and spelling?
4.0 CONCLUSION Standard English emerged as the London English, which provided a middle line among the dialects of Middle English, especially North and South.
The importance of London in the 15th century as the capital of England aided the spread of the dialect.
Although uniformity was not instantly achieved, it was the beginning of an accepted standard that gave rise to Modern English.
44 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 5.0 SUMMARY Between the end of the 14th century and the beginning of the 15th century, the London English which was more of the East Midland dialect became a standard, for the whole of England, especially in writing and in literary works.
Factors that gave rise to this development and also for its spread were that the Midland dialect of English provided a compromise between the North and South, both in sounds and in its internal linguistic features.
The Midland district which London was part was the largest and most populous of England’s major areas.
London became the capital of England, and as the most important political and commercial centre, a written standard of communication was readily, accepted.
Administrative offices and the Chancery offices also became important in terms of writing standards.
The development of printing in 1476 by Caxton resulted in the spread of a simple norm over most of the country and the London English, which was the norm, became more stable.
The existence of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge also contributed a great deal.
Conformity to the standard was however gradual, while varieties still existed in the spoken dialects.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the factors that led to the emergence of the Standard English in the 15th century.
2.
Study TEXT 4 and describe the characteristics of the London English.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th ed.
London: Routledge Crystal, D. (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd ed.
Cambridge: CUP.
Culpepper, J.
(1997).
History of English.
London: Routledge 45ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 3 EARLY MODERN PERIODS (1500-1750): SOME CHARACTERISTICS; THE RENAISSANCE ENGLISH; CHANGES IN GRAMMAR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Some Characteristics of Early Modern Periods (1500-1750) 3.2 The Renaissance English 3.3 Changes in Grammar 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have seen that it is not possible to study the history of the development of a language without reference to some particular social events that have had significant effects on the language.
Cast your mind back on the effects of the Anglo-Saxon conquest, the Norman Conquest, the Black Death and the rise of the Middle Class on English language.
You can see the close relationship that exists between socio-political and economic situations and language development.
The study of the Modern period of English (i.e.
from Chaucer to Samuel Johnson roughly 1400 -1800) will be incomplete without reference to the time referred to as early modern periods, which some scholars have conveniently put at the beginning of 1500 to around 1750.
Some placed it earlier at 1400 - 1450, immediately after Chaucer.
Those who put it around 1500 consider the effects of printing revolution, but the coming of printing which many consider as the key factor of the modern period, began in 1476, when William Caxton set up a printing press at Westminster.
There is no consensus about when the early modern period actually started.
The period, i.e.
1500 -1650 was also called the period of the Renaissance.
In this Unit we shall look at the characteristics of the early modern period.
Because of the importance of the development of printing, we shall discuss it in detail in this Unit.
46 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (i) describe some general characteristics of early modern English period (ii) identify the features of the early English grammar and vocabulary (iii)explain the contribution of printing technology to the development of the English language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Some Characteristics of Early Modern Periods (1500-1750) Printing technology which was developed in Germany in the 15th century had a significant impact on the vernacular (native) languages of Europe.
In England, it had so far reaching effect that in about a century later, manuscript books (hand written) were completely replaced by printed ones.
Printing made such a rapid progress that before the end of 1500, printed books in Europe reached about 35,000.
Though majority of these were in Latin, the effects of printing on modern languages like English was no doubt overwhelming.
By 1640 over 20,000 titles appeared in English, ranging from pamphlets to large texts.
Books were no longer an exclusive luxury of the upper class; everyone had access to it now because it was possible to reproduce a thousand copies or more of one book exactly like the other.
Thus, a powerful force was in place for promoting a standard and a uniform language.
And it also provided a means of spreading the language throughout the lands where the language was understood.
Another important factor for the growth of English, which was also a feature of the early modern period, was the rapid growth of popular education.
Literacy became widespread.
In the latter part of the Middle Ages, a good number of the people of the middle class could read and write and this helped in the rapid spread of standards and uniformity in language use.
In the later 17th and 18th centuries, education became much more accessible, with increase in the number of available schools and colleges.
In Shakespeare’s London for example, it was estimated that more than a third or even a half of the population could read and write.
Journalism developed, featuring men, like Daniel Defoe, and it was also the period of the rise of the novel.
With this kind of progress in education, the printing press was able to exert an unforgettable influence on language as well as learning.
Not just in the early modern period alone, it is noticeable that the influence of commerce, transportation and rapid means of communication has had a great impact on language.
We 47ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE shall look closely at this as we examine the growth of English as a world language in Module 4 Unit 3.
As the modern period began to witness increased technological developments, which enhanced easy travel, communication, and social contacts, people and places which had been isolated during the earlier times were now brought together.
This again enhanced the development of language.
Another important factor was social consciousness.
This means people’s general tendency to identify with certain social or economic groups.
Under modern democracies, a man can easily rise to a higher economic or social class and would likely make some efforts to adopt the standards of grammar and pronunciation of the people of his new class.
He becomes careful of his speech, manners, tastes and general comportment.
Most importantly as it applies to us here is that social consciousness creates language awareness.
The more social conscious someone is, the more careful he is in his language.
This has helped the English language to sustain a uniform standard.
What are the effects of all these social characteristics to the English language of the early modern period?
We shall look at them under the next sub-headings.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Describe the general characteristics of the early modern period.
2.
How did those characteristics affect English language grammar and vocabulary?
3.2 The Renaissance Period Two forces to be identified here are (1) a radical force to produce a change in the vocabulary of English, and (2) a conservative force which aimed at preserving the existing status of the English grammar.
The printing press, new reading habits and the spread of ideas, which came with growth in communication all promoted the extension of vocabulary, while these same factors together with social consciousness as we described above, worked actively towards the maintenance of standards especially in grammar and usage.
While education for example showed some influence in promoting grammar, spelling and pronunciation, people were still unconsciously assimilating some features of less Standard English through the reading of books, newspapers or magazines.
In modern times, you will discover that changes in grammar are less compared to changes in vocabulary.
This was not the case during the earlier English periods.
At that time, changes 48 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE in grammar were extensive.
Remember that it was during the Middle English period that the structure of English, where verb follows the subject, was stabilized.
In the middle Ages, the condition under which English was developing was peculiar to England, especially with the Norman Conquest which relegated the English language to the low class.
French became the language of the refined noble class.
But by the close of the Middle English period, the language having gone through major transforming experiences, needed to establish itself in modern times like other European languages, and be recognized in the fields were Latin had for centuries dominated.
That was why it was necessary that English establish a more uniform orthography and enrich its vocabulary.
We shall examine these in details in Unit 4 of this module.
However, we can say that the general interest in the English of the Renaissance focused on vocabulary.
And let me remind you that the period from the time of Caxton (1476) until around 1650 was called the Renaissance – a time of great change in Europe.
During the 16th century, following the development of printing there was a flood of new publications in English as a result of renewed interest in classical languages and literature and in the rapid growing fields of science, medicine and the arts.
As new concepts, techniques and inventions were being experienced in Europe, words in the languages were either insufficient or not available at all to express these new ideas, so writers began to borrow new terms.
Most of the words that came into English at this time were taken from Latin, French, Greek, Italian, Spanish and Portuguese.
And as the period of world-wide exploration came underway, words from over 50 other languages including indigenous languages of North America, Africa and Asia came into English.
We shall discuss in detail the vocabulary question and the inkhorn controversy in the next Unit.
Inkhorn terms are foreign words in English.
SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Can you identify a major influence on the Renaissance English?
2.
What necessitated the wide spread borrowing of foreign words into English language during the Renaissance period?
3.3 Changes in Grammar and Pronunciation By the time of the Renaissance, major shifts in English grammatical structure had already taken place.
Words had already lost most of their inflections.
Few changes in English syntax could still be noticed.
For 49ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE example several features of the verb use show a marked difference today.
(i) my life is run his compass (Julius Caesar) where today we should say my life has run its compass.
(ii) verbs developed wider use of auxiliaries e.g.
speak he the truth?
(does he speak the truth?
Is he speaking the truth?
)What makes you?
(What are you making?)
It judges me (I judge…) It benefits me not (It does not benefit me) etc.
Me thinks he did (I think he did).
(iii) Sentences tend to be too long, loose and linear, with repeated ‘and’ and ‘then’ coordination, mostly introduced by ‘which’ or ‘that’.
Here is an example from Caxton’s prologue to Golden Legend: And I shal praye for them vnto Almightly God that he of his benygne grace rewarde them etc.
and that it prouffyte to alle them that shal rede or here it redde, and may encrease in them virtue and expelle uyce and synne that by the ensanmple of the holy sayntes amend theyr lyuyng here in thys shorte lyf that by their merytes they and I may come to everllastyng and blysse in heuen.
(iv) There were constructions involving a double negative e.g.
I cannot do no wrong (v) A number of verbs inflections (speaketh, pleaseth, know’st, spake etc) fell out of standard use (vi) Adjectives lost their inflections, though not completely.
Expressions like most unkindest or more longer, were no more in use (vii) Pronouns like ‘thou’ ‘thee’ ‘thine’ ‘thy’ ‘thyself’ ‘ye’ fell into disuse except in poetry; ‘you’ was substituted for ‘ye’ normative; ‘its’ came into use as the possessive of it.
(viii) The pronoun ‘who’ as a relative pronoun developed in the 16th century.
(ix) The ‘s’ plural became general (x) Some unchanged plural remained e.g.
Sheep, Swine.
(xi) New conjunctions emerged: ‘because’ for example first appeared in Chaucer, but ‘for’ and ‘that’ remained the normal way of expressing cause until the early 17th century.
Participal constructions (use of verbs ending with –ed –en or –ing) became mostly common.
This added to the length of sentences.
The search for stability in the language continued until the 18th century.
50 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Identify at least 5 features of the Early Modern English grammar.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Renaissance, being a period of great social and economic change also brought with it some inevitable changes in the English language.
Changes in grammar were slight while changes in vocabulary were more dynamic because of the new waves of scientific explorations and increase in knowledge.
And we can therefore conclude that social changes have great influence on language, because language functions as a means of express meaning within specific social contexts.
5.0 SUMMARY The early Modern Period was characterized by: (i) a rapid growth of printing technology which resulted in a very high volume of printed materials in England; this provided a means of promoting standard in language use.
(ii) Growth of popular education and high degree of literacy placed more demands on printed information and literature; again increasing the power of the printing press to influence language and learning.
(iii) Modern developments in commerce, medicine, transportation, communication increased the quest for new words to express new concepts and ideas.
(iv) Social consciousness also enabled people to move along social classes, giving them the opportunity to adjust to higher standards of language use.
These factors had radical effect on the vocabulary of English because new terms emerged and borrowing became necessary to express new knowledge.
A conservative force also emerged which sought to preserve the existing structure of grammar.
These were the hall marks of Renaissance English.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (iv) 1.
Discuss the general characteristics of the early Modern period and explain their effects on the English language.
(v) 2.
Compare and contrast the Middle English grammar and the early Modern English grammar.
(vi) (vii) 51ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th ed.
London: Routledge Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed.
Cambridge.
Ogu J.N.
(1992).
A Historical Survey of English and Nigerian Situation.
Lagos: Kraft Books 52 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 4 THE PROBLEM OF SPELLING; THE INKHORN CONTROVERSY; FUTHER ENRICHMENT OF VOCABULARY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Problem of Spelling 3.2 The Inkhorn Controversy 3.3 Further Enrichment of Vocabulary 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The revolution in printing as we have seen in the previous Unit did not produce a standard in English spelling.
During the Middle Age, writers simply pulled spelling along Latin and French conventions and the result was that there were a lot of differences.
The problem continued in the modern period.
And you may have observed that up till today spelling in English is still quite problematic.
There is usually no explanation fur the ‘w’ in a word like ‘row’, when a word like ‘go’ (without a ‘w’) is pronounced the same way.
Why the verb ‘read’ (present tense) is spelt the same way as ‘read’ (past tense) but pronounced differently.
Some scholars have argued that while Caxton’s printing revolution helped in standardizing writing in English, it indeed contributed to the problem of spelling.
This is because orthography did not grow alongside pronunciation.
While the latter has changed since Caxton’s time, writing and printing has been very slow in reflecting the changes.
Some people have even argued that it is impossible to achieve consistency between spelling and speech sounds.
So we cannot talk of development in spelling, the same way we talk about it in vocabulary or pronunciation.
In fact the problem of spelling has been the most lingering problem of the English language.
In this Unit we shall be looking closely at scholarly efforts that were made in the early modern period to achieve stability in spelling.
We shall also examine the state of English vocabulary and the controversies that characterized its standardization.
53ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • identify major contributions towards standardizing English spelling • explain what is meant by ‘inkhorn terms’ and why they were rejected as part of English lexicon • describe sources of new words in English during this period.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Problem of Spelling In the Early Modern Period of English, there was no generally accepted system of spelling and it was neither fixed nor phonetic.
And as we said earlier, it was not possible to match spelling with speech, though old and Middle English tried it with fair success.
Even then Norman scribes created some confusion in spelling by writing English words the French way.
This created more problems when certain spellings became conventional and pronunciation gradually changed.
Discrepancies between sound and symbol increased when certain symbols which represented actual sounds in Latin were inserted in the English words.
An example is ‘b’ in debt or doubt from Latin debitum and dubitare.
In English the ‘b’ is silent.
The ‘gh’ in English words like night, delight, light, tight, fight, knight etc.
represents actual sounds in Latin words.
The 16th century spelling was so unstable that it became varied from writer to writer, depending on education, temperament and purpose.
An individual could adopt his own spelling and be consistent with it.
An example is Sir John Cheke for example doubled long vowels, e.g.
maad, staar, haat etc.
; he discarded final –e, in giv; belev, recev etc.
; he used ‘I’ instead of ‘y’ e.g.
mighti, beuti, dai etc.
Richard Stanyhurst adopted his spelling to soothe his translation of Latin poetry e.g.
woorde, yeet, mee, thee (the), too (to) etc.
There was then a very great need to device a means of achieving some kind of agreement.
Scholars began to attempt to draw up some rules and to devise new systems.
Thomas Smith for instance published a Dialogue Concerning the Correct and Emended Writing of the English Language in 1568.
He increased the English alphabet to 34 letters and marked the long vowels.
His reform however did not receive significant acceptance, as it was moreover written in Latin.
John Hart in 1570 published A Method or Comfortable Beginning for All Unlearned, whereby they May Bee Taught to Read English.
Again this work did not win any favour despite some special characters (or phonemes) he used for ch, sh, th, ek.
Another attempt at phonetic reform was made in 1580 by William Bullokar in his Booke at Large, for the Amendment of Orthography for English Speech.
This work 54 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE applied much of vowels and consonants sounds based on old letters of English.
The author also introduced new characters, accents and apostrophes which almost bought English spelling and accents to resemble that of French.
The most important of these reform efforts was Elementaire (1582) by Richard Mulcaster.
Mulcaster viewed spelling as right wrting and felt that spelling problem could not be solved by a radical bending of spelling to fit sounds of words.
He believed that the same letter can be used to represent different sounds just as we use one word in different senses.
Thus he refused to adopt any form of phonetic reform, and opted for custom and usage.
This means that he considered acceptability, ease and convenience in writing as the most important thing.
Popular approval must be the final authority.
He believed that no set of rules can solve the spelling problem, but some things must be left to observation and daily practice.
While he did not totally discard sounds, he insisted that it needed not receive undue attention.
These were his contributions: (i) He got rid of extra letters in words e.g.
putt, grubb, ledd, became put, grub, led,etc.
(ii) He retained‘t’ as necessary letters in words like fetch, scratch, hatch etc.
(iii) He allows double consonants when they belong to separate syllables e.g.
wit-ting sit-ting etc.
(iv) Words ending in – ss; he wrote-sse e.g.
glasse, confesse, proffesse, impresse-ed, (v) Final – e used to indicate long vowel, making a difference between made and mad, stripe and strip, bite and bit (vi) ‘y’ used to represent ‘loud’ and ‘sharp’ sound of ‘i’ e.g.
cry, deny, fry, try (vii) If we spell ‘hear’ we should also spell fear, tear, dear etc.
At the end of his book, Mulcaster gave a ‘General Table’ giving the recommended spelling for some 7,000 common English words.
Though Mulcaster’s spelling could not be said to be the model that was eventually adopted, it is clear that English spelling developed along his recommendations.
During the first half of the 12th century, spelling tended towards uniformity and this tendency increased with Dr Johnson’s dictionary.
We shall examine this in Unit 2 of Module 3.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Explain the reason for lack of uniformity in the spelling of English words of the Early Modern Period.
2.
Discuss the contributions of Richard Mulcaster’s Elementarie to the development of English spelling.
55ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.2 The Inkhorn Controversy Inkhorn terms were used by critics of foreign terms mainly from French and Latin to describe words indiscriminately introduced into English.
Such critics - one of them Thomas Wilson called it “outlandish English” which were merely “counterfeiting Kings English.” Some of the critics considered the use of these words as too pedantry (bookish) and strange.
The strongest objection which Wilson represented believed that words such as affability, ingenious, mundaine, celebrate, extol, magnificent, dexterity, scholastic; relinquish, intelligence, compendious were essentially obscure, and therefore should be thrown out.
Sir Thomas Chalouer (1549) said they were “disused words of antiquitee” borrowed from “strange languages” out of “wrotten pamphlets.” These oppositions were at their heights during the middle of the 16th century.
By this time borrowing had become excessive and the procedure for borrowing was simply being abused.
Those who defended borrowing argued that it was simply a means of enriching the English language just as Latin and French had enriched themselves.
It was a means of getting acquainted with new things, which as great novelties would be quite entertaining when they have been fully integrated in the new language.
So borrowing actually gave credit to the English language and new words were linguistic legacies for posterity.
Some scholars however, thought that compromise should be reached.
Writers should beware of indiscriminate borrowings of inkhorn terms, but must also give room to borrowing when such became inevitable.
One of the scholars, by name Puttenham who had earlier moved against inkhorn terms defended such words as scientific, significative, methodical, placation, function, audacious, compatible, subtiling, refining, compendius, proflixe, figurate, inveigle, penetrate, indignite etc.
Note that these words were inkhorn terms.
Some of the words Puttenham justified did not survive the test of time but some of them like methodical, function, audacious, compatible etc have become part of English lexicon today.
In fact one interesting thing you will notice is that most of the ‘inkhorn terms’ that were vehemently opposed during the 16th century are of common use today.
Nouns such as allurement, allusion, atmosphere, autograph, capsule, denunciation, dexterity, disability, disrespect, excursion, expectation, and jurisdiction were as difficult and strange as to become subject of controversy.
Others were adjectives like agile, appropriate, conspicuous, dexterous, expensive, external, habitual, hereditary, impersonal, insane, and malignant.
Some verbs like adapt, alienate, benefit, consolidate, disregard, emancipate, eradicate, erupt, excavate, extinguish, harass, meditate, were also described as inkhorn terms.
I’m sure you can tell the meaning of many of these words.
Most 56 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE of the words in the list are Latin words.
But some of them like anachronism, atmosphere, autograph, antipathy, chaos, chronology, climax, crisis, critic, dogma, emphasis, enthusiasm, epitome, parasite, parenthesis, pathetic, scheme, skeleton, system, tactics, were acquired by Latin from Greek.
During the Renaissance, there was a renewed study of Greek which led to the introductions of more Greek words such as anonymous, catastrophe, criterion, ephemeral, idiosyncrasy, lexicon, polemic, tonic, tantalize and thermometer.
As these words came into the English language, some retained their forms and meanings, while some lost aspect of their forms in the process of adaptation.
Words like climax, appendix, epitome, exterior, delirium, and axis retain their Latin form.
Some lost their Latin endings e.g.
consult (L. consult-are) exclusion (L. exclusion-em) and exotic (exotic- us).
Some others went through some different forms of change e.g.
conspicuous (L. conspicu-us), external (L. externus) brevity (L. brevitos).
Many English verbs borrowed from Latin usually end in –ate (e.g.
create, consolidate, eradicate, educate etc.)
Some of the words had been borrowed more than once, thus assuming different meanings.
For example, the Latin words episcopus and discus was borrowed in Old English as bishop and dish and later appeared during the Renaissance as episcopal and disc.
Many of the inkhorn terms that were out rightly rejected somehow survived, while some didn’t.
Can you think of why this happened?
Some were found and used a few times and dropped and forgotten, others remained but again forgotten.
Among some of the words that eventually disappeared were anacephalize (Greek), deruncinate, adminiculation, illecebrous, expede, exciccate, deciccate, eximious, disaccustom, disacquiant, disadorn etc.
Some of these Greek words had alternatives in Latin that the language has absorbed, or were simply modified, e.g.
discongruity (incongruity) appendence (appendage), attemptate (attempt) denunciate (denounce).
The borrowing of this period was largely experimental; they were being tried out, introduced by individuals’ judgments and choices.
Some of the words survived, some disappeared.
In Shakespeare’s days for example, no one knew whether to say effectual, effectuous, effectful, effectuating or effective.
But today, you can see that about two forms have survived i.e.
effectual and effective.
We shall see more about how French Italian and Spanish words were adopted to reinforce the English lexicon in the next sub-headings.
57ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Explain the term “inkhorn terms”.
2.
Describe some of the issues raised against the introduction of inkhorn terms into English.
3.
What was the justification for their use?
3.3 Further Enrichment of Vocabulary Foreign borrowing of words in the 16th century was not limited to learned words taken from Latin and Greek but from more than fifty languages (Baugh &Cable 2001), the most prominent being French, Italian and Spanish.
The English vocabulary of this time showed words adopted from French such as alloy, bigot, bizarre, bombast, chocolate, comrade, detail, duel, entrance, equip, essay, explore, genteel, mustache, naturalize, probability, progress, retrenchment, shock, surpass, ticket, tomato, vogue, volunteer.
Italian words: algebra, balcony, caprice, design, granite, pizza, stanza, violin, volcano.
Some of these Italian words were introduced through French or adopted to French forms, such as battalion, bankrupt, brigade, carat, charlatan, gala, gazette, grotesque, infantry, rebuff, etc.
Though there were initial protests against these words, they were eventually adopted in England and often read in English books.
Many of the Italian words for a time, preserved their Italian forms.
Spanish/Portuguese: alligator, apricot, armada, banana, barricade, bravado, brocade, cannibal, canoe, cocoa, embargo, hurricane, maize, mosquito, mulatto, Negro, potato, renegade (renegade) tobacco, yam, etc.
With the new spirit of exploration and adventure characterized the Renaissance, a great deal of impact on the English vocabulary became quite evident.
The method through which these words entered the English vocabulary was generally through writing.
Latin especially was through churchmen and scholars.
Even words borrowed from Romance languages (French, Italian, and Spanish) in the 16th century often came through books and writers.
It might be difficult to name individual writers who introduced each particular word.
But it is believed that one notable English writer- Sir Thomas More introduced words like absurdity, acceptance, anticipate, combustible, compatible, comprehensive, congratulatory, contradictory, denunciation, dissipate, endurance, exit, exaggerate, exasperate, explain, fact, frivolous, impenitent, implacable, indifference, insinuate, monopoly, necessitate, obstruction, paradox, etc.
Another scholar - Sir Thomas Elyot added the following words: accommodate, adumbrate, analogy, animate, beneficence, encyclopedia, excerpt, exhaust, experience, exterminate, frugality, infrequent, irritate, modesty 58 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE etc.
Sir John Cheke first used adapt, alienate, assassinate and benefit.
John Milton introduced consolidate, disregard, while Sir Philip Sidney brought in emancipation, eradicate, erupt, excavate, exert, exhilarate, exist, extinguish, harass, meditate, etc.
More and Elyot were sometimes referred to as “makers of English” because of their contributions in the 16th & 17th centuries by introducing or helping to establish many new words in English.
No doubt most of the words that came into the English vocabulary during the Renaissance came from sources outside, England.
Yet, a good number were to come from native sources, either through development of words through old roots or through a revival of expressions that had gone out of use.
At least this was the thought of someone like John Cheke.
Cheke was so strongly opposed to borrowing from Latin or Greek that he sought English native equivalents from whatever source.
In his translation of the gospel of St. Matthew, he attempted to change Greek words with English equivalents as much as possible.
For instance he used mooned for lunatic, toller for publican, hundreder for centurion, foresayer for prophet, byword, for parable, freshmen for proselyte, crossed for crucified and gainrising for resurrection.
Poets on their own part tried to revive old words especially words they learned from Geoffrey Chaucer.
This revival was sometimes referred to as “Chaucerism”, which was about a conscious use of old words to enlarge the vocabulary of poetry.
One of the most prominent poets in this movement was Spencer.
These poets revived old words like astound, blameful, displeasance, enroot, doom, forby (past, empight ,(fixed), natheless, whilere (a while before).
Others were askew, filch, flout, freak.
The origin of these words was uncertain.
Some were coinages such as Spencer’s blatant, braggadocio, shrimp, cosset (lamb), delve (pit), squall (to cry) and wrizzle (wrinkled).
Many of the words were simply adaptations and derivations of old words such as baneful, drear, hapless, sunshiny, or wolfish.
The words English acquired in this way were not as much as half of those obtained from outside, but the fact remains that Spencer and his colleagues contributed a great deal to the enrichment of English vocabulary.
Many of the words like belt, bevy, dapper, fortnight, glee, glance, surly, banishment, birthright, don, enshrine, drizzling, gaudy, gloomy, merriment, shady, wary, etc.
which they also introduced, have since passed from the language of poetry into common use.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Write ten (10) words that were adopted from Romance Languages.
2.
Describe the contribution of Spencer and the poets to the enrichment of English vocabulary.
59ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 4.0 CONCLUSION You can see that the spelling and vocabulary of English language had pulled the language to two opposite directions, in terms of their rate of growth and development.
On one hand, spelling had been quite unstable especially due to the fact that printing stabilized early, while pronunciation had changed many times over.
On the other hand vocabulary had been quite rapid in its development which had indeed attracted heavy criticism from English language watchdogs.
Words had been borrowed indiscriminately from Latin, Greek and the Romance languages which had threatened the existence of native English words.
5.0 SUMMARY Spelling had been one problem area in the development of English because there was never a generally accepted system of spelling.
And it was neither fixed nor phonetic.
Early Norman scholars created more problems by trying to spell the French way.
To compound the problem was the attempt by scholars to force spelling to correspond with speech sounds.
At a point writers adopted their individual mode of spellings and tried to be consistent with them.
Finally Richard Mulcaster (1582) introduced a reform which differed from previous efforts and brought in the method of spelling which simply allowed itself to be tested and proved by observation and practice.
Popular approval was to be the final authority.
Mulcaster’s spelling revolution eventually influenced modern English spelling like no other.
Unlike spelling, vocabulary had been very dynamic.
The English vocabulary since the 16th century had been enriched much more from words borrowed from Latin, Greek, French, Italian, Spanish and about fifty other languages.
However English scholars raised an alarm during the Renaissance at the rapid rate of foreign words or “inkhorn terms” being introduced into English.
Though some of these borrowed words naturally disappeared, most of them survived, along with English native words to give it the richness that it enjoys today.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What have been the causes of the problem of spelling right from the Norman Conquest?
2.
Identify the major sources of foreign influence on English vocabulary.
60 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed.
Cambridge.
61ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 5 THE EMERGENCE OF DICTIONARIES; SHAKESPEARE AND THE WORLD OF WORDS; THE KING JAMES BIBLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Emergence of Dictionaries 3.2 Shakespeare and the World of Words 3.3 The King James Bible 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit is a continuation of the history of English during the Renaissance and the early Modern English Period.
And again it continues the history of the development of vocabulary, by looking at more of the important influences on the English lexicon.
The emergence of dictionaries of hard words in English will expose you further to the contribution of early attempts at compiling English words to enhance their stability.
Most texts books on the history of English agree that the two most important influences on the development of the language during the final decade of the Renaissance are the works of William Shakespeare (1564-1616) and the King James Bible (1611).
We shall be looking at these two factors more closely in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the importance of the early dictionaries of hard words in history of English • discuss the contributions of William Shakespeare in development of English lexicon of the renaissance period • discuss the contributions of the king James bible to the development of the English language during the 16th & 17th centuries.
62 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Emergence of Dictionaries The very first attempt to produce a comprehensive list of all the words in the English language was Nathaniel Bailey’s Universal Etymological English Dictionary published in 1721.
The earliest English dictionaries were those that merely explained difficult words.
The first of this was A Table Alphabetical of Hard Words written by Robert Crawdrey, and published in 1604.
It explained some 3,000 terms.
This was followed in 1616 by John Bullkar’s English Expositor, while Henry Cockeram published the English Dictionaries in 1623.
Again in 1658, Edward Philips published New World of Words.
All these dictionaries and later compilations only treated difficult words.
A new wave of dictionaries was to be experienced in the first half of the 19th century in order to keep pace with increases in knowledge and terminologies that were the result of the industrial revolution and progress in science and medicine.
However, Dr. Samuel Johnson’s dictionary of 1755 was the first to account for the extensive additions that had been made to the language and helped to enhance their adoption into general use.
Dr Johnson’s dictionary is discussed in Unit 2 of Module 2.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the general contributions of early dictionaries of the 17th century, to the growth of English.
3.2 Shakespeare and the World of Words Though Shakespeare’s influence on the English language extended to pronunciation, syntax and usage, his impact was more prominent in the area of vocabulary.
His plays and poems also illustrated the way English was developing during the latter part of the 16th century and early 17th century - the time he lived (1564-1616).
Shakespeare had the largest vocabulary of any English writer and this is due to his resourceful use of words and his acceptance of new words.
He freely used some of the words that some people rejected as inkhorn terms.
The following words which were first used by Shakespeare were all new to English in the latter half of the 16th century: agile, allurement, antipathy, catastrophe, critical, demonstrate, dire, discountenance ,emphasis, emulate, extract, hereditary, horrid ,meditate, modest, pathetic, prodigious, vast, armada, barricade, cavalier, mutiny, palisade, renegade etc., (Baugh and cable 2001).
In some number of cases, Shakespeare’s use of certain words became their earliest occurrence in English language e.g.
accommodation, apostrophe, 63ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE assassination, barefaced, countess, courtship, dwindle, eventful, lack- lustre, dexterously, dislocate, frugal, misanthrope, laughable, obscene, pedant, premeditate, reliance, submerge etc.
The sense in which Shakespeare used some of these words was in fact closer to their original Latin meaning than the sense in which we use them today.
For example Shakespeare’s communicate means to share rather than to exchange information as we know it today.
So you can see that his liberal attitude towards foreign borrowing enhanced his stock of words.
And as he creatively used them in his works, he showed how foreign words can enrich the English vocabulary and function effectively in practical terms.
There were however some of his words (i.e.
first recorded in Shakespeare) which have not survived as the ones listed above.
About a third of his coinages from Latin fall into this category.
Some examples are: abruption, appertainments, cadens, exsufficate, persistive, protractive, questrist, soilure, tortive, ungenitured, unplausive, vastidity, (Crystal 2002).
These words could be explained in the context of which Shakespeare used them.
One aspect of Shakespeare’s lexicon, which we must mention here are his use of hyphenated compound words.
Many of these coinages were peculiarly his, some which again did not survive in modern English.
Examples of Shakespeare’s hyphenated compounds are Arch-heretique, baby-eyes, bare-pickt, breake-vow, canker-sorrow, faire-play, giant-world, halfe-blown, heauen-mouing; ill-turned, kindre-action, pale-visag’d, pell-well, vile-concluded, widow-comfort.
William Shakespeare’s works demonstrate his contributions and his indispensable place in the history of the English language.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Make a list of some of Shakespeare’s hyphenated compound words that have survived in Modern English.
2.
What do you think was responsible for the success of Shakespeare’s contribution to the development of English Vocabulary?
3.3 The King James Bible The King James Bible or Authorised Version as it was also called was published in 1611.
Though it was not authorized by any process of parliament, the Bible’s title page stated that it was appointed to be read in churches throughout the United Kingdom and this was to determine its influence on the population and far more on the language.
64 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE The Bible was translated by 54 university scholars.
The project was approved by King James himself following a recommendation by some 750 reformers from within the Church of England.
The preliminary version which took four years was submitted to the bishops for revision.
The translators were divided into companies each working on a section of the bible.
The final version took nine months.
The panel followed a number of guidelines.
They were to use the bishops Bible where possible and were permitted to consult the Tyndale Version and other earlier versions where necessary.
They were also to maintain recognized chapter divisions and proper names.
Translations by one member of a group were to be submitted by other members for approval and each group was to send its materials to the others for final agreement.
Disagreements were to be discussed formally and outside opinions sought if necessary.
The project was successful due to the personal enthusiasm and intellectual quality of the translators.
In their language choices, they did not introduce new items of vocabulary or change the grammatical structure of the language.
Frequently, they introduced old use of words from the Tyndale version, and also used quite a number of idioms.
In fact there were many phrases in the King James Bible which have entered the general idiom of the language, sometimes with minor grammatical changes.
Here are some examples: my brother’s keeper (Genesis 4); eye for eye (Genesis 15); the apple of his eye (Deuteronomy 32); a man after his own heart (1 Samuel 13), how are the mighty fallen (2 Samuel 1); a root of the matter (Job 19); salt of the earth (Math 5); new wine in old bottles (Matthew 7); physician heal thyself (Luke 4) etc.
Below are two sample texts showing the 1611 printing of the King James Authorised Version of the Bible and the 19th century printing.
Carefully compare the spelling, punctuation and vocabulary of both editions.
A is the preface to the 1611 edition.
Sample A An other thing we thinke good to admonish thee of (gentle Reader) that wee haue not tyed our selves to an vniformitie of phrasing, or to an identitie of words, as some peraduenture would wish the we had done, because they obserue, that some learned men some where, haue beene as exact as they could that way… That we should expresse the same notion in the same particular word; as for example, if we translate the Hebrew or Greekeword once by purpose, neuer to call it intent; if one where Iourneying, neuer Traveilling; if one where Thinker, neuer suppose; if one where Paine, neuer Ache; if one where Joy, neuer Gladness, etc.
65ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Sample B (Genesis 28:11-13) And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.
And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.
And behold the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will give it, and to thy seed…; SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What type of influence do you think the King James Bible had on the English language?
4.0 CONCLUSION Dictionaries of difficult words; William Shakespeare and the King James Authorised Version of the Bible were three important influences on the 16th and 17th century English, especially on the development, enrichment and stability of standard vocabulary of the English language.
Shakespeare and The King James Bible especially demonstrated how English was used during the period and helped to maintain standard in the English vocabulary, grammar and usage.
5.0 SUMMARY Dictionaries of hard words attempted to provide meaning to difficult English words during the early part of the 17th century.
This was necessary because of extensive additions to the English vocabulary, some of which generated a lot of controversy.
The dictionaries also helped to facilitate the use of the words that had been generally adopted.
William Shakespeare’s contribution to the enrichment of the English vocabulary was a major feature of the 17th century English.
His wide and creative use of words gave the language a wide stock of words, some of which have become part of modern every day English.
Similarly, the King James Authorised Version of the bible illustrated the Standard English, and helped to sustain stability since it was every body’s Bible.
Many of the Bible idioms for example have been modernized and added to every day usage.
These three influences on the English language of the 17th century were significant ones.
66 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare and contrast the influence of Shakespeare and the King James Bible on the English language of the 17th century.
2.
Discuss the contributions of the early dictionaries of hard words to the development of English vocabulary.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge.
Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed Cambridge.
67ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE MODULE 3 Unit 1 Changes in Pronunciation; the Great Vowel Shift; Some Features of Grammar Unit 2 The 18th Century English; An English Academy; Johnson’s Dictionary Unit 3 The 18th Century Grammarians; the Rise of Prescriptive Grammar Unit 4 English since 1900 Unit 5 Sources of New Words; the Oxford English Dictionary; the Spelling Reform; Functional Varieties of English UNIT 1 CHANGES IN PRONUNCIATION; THE GREAT VOWEL SHIFT; SOME FEATURES OF GRAMMAR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Changes in Pronunciation 3.2 The Great Vowel Shift 3.3 Some Features of Grammar 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The study of sounds changes in the history of English is as important as the study of grammar and vocabulary.
This is because language operates as a system and as we have earlier observed, a change in one part often results in a change on the other.
As you must have noticed in Module 2 Unit 1, Old English speech sounds differed significantly from the Middle English pronunciation.
And you will also discover in this unit that there had been consistent sound changes from old English through to the modern period.
The major change in pronunciation which took place at the end of the Middle English period, and affected the vowel system so fundamentally is called The Great Vowel Shift.
This change has been responsible for most modern speech sounds.
In this Unit, You will see how this change occurred.
We shall also examine in this Unit some of the features of English grammar of the late 16th century and early 17th century.
68 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • identify some changes that occurred in the speech sounds of early modern English • explain what is meant by the great vowel shift • describe some features of the grammar of the early 17th century.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Changes in Pronunciation Some sounds in English have not had any changes like others.
For example, the short /e/ has remained unchanged since the old English times.
The O.E bẻdd is still bed today; whereas the â in O. E stân (store) became a sound like /כ:/ as in law towards the end of Old English, and later changed to ō similar to its current pronunciation o (store).
Changes in pronunciation however varied according to regions.
Changes in consonant sounds had been insignificant compared to changes in vowel sounds.
Though some voiced consonants in Old English, became voiceless or occasionally lost in Middle English, consonant have remained fairly as stable as they been in Old English (O.E).
The w sound was almost generally lost in Middle English (M.E) where they had been pronounced in Old English; O.E swâ became sō (so) and O.E hwâ changed to hō (who) in Middle English.
Most short vowels in Old English; like è, ì, ô, ú passed on to Middle English unchanged.
The long ý developed as the short ý.
The O.E brýd became brìde (M.E) and bride in modern English; O.E fýr became fīre (M.E) and fire in modern English.
The quality Old English vowels did not change much in passing to Middle English but their length were considerable altered.
Old English long vowels for example were shortened early in the Middle English period when followed by double consonants.
Compare Middle English grèt with Old English grẻat.
All Middle English long vowels went through extensive alteration in passing to Middle English, but short vowels that occur where syllables are accented remained fairly stable.
Short vowels like a and u went through important changes.
M.E a became / æ/ in the 16th century, pronounced as cat, thank, mat, flax, almost returning to the Old English ǽ as in at, apple, back.
The u in Middle English became what is known as unrounding in M.E.
The vowel was pronounced as u as in full or pull.
In early modern English u became u as in cut, but, sun, love.
As far as short vowels are concerned a modern speaker of English will have no difficulty in understanding the English of any period in history.
But this 69ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE situation is quite different when we consider long vowels.
The notable change in pronunciation involving long vowels is known as The Great Vowel Shift.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Compare some vowel sounds in Middle English with those in Modern English.
2.
Compare changes in vowel sounds with those of consonant sounds in both Old and Middle English.
3.2 The Great Vowel Shift The Great Vowel Shift affected the seven long vowels in English.
In Middle English they were ī, ệ, ệ Ộ, ộ ữ. Ī pronounced as i: e.g.
/ fi:f / became /fair/ five ệ pronounced as e e.g.
/me:də/ became /mi:d / mead ệ pronounced as ε: e.g.
/kl ε:nə / became /kle:n/ clean ặ pronounced as a : e.g.
/na:mə / became / ne:m/ name Ộ pronounced as כ: e.g.
/gכ:tδ / became /go:t/ goat ộ pronounced as o: e.g.
/ro:tδ/ became /ru:t/ root û pronounced as u: e.g.
/du:n/ became /daun/ down Notice that i and u became diphthongs ai and au.
And you can see that most of the vowels had almost acquired their present pronunciation by the 16th century, through the Great Vowel Shift.
You will also notice that the Middle English ệ has changed to /i:/.
In the early modern period (of Shakespeare) ệ was pronounced as in lane, or name but now it sounds as lean, clean, bean.
The change occurred at about the end of the 17th century.
The Great Vowel Shift is responsible for the random use of vowel symbols in English spelling.
Spelling had already become fixed before the shift and therefore did not change when the quality of the long vowels changed.
As a result vowel symbols no longer correspond with the sounds they once represented in Old English.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Describe the influence of the Great Vowel Shift to modern pronunciation.
3.3 Some Features of Grammar The English grammar of the late 16th century and early 17th century is marked by some characteristics which had since disappeared, especially the few parts of speech that retained their old forms.
We shall examine some of them.
70 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE The Noun: The only inflections in the noun were, as we mentioned in Unit 3 of Module 2 those marking the plural and possessive singular.
There were however a few nouns like sheep, and swine with unchanged plurals.
In the 16th century some old weak plurals like – n survived.
Most of them gave way to the – s plural, such as fon (foes) kneen (knees) fleen (fleas).
Shakespeare for example had some forms like eyen (eyes), shoon (shoes), and kine,.
Some mixed plurals like children, oxen, brethren, and some internal change of vowels like mice, feet, survived.
The Adjective: Since the adjective lost its inflectional endings that marked gender, number and case distinctions, the only forms it retained during the 16th and 17th centuries were the comparative and superlative degrees.
The two common endings -er (comparative) and – est (superlative) with the adverb more and most had been in use since the Old English period.
Shakespeare used double comparative or superlative such as more large, most boldest; or most unkindest.
These are no longer in use today.
In modern times only one syllable (monosyllable) words take the –er, -est suffixes like fine-finer-finest; tall-taller-tallest etc.
Words with more than one syllable take more and most e.g.
beautiful -more beautiful -most beautiful; active -more active -most active; careful -more careful l-most careful etc.
The Pronoun: As we have said earlier, it was during the 16th century that the pronouns thou, thy, thee were dropped except where the Authorised Version or Shakespeare is still read.
You was substituted for ye, while its was introduced as the possessive of it.
During the Middle English the singular forms thou, thy, and thee were used among friends and colleagues and for addressing superiors.
In the 16th century ye, your, you became pronouns of direct address irrespective of rank or closeness, while the singular forms disappeared.
However, the Authorised Version of the Bible and Shakespeare still used them.
The formative of its as possessive marker was one interesting thing of the early modern period.
However, his was still used as the proper form 71ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE of the possessive.
E.g.
if the salt has lost his savor; little candles throw his beams etc.
Another development of the pronoun in the 16th century was the use of who as a relative pronoun.
In Old English there were no relative pronouns, rather definite articles (sệ, sệo,þœt) were used as relative.
Sometimes the article þe was added (sệ, þe, which, that) and sometimes þe was used alone.
In the Middle English this was replaced by þœt (that).
In the 15th century which and that began to be alternated.
It was not until 16th century that the relative pronoun who came into use.
The Verb: Verbs were commonly used without auxiliaries in interrogative statements.
A question in Shakespeare’s Macbeth says Goes the king hence today?
Normally we would say: Is the king going out today?
Or Does the king go out?
Another noticeable difference is the omission of progressive forms.
It is common to hear or read: Where goes he?
or What do you read?
Rather than where are you going?
or what are you reading?
The increase in the use of progressive forms is a modern development.
Impersonal use of verbs was much more common in the 16th and 17th centuries.
A construction like it pleases me not, it dislikes me, it repents me, are familiar expressions in Shakespeare and the King James Bible, which in more recent English have been replaced by personal constructions like It doesn’t please me; I don’t like it or I repent.
The regular ending of the third person singular –eth, was universal right from the 14th century and all through the Middle English period, thus goeth, giveth, lieth, saith, doth, speaketh became the standard forms.
Forms like goes, gives, lies, says, does are also a modern development of English.
This however made some occasional appearances in the 15th century.
We also mentioned in Unit 5 of Module 1 that some Old English strong verbs were lost during the Middle English period and some became weak verbs.
Those that remained became subject to functions in the past tense and past participle.
Verbs like hide, crow, crowd, flay, dread etc.
developed weak forms.
While a number of weak forms became strong, e.g.
blowed, growed, shined, shrinked, and swinged.
Some of these verbs have also undergone changes in modern English.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 (i) Describe some features of the pronoun during the 16th century.
(ii) Write some verbs that may be referred to as having weak forms in Middle English.
72 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 4.0 CONCLUSION Some of the changes that were characteristic of the 16th century actually started earlier.
Sounds changes was climaxed by the Great Vowel Shift which provided the foundation for modern English pronunciation.
Changes in some forms of grammar as we have seen in this Unit were expected as a part of the ongoing development process of the language, which became more radical with the emergence of the Standard English.
5.0 SUMMARY Sound changes have been important in the process of development of the English language.
Changes occurred more with vowel sound than with consonants.
And except for notable changes in the sounds of i and u, other vowels did not change much from Old English.
The most important change in the English sound system is the Great Vowel Shift, which affected some seven long vowel sounds and changed them from Middle English pronunciation to modern pronunciation.
Changes in grammar were those characteristic of the Renaissance English.
The –s plural marker was generally adopted, with some few mixed plurals.
Adjectives lost their inflections and retained only the –er and –est markers for comparative and superlative degrees.
For pronouns ye, your, and you, replaced the singular thou, thy and thee and became pronouns for direct address irrespective of the status of the addresses or the relationship between addressee and the addresser.
Impersonal use of verbs, the scarcity of progressive forms, the –eth ending of verbs and the weakening of some strong verbs and vice versa were the general features of verbs in the 16th century.
All the features of grammar and pronunciation as we have seen in this Unit were further developed but became the strong foundation for the modern day English.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss some general patterns of change in the 16th century English pronunciation.
2.
Describe some general features of grammar during the 16th century.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh, A.C. & Cable T. (2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge Crystal, D. (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed Cambridge University Press.
Ogu, J.N.
(1992).
A Historical Survey of English and Nigerian Situation, Lagos: Kraft.
73ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 2 THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE IN THE 18TH CENTURY: AN ENGLISH ACADEMY AND JOHNSON’S DICTIONARY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The 18th Century English 3.2 An English Academy 3.3 Johnson’s Dictionary 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the major characteristics of the Renaissance is the search for new knowledge and in the 17th and 18th centuries there was a conflict of ideas between science and religious thinking, which was going to involve English and language use.
Matters of knowledge and learning were now being extensively published in English and in the latter part of the 17th century, there arose a kind of public consciousness towards the language.
For instance, a popular feeling arising from the conflict of science and religion, proposed that scientific prose should be written in plain language, made clear and precise.
And the style must not be assertive.
It was also argued that language should be void of emotions; it should be rational and English prose was to be used to facilitate national unity rather than mere source of entertainment or relaxation.
There was a Royal Society then in the 1660s the job, of which was to propose solution to the conflict of thoughts, especially to design a universal language style for scientific writing.
But the Royal Society failed to create the plain style of language which it was meant to do neither did its members show any example.
This search for stability and a demand for regulation introduce us to the temper of the 18th century, which we shall discuss in this unit under the 18th Century English.
We shall also examine some of the efforts made by scholars to achieve order and standard in English with particular reference to Dr Johnson’s Dictionary.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • describe the general characteristics of the 18th century England • explain the English language situation of the 18th century 74 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE • describe some efforts made to achieve order and uniformity in English in the 18th century • discuss the contributions of Johnson’s dictionary to the growth of English vocabulary and language use.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The 18th Century English In the study of English literature, the first half of the 18th century, is often referred to as the Augustan Age in England.
It was a period of English prose writing which invariably affected the course of the English language.
This age was characterized by a search for stability in language use.
There was a strong sense of order and great desire for a system that would enhance efforts towards conformity to certain standards of good writing.
There was also a drive towards correctness and attempts were made to formulate rules and principles to define correctness and to achieve correctness.
This was characteristic of the spirit of rational science and philosophy that started with the Renaissance.
Latin was looked upon as a classical standard for literature.
Concerns for English soon began to take a new turn.
Questions were then asked whether the language was at all worthy to be used for writing, where Latin had been the tradition; whether the extensive additions being made to the vocabulary were justified, and whether a better system of spelling could be introduced.
For the first time, it was discovered that English had no grammar.
What was grammar did not follow any generally accepted pattern.
The result was that English did not have any rules.
People did not know when they were wrong or right.
Everything was uncertain.
Even among the educated people there was so much variation on matters of grammar.
Latin remained an authoritative example in which one was told how to use language.
People began to feel that this problem could be solved by an English Academy that could legislate on matters of language.
The popular idea was that English was being corrupted and needed to be refined and corrected.
Necessary reforms should be in place after which the language should be fixed permanently and protected from regular changes.
In a nutshell the 18th century sought to: (i) reduce the language to rule and set up a standard of current usage; (ii) refine the language – that is, to remove supposed defects and introduce certain improvements; and (iii) fix it permanently in the desire form (Baugh & Cable 2001).
75ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Attempts to Purify the Language Right from the 17th century as we have pointed out, people were conscious that English lacked standards - the fact that the language did not have rules to determine right or wrong in its usage.
Writers were particularly worried that writing was more of a guess work; individuals wrote according to their choices of words and how best they felt they could express themselves, not guided by any particular standard.
This led to further corruption of the language, as some people thought.
The feeling that English was being corrupted and unchecked gave rise to some attempts to clean up the language and rid it of some supposed imperfections.
One of such attempts was Swift’s proposal of 1712, titled: A Proposal for Correcting, Improving, and Ascertaining the English Tongue.
Swift was not comfortable with the spate of scientific enquiry and revolutions that favoured careless use of language.
Innovations such as clipping and shortening of words like mob, taxi, rep or phone was not acceptable to Swift.
A later publication Philosophy of Rhetoric by George Campbell (1776) also condemned this practice.
In fact Campbell described it as ‘barbarism’ in language use.
Another innovation that Swift opposed was the tendency to contract verbs like ‘rebuk’d,’ ‘disturb’d’ or ‘perturb’d’.
He condemned this practice and argued that leaving out a vowel to save a syllable makes such contracted forms very difficult to pronounce.
Again Swift condemned some new words that kept coming into the English language.
Words such as sham, banter, mob, bubble, bully, shuffling, or palming, that were becoming the vogue among people of fashion and even among preachers were rejected.
As we have pointed out in the earlier Unit, Swift was not alone in the criticism of foreign words.
But Swift desired and hoped that like Latin and Greek, English could be rendered stable.
But it is a mistaken notion that these languages never had times when they struggled with the process of stability like English at this period.
However Swift and others who believed that the problems that confronted English - that of standardizing, refining, and ‘fixing’ were to consider what happened in Italy and France.
Each of these countries had an academy that defined standards in language and monitored the processes that sustained these standards.
Italy for example founded the Accademia della Crusca in 1582, that was responsible for the purification of the Italian language.
The Academy to this effect published in 1612 a dictionary called Vocabolario degli Accademici della Crusca, which had about six volumes by 1738.
France similarly established an Academy.
The principal functions of the Academy were to give rules to the French language, render it pure and capable of treating the arts and sciences.
It was also to compile a dictionary, a grammar, a rhetoric and a guide on how to write poetry.
These were all 76 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE achieved by 1694.
England did not have any Academy that performed similar functions.
SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Describe the problems that English had, that became prominent in the 18th century.
2.
Why did these problems become too obvious in the 18th century?
3.2 An English Academy An English Academy was then suggested following the Italian and French example.
In 1660, a volume was published titled New Atlantis… continued by R.H Esquire.
The author formally pictured an academy that would be charged with purifying the English language and regulating its grammar and vocabulary.
Not long, the idea of an academy received supports from influential intellectuals, including John Dryden (a poet), and John Evelyn among others.
Evelyn, who was a member of the Royal society, proposed that a grammar of language be formulated with some spelling reforms to be followed by a collection of all ‘pure’ English words with their meanings.
He further suggested collections of technical words, dialects, expressions and archaic words that might be revived and possibly translating some of the best of Greek and Latin literatures as models of elegance and style.
Remember that the Royal Society was a established for scientific research and had no real interest in language matters, so nothing was done about Evelyn’s proposals.
Dryden’s efforts also in this direction did not attract any significant attention.
Towards the end of the century however, Daniel Defoe (a novelist) in his Essay upon Projects (1697) again raised the issue of an English Academy and devoted a whole article to the subjects of academies.
Swift’s Proposal of 1712, as we noted earlier, marked the heights of the movement for an English Academy.
Already public opinion had been in its favour following the efforts of Dryden, Evelyn and others, for more than fifty years.
Once again the idea of an Academy suffered a set back following a publication of Reflections on Dr Swift’s Letter to the Earl of Oxford about the English Tongue by John Oldmixon, in the same year that Swift Proposal appeared.
Oldmixon (a lawyer) writing in the name of the legal profession totally attacked the idea of standardizing the language, arguing that it was impossible to prevent a language from responding to change.
While he did not protest against the idea of an Academy, he ridiculed the person of Swift and his proposal and nothing subsequently came out of Swift’s Proposal, which was indeed the closest England ever came to having an 77ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Academy.
Subsequent talk of an Academy in England was soon received with skepticism.
There were now doubts of the results of the French Academy.
Some came to think that the Academy came to fix French but ended up spoiling it.
The claim that a language could be fixed was the platform upon which the idea of an Academy was built, now it began to decline and popular feeling began to favour the notion that nothing can stop a language from changing, not even Latin or Greek could resist change.
When it was clear that Swift’s Proposal had failed the only means was to work out a substitute for an academy and that would demand working directly on the public.
Individuals sought to provide reforms that they believed necessary and to set up standards that would be accepted by every body.
Thus, in 1724 an anonymous publication appeared under the title: The Many Advantages of a Good Language to Any Nation: with an Examination of the Present State of our Own.
This re-echoed the old complaints that English was full of too many monosyllables, used too many contractions, and had no adequate grammar or dictionary.
It then called upon the public to take part in the discussion on matters of language and proposed a series of weekly or monthly publications on grammar and other topics on language.
Some other publications also emerged calling for reforms on grammar and spelling.
All these publications identified two greatest needs of the English language (i) standard grammar (ii) a dictionary.
The need for a dictionary was met by Johnson’s dictionary of 1755 and the one of grammar by early grammarians in the latter part of the 18th century.
The latter shall be discussed in Unit 3 of Module 2.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Discuss the factors that favoured the proposal for the establishment of an English Academy.
2.
Explain the reasons why Swift’s Proposal failed.
3.
What substitutes were adopted for an academy?
3.3 Johnson’s Dictionary Dr. Johnson’s dictionary of 1755 was the first of its kind to exhibit English vocabulary in a more fully and extensive manner.
It offered quotations to illustrate the use of words.
Thus, it became the first dictionary to record language usage.
And this was to aid understanding where the explaining of meanings became inadequate.
The dictionary also gave a guide to pronunciation.
The purpose of this dictionary was not just to provide a kind of standard in spelling and use of words, it was, according to the author to refine the 78 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE English language and ensure grammatical purity; to clear it from colloquial barbarism, licentious idioms and irregular idioms” (Baugh & Cable 2001: 273).
At another place he said it was to fix the English language, preserve its purity and ascertain the meaning of English idioms.
This was like performing the functions of an Academy; and in fact, the Johnson’s dictionary could compare favourably with similar works of an Academy in France or Italy.
The dictionary however had its defects.
For instance, it was said to include many words that did not belong to English, and its history of words was not perfect.
Some of its explanations of places were incorrect and full of prejudice and his definitions were sometimes discriminatory.
Though laden with its inadequacies scholars still believed that Johnson’s dictionary is the foundation of all meaningful efforts towards the standardization of the English language.
Dr. Samuel Johnson himself is considered as the founder of the modern English dictionary.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Describe the features of the Johnson’s Dictionary of the 18th century.
2.
What faults were leveled against the work?
4.0 CONCLUSION The position of the 18th century English was that of uncertainty in grammar and vocabulary.
It was the general feeling that English lacked standards and needed a regulatory body.
This resulted in the call for an English Academy and some other attempts to fix a standard.
When the efforts failed, Samuel Johnson’s dictionary appeared to try to solve the problem of standards in spelling, pronunciation and language use.
5.0 SUMMARY The 18th century was an age in search of rules and established standards of spelling and language usage.
Efforts to refine the English grammar and remove some supposed defects and improve on it became necessary.
A strong thirst to fix the language permanently as a guide to correct usage in both writing and speaking became the preoccupation of language scholars.
There was a call for an English Academy that would effectively legislate on matters of language as described above and serve as a watchdog against foreign agents of pollution, following the examples of France and Italy.
At the forefront of this call was the Swift’s Proposal of 1712.
When this proposal failed individuals adopted other forms of propaganda to win public interest in favour of standards for English and its purity.
This was in form of weekly and monthly 79ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE publications on matters of language.
In 1755 Samuel Johnson’s dictionary appeared that provided for the first time the standard steps to fix the language.
The dictionary provided a comprehensive list of English words, a guide to spelling and pronunciation, and a guide to language usage.
The dictionary almost served as an Academy by itself and solved one of the greatest problems of English at that time which was lack of standards in vocabulary.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the problems of English that became glaring in the 18th century.
2.
Describe the features of the Johnson’s dictionary of the 18th century and its contribution to the development of the English language.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge.
Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed .Cambridge University Press.
80 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 3 THE 18TH CENTURY GRAMMARIANS; THE RISE OF PRESCRIPTIVE GRAMMAR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The 18th Century Grammarians 3.2 The Rise of Prescriptive Grammar 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the greatest defects of the English language in the 18th century as we observed in Unit 2 of this Module was the absence of consistent grammar.
There was no standard because the language had not been reduced to rules, showing what correct English was and what it wasn’t.
So people used the language with the consciousness that it possessed no character that reflected order and consistency.
It was this challenge that the 18th century grammarians would confront.
In this Unit, we shall see the efforts of the grammarians to formulate rules for the English language and how this attempt led to the emergence of prescriptive grammar.
What were the achievements of the grammarians and what were their failures?
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • assess the general contributions of the early grammarians to provide a standard for English grammar • describe the rise of prescriptive grammar and say why it is called prescriptive grammar • distinguish between prescriptive grammar and the grammar of the early modern period.
81ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The 18th Century Grammarians Before the 18th century there had been few attempts to make English grammar more formal and stable.
However these works were generally written for the purpose of teaching foreign learners the language or providing basis for learning Latin grammar.
An example was Ben Johnson’s An English grammar …for the Benefit of Strangers, published in 1640.
It was in the 18th century that English grammar was viewed as a subject worthy of study by itself.
An earlier writer, John Wallis (Grammatical Linguae Anglicante, 1653) had observed that the Latin structure defers significantly from that of English, and therefore describing English using Latin grammar was not proper.
It was like forcing English to the methods and rules of Latin.
In the 18th century, the grounds were set to witness descriptions of grammar that had its peculiar nature and syntax.
Unfortunately most of the compilers of the English grammar were only trained in Latin and Greek and still tried to preserve some of the classical concepts that are foreign to English.
The works of the grammarians began with the work of Joseph Priestly (1761) titled The Rudiments of English Grammar.
A month later, Dr. Robert Lowth, a bishop of London, published Short Introduction to English Grammar (1762).
About 22 editions of this book appeared in the 18th century, and became very influential.
Subsequent four publications were mere imitations of Lowth’s grammar.
For instance John Ash’s Grammatical Institutes (1763) was intended to serve as Easy Introduction to Dr. Lowth’s English Grammar.
In 1784, Noah Webster published A Grammatical Institute of the English Language, which enjoyed much circulation and influence in America.
Most of these works were by men who did not have any special training in language.
Lowth for example was a clergyman, and their works were a mixture of philosophical matters with language and did not really answer the great questions of grammatical descriptions.
Over 200 works on grammar and rhetoric were published between 1750 and 1800.
What really was their aim and what did they achieve?
It is undeniable that the 18th century English grammarians attempted a coherent prescriptive tradition, within which they aimed at: (a) Codifying the principles of the language and reducing it to rules; (b) Settling disputed points and deciding on cases of divided usage; and (c) Pointing out common errors, correcting such supposed errors and improving the language.
82 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE (a) The grammarians were to demonstrate that English was capable of order and systematic procedure for achieving correctness.
Lowth had argued that the supposed irregularity in the language was the problem of users and not with the language itself.
People had taken their skills in the language for granted and proceeded without being conscious of any rules.
So the grammarians were to systematize the facts of English grammar and draw up rules by which questions could be examined and decided.
(b) They were to settle disputed cases of grammar and usage.
They were not just to make rules but also pronounce judgment where necessary.
There were no longer going to be cases of uncertainty.
A grammatical construction is either right or wrong, and it was the job of the grammarians to decide.
(c) Dr Lowth again observed that the best way to judge whether a construction was right or wrong was to lay down rules, and illustrate them by examples.
But besides showing what was right, it was necessary pointing out what was wrong.
So the grammarians would identify grammatical errors and demonstrate how such errors would be corrected.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the aims of the 18th century grammarians.
3.2 The Rise of Prescriptive Grammar In terms of achievement, the grammarians were going to do for grammar what Johnson’s Dictionary had done for vocabulary.
The dictionary had handled most questions of spelling and lexicon in a fairly systematic way, and attention was now on grammar.
Now the grammarians set out to prescribe.
To prescribe in this context, means that people were told what to say, the grammar was to be static, which invariably implied that anything out of the specifications was condemned and proscribed.
For example, expressions like had rather, had better, were condemned; I would rather was accepted.
There was preference for different from rather than different than or to, and the rejection of between you and me.
He is taller than I, was accepted rather taller than me.
Shall was approved for the first person pronoun, while will for the third person etc.
Do not forget that no consensus was reached among the grammarians in this rule making process.
However a decision was usually taken after such questions as reason and examples from Latin or Greek had been considered.
83ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE William Ward in his Grammar of the English Language (1765) drew up for the first time a full set of prescriptions that formed a background to the rules found in modern English books.
This publication was strengthened by Lindey Murray’s English Grammar (1795).
The books by Lowth and Murray and those they influenced have been quite controversial and were often considered as the origins of most of the grammatical controversies in today’s English.
To make grammatical rules the grammarians were guided by three considerations: reason (or analogy): history of the word or phrase involved and the examples of Greek and Latin.
The third point formed the basis upon which many questions of grammar were decided.
Some grammarians felt that descriptive comparisons among these languages (English included) could be turned into prescriptive rules especially since they were working towards a universal grammar, and the idea of universal grammar was derived from the traditions of Latin and Greek.
However there was in the 18th century a definite feeling that trying to fit English into the pattern of Latin grammar was a disadvantage.
This feeling was sustained in the next century when the interest in universal grammar declined.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What does Prescriptive Grammar mean?
2.
What do you think were the achievements of the 18th century grammarians?
4.0 CONCLUSION What we still have today as traditional grammar that tells us what is right and wrong has its foundation in the 18th century grammarians.
Bishop Robert Lowth in 1762 said: “the principle design of a Grammar of any Language is to teach us to express ourselves with propriety in the Language; and to enable us judge every phrase and form of construction, whether it be right or wrong”.
(Crystal 2001:79).
So the grammarians set out to provide for English grammar a platform for determining what was correct about spoken or written English and what was wrong.
In doing this they prescribed certain forms as correct and proscribed others as incorrect.
This approach however brought about a serious argument - the question of whether correctness should be determined by usage or grammatical rules.
Shouldn’t dictionaries and grammars rather reflect usage describing current practice than prescribe rules?
This view has since been adopted by modern descriptive grammarians in their study and analysis of language.
84 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 5.0 SUMMARY Before the 18th century, English grammar had no definite rules.
And it was difficult to determine what correct or incorrect sentence was since there were no standards.
The assignment before the 18th century grammarians were to: (i) codify the principles of the language and reduce it to rules; (ii) point out common errors; correct such errors and improve on the language; (iii) settle disputed points and decide on cases of divided usage.
They set about to achieve the above by applying reason, common sense, history, logic and references to Latin and Greek.
At the end, they were able to formulate rules for the language, prescribing some grammatical forms as correct and proscribing some grammatical forms as incorrect.
Some of these publications have been controversial while some have been condemned as containing a lot of blunders.
One of the most important arguments against their approach had been that English grammar should reflect usage showing current practice rather than proscribed rules.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the activities of the 18th century grammarians and outline their achievements.
2.
What was the main criticism against the Grammarians?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge.
Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed.
Cambridge.
85ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 4 ENGLISH SINCE 1900 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Influences on the 19th Century English and After 3.2 Vocabulary and New Developments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The 19th century and after, are also referred to as late modern period, or simply the period of modern English.
Again we are going to look at some of the major influences on English language which have been mainly on vocabulary.
So far, we have seen that social factors have contributed greatly to the growth of the language.
Again, both political and social factors had helped to strengthen the position of England as a world power especially with its successive victories at wars during the 19th century (e.g.
victory at Trafalgar, against France in 1805 and against Russia at Crimea 1854-56).
Its political and social reforms in the 19th and 20th centuries were also important factors in establishing England as one of the world’s stable democracies.
The world wars of the 20th century and its effects on the society; the growth and importance of some of British colonies; their eventual independence and the rapid growth of the United States as one of the greatest English speaking world powers certainly have their influences on the English language of today.
We shall consider in detail some of these factors in Units 17 and 18.
In this Unit we shall be considering the more influential factors as they relate to language, namely the growth of Science and Medicine, Transport, Information technology, Journalism and Broadcasting and the world wars.
You shall also see how developments in other areas have affected English vocabulary.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to: • discuss the factors that influenced English vocabulary in the 19th century and after • explain how English vocabulary has been largely affected by some new developments across the world since1900.
86 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Influences on the 19th Century English and After As you can see in this study, English is one language that easily accepts change and admits foreign technical terms.
And no doubt as someone that has been studying the language you are familiar with terms that are associated with professions or register.
And it is easy to identify terms that are associated with science, medicine or engineering.
These technical terms came along with growth and development in the various disciplines during the 19th and 20th centuries.
Let’s consider some of these disciplines and terms associated with them.
We are able to appreciate these terms because they have become part of our everyday communication.
(i) Growth in Medicine and other Sciences: In every field of science, there has been a growth in technical words in the 19th and 20th centuries which only the specialist in these fields understand but with time, a good number of the words became familiar and in fact turn to everyday usage.
In medicine for example we are familiar with names of diseases like: Anaemia, Diarrhea, Appendicitis, Bronchitis, and Cardiac-arrest and other numerous ailments.
We can easily associate terms like Bacteriology, Virology, Immunology, Paediatrics, Orthodontics, with medicine and we can easily suggest what some of them mean from their names.
AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) which has become a household term was unknown in the 19th century.
We can easily talk of clinics, anti-biotic, vaccine, or anesthetic.
We have learnt names of drugs like paracetamol, aspirin, analgesics, iodine, panadol, morphine, or penicillin.
Medical equipment such as stethoscope, syringe, electrocardiogram, ultrasound scan machine, or x-ray machine, is not very strange to us.
We speak of hormones, enzymes; metabolism, endocrine glands, DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) etc., and we know what carbohydrate, vitamins, proteins, amino- acids, or cholesterol mean.
Although you may not explain them clearly but you’re familiar with them.
For example, carbohydrates gives energy, protein builds up body tissues and so on.
We often talk about someone who usually falls ill by eating a particular food as being allergic to that food.
All these words that came during the 19th and 20th centuries have become everyday language.
In physics and electricity we can easily identify words that we know.
Words like relativity, calorie, ultra-violent rays, ionization, transformer, dynamo, current, arc light, are indeed familiar though many of them we 87ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE may not really explain.
The development of atomic energy and nuclear weapons following the World Wars and international conflicts has given rise to words like atomic bomb, hydrogen bomb, air raid, ballistic missiles, sand missiles, radio active, chain reaction, fallout, etc.
Chemistry has given the English lexicon, nitrogen, alkali, benzene, radium, creosote, biochemical, petrol-chemical etc.
Aviation and space science have also contributed terms such as astronaut, cosmonauts, space craft, space shuttle, count down command module blast off etc.
How we know that these terms have to stay is that we often make reference to them in informal speech or writing consciously and unconsciously.
Many times we fail to recognize where the words come from.
You often hear people refer to inferiority complex, melancholic, or schizophrenia without realizing that they are using words from formal psychology.
(ii) Growth in Automobile and Transport Industry: Scientific discoveries and inventions have proved to be an important source of new words.
The word automobile itself is a new term just as we have saloon (American sedan) as terms used for earlier types of vehicles.
Now we have lorry (Army-truck), trailer limousine, mustang, jeep, Mercedes-Benz, Ford, Volkswagen, etc.
some of the cars are named after their inventors, e.g., Ford or Mercedes.
We have learnt new meanings with the evolution of vehicles like carburetor, sparking plug, (American(Ame) spark plug) choke, clutch, gear liver (Ame-gear shift), gearbox, steering wheels, differential, shock absorber, chassis, automatic transmission, radial tyres, spare tyres, convertible, or station wagon etc .And a car is usually parked in a garage.
We now talk of the traffic, speeding, traffic light, petrol (Ame gas), bus-stop, terminus, ticket, etc.
You may supply more examples to illustrate further how these technical terms have become part of our everyday language.
(iii) Development in Broadcasting, Information Technology and Computing.
Communication and computer technology are other aspects of science development that have contributed new words to English vocabulary especially due to the degree of impact these developments have had on people’s daily life.
These additions are either entirely new words or old words being given new meanings.
In communication, especially in films, broadcasting and motion pictures most new words came in during the 20th century.
The word cinema dates from 1899, while motion picture came much later.
The word radio in the sense of broadcasting came from about 1925, while the term television (TV) was introduced at about 1904.
Radio and TV share some 88 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE common terminologies like broadcasting, newscaster, aerial, transmitter, transmission, antenna, lead-in, loud speaker, standby, announcer, reception, microphone, camera, etc.
but abbreviations like FM (frequency modulation) AM (amplitude modulation) are used only for the identification of radio broadcasting stations.
But terms like cable TV, cable network, teleprompter, video tape, UHL channel, colour programming, digital TV, super thin TV, VCD, DVD are peculiar to the television.
Computer technology has been another significant influence on the vocabulary of English.
The first digital computers were invented between 1940 and 1950, with some general terms like program, memory, language, and hard ware.
With new waves of development in computer technology during the 1980’s, people began to own ‘PCs’ (personal computers) and learn new words from computing such as RAM (random-access memory), ROM (read-only memory) DOS (disk operating system), micro processor, byte, gig, modem, software, mouse, keyboard etc.
and with the growth of the internet, we now use terms like www (World Wide Web), browse, hack, down load, upload, hyper text, browser, search engine, LAN (local area network, WAN (wide area network), e-mail, yahoo etc.
(iv) The Influence of Journalism: Journalists do not only propagate new words, they also create theirs.
Newspaper and magazines have demonstrated a great deal of creativity when it comes to saying what just have to be said even when the reporter lacks the right word.
Many times they adopt colloquial and informal styles, sometimes using words out of context and often giving new meanings to familiar words.
And some of such words are used metaphorically.
For example quiz for question; oust for remove, probe for investigate, comb for search and maul for defeat.
Law makers will always reach at a truce; someone spikes a rumour, or makes a business deal.
We read about a cleanup, a go-between and how the price soared.
The president is usually briefed or chauffeured and we expect some sought of entertellment or condomania or satzefaction.
These are coinages we see in magazines and newspapers that catch our attention, sometimes used as adverts or to create sensations but indeed much of these coinages are finding their ways into formal writing.
(v) The Effect of World Wars: As we examine how great developments leave their marks on the English language, we must not fail to mention that the First World War (1914-1918) brought some words into English.
Some of these are military terms, or words associated with warfare e.g.
air raid, anti aircraft gun, tank, nose-dive, blimp, gas mask, liaison officer, and camouflage.
89ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE ‘Liaison’ and ‘camouflage’ are borrowed from French.
We also have words that assume new meaning e.g.
sector (specific position) barrage (protective screen of a machine gun); dud (a shell that did not explode) etc.
Today we say ‘sector of the economy’ ‘barrage of corruption’, dud cheque’ with new meanings.
Some words already in the language were popularized by the war, e.g.
dugout, machine gun, periscope, no man’s land, doughboy etc.
World War II wasn’t as productive as the World War I in terms of introducing new words.
However it contributed certain new words and new meanings about new methods of warfare.
Examples are alert, block-buster, dive-bombing, nuclear bombing, evacuate, parachutist, landing strip, crash landing, wad block, fox hole, bulldozer, task force.
Some expressions like spearhead, to mop up and to appease are new verbs or old one with military sense.
The word commando already existed before 1940’s, acquired a new meaning.
Others that either acquired new meaning or given great currency during the war are backlog, stockpile, priority, bottleneck, ceiling (limit) etc.
The war also contributed expressions like traveler, iron curtain, cold war, fellow etc.
to English vocabulary.
Most of these words and expressions have since been absorbed into everyday civilian language.
SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List 5 words that the growth of science introduced into English.
2.
List 10 words that are associated with Broadcasting, computing.
3.2 Vocabulary and New Developments Vocabulary has its way of expressing and highlighting developments.
You have seen so far, in this Unit and the previous ones that, a new development leaves a significant linguistic mark on the language, so that one can easily give a history of either a scientific or social development by simply identifying some linguistic evidences that go along with it.
Take for example the World War II, new words came with new methods of warfare including air combat, so we have air raid.
And we trace the history of certain words by simply studying the events and developments that brought them.
Language also reflects how current people are with new developments and culture because when new words enter into a language people quickly learn them as a way of updating their knowledge and experience.
These are what we have tried to prove in the history of English.
In this sub-section we shall consider a few developments that impacted on the English language.
90 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE At about 1839, the words photograph or photography appeared signaling other related words such as camera, film, enlargement, focus, aperture, shutter, lenses, negative etc.
and in the latter part of the 19th century words like telephone, typewriter, apartment house, blue print, oilfield, motorcycle, feminist, fundamentalist, marathon etc.
appeared.
These words were said to be the out come of the revival of the Olympic Games in Athens in 1896.
The 20th century has witnessed a rapid growth of vocabulary.
Between 1906 and 1908, new words like questionnaire, suffragette, raincoat, thermos, free verse, came into English.
This was also the period when many words in aviation and aeronautics were introduced e.g.
aircraft, airplane, hydroplane, dirigible etc.
1910 came with terms like futurist, post-expressionist (art), Freudian (psychology) intelligentsia (superior culture) and profiteer.
At about 1933 came deep-freezer, air- conditioned, nylon, and transistor.
Expressions like credit card, ecosystem, and existentialism came around 1972.
We must mention here that a good number of words must have come out of individual’s deliberate creation or coinage, borne out of ingenuity or imitation.
A few of them like Kodak, (a trade mark), Frigidaire, Kleenex, Xerox, or Zipper, often treated as common nouns, are coinages that represent trade names.
Some of these coinages are actually acronyms - words formed by joining few letters of two or more words.
E.g.
AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome); Radar (radio detecting and ranging) etc.
Some are blend words or portmanteau words like Interpol (international + police) travelogue (travel + dialogue); while some are simple clipped words e.g.
fax (facsimile) phone (telephone), lab (laboratory).
In many cases, the blend or clipped words gain more popularity and patronage than the original word.
As new developments keep taking place, we expect new words to express them.
SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Explain the relationship between new developments and old vocabulary.
2.
Can you identify some recent words in the vocabulary of Nigerian English?
4.0 CONCLUSION Scientific and social developments are major factors in the enrichment of English vocabulary.
As new things take place, the need naturally arises for the appropriate words to express them.
Words that already exist in the language are not usually sufficient to represent new experiences.
So as society grows, all its aspects grow, so language, 91ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE especially vocabulary grows.
And we expect more stock of words in English as we witness new inventions and more technological breakthroughs.
5.0 SUMMARY The rapid growth of English vocabulary from the 19th century upwards, has been sequel to the growth and development of science and medicine, communication and Broadcasting, Information technology and Computing.
Others are Journalism and the World Wars, within the same period.
We have also observed that the development of vocabulary is an on-going process because as the world witnesses new developments, new words and expressions are bound to evolve as part of those development processes.
And people must learn those new terms to update their knowledge and express their experience, as well as benefit maximally from the emerging developments and technologies.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List at least ten (10) words you consider to be new developments in the English in Nigeria.
2.
Discuss five (5) factors that directly influenced the development of English vocabulary of the 19th century and after.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge.
Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed.
Cambridge.
92 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 5 SOURCES OF NEW WORDS; THE OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY; SPELLING REFORM; FUNCTIONAL VARIETIES OF ENGLISH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sources of New Words 3.2 The Oxford English Dictionary 3.3 Spelling Reform 3.4 Functional Varieties of English 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We are still studying the features of late Modern English, i.e., from 1900 to the present time.
In this Unit we shall be considering the extent to which new words entered (and are still entering) Modern English and their sources.
Secondly, we shall be looking at the emergence and contribution of the Oxford English Dictionary and the question of Spelling Reform.
Lastly, we shall examine the functional varieties and dialects of Modern English.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • describe the sources of lexicon of modern English • explain the contributions of oxford English dictionary • identify some functional varieties of English • describe the contributions of the spelling reform.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sources of New Words You will recall that the greatest radical changes in the history of English have taken place in the vocabulary.
The events and developments in Europe and England are usually reflected in the English language by the 93ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE number of new words that are introduced following the events.
Can you remember any Old English words that came with the Anglo-Saxon invasion or words that were introduced as a result of the Danish invasion, or French words that the Normans brought with them as they conquered England in 1066?
In the Modern periods new words that came into the English lexicon did not come with military conquest, rather they came from common sources such as borrowings from other modern European languages; creation of words through self-explaining compounds, prefixes and suffixes; coinages; forming of words from Greek and Latin elements; common words from proper names; slang and old words that assumed new meanings.
We shall discuss each of these briefly: (i) Borrowings from Modern European Languages.
The English language has further extended its vocabulary with new words like aperitif, chauffeur, garage etc (French), ciao, vendetta etc (Italian), bonanza, canyon, cantina etc (Spanish) feschrift, angst, etc (German), troika, vodka, glasnost, perestroika (Russia), robot, (Czech), loot, thug etc (India), pygamas (Persia), sake, yen, soy etc (Japan).
Most of these words have been adopted the way they are, with the same meaning that they designate in their original languages.
(ii) Forming Words through Self-Explaining Compounds.
Compound words such as fire-extinguisher, finger-print etc.
(often with hyphens) represent the old method of creating words in English language.
In the 20th century, it continued to provide cheap method of forming new words.
Words such as know-how, lip-stick, streamline, hitchhike, e-mail, babysitter, life style, greenhouse effect, acid rain etc.
are familiar examples.
You can see that the words explain themselves without having to consult the dictionary.
(iii) Compounds from Greek and Latin Elements.
Latin and Greek are familiar classical languages whose elements have been in the English language for a long time.
In modern times, they remain a favourite source of scientific terms in the language.
The word genetics for example is formed from two Greek roots which stands for well and to be born.
Genetics is the study of heredity - about natural traits, abilities or illnesses of parents pass on to their children.
The suffix scope in telescope, stethoscope, etc.
is from the Greek word meaning water, while ‘tele’ in telescope, telephone, television etc., is adopted from Greek element meaning far.
The word automobile is from both Greek and Latin.
Auto in Greek represents self while mobile is Latin mobilis 94 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE meaning moveable.
Many scientific words in the English language can actually be traceable this way with their roots in Greek or Latin.
(iv) Prefixes and Suffixes.
Another method for forming words has been by adding familiar prefixes and suffixes to existing words.
Thus in the Modern period, words such as transatlantic, transcontinental, transformer, transmarine, post classical, postgraduate, prenatal, preschool, preview, counterattack, superman, neoclassical, stardom, gangster, profiteer etc came into the language.
(v) Coinages.
Some new words in the language are as a result of deliberate coinages during this period.
Many of such words came from the media and advertising.
Words like Xerox, Frigidaire and Kodak were initially used as trademarks, but today you can hear someone saying “I would like to Xerox the whole paper”.
Acronym is another method through which new words were invented.
We often refer to OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Countries) ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African States) UNICEF (United Nations Children’s fund) without having to bother about their full meaning.
In some coinages it is easy to guess the combination that is made, either an element with an existing word in the language or some familiar element.
Examples are travelogue (travel and dialogue), Dictaphone (dictate and telephone), electrocute (electricity and execute) etc.
Words like travelogue and electrocute are called blends or portmanteau.
(vi) Words from Proper Names.
Some words in the language are actually adopted from proper names with which the idea expressed by the words is associated.
Sandwich for example is attributable to the Earl of Sandwich who on one occasion was said to put slices of meat between pieces of bread.
Limousine is a name of a province in France.
Names like Mercedes, Ford, or Volkswagen are cars named after their inventors.
The word boycott was derived from the experience of captain Boycott -an agent of a house owner who refused to accept rent offered by tenants.
His life was threatened, his servants were forced to desert him and his figure was burnt in effigy.
This was in 1880 in Ireland.
Since then the word boycott evolved meaning to force something to happen, by refusing to do something.
We have more of such words in English language.
95ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE (vii) Slang.
Slang could be said to be common words or expressions that do not belong to the standard variety but are generally used in some informal contexts, with some special meaning.
Earlier in the history of the English language slang was rejected as vulgar, or ‘vagabond’.
But in modern times, many slang words like joke, boom, slum, fad, scram, buzz, put-down, vamoose etc are finding their way into formal writing.
(viii) Old Words with New Meanings.
The process of extending the vocabulary of a language also involves attaching new meanings to old-familiar words.
Words like mouse, boot, click, navigate as used today in computing are examples of old words with new meanings.
Skyline initially meant the horizon, now it refers to sky-scrapers.
A record no longer refers to music, but other things from bookkeeping to documentation.
Phrasal verbs like sign-off or stand-by is now mainly used in the media, like take-off (in a plane) kick-off (in football) and call-up (in telephone).
Some words are now better interpreted in the content of users and situations, than their dictionary meaning.
Skyscrapers SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List at least six (6) sources of lexicon in Modern English.
2.
Discuss four (4) contributions of these sources.
3.2 The Oxford English Dictionary It was around 1850 that the inadequacy of existing dictionaries of the English language began to be felt very seriously.
With the increasing amount of new words entering into the language the Johnson’s dictionary for example became far below standard to meet intellectual needs of the modern reader.
The British Philological Society in 1857 appointed a committee to collect words that were not in the dictionaries, with an aim of publishing a supplement to them.
It later decided to produce an entirely new English dictionary, in order to record every word that could be found in the language from around the year 1000.
The dictionary was also to show the history of each word, its spellings and its usage, past and present.
A call for volunteers in the project attracted numerous materials from hundred of readers from all over the world.
By 1879, a formal agreement had been reached with the Oxford University Press, to publish and finance the philological society’s dictionary.
Work on the dictionary was finished around 1895 and was originally known as A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles, but was later called The Oxford English Dictionary.
The completed work was in 10 volumes, with 240,165 main words.
A supplementary volume was published in 1933 containing additions and corrections.
The 96 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 2nd edition of the dictionary contained 290, 500 entries, about 38,000 more than the 1993 supplement.
Three volumes were published between 1993 and 1997.
The dictionary is said to be the biggest of any language in the world.
It provided some data that has helped to answer questions relating to the history of the English language.
It has also influenced the attitude of many people favourably towards the English language by exhibiting the history of words and idioms, their forms and their different levels of usage, and a guide to their pronunciation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 In what ways do you think the Oxford English Dictionary has aided the growth of the English language?
3.3 Spelling Reform You will again recall that spelling has been one of the teething problems of the English language right from the beginning.
This problem continued to plague the language through the time of Shakespeare, to the early part of the 19th century.
Interest was once again renewed in it, and this led to the formation of Spelling Reform Associations in Britain and American.
These associations did not achieve much.
In 1898 the British National Education Association formally adopted twelve simplified spellings for use in its publications.
They are tho, altho, thoro, thorofare, thru, throughout, program, catalog, prolog, decalog, demagog, and pedagog.
While some of these have come into general use, many of them did not get public acceptance.
In 1906 a Simplified Spelling Board emerged in the United States which aimed at publishing 300 words, for which different spellings were used e.g.
(metre, meter, judgment, judgement, encyclopeadia, encyclopedia etc.)
and to recommend the simpler form.
Again this was not well received.
The print media and book publishers continued to use the traditional spelling.
Though these Reform attempts did not achieve much result, they indeed stimulated public interest to the need to achieve a permanent solution to the spelling problem.
But most people believed that a radical change of spelling would not favour many people who were already used to the traditional spelling.
And to many people the written word is as important as the spoken word.
A radical change in spelling would certainly affect meaning to many people.
Popular opinion was that if spelling was ever to be reformed, it must be approached gradually.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Was the idea for Spelling Reform successful?
2.
What was the popular attitude towards the Spelling Reform?
97ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.4 Functional Varieties of English In any community where people use a particular language, there is bound to be differences in speech.
Speech variations are often due to levels of education, differences in culture, professions, status and regional backgrounds of people that have come from different places.
Also varieties are due to contexts in which language is used, as in formal or informal, or to varieties influenced by local or class dialects.
So it is easy to distinguish between standard and non-standard varieties.
Slang for example is a form of non standard variety used mostly in informal contexts.
Modern English has developed a lot of varieties, which we can associate with different classes of people or social groups.
There is the spoken standard, which is the conversational language of educated people.
This variety is marked by conformity to the rules of grammar and pronunciation.
There is also the written standard, which is the language of books and other forms of academic writing.
We can distinguished between spoken and written varieties because spoken standard is often used in informal situations and often characterized by words like trip, daddy, hols etc as against the formal written forms - journey, father and holiday.
Then we have the popular standard of uneducated people which is characterized by slang, pidgin, and coinages.
This variety does not generally conform to the rules of correctness.
But with the movement of English across the world much of this variety also known as vernacular English has evolved in many second language countries.
In Britain the Spoken Standard is known as Received Pronunciation (RP).
This standard varies in different parts of English speaking countries.
It is the type associated with educated people with a high degree of conformity to rules.
It is more of a class variety than regional dialect.
Standard variety is determined by its acceptability and intelligibility (i.e.
sense or meaningfulness) among speakers of English across the world.
In addition to the educated standard, there are regional dialects of English among the English-speaking world.
This is discussed in details in Units 16 and 17.
In Britain regional dialects of English developed right from the old English.
Today we have modern dialects like Welsh, Scot, Irish etc.
each having its several sub-regional varieties, like British English, English English, BBC English, Norn, Scottish English, Welsh English etc.
98 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Can you identify the differences between written and spoken English?
2.
Why do we say that a variety of English is Standard and another non-standard?
3.
What is the difference between social dialect and regional dialect?
4.0 CONCLUSION We can see that Modern English is characterized by further enlargement of its vocabulary through different sources.
And that old dictionaries became inadequate to meet the needs of modern scholarship, hence, the development of the Oxford English dictionary.
Attempts at spelling Reforms failed because publishers and academics remain loyal to traditional spelling.
Modern English is characterized by functional varieties and regional dialects.
5.0 SUMMARY Sources of new words include borrowings, self-explaining compounds, Greek and Latin elements, prefixes and suffixes, coinages, proper names, slang and old words that assumed new meaning.
The Oxford English dictionary was able to provide a more comprehensive inventory of old and new words, as well as idioms in English and provided a guide to their spellings, pronunciation, meanings and usages.
Attempts at a spelling reform failed due to poor response of people to the proposal.
Writers and publishers continued to use the traditional spelling.
And as English continued to grow, varieties of usages naturally emerged.
We can identify distinct spoken and written varieties, standard and non-standard varieties.
As it was the case with old English, regional dialects of English became more complex.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe at least five (5) sources of New English Words.
2.
Why is a variety of English said to be “non-standard” give examples?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge.
Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed.
Cambridge: CUP.
99ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE MODULE 4 Unit 1 Varieties of Modern English Unit 2 English across the World Unit 3 Reasons for the Growth of English as a World Language Unit 4 American English Unit 5 English in Nigeria UNIT 1 VARIETIES OF MODERN ENGLISH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Australia; New Zealand; South Africa 3.2 East and West Africa 3.3 South-East Asia and the Pacific 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The English language continued to grow during the modern period both in the enlargement of its vocabulary and in its spread.
The first signs of the progress of English as a world language began to manifest towards the latter part of the 16th century.
At that time, the number of mother- tongue English speakers in the world was estimated at between five and seven million, all living within Great Britain.
In the period between the end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth I (1603) and the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth II (1950), the number of English speakers rose to between one and half billion to two billion, spread throughout almost all the countries of the world.
Presently there are approximately 75 territories where English is spoken either as the first language, L1 (mother-tongue) or as an official language, L2 (second language).
Countries where English is spoken as a native language (first language) are mainly the UK, USA, Australia, New Zealand and South-Africa.
The dispersals (or diasporas) of English are of two types, first is the first Diaspora involving the migration of about 25,000 people from the South and East of England to America and Australia, resulting in new mother tongue varieties of English.
The second Diaspora, involving the colonization of Africa and Asia, led to the development of a number of 100 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE second language varieties, often referred to as “New Englishes” a table of statistics on world English usage and the country population figures is given in Unit 2 of Module 4.
In this unit we shall be considering varieties of English in Australia, New Zealand, Africa and Asia.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • describe the features of Australian and new Zealand English • distinguish between south African English and some varieties of English in west Africa • identify some general features of English in south-east Asia i.e., Singapore, Malaysia, Philippines, and Hong Kong.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 English in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa (a) English in Australia You were told in the introduction to this Unit that English came to Australia when some English immigrants landed in Australia and America in the 18th century.
The first presence of Britain in Australia was in 1770 when James Cook visited the territory.
In 1788 the first fleet of British settlers including about 130,020 prisoners settled in Sidney, Australia.
From then on immigrants increased rapidly.
By 1850 the population of Australia had risen to about 400,000 and by 1900, nearly 4 million.
As at 2001, the population stood at 19million.
Britain has the highest number of settlers in Australia that is why they have the greater influence on the language than any other.
Many of the convicts or prisoners transported to Australia were from London, and Ireland.
English in Australia is not only characterized by differences in vocabulary but also in pronunciation, with features of Cockney and Irish English.
In fact many of the words in Australian English may not be understood in England or America today.
Some are old words that have acquired new meanings in a new environment.
The Australian Kangaroo and boomerang for example have become general English words but not Wombat which is an Australian animal.
The American ranch (where cattle are reared) is the Australian station.
The term robin in Australia applies to some birds that are unknown in Europe and not just a particular bird as we know it here.
Several words however that are thought to be Australian actually started in Britain, and may still be heard in local British dialects.
Australian accent as we said earlier sounds very much like one of the British dialects known as Cockney, 101ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE especially in the quality of the vowels and diphthongs.
A word pronounced as hay in Australian English may sound as high to an American, or basin as bison (Baugh& Cable 2002).
(b) English in New Zealand New Zealand and Australia are neighbours.
The New Zealand natives are called the Maori.
With the British presence in Australia in 1770, European traders began to settle in New Zealand in the 1790s.
Christian missionary work began among the Maori from 1814.
But official British occupation was in 1840 following the treaty of Waitangi between the Maori chiefs and the British crown.
European immigration grew from 2000 in 1840 to 25,000 by 1850.
And by 1900, it had risen to about 750,000.
The total population as at 2001 was 3.8 million.
Three factors in the New Zealand social history have had some linguistic consequences in New Zealand English in the 20th century.
First is that New Zealand has had a stronger sense of historical relationship with Britain compared to Australia They had imbibed more of British cultures and values, including the British accent.
Secondly, New Zealand had developed a deep sense of national identity which had motivated a distinctive New Zealand vocabulary and thirdly, there has been an increase awareness and use of Maori words in New Zealand English arising from the need to recognize the rights of Maori people who constitute about 13% of the entire population.
Studies in New Zealand English show that the British Received Pronunciation (RP) is still the most highly rated in education while the local accent is more preferred in social communication and solidarity.
(c) South African English South Africa was colonized by the Dutch in 1650’s but the British arrived the country at about 1795 when they colonized the Cape coast, and did not begin to settle in large numbers until 1820.
The majority of the Cape settlers came from Southern England, though there were some sizeable number from Ireland and Scotland.
In the 1850 further settlements occurred in the Natal region, from Yorkshire and Lancaster, still in Britain.
From 1822 when English was declared the official language, it was also learnt as a second language by the black natives.
The native language is called Afrikaans.
The English language vocabulary has got some elements from Afrikaans and Dutch influences which are passed to general use today.
For example, apartheid, commando, commandeer, and trek are used today in such a way that one hardly recognizes their South African origin.
As in Australian English a number of English words are used in new senses.
The history of apartheid in South Africa has given new meanings to location (where 102 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE black Africans were required to live) lands (those locations required for farming alone), divide (water shade) up country etc.
In pronunciation, the South African English has been much influenced by the pronunciation of Afrikaans, where we have ‘pen’ for pin or ‘ceb’ for cab.
The South African shares with the American English in some general ways especially with pronunciation of /r/.
The mainstream South Africa English however, does not have /r/ after vowels but this consonant is often pronounced by speakers with an Afrikaans back ground.
The South African variety of English refers to English used by those who speak English as their mother tongue.
SELFASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Distinguish between the Australian English and the New Zealand English.
2.
Describe some features of South African English.
3.2 East and West Africa (a) English in East Africa East African countries were colonized by the British from the 1850s, following the expeditions of British explorers such as David Livingstone and Richard Burton.
English was the language of administration, education and law.
Most of the countries gained independence from the early 1960s but English remained the official language in Uganda, Zambia, Malawi, and Kenya although Swahili was used as lingua franca in Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania.
Because of the large numbers of British emigrants that settled in these areas, British English model was introduced early in schools, re-enforcing the Standard English brought by the missionaries.
The result was a mother-tongue variety which was similar to the Australian or South-African English.
The influence of British English in East African countries gave them a strong model to learn a second language.
Secondly there was little motivation for the development of pidgin varieties following the widespread of Standard English.
It may be difficult to discuss some distinct features of the varieties of English that may have emerged in these countries over the years in this short sub-heading.
But Baugh and Cable (2002) have observed certain general features of lexis and grammar in some of these East African countries including Kenya, Tanzania Uganda, Malawi and Ethiopia which are quite noticeable.
For example, some phrasal verbs in British lose their adverbial particles; pick up for instance is simply ‘pick’, drop off is used as ‘drop’ while crop up is simply ‘crop’.
Some nouns in Kenyan and Tanzanian colloquial speech have some plural forms that are treated as Singulars; e.g.
behaviours, minds, laps, noses, and popcorns.
103ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE (b) English in West Africa English in West Africa is linked with colonization and slave trade and the development of pidgin and Creole languages.
From the late 15th century upwards British traders had visited various coastal areas in West Africa including Nigeria, Ghana, Gambia, Sierra Leone and Cameroon.
There were no strong British settlements in these territories, but with British colonial administration, English became the lingua franca (or the official language), in these countries.
Pidgin and creoles which developed from English contact were now spoken by many people along with hundreds of local languages.
Right now the English spoken by many of these countries have developed certain features which make it possible to identify such varieties of Nigerian English, Ghanaian English or Gambian English.
However it is difficult to say whether some features that are distinct to some countries are also available in others.
But one thing is clear; distinct features of these varieties can be found mainly on the amount of loan-words from local languages and some coinages that identify national institutions and practices.
But in many cases standard West African English varieties are similar to British Standard English especially in grammar and speech sounds.
And standard is also to be found in the lexicon except in cases where English words assume new meanings to reflect the local context.
Interestingly some words are used in two or three countries mentioned above, with exactly the same form and meaning examples are ‘chop’, meaning food in Sierra Leone, Ghana, and the Gambia.
In the Nigerian pidgin it is also used as eat (verb).
Kola is used as fruit for stimulant, traditional symbol of unity, and bribery, especially in Ghana and Nigeria.
Stranger is used for guest in Sierra Leone and in non-standard Nigeria English.
Aunty (aunt) is used to address any woman older than you are, or a friend of your parent in Nigeria.
Danfo (minibus), globe (bulb), machine/okada (motor-cycle), yellow-fever (traffic warden) cash-madam (wealthy woman), area-boys (street urchins), go-slow (traffic jam) in Nigeria; rentage (rent) in Sierra Leone; slowly-slowly in Ghana etc.
All these comparisons show us that countries have developed full-fledged varieties that explain the influence of the environment and culture on the language.
However it will be difficult to identify particular West African standard varieties since varieties differ from country to country.
We shall look more closely at the Nigerian English in Unit 5 of Module 4.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Describe the differences between East African English and West African English.
2.
Do you agree that there is a West African Variety of English?
104 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.3 English in South-East Asia and the Pacific Countries in this region include Brunei, Cambodia, Fiji Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
But we shall briefly look at some varieties of English in Singapore, Malaysia, Philippines, and Hong Kong.
(a) English in Singapore Singapore was a part of Malaysia which was a British colony from the early 19th century until 1957 when it gained its independence.
Singapore became a separate state two years later and has experienced some economic and social growth during the 20th century.
English was an important language of government business and education.
It was in the 1950s that a bilingual educational system was introduced and English was used as a neutral, unifying language alongside local languages such as Chinese, Malay, Tamil and Mandarin.
Since 1975 the use of English in Singapore has increased steadily among the general population.
However key government bodies, including the founder of the independent state of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew had expressed concern over the loss of Asian cultures and values and had begun to promote the use of local languages, especially Mandarin, a popular local language.
The majority of the Singaporean population is Chinese while Malays are their natural neighbours.
This different cultural settings no doubt affected the history of English in the region.
Due to the widespread interest in the English language, it may not be surprising that a local variety, which may be called Singaporean English, has emerged.
According to Baugh and Cable (2002), some specific features of English in Singapore and Malaysia resemble some English-based Creole or vernacular in other parts of the word.
For example the omission of be as an operator e.g.
‘the man-healthy,’ omitting is or as an auxiliary (the work - going on fine; instead of ‘the work is going on fine’).
No doubt lexical items that do not have direct English equivalents would have found their way into the Singaporean English; there may also have been some direct borrowings from the local languages.
(b) English in Malaysia The situation is different in Malaysia following the Malaysian independence in 1957.
The local language Bahasa Malaysia was adopted as the national language and the use of English declined.
By the middle of the 1980’s the local national language had helped in unifying the different ethnic population but it had also restricted many Malaysians from reading English or scientific publications.
There are about 80 languages spoken in Malaysia.
English is still being offered at school and the traditional prestige attached to it still exists, but its use is more 105ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE for international purpose rather than national.
The users are mainly the educated elite who often code switch between English and Malay.
The presence of the vocabulary of Malay in English is gradually becoming a feature of Malaysian English.
Like the Singaporean English, Malaysian English grammar is slightly different from that of the Standard English.
A Malaysian would say: may I know how do I get there?
Rather than May I know how to get there; or May I ask where does the cab stop?
Than May I ask where the cab stops etc.
(c) Hong Kong English We are singling out Hong Kong from among its East Asian neighbours like China, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan because it is a country where English is an official language due to its colonial history .
Chinese is the mother-tongue of over 98% of the population.
In recent years however, say 1992, it was estimated that about a quarter of the population speak English.
English and Chinese have joint official status but Chinese predominates in most speech situations, often with code-switching.
During the British colonial administrations, from 1847 till 1997, British and Chinese communities led separate lives due to language barriers, racial prejudice and cultural differences.
When they made business contacts communications was mainly in Pidgin English.
During this period English was largely restricted to colonial use as the language of government, law and education.
But during the 20th century, Western- educated Chinese elite began to get involved in business and the professions, and English ceased to be colonial language to a language of wider communication in Hong Kong regions.
However, Hong Kong English has not yet been accepted as an autonomous variety of English.
Its existence is acknowledged but it is not a variety which the Hong Kong English speakers will aspire.
As a result, majority of speakers including English teachers still recommend British English as the Standard in terms of grammar.
Like other varieties of modern English the Hong Kong English has its peculiar accent, and lexis.
Bolton (2000) for example provides some Hong Kong English items such as abbreviations; English words with new meaning and borrowed words from Chinese.
ABC for instance stands for (Australian/American-born-Chinese); canto-speak (speaker of the Cantonese language), astronaut (a senior public servant), bo lei (a variety of strong black tea) big brother an eldest male sibling in a family); chit (bill) etc.
(See Jenkins, 2003).
(d) English in Philippines The Philippines gained their political independence from the United States in1946 and have retained a strong influence of the American 106 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE English.
English is the second language of the Philippines, while Filipino is the official Lingual Franca.
Both English and Filipino are the language of education, but English serves as the language of wider communication.
The Philippines English variety has been identified since the late 1980, with its peculiar pronunciation, grammar and vocabulary.
A considerable difference also exists between the English of the older and younger generations, along with variations in use among proficient English users ranging from informal usage to standard Philippines English for speech and writing (with code switching).
Code switching is when a speaker switches between two languages at once.
About 37 million people in Philippines speak English with same reasonable level of competence.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Describe some general features of English in South-East Asia.
2.
Compare and contrast between English in Malaysia with English in Singapore.
3.
Identify some features of Hong Kong English.
4.0 CONCLUSION The spread of English as a result of the migration of native speakers of English from England to the Australia and the New World (USA) gave rise to emergence of new mother-tongue varieties of English.
While the British colonization of Asia and Africa resulted in the growth of new modern Englishes.
In South East Asia and Africa, English has assumed the status of second language with a considerable number of the population having recognizable skills in spoken and written English.
English in these countries have since developed native varieties which form the world Englishes.
5.0 SUMMARY The growth of English as a world language can be seen from the rapid growing varieties of English across the world, with the number of speakers having reached over 2 billion in the 20th century.
Countries where English is the mother-tongue are Britain, USA, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa.
English in East and West Africa, South- East Asia and the Pacific serves as the official or national language.
All the varieties of English (native and non-native) have their peculiar features ranging from differences in accent and pronunciation, grammar and vocabulary.
This is due to differences of environments, cultures and experience.
107ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why is the British linguistic culture more evident in the New Zealand English than in Australian English?
2.
Compare and contrast between English in East and West Africa with English in South-East Asia?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge.
Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed Cambridge: CUP.
Jenkins, J (2003).
World Englishes: a Resource Book for Students.
London: Routledge.
108 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 2 ENGLISH ACROSS THE WORLD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 South Africa 3.2 The Caribbean 3.3 Canada 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit is a continuation of Unit 1 of Module 4 in which we began to examine the spread of the English language across the world with distinct modern second language varieties known as “new Englishes.” In the previous unit we saw the varieties of English in South-East Asia and the Pacific Islands, specifically Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines and Hong Kong.
In this Unit we shall be examining the South Asian variety of English, alongside Canada and the Caribbean.
We are interested in some specific countries because of the direct British influence through colonization.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: • describe some general features of south-Asian English • distinguish between Canadian English and Caribbean English.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 English in South-Asia South Asian English refer to varieties in Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
Together they account for about a fifth of the world population.
Within this group only Indian and Lankan Englishes are well developed and well documented.
We shall concentrate only on Indian English.
Unlike Bangladesh and Pakistan where English is used mainly for official purposes, English in India performs a neutral unifying role like in Nigeria, serving as a language of communication across a people of diverse cultures.
India was colonized by Britain from 109ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 1765 until independence in 1947.
During this period English was the language of administration and education.
The earliest English language policy was contained in Macaulay’s famous ‘minute’ passed shortly after his arrival in Calcutta as the British head of the Indian Supreme Council in 1834.
Thomas Macaulay served in India as the British Representative for four years.
His ‘minute’ (i.e.
bill) presented the case for a new English subculture in the region.
When the Universities of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras were founded in 1857, English became the primary medium of instruction thereby establishing its status and steady growth during the next century.
Today English in India performs both public and private functions in a variety that has developed its own sound system, grammatical structure and vocabulary.
English is recognised as the next official language after Hindi following the 1950 Constitution of India which declared Hindi the official national language, and English was made the ‘associate’ official language by the 1967 Official Language (Amendment) Act.
This means that English would continue to be used alongside Hindi in all official matters at the national level.
In adapting to local cultures and environment, Indian English has evolved its own characteristics through the interaction of Indian languages and social behaviours with those of English.
For speakers of Hindi for instance, English words that begin with sk, st or sp is usually pronounced with an initial vowel, since Hindi does not permit, sk or st at the beginning of words.
So an Hindi speaker would pronounce a word like ‘standard’ – ‘istandard’; ‘skim’ would be ‘iskim’.
And in some varieties of Indian English /v/ and /w/ sounds are not usually differentiated.
Words like ‘vet’ and ‘wet’ for instance would sound the same way.
Greetings and remarks showing politeness in English are something like kindly please advise me; invite your kind attention,; bow my forehead; blessed my hovel with the good dust of your feet etc.
Modes of address are often like king of pearls; policewala etc.
Compliments include helloji, thank youji, doctorji etc.
The additional suffix is probably an item from the Hindi.
(See Baugh & Cable 2002; Jenkins, 2003).
Indian English is also characterised by a great deal of code switching or code mixing.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Describe some features of Indian English.
2.
Why is the Indian variety of English more developed than those of Bangladesh and Pakistan?
110 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.2 Caribbean English English in the Caribbean countries like Jamaica, Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago, Cuba, Haiti etc.
are characterised by the use of Pidgin and the English based Creole.
Creole is pidgin that has native speakers with fairly stable features.
Creole like pidgin is a combination of an European language (e.g.
English) and other languages.
In most of the Anglophone Caribbean islands, the language contacts are those of West Africa and the African languages spoken by the slaves brought to the Caribbean during the slave trade.
Rather than describe this variety as “English Creole” some scholars prefer to describe it as “Caribbean Creole” or West Indian Creole.
However a variety of Standard English exists in the Caribbean countries as an official means of communication among the educated minority.
The American variety of English is preferred even by the mass media due to an increasing influence of USA in the local economies.
Each of the English-speaking countries in the region has to some extent developed its own variety of standard language through variations in accent and vocabulary to reflect indigenous cultural practices.
Some of these English-based varieties show some contact with other languages such as French, Spanish, Portuguese and Dutch.
But it is clear that the varieties of the Caribbean have much in common due to the shared history and linguistic heritage of the people.
No wonder, the concept of Standard West Indian English has begun to emerge.
A shared feature of Caribbean English is the West Indian accent which sounds much like the West African tone language feature.
Syllables tend to be equally stressed.
Consequently, unstressed syllables in most English accents are given prominence.
The schwa /ə/ is usually stressed so that a word like Peter /pitə/ would sound like /pi:ta/; bigger /biga/; photo /fọto/ will sound like /foto/ etc.
This often causes intelligibility problem with those not familiar with the style of speech.
Vowels like /a/, /ọ/, /ọ:/ merge, so that words lie God, pot and caught are pronounced the same.
Words like teeth are pronounced /tit/, father /fada/ and think /tink/.
There are few prominent differences in grammar in the standard varieties of Caribbean English but some features mark them off as Creole English.
An example is the problem with differentiating between the uses of will and would, shall and should etc.
which is a problem common with most learners of English in West African countries.
The Caribbean English however has added some new vocabulary to Standard English.
Most of these loan words reflect the Caribbean environment, the people’s traditional behaviour and religious customs.
Those that have entered into Standard English include reggae, calypso, dreadlocks, 111ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Rasta, etc.
Some of the words are restricted to the regions they belong.
Words like duppy (ghost) ganja (weed) susumba (a type of plant), watchy (watchman) belongs to Jamaican English while words like boar- hog (boar) roti (a type of bread), and congolala (a type of medicinal plant) are found in Trinidad and Tobago English.
A large number of words in Caribbean English can also be traced to African languages.
SELF ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Describe some general features of Caribbean English.
2.
Identify at least five (5) words that Caribbean English has contributed to Standard English.
3.3 English in Canada Earlier settlers in Canada were from the United States, so the American English has had the strongest influence in Canadian English.
However, features of British pronunciation and spelling are observable on the Canadian variety.
English and French are the two official languages in Canada, again creating a possible influence between the two languages.
Both British and American English no doubt have supplied Canadian English with features with American influence dominating.
The use of linguistic features from British English (BrE) or American (AmE) however varies from person to person depending on age, education, sex, occupation and location.
For instance the AmE is more popular with young people throughout Canada than with elderly people.
Some features originate in Canada and are peculiarly Canadian, while some are BrE, AmE and French.
Words like aboiteau (dam), creditiste (member of the Social Credit Party), salt-chuck (ocean), skookum (powerful) etc.
are Canadian.
A word like Prime Minister is used at the federal level while Premier is regional.
Some cultural or political institutions in Quebec for example are called bloc Quebecois or Caisse Populaire, which are words of French origin.
Canadian English (CaE) spelling incorporates both British and American.
The British ‘tyre’ is often spelt ‘tire’ in CaE while the American ‘center’ is spelt the British ‘centre,’ showing that CaE cannot be identified completely with either the AmE or BrE.
Similarly, both AmE and BrE varieties provide sources of vocabulary to the CaE.
The British tap (AmE faucet), railway (AmE railroad), AmE gas (BrE Petrol), sidewalk (BrE pavement) etc are used side by side though usages vary from place to place.
Pronunciation lean more towards the British model.
However, some general impression about English in Canada is that one hardly differentiates between what is Canadian and what is American.
112 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Describe the Canadian English.
2.
Why does the American variety tend to have the greater influence on the Canadian English?
4.0 CONCLUSION English in South Asian countries, together with West Indian English is among modern varieties of English know as new world Englishes.
English became the official of these regions through British colonial influences in Asia, and the slave trade in Africa between the 16th and 19th centuries.
The American earliest settlement in Canada contributed a great deal to the influence of the American English on the Canadian English.
5.0 SUMMARY Among the South Asian Countries, India and Sri Lanka have the most developed and documented varieties of new world Englishes.
India’s long history of British Colonial influence gave it a strong backing to adopt a national language policy that favoured the growth and spread of English in the country.
Today about 350 million Indians speak English as their first language.
Though a variety of Standard English exists in the Caribbean as the official medium of communication among a few educated people, the Caribbean English is more of English-based Pidgin and Creole.
All the Caribbean varieties share a common feature of pronunciation but different use of vocabularies, which serves as a pointer to the region that supplies some particular words.
The Caribbean English is significantly influenced by languages of the West coast of Africa including Hausa, Efik, Igbo, Yoruba and Twi.
Lastly, you have seen that Canadian English is largely influenced by the American English, British English and French.
However some lexical items are peculiarly Canadian.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe some general features of the Indian English.
2.
Differentiate between the Caribbean English and the Canadian English.
113ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Baugh A.C, Cable .T.
(2001).
A History of the English Language, 5th Ed.
London: Routledge.
Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed.
Cambridge: CUP.
Jenkins, J (2003).
World Engllishes: A Resource Book for Students, London: Routledge.
114 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 3 THE GROWTH OF ENGLISH AS A WORLD LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Reasons for the Growth of English as a World Language 3.2 Data of World English 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 4 of Module 3, we looked at some influences on Modern English.
And in that study, we identified the contributions of Science and Medicine, Information Technology, Engineering and the Mass Media to the enrichment of the English vocabulary.
In this unit we shall consider how some of these factors among others have aided the growth and spread of English as a world language.
In the last two units, we saw how English moved from its native shores in Britain with about seven million speakers in the early part of the 17th century to almost every part of the world with more than 2 billion speakers, most of the speakers being those whom English is not their mother tongue.
In most of the countries where English functions as a second official language, different standard and non-standard varieties have developed with features that are peculiar to regions and cultural practices.
What reasons are responsible for this astronomical growth of the English Language?
We shall attempt to answer this question in this unit.
We shall also provide a data showing the state of World English in terms of the countries and number of speakers as at 2001.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss factors that are responsible for the growth of English as a world language • suggest what the future of English may look like.
115ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Reasons for the Growth of English as a World Language The dispersal of English around the world can be linked with some factors, the most important ones being the expansion of British colonial powers and the emergence of the USA as a leading economic power of the 20th century.
Let us look at them more closely: (a) British Colonial Influences The movement of English around the world began with the British colonial powers in America, Asia and Africa.
English was essentially the language of administration, law, education and religion.
In most of the colonies, English was made compulsory in school and became a major requirement for social advancement or privileges.
Individuals had no choice but learn English if they wanted to make any social progress.
Upon the attainment of independence the 20th century many of the former British colonies adopted English as their official or semi-official language.
English is now represented in all the continents of the world in over 70 territories.
(b) Emergence of the United States as a World Economic Power The USA’s ever rising and dominant economic position in the world acts as a major attraction to international trade and allied businesses.
Individuals and organizations wishing to conduct business or develop international links with the USA are thus under considerable pressure to either learn English or work with it.
Tourism and advertising for instance are particularly dependent on English while any multi-national business would want to establish offices in major English-speaking countries and particularly in the United States.
(c) Internal Political Reasons Whether a country had been a former British colony or not, it is clear that English may have a role in providing a neutral means of communication, among its different ethnic groups.
A distinctive local variety may stand as a symbol of national unity.
(d) Some Practical Reasons English is the language of international air traffic control, policing and emergency services.
It is the major language of international business and academic conferences and the leading language of international tourism.
116 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE (e) Language of the United Nations (UN) English is an official language of the UN, before French.
Most businesses of the UN or its Agencies are conducted in English, and member countries of the UN are again under pressure to learn English.
(f) Intellectual Reasons Because of its versatile nature, English has become the language of science and technology, which is able to transmit scientific and educational information across the world.
Over 80% of all information which is stored in electronic (computer) retrieval systems is in English.
Scholars, who wish to have access to information relating to the arts, philosophy, religion, literature or history at a global level, do so through the medium of English.
In most parts of the world, the only way by which people have access to classical writing on a range of subjects is to look for their English translations.
(g) The Language of International Media Communication English is the main language of Satellite Broadcasting.
International news on CNN, BBC or VOA is transmitted in English and the influence of international communication on the local mass media is a very strong one.
English has become the language of local newspapers, televisions, radio and advertising in many countries of the world.
(h) The Language of Entertainment English is the main language of popular music and performing arts.
It is also the language of home computers, video games and entertainment programmes in the mass media.
These reasons and many others which you may be familiar with are very strong in propelling English to its present status of a world language.
117ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 3.2 World English Country Pop (2001) Total L1 Total L2 American Samoa 67,000 2,000 65,000 Australia 18,972,000 14,987,000 3,500,000 Bahamas 298,000 260,000 28,000 Bangladesh 131,270,000 3,500,000 Barbados 275,000 262,000 13,000 Bermuda 63,000 63,000 Botswana 1,586,000 630,000 British Virgin Is.
20,800 20,000 Brunei 344,000 10,000 134,000 Cameroon 15,900,000 7,700,000 Canada 31,600,000 20,000,000 7,000,000 Dominica 70,000 3,000 60,000 Fiji 850,000 6,000 170,000 Gambia 1,411,000 40,000 Gibraltar 31,000 28,000 2,000 Grenada 100,000 100,000 Guyana 700,000 650,000 30,000 Hong Kong 7,210,000 150,000 2,200,000 India 1,029,991,000 350,000 200,000,000 Ireland 3,850,000 3,750,000 100,000 Jamaica 2,665,000 2,600,000 50,000 Kenya 30,766,000 2,700,000 Lesotho 2,177,000 500,000 Liberia 3,226,000 600,000 2,500,000 Malawi 10,548,000 540,000 Malaysia 22,230,000 380,000 7,000,000 Malta 395,000 13,000 95,000 Mauritius 1,190,000 2,000 200,000 Namibia 1,800,000 14,000 300,000 New Zealand 3,864,000 3,700,000 150,000 Nigeria 126,636,000 60,000,000 Pakistan 145,000,000 17,000.000 Papua New Guinea 5,000,000 150,000 3,000,000 Philippines 83,000,000 20,000 40,000,000 Puerto Rico 3,937,000 100,000 1,840,000 Rwanda 7,313,000 20,000 St. Lucia 158,000 31,000 40,000 Samoa 180,000 1,000 93,000 Seychelles 80,000 3,000 30,000 Sierra Leone 5,427,000 500,000 4,400,000 Singapore 4,300,000 350,000 2,000,000 118 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE South Africa 43,586,000 3,700,000 10,000,000 Sri Lanka 19,400,000 10,000 1,900,000 Suriname 434,000 260,000 150,000 Swaziland 1,140,000 50,000 Tanzania 36,232,000 4,000,000 Trinidad & Tobago 1,170,000 1,145,000 Uganda 23,986,000 2,500,000 United Kingdom 59,648,000 58,100,000 1,500,000 United States 278,059,000 215,424,000 25,600,000 Zambia 9,770,000 110,000 1,800,000 Zimbabwe 11,365,000 25,000 15,000 Source: Crystal (2002) * L1 stands for speakers of English as their first language * L2 stands for speakers of English as their second language 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion therefore, we can say that English did not just jump into its present world prominence.
Historical, political, economic and intellectual reasons have been responsible.
But you may ask, what is the future of English?
Is it still going to remain a world language in the next one hundred years?
Some scholars have tried to suggest answers by trying to answer the question of what makes a language a world language (as we have discussed above) and what had been responsible for the decline of previous world languages like Latin or French.
Rather than decline, some scholars are optimistic that English will develop a larger number of local varieties across the world because presently, English has shifted from being a foreign language of many countries to being a second language.
And more people are learning English almost on a daily basis.
In many countries, English language programmes are run in schools and institutions of higher learning.
And as it continues to serve as a main medium of international communication, it is likely to sustain greater mutual intelligibility and common standards.
And because it encourages the development of local varieties, it may continue to act as a language of identify for many people across the world.
Other factors such as number of young speakers and the rate of urbanization in different countries, the rate of development in countries, such as literacy and education provision, the population of native speakers who are literate and capable generating intellectual resources in English must also be considered in order to be sure that English will retain its present world status.
119ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 5.0 SUMMARY English is a world language today because of its historical advantage as a colonial language.
And being the first language of the USA, again due to British influence, the rise in the status of the country as the world leading economic power, has naturally promoted the growth of the language.
English is the language of international communication and education; science and technology, and general knowledge.
It is also the language of the United Nations, the language of air traffic control, policing, advertising and entertainment.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss five (5) factors that are responsible for the growth of English as a world language.
2.
Do you think English will remain a world language in the next 50 years?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed.
Cambridge.
Jenkins, J (2003).
World Englishes: A Resource Book for Students.
London: Routledge.
120 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 4 AMERICAN ENGLISH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 English in America 3.2 Features of the American English (AmE) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have already noted in Unit 3 of Module 4 that the rise of the United States of America as a world social and economic power is one of the primary factors that gave the English language its present status as a world language.
And the American English (AmE) being one of the new mother tongue varieties that has had some influence on a number of world Englishes, it is important to look more closely at its features.
First, you will be introduced to how English came to America to begin with and how it developed features that distinguish it from the British English (BrE).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • narrate briefly the history of the American English • describe the features of the AmE • distinguish between the AmE and British English (BrE).
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 English in America The first British expedition to America was in 1584 led by Walter Raleigh.
The explorers came from the west and east of England and landed in North Carolina, near Roanoke Island.
This group of explorers could not settle permanently there due to some conflict with the native Indian population.
However they came back and eventually settled permanently in 1607 at Chesapeake Bay and called their settlement Jamestown (after James 1).
The area where they occupied they named Virginia (after the “virgin Queen” Elizabeth).
Subsequent settlements 121ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE followed.
In 1620 some missionaries arrived but being unable to reach Virginia, they landed further north and settled at what is now known as Plymouth, Massachusetts in New England.
Both settlements spread rapidly and attracted other immigrants.
Because of the different linguistic backgrounds of these people, certain differences in their accents of the English language became glaring.
The settlers in Virginia came from the west of England spoke their peculiar accent with its voicing of ‘r’ and‘s’ after vowels.
So that in a word like ‘far’, the ‘r’ sounds.
Those that settled in Massachusetts were mainly from the east of England and did not have this accent.
During the 17th century more immigrants, with English backgrounds came to America and settled in places like Pennsylvania and New York, thus people speaking various varieties of English began to live side by side.
During this period too, slave trade flourished and slaves were transported from West Africa to the United States and the Caribbean.
The Englishes that developed among the slaves were initially pidgin, but with their use as mother tongue following the birth of a new generation, Creole developed.
In the 18th century there was a mass migration of people from Ireland to America which started from 1600.
Many of them settled in the coastal areas of Philadelphia and southern part of California.
By the time of American independence in 1776 about 15% of the population was Scot Irish.
The accent that emerged is mostly associated with the present-day American speech.
The Quest for Growth of the American English The growth of English and literary culture in America was not as rapid as it was in England.
America was intellectually dependent on Britain and American presses were said to be printing and publishing mainly British books and magazines.
American scholars began to feel that the dearth of books by recognized American writers was responsible for the lack of lexical growth of the American English.
Thousands of new words were being created all over America but they were not reaching the wider population through literatures.
So the issue of language development which had preoccupied British intellectuals during the 18th century was to engage the attention of American scholars in the 19th century.
Noah Webster was one of such scholars.
He wrote the Dissertations on the English (1789) and proposed the institution of “American Standard” and argued that as a newly independent nation, America deserved an independent system, including language.
Spelling reform was to be a major step in this direction which would mark a distinct American orthography.
Webster himself did not implement a radical spelling reform in his A Compendious Dictionary of the English Language (1806) but it was a great achievement which took the development of the American English to a new unique level.
A vast 122 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE variety of innovations began to appear in the emerging literary works of Americans of the 19th century.
By 1860’s the American spelling system had become fully established.
Not only in spelling, some grammatical forms and vocabulary which could be identified as clearly American began to emerge as well.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Explain the process of the movement of English to the American soil.
2.
Discuss the contributions of Noah Webster to the development of the American English.
3.2 Features of the American English In order to properly see the extent of deviation or difference from the British English, we shall look at the uniqueness of the AmE by comparing it with the BrE.
And we shall do this at the levels of spelling, vocabulary, grammar and pronunciation.
The list of examples we shall provide is in no wide exhaustive.
(i) Differences in Spelling AmE BrE (or) (our) color colour favor favour honor honour etc.
(dgment) (dgement) acknowledgment acknowledgement judgment judgement etc.
(o) (ou) mold mould smolder smoulder etc (er) (re) center centre liter litre theater theatre etc 123ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE (e) (ae/oe) fetus foetus medieval mediaeval maneuver manoeuvre (se) (ce) defense defence license licence offense offence (in) (en) indorse endorse insure ensure etc (single consonant) (double consonants) counselor counsellor libelous libellous quarreling quarelling (double consonants) (single consonant) fulfillment fulfilment installment instalement skillful skilful Others Spelling Differences Check cheque Draft draught Gage gauge Mustache moustache Plow plough Program programme Story storey Sulfur sulphur Tire tyre Whisky whiskey etc.
124 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Differences in Vocabulary AmE BrE Faucet tap Muffler silencer Candy sweets Driver’s license driving license Generator dynamo Zero nought, nil Line queue To ring to call Game match Soccer football Gas petrol Airplane aeroplane Casket coffin Cookie biscuit Corn maize Diaper nappy Drapes curtains Bookstore bookshop Living room sitting room Smock overall Bill bank note Flash light touch tight Headlamp headlight Candidature candidacy Centennial centenary Cook cookery Racist, racism racialist, racialism Transportation transport etc.
Differences in Grammar AmE BrE I’ll see you at the weekend I’ll see you during the weekend It’s twenty after four it’s twenty past four I haven’t seen her in ages I haven’t seen her for ages Monday through Friday Monday to Friday inclusive Sundays we go to church On Sundays we go to church I looked out the window I looked out of the window Half the cash goes for clothes Half the cash goes on clothes They live on Broad street They live in Broad street I moved toward the car I moved towards the car Do you have the time?
Have you got the time?
125ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE The house was burned down The house was burnt down It’s a half hour It’s half an hour We shall see in the future We shall see in future She is still in the hospital She is still in hospital The government is democratic The government are democratic I’ll go momentarily I’ll go in a moment I feel real good I feel really good etc.
Differences in Pronunciation Item AmE BrE (RP) Asthma ‘azma ‘asma Chassis tȓȓȓȓ asi:s ‘ȓȓȓȓ asi:s Clerk klзrk kla:k Clique klik kli:k Data deitə da:tə Leisure ‘lizə ‘lezə Medicine ‘medisin ‘medsin Erase i’reis i’reiz Missile ‘misəl ‘misail Lieutenant lu:’tenənt lef’tenənt Schedule ‘skedzuəl ‘ȓȓȓȓ edju:l Z zi: zed etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Describe some features of American grammar.
2.
Different between AmE spelling from BrE spelling.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Americans have established for themselves a language culture and uniqueness that is peculiar to their environment.
It is one mother tongue variety of the English that has influenced other varieties including the Canadian and the British English itself.
Today the AmE is noticeable in many new Englishes in Asia, and Africa.
5.0 SUMMARY English came to America in the 17th century following the first British settlement in Virginia in 1620.
Some later groups landed in Massachusetts, Philadelphia, New York and some other parts of the United States.
English was then established as the colonial language of administration and social communication.
Different settlers with different linguistic backgrounds also meant distinct varieties and accents 126 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE of English.
Pidgin and Creole developed in Caribbean following the transportation of black slaves to the new world.
This was the beginning of new Englishes in the United States.
Concern for linguistic and literary development was rather slow in America.
With the scholarly efforts and writings of American scholars like Noah Webster, a new- awakening for purely American linguistic identity was born.
America had obtained its political independence in 1776, and this new feeling and hunger for a new nation aided the emergence of what is today known as American English.
The uniqueness of the American variety can be seen in its distinct spelling, grammar, vocabulary and pronunciation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare and contrast between the American English spelling with that of the British.
2.
Write at least fifteen (15) words that are American and give their British equivalents.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Crystal (2002).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of English Language, 2nd Ed.
Cambridge: CUP.
Jenkins, J (2003).
World Englishes: A Resource Book for Students.
London: Routledge.
Trudgil, P & Jean, H. (1982).
International English.
London: Edward Arnold.
127ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE UNIT 5 ENGLISH IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How English Came to Nigeria 3.2 English in Nigeria Today 3.3 Varieties of the Nigerian English 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will agree with me that the English language in Nigeria today no longer functions as a colonial language.
It is rather a neutral language of wider communication among the various ethnic groups and cultures in Nigeria.
And as the first official language, it has been the language of political administration, law, education, commerce and industry etc.
Because of the multilingual and multicultural nature of the Nigerian society most Nigerian speakers of English operate within a variety of the Nigerian English as the language responds to factors of the environment in which it finds itself.
In this unit, we shall briefly consider the history of English in Nigeria,, the emergence of the Nigerian English and varieties of English in Nigeria today.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • narrate briefly the history of English in Nigeria • explain what is known as the ‘Nigerian English’ • describe the varieties of English in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 How English Came to Nigeria English did not come to Nigeria with colonialism; it came before it.
Though the exact date was not recorded, historians believe that English was spoken in old Calabar as a result of about 400 years of cultural and trade contact with Europe.
In his Christian Missions in Nigeria (1965) Ajayi says that English was the only European language spoken by 128 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE Calabar traders and that Hope Waddel did find intelligent journals of the affairs of the region in English, as far back as 1767.
Nigeria’s earliest contact with Europe particularly the Portuguese was in the 15th century in places like Warri, Brass and Calabar before the slave trade.
Communication between the natives and the Portuguese merchants was initially very difficult.
The result was an emergence of a Pidgin English which was a mixture of the indigenous language and the Portuguese dialect of the English language.
The new pidgin soon became influential and eventually displaced Portuguese as the language of commerce.
Further trade contacts with English traders and sea captains made the Pidgin English the chief coastal trade language of the earliest times.
The coming of professional interpreters to Nigeria is another fundamental factor that implanted English in Nigeria.
The interpreters or clerks were freed slaves from Monrovia and Freetown.
Since they could speak English due to their many years in England, USA and the Caribbean, the abolition of the slave trade in the early 19th century meant a new life for them.
Many of them came to Nigeria to work as clerks in government and interpreters between European traders and the indigenous people.
Some Nigerian freed slaves in Freetown also came back to their original homes in Lagos, Badagry and Abeokuta and this meant a stronger influence of English in Nigeria.
The abolition of the slave trade in 1807-1808 in Britain and United States forced European slave traders to seek alternative source of trade in the interiors taking the English language further into the rural areas.
It was already on record that Mungo Park in 1795 discovered that River Niger flowed eastwards and that trade was possible between the eastern regions and the west.
Missionary activities also contributed to the establishing of English in Nigeria.
The coming of Rev.
Thomas Freeman to Badagry in 1842, Rev.
Hope Waddel of the Church of Scotland to Calabar in 1846 and Rev.
Samuel Edgerly and others to Duke Town, Calabar in 1854 began the phase of formal acquisition of English in Nigeria.
The missionaries established schools and taught their converts in Standard English.
The Church Missionary Society (CMS) founded two schools in Badagry and a station in Abeokuta in 1846.
The Methodist Church founded the Methodist Boys High School, Lagos in 1876, while Hope Waddel Institute, Calabar was established in 1895.
The first Christian mission was also opened in Zaria in 1902.
The English Language was taught in these schools.
Samuel Edgerly and Townsend opened the first printing press in Nigeria in 1852.
Wherever the missionaries went they taught their converts in English, thus English became the language of 129ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE civilization and Christianity.
Christian education is therefore an important medium through which Standard English gained access to the local population in the early 19th century.
British interest in Nigeria changed from mere commercial capitalism to outright colonization in 1861 when Lagos was invaded and annexed as a British colony.
Subsequent consolidation of the British colonial administration in Nigerian in the years that followed empowered a more organized education and emphasis in the learning of English.
In fact government grants to schools then depended largely on the effective learning and teaching of the English Language.
People who could write and speak English enjoyed special privileges with regards to jobs and social amenities by the colonial government.
English Language became a passport to good living and everyone was invariably forced to learn and spread the language.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
How did English come to Nigeria?
2.
What roles did the colonial administration play in establishing English in Nigeria?
3.
Discuss the contributions of Christianity to the planting of English in Nigeria.
3.2 English in Nigeria Today The English language has become part of our social and cultural life.
And being a language that easily accommodates new ways of expressing meaning, it has been pulled to different directions by the Nigerian user, who must express meanings that are peculiarly Nigerian.
Many times English has had to assume what language scholars call “local flavour” in order to respond appropriately to the Nigerian social environment and multi cultures, especially when there are no English equivalents for local thoughts.
This has led to the development of the Nigerian variety of English, known as “Nigerian English” (NE) – the English spoken in Nigeria, by Nigerians and often for Nigerians.
Abiodun Adetugbo, a foremost Nigerian Linguist says that NE is “the brand of English spoken by Nigerians, just as American English is that type of English spoken by Americans.” So Nigerian English is one of the new Englishes that has been truly integrated into our socio-cultural system and performs the function of an official language.
There have been series of arguments among Nigerian linguists about what really the features of NE are.
But the argument that Nigerian English is a pidgin variety or a non-standard variety of the British 130 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE English has been laid to rest, by simply identifying the varieties of English in Nigeria.
This is discussed below.
One of the features of Nigerian English according to linguists is that it has restricted registers – you do not have many registers to choose from.
Secondly, it is ‘bookish” in the sense that its lexical forms and grammar are the types you find in books – usually formal, like that of Indian English (See Module 4 unit 2).
But we can agree that these forms are part of the influences of the 19th century English novels and also the fact that most Nigerians acquire English from formal classroom situations.
Certainly NE is not errors or non-standard English.
What may people see as “on-standard” in spoken Nigerian English for example are simply the elements of transfer of some of the features of the mother tongue into English which is characteristic of most primary school leavers and a few educated Nigerians.
This brings us to the fact that there is standard Nigerian English and non-standard Nigerian English according to the levels of education and experiences of the speakers.
Below are some Adetugbo’s examples of Nigerian English expressions: NE BrE (i) I ride in a bus I ride on a bus (ii) I get down from a bus I get off a bus (iii) I ask for a lift I hitch a ride (iv) Ask from the teacher Ask the teacher (v) May I follow you home May I come home with you (vi) I will escort you I’ll see you off (vii) My wife has taken in My wife is pregnant (viii) He is not on seat He is not immediately available (ix) Don’t move with bad people Don’t associate with bad people (x) She reached here safely She got here safely (xi) These are my invitees These are my guests (xii) This is my junior brother This is my younger brother etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What is Nigerian English?
2.
What functions does English language perform in Nigeria today?
3.4 Varieties of English in Nigeria We are using “varieties” in the context of this study to mean “types”.
As we already mentioned in the preceding subsection, varieties of a language are bound to develop as long as there are people of different 131ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE classes, levels of education, cultures, social exposures and experiences using the language.
In Nigeria there are over 400 languages spoken by people of different cultures who have had to learn and speak English.
Many of these people speak their mother tongues at home and speak English at work, school or places of business.
These people belong to the various social classes and use the brand of English available to them.
Some of them are merely primary school leavers, some attended just the secondary school while some never attended any school at all.
In the type of English spoken by these people, it is not uncommon to find some element of mother tongue transfers to English, either in the pronunciation of English words or in the choice of words the people use.
Some of them simply ignore some rules of grammar.
All these gave rise to the different varieties of English we have in Nigeria today.
Some Nigerian linguists have identified some varieties of English and classified them in groups.
We shall look at three (3) classifications by three linguists.
The first one is by Brosnaham who identified four varieties of English in Nigeria.
(i) The variety spoken by people with no formal education, i.e.
the pidgin English (ii) The variety spoken by people with only primary education (iii) The variety spoken by secondary school leavers, which is marked by some great deal of fluency.
(iv) The variety spoken by people with university or high education The next one is by Ayo Banjo.
He also identified four varieties namely: (i) The variety spoken by semi-illiterate Nigerians and those with elementary school education (ii) The variety characterized by fewer negative transfers from mother tongue, intelligible to the great majority and is accepted locally but lacks international intelligibility.
(iii) The variety spoken by secondary school leavers.
This is both nationally and internationally intelligible but has error in pronunciations.
(iv) The variety close to the standard British accent.
This variety carries higher international acceptance but is locally rejected as fake or foreign.
Last is the classification by Mobolaji Adekunle.
He identified three varieties.
(i) The Near-Native variety – the variety by well-educated Nigerians, which is almost the same as the British Standard English 132 ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE (ii) The Local Colour Variety - the “Nigerianised” variety of English that reflects the Nigerian environment - its local customs and cultures.
(iii) The Incipient Bilingual Variety – this is characterized by deviations from English grammatical structures, and is marked by translations of the native language.
It is very close to the Pidgin English.
All these linguists and many others we have not been able to mention, agree that varieties of English exist in Nigeria.
If you look at the groups carefully you will discover that you can easily identify some members of one group in another group, based on speakers’ backgrounds and education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Identify three varieties of English in Nigeria.
2.
Compare Adekunle’s group of varieties with that of Banjo.
Are there any similarities?
3.
What variety do you think you speak?
4.0 CONCLUSION We can conclude that English language has come to stay in Nigeria.
And as a neutral language of communication that bridges the communication gap between people of the Nigerian multi-lingual and multi-ethnic groups, it is likely to continue to play this role in generations to come.
The different varieties we see of English today, is expected because language is naturally sensitive to its environment and socio-cultural context.
5.0 SUMMARY English came to Nigeria many years before the British colonial rule, through trade contacts between Europe and West coast of Africa.
Other factors include the abolition of slave trade and the contributions of professional interpreters, missionary activities and colonialism.
As an official language of Nigeria ahead of French, and functions as the neutral language of communication, it has developed local colours that identify the Nigerian English.
It has also developed varieties that explain the nature of its new home, as well as the social and educational levels of the Nigerian users.
133ENG211 HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the factors that gave rise to the planting of English in Nigeria.
2.
What is Nigerian English?
Identify some varieties of English in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Jowitt, D. (1991).
Nigerian English Usage: An Introduction.
Ikeja: Longman.
Ogu, J.N.
(1992).
A Historical Survey of English and Nigerian Situation.
Lagos: Kraft.
134
