 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: FRE211 COURSE TITLE: ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION COURSE GUIDE FRE211 COURSE GUIDE FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Course Developer Emmanuel A. Adeniyi Department of Linguistics Nigeria French Language Village Ajara-Badagry, Lagos Unit Writer Emmanuel A. Adeniyi Department of Linguistics Nigeria French Language Village Ajara-Badagry, Lagos Course Coordinator Ms. Lucy Jubrin National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr Christine Ofulue National Open University Of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii COURSE GUIDE FRE211 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2007 ISBN: 978-058-268-1 All Rights Reserved Printed by For National Open University of Nigeria iii COURSE GUIDE FRE211 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction…………………………………………… 1 What You Will Learn In This Course………………… 1 Course Aims…………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives……………………………………... 1-2 Working Through This Course……………………….. 2 Course Materials……………………………………….
2 Study Units…………………………………………….
2-3 Textbooks and References…………………………….
4 Assessment…………………………………………….
4 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs)…………………… 4 Final Examinations Grading & Marking Scheme…….. 4-5 Course Overview……………………………………… 5 How To Get The Most From This Course…………..... 5 Tutors and Tutorials…………………………………… 5-6 Summary……………………………………………….
6 iv Introduction This course is a one semester course in the second year of B.A.
(Hons) Degree in French studies.
It is a three credit course of twenty units.
It intends to enable you to understand the various register of French Language through the study and analysis of documents such as French and Francophone newspaper artists as well as tests on commercial, technical and literacy excerpts.
This course is a prelude to FRE 303: Advanced Studies in French Language Structures.
It is very necessary for students because it enables them to read, understand and answer questions orally and in written forms.
It gives them more insight and appreciation of various registers of French Language.
It enables them to read, listen and interpret passages in French with their own words and expressions.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about and the course materials you will use.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
What You Will Learn In This Course The main aim of FRE211: Understanding of various registers of French Language through the study of passages, documents such as French and francophone newspaper and literacy excerpts.
You will also learn how to interpret and express yourself orally and how to summarise documents by using your own words and expressions.
Course Aims The course is making you read, understand and interpret passages from various register of French Language.
This will be achieved: (cid:1) Through reading of passages (cid:1) Through listening to oral conversations (cid:1) Through observations of images/photo/cartoons etc.
Course Objectives There are objectives to be achieved in each unit of the course.
You should read them before studying each unit.
It is expected that by the time you have finished studying this course you should be able to: (cid:1) Read more passages on various registers of French Languages; (cid:1) Understand more messages contained in various registers; FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) Interpret more messages from various registers; (cid:1) Communicate more easily in oral written forms; (cid:1) Transcribe what you hear as exactly as possible without many spelling mistakes; (cid:1) Display a considerable amount of ability to grasp the essentials of the oral passage; (cid:1) Appreciate more the atmosphere in which discourse is carried out in real life; (cid:1) Develop your habit of listening to oral passages and render them in written form; (cid:1) Add and enrich your vocabulary and knowledge in French; (cid:1) Note little difference in the aspects of intonation, pronunciation and articulation between a native pure French speaker and a francophone.
Working Through This Course To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units, read recommended textbooks and other materials related to Advanced Study in Oral and Written Comprehension and other materials provided by NOUN.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises.
You will also have to submit your Tutor-marked Assignments to your tutors.
This course will take you between 20 and 25 weeks to complete at the rate of 2 to 3 hours per week.
You will find all the components of the course listed below.
You need to allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully and in time.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: (cid:1) Course Guide (cid:1) Study units (cid:1) Textbooks (cid:1) Magazines/Newspapers (cid:1) Assignment file Study Units There are twenty units in this course.
They are: Module 1 Unit 1 L’hyène et le bouc Unit 2 L’araignée et les animaux ii FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Unit 3 La tortue et le pigeon Unit 4 D’où vient le tam-tam et l’orchestre scolaire ?
Unit 5 Une belle journée de classe Module 2 Unit 1 La couturière Unit 2 Un marché de village Unit 3 Bricolage Unit 4 La squat, un lieu de résistance Unit 5 La presse française « Les quotidiens et la presse hebdomadaire » Module 3 Unit 1 La laitière et la pot au lait Unit 2 A ma mère Unit 3 Journal En Français Facile Sur Rfi Unit 4 Parler au Quotidien sur RFI Unit 5 L’auvergnat – de Georges Brassens Module 4 Unit 1 Les Collégiennes d’Abidjan – D. Kone Unit 2 Advert – I.E.S.A.
Unit 3 Photo-Couverture – “La Nation” Unit 4 Images – Tempo 1 Unit 5 Cartoon – Dessins Animes The units are grouped on the activities of animals, birds and human beings.
Module 1 –.Short passages on human activities.
Module 2 – Reading of excerpts from journals, textbooks and reading of poems.
Module 3 – Listening to recorded programmes from Radio and listening to songs.
Module 4– Reading and interpretation of adverts, drawings / photo, cartoons from journals / magazines.
The units under various modules have various objectives, directions for only, reading materials and self assignments.
There are exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course in general.
iii FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Textbooks and References There are a few recommended textbooks for this course.
The major ones are: Emmanuel A. ADENIYI (2006) Contes Nigérians II (revised edition) Agoro Publicity Company Ibadan.
Emmanuel A. ADENIYI (2005) Basic Elements of French Pronunciation – Agoro Publicity Company – Ibadan.
Other references include newspapers, magazines in French Language from France or from francophone countries.
Finally, radio stations / televisions stations in France or Francophone countries receivable in Nigeria could be good avenues for self training.
Assessment To assess yourself, you have in each unit 2 to 3 exercises: they include oral reproduction /reading aloud, formation of new words and written expressions (usage of words in good sentences and résumé).
In doing these assignments, you are expected to apply knowledge acquired during the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignments At the end of each unit, there are TMAs containing 5 to 10 questions each.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule by NOUN.
The work that you submit to your tutor for assessment will count fro 40% of your total score.
Final Examination, Grading And Marking Scheme The final examination for FRE211 will be in two parts oral and written forms.
The two will be marked over 60%.
The oral aspect will comprise reading and answering questions on the passage read orally and they will be scored as follows: (cid:1) Reading – pronunciation – 5 marks – observation of “liaison” 5 marks observation of “punctuations” 5 marks – total 15 marks.
(cid:1) Answering of questions – Examiners will ask at least 5 questions based on the passage read and one general question that may or iv FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION may not be related to the passage.
The general question will allow students to express themselves freely.
The five questions will carry 10 marks while the general question will carry 5 marks - (Total 15 marks).
The written aspect of the examination will comprise a dictation exercise or “exercices à trous” and a summary (résumé).
The dictation or “exercices à trous” will be over 15 marks and the résumé will also be 15 marks.
Course Overview There are 20 units in this course.
You are to spend one week on each unit.
Assignment 1 will come at the end of unit 4, assignment 2 at the end of unit 8, assignment 3 at the end of unit 12, assignment 4 at the end of unit 16 and assignment 5 at the end unit 20.
How to Get the Most from This Course The advantage of distance learning is that you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own space, and at your convenient time and place.
The course materials replace the lecturer that stands before you in a face to face situation.
Each of the units has a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit.
You also have learning objectives of the units that tell you what you should be able to know on completion of the unit.
Having finished the unit, you read to go back to these objectives to confirm whether you have achieved these objectives.
The main body starts with an oral or written passage in French and explanations of keywords to make you understand the passages better.
Working through these texts will help you tremendously to achieve the objectives of the units and prepare you for the assignments and the final examination.
Do each as you meet them in the unit.
Tutors and Tutorials This course is 3 credit units.
There should be 20 hours of tutorials provides in support of this course.
You will be notified of dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name, phone number and e-mail address of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must send tutor – vFRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION marked assignments to your tutor well before the deadline.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
You should try your best to attend tutorials.
This is the only chance you have for a face - to face contact with your tutor, you will also have the opportunity to ask questions which will be answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a list of questions before attending to them.
You will gain a lot from participating actively.
Summary This course intends to make you understand various register of French Language through the study and analysis of documents such as French and Francophone newspaper articles as well as administrative, commercial, technical and literacy excerpts.
On successful completion of this course, you will be equipped with adequate knowledge and the necessary components needed for Advanced Study in Oral and Written Comprehension.
In addition to all the above, you must have acquired some vocabulary on different registers.
You will be able to: (cid:1) Answer questions related to oral and written texts.
(cid:1) Understand various register on French Language (cid:1) Develop your audio ability more.
(cid:1) Transcribe what you hear as exactly as possible without many spelling mistakes.
(cid:1) Display a considerable amount of ability to grasp the essentials of the oral passage.
(cid:1) Appreciate more the atmosphere in which discourse is carried out in real life, much more vi FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Course Code FRE 211 Course Title Advanced Study in Oral and Written Comprehension Course Developer Emmanuel A. Adeniyi Department of Linguistics Nigeria French Language Village Ajara-Badagry, Lagos Unit Writer Emmanuel A. Adeniyi Department of Linguistics Nigeria French Language Village Ajara-Badagry, Lagos Course Coordinator Ms. Lucy Jubrin National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr Christine Ofulue National Open University Of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA viiFRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2007 ISBN: 978-058-268-1 All Rights Reserved Printed by For National Open University of Nigeria viii FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Module 1……………………………………………….
1 Unit 1 L’hyène et le bouc……………………….
1-5 Unit 2 L’araignée et les animaux……………….. 6-10 Unit 3 La tortue et le pigeon…………………….
11-15 Unit 4 D’où vient le tam-tam et l’orchestre scolaire?.....................................................
16-21 Unit 5 Une belle journée de classe……………… 22-27 Module 2……………………………………………….
28 Unit 1 La couturière…………………………….. 28-33 Unit 2 Un marché de village…………………….
34-39 Unit 3 Bricolage………………………………… 40-45 Unit 4 La squat, un lieu de résistance…………... 46-51 Unit 5 La presse française « Les quotidiens et la Presse hebdomadaire »………………….. 52-58 Module 3……………………………………………….
59 Unit 1 La laitière et la pot au lait……………….. 59-63 Unit 2 A ma mère……………………………….
64-68 Unit 3 Journal En Français Facile Sur Rfi ……… 69-72 Unit 4 Parler au Quotidien sur RFI……………... 73-75 Unit 5 L’auvergnat – De Georges Brassens…….
76-80 Module 4……………………………………………….
81 Unit 1 Les Collégiennes d’Abidjan – D. Kone… 81-84 Unit 2 Advert – I.E.S.A………………………… 85-88 Unit 3 Photo-Couverture – “La Nation”………... 89-92 Unit 4 Images – Tempo 1……………………….
93-96 Unit 5 Cartoon – Dessins Animes……………… 97-99 ixNoneFRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION MODULE 1 Unit 1 L’hyène et le bouc Unit 2 L’araignée et les animaux Unit 3 La tortue et le pigeon Unit 4 D’où vient le tam-tam et l’orchestre scolaire ?
Unit 5 Une belle journée de classe UNIT 1 L’HYENE ET LE BOUC CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Le Bouc Et L’hyène 3.2 Oral Reproduction –Reading Aloud 3.3 Vocabulary - Identification of Key Words 3.3.1 Oral Expression 3.3.2 Written Expression 3.4 Résumé (Re-Presentation Of The Passage (Oral And Written) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will be an entry point for you to this course.
You will listen, read a short passage and answer questions on vocabulary, and do comprehension exercises on a story about “The hyena and the he-goat”, both orally and in written form.
The story relates why big animals have, since the olden days, been killing day, small ones the in forest.
Reading of the passage will also lead you to telling your own story with your own words and expressions in oral and written forms.
The story is about why big animals have, since the olden days, been killing small ones in the forest.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of the study of this unit will enable you: (cid:1) Read, understand and answer questions related the passage; 1FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) Identify key words and use them in your own sentences; (cid:1) Summarise the passage in your own words and expressions in oral and written forms; (cid:1) Also you will be able to re-present the story your own way, imagine a conclusion to it orally and in written form; (cid:1) Finally, you should be able to discover or spell out the lesson the story teaches us.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now listen to the passage and try reading it after.
3.1 Le Bouc Et L’hyène Au temps jadis, au pays des animaux, les grands dévoraient toujours les petits sans raison.
Les petits animaux vivaient alors dans la peur et chaque fois qu’ils voyaient venir un des grands, ils courraient comme des fous pour se sauver et se mettre à l’abri du danger.
Dans le même pays, les rois régnaient à tour de rôle et chaque roi devait régner pour une période de dix ans au maximum.
Un jour ce fut le tour de l’éléphant de régner sur le trône.
Très réputé pour sa patience et sa gentillesse, les petits animaux étaient contents à l’espoir que leur situation allait changer pour de bon.
Ils comptaient vivre en paix avec les grands animaux.
Et dès les premiers mois du règne de l’éléphant, ils formèrent une délégation pour aller présenter leurs doléances à leur roi qu’ils supplièrent d’abolir cette loi du « plus fort ».
Après avoir longuement réfléchi, le roi ordonna que désormais, avant qu’un grand animal ne tue un petit, il devait lui poser trois questions auxquelles le petit devait apporter de réponses satisfaisantes.
Si le petit animal n’arrive pas à fournir de bonnes réponses, le grand pouvait alors le dévorer.
Quelques mois après l’entrée en vigueur de la nouvelle loi au pays des animaux, l’hyène croise le bouc sur son chemin et pour se conformer à la loi, elle dit au bouc : (cid:1) « Bouc, dis-moi trois vérités, ainsi tu éviteras que je te mange ».
Le bouc fouille sa cervelle et dit à l’hyène : 2 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) « Toi hyène, si tu me laisses partir, et que je raconte aux autres que toi hyène, tu m’as croisé et que tu ne m’as pas dévoré, personne ne me croira ».
(cid:1) Tu as dit la vérité, répondit l’hyène.
Le bouc ajouta : (cid:1) « Si tu partais toi hyène sans me manger, et que tu racontes aux autres que tu as rencontré un bouc et que tu ne l’as pas mangé, personne ne te croira ».
(cid:1) Vérité absolue rétorqua l’hyène.
Pour la troisième vérité le bouc enchaîna : (cid:1) « Si toi, hyène tu me rencontres et tu prends ton temps pour discuter avec moi sans aucune intention pressante de me dévorer comme à l’accoutumée, c’est que certainement, tu es déjà rassasié.
» (cid:1) Tu es très intelligent, répondit l’hyène, et pour faire voire au bouc qu’il avait fourni de bonnes réponses, l’hyène lui demanda de le suivre et lui promit une surprise.
Conte tiré de Contes nigérians II (revised edition), by Emmanuel A. ADENIYI 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud Read the passage you have just listened to the way you heard it read.
Pronounce the following words several times: temps, grands, longuement, intelligent, certainement, enchaîna, toujours, raisons, surprise, chaque, danger, voyaient, rois, régner, régnaient, éléphant, patience, gentillesse, situation, comptaient, changer, délégation, doléances, longuement, satisfaisantes, coutume, à l’accoutumée.
3.3 Vocabulary-Identification of Key Words The passage is talking about how animals used to live in the past, the relationship that has been existing between big and small ones since then till now.
Words and expressions are useful for story telling and are related to animal life.
These words and expressions include: Au temps jadis = In the olden days Dévoraient (imparfait) = Used to eat (used to kill) La peur = fear Des fous = Mad people Se metre à l’abri = To stay away (to take protection or take cover) from danger 3FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION A tour de rôle = In turn Très réputé = Very reputed, well known Gentillesse = Kindness Et dès les premiers mois = And from the first months Désormais = Henceforth Réponses satisfaisantes = Satisfactory answers.
Le bouc fouille sa cervelle = The he-goat searches its brain Vérité absolue = Absolute truth Comme à l’accoutumée = As usual 3.3.1 Oral Expression (cid:1) Form words (nouns or verbs) from the following words as indicated in the bracket.
Take a cue from the following example: Blanc (verb), "Blanc" is an adjective.
You should now produce the verb that is derived from it.
That gives you “blanchir”.
Now do the exercises that follows: Grand (verb), courraient (noun), régnaient (noun), réputé (noun), l’espoir (verb) Réponse (verb), gentillesse (adjective), satisfaisante (verb), la cervelle (noun), la peur (adjective).
3.3.2 Written Expression (cid:1) Now make use of the new words formed in good and complete sentences in French.
3.4 Résumé (Representation of the Passage – Oral and Written) (cid:1) Summarize the story in the passage in your own words and re- present (narrate) it as you understand it.
(cid:1) Write your summary in fifteen (15) sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have read a story about two animals, the relationship between animals in the past, how the time of a particular ruler in the animals’ kingdom favoured the small ones and the conditions under which they were favoured.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has helped you to know meanings of words, and how to form new words from existing ones and how to use these new words in forming good and complete sentences in French.
The unit has also 4 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION taught you how to summarise and re-present the passage in your own words in oral and written forms in French.
By being able to reduce the passage to fifteen (15) sentences and by being able to use your own words to re-tell the story, you must have learnt a lot from the unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
De quoi parle le conte?
2.
Comment vivaient les petits animaux ?
3.
Sous le règne de quel roi des animaux la condition des petits animaux avait été améliorée ?
4.
Mentionnez deux qualités du nouveau roi qui a amélioré la condition des petits animaux.
5.
Expliquez l’expression : « La loi du plus fort ».
6.
Imaginez la réponse de l’hyène après la troisième réponse du bouc.
7.
Donnez un autre titre à ce conte.
8.
Si vous étiez à la place du bouc qu’auriez-vous fait en rencontrant l’hyène ?
9.
En trois phrases décrivez le bouc.
10.
En trois phrases décrivez l’hyène.
11.
Imaginez la fin de ce conte.
12.
Racontez un conte semblable à ce conte.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Emmanuel A. ADENIYI (2005) Basic Elements on French Pronunciation Agoro Publicity Company, Ibadan Emmanuel A. ADENIYI (2006) Contes Nigérians II (Revised edition) Agoro-Publicity Company Ibadan.
Tunde AYELERU A Concise Course in French for College and University Students (revised edition) 5FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 2 L’ARAIGNÉE ET LES ANIMAUX CONTENTS Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 L’araignée Et Les Animaux 3.2 Oral Reproduction - Reading- Aloud 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Written Expression 3.4 Résumé (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of short stories on the activities of animals, birds and human beings.
Like in unit 1, “L’hyène et le bouc”, you will listen to a passage, read and answer questions on vocabulary and comprehension.
The short story is about “l’araignée et les animaux” (The spider and animals).
The story relates how the spider tried to kill all animals and how she died at the end.
The study of the passage will enrich your vocabulary.
In addition, it will give you more knowledge about life and relationship between animals in the bush.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, will enable you to: (cid:1) read, understand and answer questions related to the passages; (cid:1) identify key words from the passage and use them in your sentences; (cid:1) summarise the passage by using your own expressions orally and in written forms; (cid:1) narrate the story your own way, imagine another conclusion to it orally and in written form; (cid:1) give more lessons that could be drawn from the story.
6 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now read the passage 3.1 L’araignee Et Les Animaux L’araignée, qui avait voulu tuer tous les autres animaux sans y parvenir, alla demander conseil à Dieu.
(cid:1) Eh bien !
dit Dieu, à partir d’aujourd’hui, personne ne se moquera plus de son voisin.
Celui qui le fera mourra sur place.
L’araignée retourna chez elle, prit sa houe et alla au champ.
Là, elle se mit à donner des coups de houe sur un rocher afin de faire un sillon.
Le rocher était à côté de la piste des animaux.
Vint à passer l’éléphant : - Eh, amie araignée, que fais-tu là ?
Ignorante, as-tu déjà vu quelqu’un cultiver un rocher ?
L’éléphant tomba mort.
L’araignée le mit de côté.
Avec cette ruse, elle tua tous les animaux, sauf la pintade.
Celle-ci, perchée sur la branche d’un arbre, avait remarqué les tours de la rusée.
Notre pintade descendit doucement de l’arbre, passa par la même piste, sans mot dire.
(cid:1) Eh !
Amie pintade, lui dit l’araignée.
Où vas-tu ?
(cid:1) Je vais chez le chef pour me faire tresser les cheveux, lui répondit la pintade.
(cid:1) Ah !
Ah !
Pintade, toi qui as toujours une tête dépourvue de plumes, depuis quand as-tu assez de cheveux pour te les faire tresser ?
Ne me trompe pas.
A peine l’araignée avait-elle fini de rire qu’elle tomba morte à son tour.
Voilà pourquoi il ne faut pas se moquer de ses camarades.
K. AGBETIAFA, Y. NAMBOU, « Contes du Togo », CLE International/ EA, Paris, 1980 3.2 Oral Reproduction Reading Aloud (cid:1) Read the passage you have just listened to and pronounce the words as exactly as possible.
(cid:1) Pronounce the following words, several times: 7FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Une araignée, un ignorant, ignorer,une ignorance, l’éléphant, la pintade, descendit, doucement, quelqu’un, voisin, un conseil, la ruse.
3.3 Vocabulary-Identification Of Key Words The passage is talking about « l’araignée et les animaux », “The spider and the other animals”, how the spider intended to kill all other animals without success in the first place and how she went to God to seek for advice.
God then decreed that any animal that laughed or made, jest of another animal would die on the spot.
The spider made other animals to laugh by pretending to cultivate on a rock close to the path of all the animals.
Elephant was her first victim and all other animals, except, “la pintade”, guinea-fowl, who saw the “astuce” (the trick) used by l’araignée to eliminate others.
La pintade now made l’araignée to laugh at her and l’araignée too, died on the spot.
The words and expressions used include the following: Aller demander conseil = Go to seek for advice A partir d’aujourd’hui = As from today Se moquer (se moquera) = To laugh at, or make jest of Une ruse = a trick Faire tresser les cheveux = weave the hair Tête dépourvue de plumes= A head without feathers A peine = Barely La piste = The path Sauf la pintade = Except guinea-fowl Percher (perchée sur la branche d’un arbre) = To perch (perched on a branch of a tree) Voilà pourquoi = That is the reason why.
3.3.1 Word Formation (cid:1) Form new words (verb, noun, adjective or adverb) from the following according to the brackets: Tuer (noun), Conseil (verb), Se moquer de (noun: 2 possibilities), Répondre (noun:2 possibilities), Coups (verb), Tromper (noun : 2 possibilities) You will have one example to enable you understand properly what you are expected to do “Tuer” is a verb and you should look for a noun that comes from it.
“La tuerie” which means slaughter can be given.
3.3.2 Written Expression 8 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) Use the new words and the ones you used to form good and complete sentences in French.
(cid:1) Explain the following words or group of words in your own words: Un ignorant, la ruse, cultiver un rocher, faire un sillon, le ruse.
3.4 Résumé (Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And Written Forms) (cid:1) Summarize the story in the passage in your own words and narrate it in another form.
(cid:1) Write down your summary in just 10 (ten) sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have just read a story about how the spider wanted to kill all other animals and how God decreed that no animal should laugh at the other and that any animal that laughs at his/her fellow animal will die on the spot.
The story tells us how the elephant laughed at the spider and died on the spot.
All other animals, except the guinea-fowl also laughed and died.
Finally, the story tells us how the spider in turn laughed at the guinea-fowl and how she too died on the spot.
The story finally reveals certain aspects of the characters of the Spider, the elephant and the guinea-fowl.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has helped you to learn more about animals and their character, how to form words and use same in good sentences.
The unit has also increased your vocabulary with respect to story telling.
The unit has helped you to develop the ability to further comprehend passages, use expressions of your own and remember old stories about animals to and to create new ones in your own words and expressions.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Citez les personnages du texte 2.
L’araignée est sur un rocher avec sa houe, que fait-elle sur le rocher ?
3.
Comment trouvez-vous l’araignée ?
4.
Mentionnez deux caractères de l’araignée 5.
Mentionnez deux caractères de la pintade.
9FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 6.
Décrivez une houe.
7.
Mentionnez deux utilités de la houe.
8.
Prolongez un peu ce conte à votre façon.
9.
Mettez-vous à la place de Dieu et donnez un conseil à l’araignée 10.
Faites un petit dessin de l’araignée, de l’éléphant et de la pintade.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Emmanuel A. ADENIYI (2005) Basic Elements of French Pronunciation Agoro Publicity Company, IBADAN K. Agbetiafa, y. Nambou, Contes du Togo, CLE International /Nea Paris.
Mon quatrième livre de lecture par un groupe d’enseignants togolais , Nouvelles Editions Africaines, Lomé TOGO 10 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 3 LA TORTUE ET LE PIGEON CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 La Tortue Et Le Pigeon 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading 3.3 Vocabulary–Identification Of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Oral and Written Expressions 3.3.3 Words Substitution 3.4 Résumé (Re- Presentation Of The Passage: Oral And Written) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This third unit is a continuation of short stories on animals, birds and human activities.
Like in units one and two, (L’hyène et le bouc and l’araignée et les animaux) you will listen to a passage, read and answer questions on vocabulary and comprehension on a short story about “La tortue et le pigeon”, (The tortoise and the pigeon).
The story relates one of the many cunny ways used by “LA TORTUE” (TORTOISE), to deceive and cheat other animals, birds and at times human beings in African stories.
This story tells us how “la Tortue” (Tortoise) played on the intelligence of “Le pigeon (the pigeon) by using different intonations, to starve, punish and incriminate her very close friend “le pigeon”.
Tone represents an important aspect of most African languages.
The study of this unit will make you acquire more words and expressions related to story telling.
It will also give you greater insight and knowledge into the character of birds and animals, which is not too different from that of human beings.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will make you to: (cid:1) read, understand and answer questions related to the passage.
11FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) identify key words from the passage, form new ones and make use of same in written forms.
(cid:1) reconstitute part of the passage by filling in missing words.
(cid:1) summarize the passage by using your own words and expressions orally and in written form.
Finally, you will be able to narrate the story your own way; Propose a conclusion to it and bring out one, two or more lessons from it.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now read the passage 3.1 La Tortue Et Le Pigeon La tortue et le pigeon étaient des amis très intimes.
Ils faisaient tout ensemble et tout le monde louait leur action.
Un jour, ces deux amis inséparables décidèrent de faire un voyage au pays d’un grand roi très réputé pour son hospitalité et sa gentillesse.
Voici nos amis en route, et au bout de deux nuits et deux jours de marche, les voici à l’entrée du fameux village, leur destination.
En attendant le messager qui était parti avertir le roi de leur visite, la tortue dit au pigeon : - « dès que nous serons dans le village, je serai ẮLEJỜ , c’est-à-dire l’étranger, et toi tu seras ẮLÉJÓ , c’est- à-dire, le second.
Ainsi, nous saurons à qui est destiné tel ou tel plat apporté par le roi ou toute autre personne du village ».
Très naïvement le pigeon accepta la proposition de la tortue.
Tout juste après cette mise de la tortue, le messager se présenta aux visiteurs et les conduisit dans un appartement très chic, réservé aux augustes visiteurs.
Ils avaient un salon commun mais chacun avait sa chambre à coucher.
La tortue se hâta de mettre devant sa porte : « ÀLEJÒ ».
Une demi-heure plus tard, un messager arriva, accompagné de deux jeunes filles chargées de mets très délicieux dont l’odeur faisait saliver (venir l’eau à la bouche).
Les jeunes filles déposèrent les mets au salon et le messager ajouta : - « Le roi envoie ces plats à l’étranger, c’est-à-dire, « ÀLEJÒ ».
La tortue ordonna au messager de répéter ce qu’il venait de dire et demanda au pigeon de bien écouter.
Sans comprendre pourquoi, le messager répéta sa phrase et 12 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION la tortue demanda au pigeon s’il avait entendu, et lui aussi répondit oui.
Le soir, le roi renouvela ses largesses et envoya deux filles chargées de mets encore plus succulents que ceux de midi.
Le messager répéta le même message qu’à midi et la tortue le pria de répéter une fois de plus le message et invita le pigeon à écouter pour une deuxième fois.
La tortue agit ainsi pendant trois jours.
Durant ces trois jours donc, le pigeon n’avait rien mangé, rien bu.
Il était devenu si maigre qu’il pouvait à peine voler.
Ainsi il décida de sortir pour chercher à manger.
Conte tiré de Contes nigérians II, by Emmanuel A. ADENIYI 3.2 Oral Reproduction Reading Aloud (cid:1) Read the passage you have just listened to and pronounce as correctly as possible the words.
(cid:1) Pronounce the following words several times: La tortue, le pigeon, intimes, louait, louer, action,inséparables, fameux, destination, une entrée, entrer, le message, le messager, le village, naïvement, la proposition, l’étranger, tout, juste après, commun,la tortue se hâta, se hâter, les mets, délicieux, succulents.
3.3 Vocabulary- Identification Of Key Words The passage is talking about “la tortue et le pigeon”, how for several days, tortoise deprived her friend Pigeon from eating meals brought by the king they both visited.
The village people now discovered that one of the strangers used to steal their farm produce and reported the incidence to the king who was surprised and annoyed.
The king then summoned the visitors to find out who the thief was and why he was stealing food despite the abundance, succulence and delicious food, the king had been sending to them since their arrival.
Words and expressions used in this story includes the followings ones: (cid:1) Des amis très intimes = Very close friends, (cid:1) Ils faisaient tout ensemble = They used to do everything together (cid:1) Des amis inséparables = Inseparable, very close friends (cid:1) Faire un voyage =to take a trip 13FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) l’entrée = entrance (cid:1) le fameux village = famous village (cid:1) Tout en attendant = While waiting for (cid:1) Dès que ….
= As soon as… (cid:1) Une mise au point = A clarification (cid:1) Augustes visiteurs = Very important guests (cid:1) La tortue se hâta = Tortoise hurried (cid:1) Le salon commun = Common living room (cid:1) La chambre à coucher = Bedroom.
3.3.1 Words Formation (cid:1) Find words or expressions synonymous to the following words or group of words : amis très intimes, village fameux, un appartement très chic, augustes visiteurs, mets délicieux.
3.3.2 Oral And Written Expressions Note that synonymes words or expressions give the same or very similar meanings (cid:1) Use the synonyms you have just found and the group of words above orally in good and complete sentences and in written forms.
3.3.3 Word Substitution (cid:1) Reconstitute the following paragraphs of the passage by filling in the gaps: La tortue et le pigeon …… des ….. amis très ….. .
Ils faisaient….
Ensemble et tout….. louait …… .
Un jour, ….. décidèrent de …… au pays …….
très …….
pour son ….
et sa ….
.
Voici …… en ……., et …… de deux…….. et …..jours de ……, les voici…….
du……village, leur….. .
3.4 Résumé (Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) (cid:1) summarize and narrate the story in the passage in your own words.
14 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) Write your summary in (twenty) 20 sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read a story on how Tortoise played upon Pigeon’s intelligence to starve him.
The story also showed us another side of animals’ character.
In addition, the story reveals to us that tone is one of the important aspects of language,” especially in African languages.
A simple difference in tone can lead to a change in meaning.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learned new words on food (délicieux, succulent), and also how you can twist or change meaning of words by simple change of tone.
By placing an accent on a letter, you have effected a change of meaning to obtain a change of behaviour and that is what Tortoise did in the story.
By bringing in more animals to the world of story telling, this unit has made you to be more conversant with animals names in French.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Faites une petite description de la tortue et de la pigeon.
2.
Pourquoi les deux amis ont-ils voyagé, et où sont-ils allés ?
3.
Quelle a été la durée de leur voyage ?
4.
Mentionnez en deux phrases quelques caractères de la tortue.
5.
Mentionnez en deux phrases quelques caractères du pigeon.
6.
Comment trouvez-vous le roi du village ?
7.
Que feriez-vous si vous étiez à la place du pigeon ?
8.
Que feriez-vous si vous étiez à la place du messager du roi ?
9.
Imaginez une suite et une fin à ce conte.
10.
Proposez au moins deux leçons de morale qu’on peut apprendre de ce conte.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Emmanuel A ADENIYI (2006) Contes Nigérians II (revised edition) Agoro Publicity- Company Ibadan Emmanuel A. ADENIYI (2005) Basic Elements of French Pronunciation- Agoro Publicity Company –Ibadan Tunde AJIBOYE (2002) Introduction to Practice in oral French (revised edition) Bounty Press Limited- Ibadan 15FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 4 D’OÙ VIENT LE TAM- TAM ?
ET L’ORCHESTRE SCOLAIRE CONTENTS Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 « D’ou Vient Le Tam-Tam » Et « L’orchestre Scolaire » 3.2 Orale Reproduction -- Reading 3.3 Vocabulary –Identification Of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Oral and Written Expressions (Dictation) 3.3.3 Word Substitution 3.4 RÉSUMÉ (Presentation of the passage in oral and written forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0.
Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0.
Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This Fourth unit is a follow up of the three preceding units and it focusses on one of human beings’ activities and its origin.
The unit titled “D’où vient le tam-tam” ?
and “L’orchestre scolaire” relates the origin, the usefulness and the different times “le tam-tam” (the drum) is used.
“L’orchestre scolaire” (the school band) explains the different musical instruments, and what one needs to do or know before playing one of them.
The study of this unit will further equip you with new expressions related to some human activities (dancing and singing).
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will help you to: (cid:1) read, understand and answer questions related to the passage.
(cid:1) identify key words from the passage, compose new words and make use of same in sentences.
(cid:1) introduce you to one vital aspect of oral comprehension (Dictée = Dictation).
16 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) reconstitute the passage by filling in the gaps and the missing words.
(cid:1) summarise the passages by using your own words and expressions Now read the passage.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 D’où vient le tam-tam ?
et L’orchestre scolaire [A] D’OÙ VIENT LE TAM –TAM ?
1.
C’est le soir.
Afi et sa grand’mère s’installent dans la cour pour profiter du clair de lune.
Des roulement, de tambour retentissent dans la maison du chef Akugbé.
2.
Y aura-t-il jeu de tam-tam ce soir ?
demande Afi à sa grand’mère.
(cid:1) Oui, répond la vieille femme, c’est ce soir que commencent les funérailles du chef Akugbé.
(cid:1) Mais, qui a inventé le tam-tam ?
Demande Afi.
3.
Ce sont les chasseurs qui l’ont inventé.
Souvent, au cœur de la forêt, ils surprennent des génies qui dansent au rythme du tam-tam.
Alors, ils se cachent, les observent, apprennent leurs chants et leurs danses.
Il arrive parfois que les génies enlèvent des chasseurs et les emportent loin dans leurs cachettes invisibles.
Là ils les initient à l’art du tam-tam et leur montrent comment fabriquer des tambours avec des peaux de bêtes 4.
Il y a des tam-tam qui annoncent les grands malheurs ; certains invitent les enfants aux jeux, d’autres les joies où accompagnent les chants des morts ; il y en a dont les rythmes endiablés font oublier au laboureur ses fatigues pendant les travaux des champs.
[B] L’ORCHESTRE SCOLAIRE 1.
Le groupe folklorique de mon école exécute des ballets, des chants et des danses de chez nous et d’ailleurs.
Abalo est le principal batteur de tam-tam ; Afi préfère chanter.
2.
Depuis cette rentrée, nous avons constitué un petit orchestre moderne.
Nos instruments sont beaux.
Ils émettent des sons mélodieux.
C’est merveilleux de les entendre résonner.
Il y a des instruments à vent, des instruments à cordes, des 17FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION instruments à percussion.
Dans la première catégorie se rangent les flûtes, les trompettes et les trombones ; la catégorie suivante comprend les guitares et la contrebasse.
Viennent enfin les tambours, les cymbales, les castagnettes.
L’année prochaine, nous aurons un amplificateur et des haut- parleurs.
Ces appareils portent le son très loin et permettent à plusieurs personnes de danser en même temps.
3.
Mais on ne joue pas n’importe comment sur ces instruments.
Il faut apprendre le solfège, c’est-à-dire connaître les sons et savoir les chanter.
Chaque son dessiné s’appelle une note.
Il y a sept notes : do, ré, mi, fa, sol, la si.
Notre orchestre anime déjà des fêtes scolaires et des cérémonies officielles.
3.2 Oral Reproduction—Reading Aloud (cid:1) Read the passage you have just listened to and pronounce the words properly (cid:1) Pronounce the following words or group of words several times: Tam-tam, grand’mère, la cours, profiter, clair de lune, des roulements de tambour, retentissement, retentir, les funérailles, inventer, les chasseurs, au cœur, la forêt, des génies, le rythme, les cachettes, initier, l’art, des peaux, les grand malheurs, les jeux, les rythmes endiablés, le laboureur, un orchestre, group folklorique, exécuter des ballets, la batteur, des instruments, des sons mélodieux, merveilleux, résonner, instrument à percussion, les flûtes, les trompettes, les trombones, les guitares, les cymbales, les castagnettes, un amplificateur, un haut-parleur, le solfège.
3.3.1 Vocabulary—Identification Of Key Words The passages (D’où vient le tam-tam?, and L’orchestre scolaire) relate the origin of drum, how the drum was made, and what it is made of, and at what occasions the drum is beaten.
In addition, the passage talks about certain modern musical instruments, their functions and their importance to human beings.
Words and expressions used in the passages include the following: Le tam-tam = Drum S’installent (s’installer) = to take seat Profiter = To benefit, take advantage of … Clair de lune = Moon light 18 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Des roulements de tambour = Drum roll, drum beats.
Retentissement (retentir) = to ring, to echo (ringing, echoing.)
Les chasseurs = Hunters Au cœur de la forêt = At the heart of the forest, in the bush.
Les genies = Spirits (of the forest) Enlèvent (enlever) = kidnap, abduct (to kidnap, to abduct) Les cachettes = Hide outs Rythmes endiablés = Wild turbulent rhythms Exécute (exécuter) = Execute, play, perform (To execute, to play, to perform) Des ballets = Dances, spectacles, ballets.
Les trombones =Trombones Les cymbales = Cymbals Les castagnettes = Castanets Un amplificateur = An Amplifiyer Un haut-parleur = A loud-speaker Le solfège = Rudiments of music.
3.3.2 Words Formation (cid:1) Form words in accordance with the parts of speech indicated in brackets in front of each of the following words : (cid:1) S’installent (noun), des roulements (verb) clair (verb), les funérailles (adjective), inventer (noun), les chasser (noun), les chasseurs (verb) leurs cachettes (verb), rythmes endiablés (noun), les malheurs (adjective), mélodieux (noun), un amplificateur (verb), anime (noun : two possibilities), fêtes (verb).
3.3.3 Oral and Written Exercises (Dictation) (cid:1) Listen to the pronunciation and intonation of the group of words and write them down by putting correct and appropriate punctuations.
C’est le soir /.
Afi / et sa grand’mère / s’installent / dans la cour / pour profiter / du clair de lune /.
Des roulements de tambour retentissent / dans la maison du chef / Akugbe /.
Ce sont les chasseurs / qui l’ont inventé /.
Souvent /, au cœur de la forêt,/ ils surprennent des génies / qui dansent au rythme du tam-tam /.
Alors /, ils se cachent /, les observent /, apprennent leurs chants / et leurs danses /.
NB : Each portion that makes a breath group is marked by /, and it should be dictated as such.
19FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.4 Word Substitution (Exercice A Trous) (cid:1) Reconstitute the following passage by filling in the gaps with the appropriate words.
Y aura-t-il ….
De tam-tam ….
?
demande Afi à sa ….
(cid:1) Oui, ….
La vieille femme, c’est ….
Que commencent ….
Du Chef Akugbe (cid:1) Mais qui a inventé ….
?
Demande Afi.
Ce sont ….
qui l’ont ….
souvent, ….
de la forêt, ils ….
les ….qui ….
au ….
du ….
Alors, ils ….
les …., ….
leurs ….
et leurs ….
Il arrive ….
parfois que ….
enlèvent ….
et les ….
loin dans leurs ….. invisibles.
Là, ils ….
à ….
du ….
….
et leur ….
comment ….
….
avec des ….
de bêtes.
3.5 Résumé (Presentation of the Expressions (Dictation) (cid:1) Explain the two texts orally by using your own words and expressions.
(cid:1) Write your explanations in 10 sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read two short passages on the origin and functions of an instrument that is important and very useful to human beings.
“Le tam-tam” is the first part.
The second part, “L’orchestre scolaire”, narrates all the activities and other forms of modern musical instruments.
It also informs us of what it entails to play some of these musical instruments.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has helped you to know words and expressions related to music and musical instruments.
You have also acquired knowledge on one some important human activities, singing and dancing.
The unit has helped you to know that in African context, drums have various functions; they convey different messages and you play them during various occasions.
Furthermore, through this unit, you have learnt that beating a drum is an art that one should be initiated to, be it traditional drums or modern musical instruments.
There is no doubt that the unit has enriched you greatly.
20 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Lisez le texte “D’où vient le tam-tam” ?
et relevez la phrase qui explique pourquoi on joue du tam-tam dans la maison du chef.
2.
Qui sont ceux qui ont appris aux chasseurs l’art du tam-tam ?
3.
Que leur apprennent-ils à faire ?
4.
Citez deux occasions dans lesquelles on utilise le tam-tam.
5.
Qu’est-ce qui arrive parfois aux chasseurs ?
6.
Dans l’orchestre scolaire, quelle est de travail de Abalo ?
7.
Mentionnez deux instruments de musique cités dans le passage « l’orchestre scolaire ».
8.
Quelle est la fonction de l’amplificateur et des haut-parleurs ?
9.
Citez les activités du groupe folklorique de « l’orchestre scolaire ».
10.
Dans quelle catégorie classez-vous les instruments de musique suivants : (cid:1) les flûtes, les trompette et les trombones.
(cid:1) les guitares et la contrebasse (cid:1) les tambours, les cymbales et les castagnettes.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Emmanuel E. Adeniyi (2005) Basic Elements of French Pronunciation – Agoro- Publicity Company- Ibadan.
Mon quatrième livre de lecture NEA/EDICEF, PARIS.
TUNDE AJIBOYE (2002) Introduction to Practice in Oral French (Revised Edition) Bounty Press Limited.
Ibadan.
21FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 5 UNE BELLE JOURNÉE DE CLASSE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Une Belle Journée De Classe 3.2 Oral Reproduction.
Reading Aloud 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Word Substitution 3.4 Résumé (Presentation of the Passage in Oral and Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Module II comprising units 5, 6, 7 and 8.
The module will be made of short passages on human activities.
The unit titled “Une belle journée de classe” (A beautiful day in class) is about activities carried out by a teacher and pupils of a primary school.
This unit will enable you to know names of internal organs of birds in French.
You will also be familiar with names of professions and animal health.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) read, understand and answer questions related to the passage.
(cid:1) identify key words from the passage, form new words from the existing ones in the passage and use words formed in your own sentences.
(cid:1) describe one of your daily activities in your place of work or in your house.
(cid:1) ask your children to tell you what their life ambition is, what profession they like and their reasons for liking the professions.
Now listen to the passage, and then read it.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 22 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.1 Une Belle Journée De Classe 1.
Monsieur Sémanou jette un coup d’œil à sa montre, annonce la fin de la leçon de calcul et ordonne: (cid:1) Rangez votre matériel et prenez vos ardoises.
Aujourd’hui, nous allons réviser tout ce qui nous avons étudié sur les oiseaux.
1.
L’instituteur accroche au mur une grande carte muette représentant l’appareil digestif des oiseaux.
Il marque d’un numéro chaque partie du dessin.
Puis, il nous invite à porter sur nos ardoises les noms des organes correspondant aux numéros.
Abalo et Douti ont parfaitement réussi l’exercice.
Monsieur Sémanou les félicite.
2.
L’étude porte ensuite sur l’élevage et les soins à donner aux animaux de la ferme.
Les élèves rapportent les expériences de leurs parents.
Afi se lève et demande: (cid:1) Monsieur, est-ce vrai qu’il y a aussi des médecins pour les animaux ?
(cid:1) Bien sûr, Afi, répond le maître.
Ce sont les docteurs vétérinaires.
(cid:1) Monsieur, j’aimerais plus tard devenir docteur vétérinaire, continue Afi.
Je pourrais soigner les animaux de mon père.
Il a un grand troupeau de moutons et beaucoup de volailles.
Mais quand vient la mauvaise saison, ils meurent tous.
Ça fait pitié !
La classe éclate de rire, Monsieur Sémanou donne plusieurs coups de règle sur la table pour réclamer le silence.
(cid:1) L’idée de votre camarade est excellente !
dit-il.
Puis il poursuit : (cid:1) Afi, quand tu seras docteur vétérinaire, tu pourras aussi donner des conseils aux paysans qui voudront créer des fermes modernes.
Ton futur métier aidera le pays à se développer.
Et toute la classe applaudit pour encourager l’ambition d’Afi.
Monsieur Sémanou promet de faire venir prochainement à l’école le docteur vétérinaire pour lui parler.
23FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud (cid:1) Read the passage you have just listened to, articulate the words with properly and with the right intonation.
Try to observe the “liaison” when the need arises.
(cid:1) Pronounce the following words or group of words several times: Jeter – M. Sémanou jette, un coup d’œil, les yeux, la leçon, le calcul, une ardoise, réviser, les oiseaux, instituteur, une carte muette, un homme muet, un appareil digestif, un numéro, un dessin, des organes, parfaitement, l’élevage, élever, les soins, les animaux, la ferme, les médecins, les docteurs vétérinaires, un troupeau, des moutons, beaucoup de volailles, la mauvaise saison, des paysans, une ambition.
3.3 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words The passage “Une belle journée de classe” relates how a young girl spent a beautiful day in her class.
The passage also relates what made the day to be well spent according to the young girl.
The passage in addition explains why the young girl wants to be a veterinary doctor.
The passage shows also the love the young girl has for her parents.
Finally, the passage through the explanation of Monsieur Sémanou shows the importance of the young girls’ life ambition to the community in particular and to the country at large.
Words and expressions used in the passage include the following: Jette (jeter) un coup d’oeil =To glance at La leçon = lesson Une ardoise = Slate (used by pupils to write) Reviser = = To revise L’instituteur = = Teacher (primary school) muette ou muet = dumb (person) accroche du mur (accrocher) = hang on the wall (to hang) Carte muette = A mute map Appareil digestif =Digestive system or apparatus Le dessin = Drawing M. Sémanou félicite =Mr Semanou congratulates Féliciter =To congratulate L’élevage (masculine) = Rearing, breeding Les soins (masculine) = Cares Les médecins =Physicians Les docteurs vétérinaires = Vetinary doctors Soigner = To take care Un troupeau de moutons = A herd, flock 24 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION La volaille =Group of fowl, poultry La mauvaise saison = Bad weather La classe applaudit (aplaudir) = The class applauds Les fermes modernes = Modern farms Ton futur métier = your future profession Rangez (ranger) = Park (To park, keep away) 3.3.1 Word Formation (cid:1) Form new words from the following words as indicated in brackets: Sa montre (verb), calcul (verb), réviser (noun), l’instituteur (noun- feminin), dessin (verb), l’élevage (verb), les soins (verb), les soins (noun), conseils (verb) les fermes (noun).
3.3.2 Words Substitution Listen to the passage and complete the passage by filling in the gaps with the missing words.
Monsieur……jette un coup …… à sa ……., annonce la ……….
de la leçon de ……….. et ordonne : Rangez……….et prenez vos ………… Aujourd’hui, nous…….. réviser………ce que nous ……….
sur les ……… L’instituteur …….. au mur une grande………représentent l’appareil………..des oiseaux.
Il marque d’un ………chaque partie du ………..Puis il nous ……….à porter…….
des organes correspondant…………….
Ababo et ………….ont réussi …………Monsieur …….les …………/.
3.4 Résumé (Presentation Of Passage In Oral And Written Forms) (cid:1) Explain the text “Une belle journée de classe" orally.
Use your own words and expressions.
(cid:1) Write your explanation in less than 10 sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read how a young girl spent a nice day in her school and what made her day nice.
The unit has related to you how ambitions do come and what motivates people to choose one career or the other.
You have learnt many new words and expressions in this unit.
25FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has helped you know names of parts of a bird’s digestive system.
The unit has also helped you to know more about the life of birds and animals, their sickness and the type of people taking care of them.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Expliquer avec vos propres mots et expressions les groupes de mots suivants: a) Il jette un coup d’œil à sa montre b) Une carte muette c) Afi a l’ambition de devenir docteur vétérinaire.
2.
Citez les personnages du texte et dites ce que chacun a fait.
Encerclez la réponse convenable sous chaque question de 3 à 7 3.
L’instituteur accroche au mur a) Une grande carte muette b) Un joli dessin c) Une belle photo de la classe 4.
L’étude du jour dans ce texte porte sur a) L’homme et les activités b) L'élevage et les soins à donner aux animaux.
c) La géographie de la France.
5.
Les docteurs vétérinaires soignent a) les hommes et les femmes b) les avions et les voitures c) les animaux et les oiseaux 6.
Toute la classe applaudit Afi a) pour encourager son ambition b) pour décourager Monsieur Sémanou c) pour dire qu’elle n’aime pas Afi 7.
Monsieur Sémanou veut inviter prochainement: a) les parents de Afi 26 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION b) les amis de Afi c) le docteur vétérinaire.
7.
Ce texte évoque en vous quelques souvenirs Lesquels ?
8.
Afi aime-t-elle ses parents ?
Si oui, justifier votre réponse et si non, justifiez également à l’aide des phrases prononcées par Afi dans le texte.
9.
Parlez de votre ambition d’enfance en 10 phrases 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Emmanuel A.ADENIYI (2005) Basic Elements of French Pronunciation – agro-Publicity Company – Ibadan.
Introduction to practice in Oral French (Revised Edition) by Tunde Ajiboye – Pubished by Bounty Press Limited.
Mon quatrième livre de lecture – NEA/EDICEF 1984 27FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION MODULE 2 Unit 1 La couturière Unit 2 Un marché de village Unit 3 Bricolage Unit 4 La squat, un lieu de résistance Unit 5 La presse française « Les quotidiens et la presse hebdomadaire » UNIT 1 LA COUTURIERE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 La Couturiere 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Dictation Exercice 3.3.3 Resume (Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will continue to learn and know more about the activities of human beings just as in unit 5.
Unit 6, “La couturière” (The Sewing mistress ) is talking about an important activity which is indispensable and very useful in everybody’s life.
It deals with the art of making dresses.
The study of this unit will enable you to know and be familiar with expressions used by people in the dress making business, and the names of various dresses that women put on.
Finally, the study of the unit will encourage you to discover more names of women’s and men’s clothes.
28 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of the unit will give you the opportunity to: (cid:1) read, understand and answer questions related to the passage; (cid:1) identify key words from the passage, form new words from the existing ones in the passage and use words formed in your own sentences.
(cid:1) know more about the dressmaking activity and the words related to it.
Now, listen to the passage and read it later 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 La Couturiere La fête du Nouvel An approche.
Afi voudrait se faire confectionner un costume.
Elle se rend dans l’atelier « Couture Rapide » situé 125, rue du Mono.
Une apprentie couturière vient aussitôt à sa rencontre.
Elle introduit Afi dans la salle d’attente et la fait asseoir.
Une autre lui prend gentillement son colis et le pose sur la table de coupe.
En attandant la maitresse, Afi admire l’atelier.
Elle se regarde dans un miroir en face.
Son attention est retenue par les nombreuses machines à coudre derrière lesquelles sont assises des couturières.
Toutes cousent avec grâce et délicatesse.
Elles s’occupent de plusieurs opérations : elles font des boutonnières , des broderies, des cols de chemises, des faufils, etc.
Le tic-tac des machines envahit tout l’atelier.
Dans des armoires vitrées sont rangés des vêtements et des sous-vêtements.
Sur les modèmes exposés.
Afi reconnaît quelques points de broderie appris à l’école.
Enfin, la maitresse-couturière arrive auprès de sa jeune cliente: (cid:1) Bonjour Afi, dit-elle, d’une voix aimable.
Quel modèle désires-tu ?
Une robe, une jupe, un corsage, une chemise- dame, une veste, un patalon… ?
(cid:1) Rien de tout cela, Madame !
répond Afi.
Je voudrais commander un corsage et deux pagnes.
29FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION La patronne prend les mesures d’Afi : la taille, le tour de poitrine, la longueur de la manche et du corsage.
Elle les reporte dans un cahier.
(cid:1) Tu repasseras dans une semaine pour l’essayage, dit enfin la maitresse-couturière.
Contente de l’accueil qui lui a été réservé, Afi remercie la maitresse d’atelier et prend congé d’elle.
3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud (cid:1) Read the passage you have just listened to, pronounce and articulate the words with right.
Try to observe the “liaison” where necessary.
Avoid it where it is not necessary.
(cid:1) Pronounce the following words or group of words several times; La fête du nouvel an, se faire confectioner, un costume, l’atelier, couture rapide, une apprentie couturière, gentiment, son colis, la table de coupe, la maîtresse, un miroir, les machines à coudre, toutescousent avec grâce et délicatesse, plusieurs opérations, des boutonnières, des broderies, des cols de chemises, des faufils, le tic-tac, des armoires, des vêtements, des sous-vêtements, les modèles, une jupe, un corsage, une veste, une chemise-dame, commander des pagnes, la patronne, la taille, la poitrine, l’essayage.
3.3 Vocabulary - Identification Of Key Words The passage, “La couturière” relates how a young girl named Afi went to a sewing-mistress workshop to make a beautiful dress for the celebration of new year.
In addition, the passage describes how Afi was received by the pupils in the presence of the mistress.
It relates also to what each of them was doing.
Finally, the passage describes a few objects in the workshop and the environment within.
Some words and expressions used in the passage include the following: La couturière = dressmaker, seamstress La fête du nouvel an = New year festival Se faire (confectionner) = To make Un costume = A dress Une apprentie (couturière) =A learner, a pupil (Seamstress) La salle d’attente = Waiting room Gentiment = Gently 30 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION L’atelier = Workshop Les machines à coudre = Sewing machines Toutes cousent (coudre) = They are all sewing (to sew) Des boutonnières = Buttonholes Des broderies = Embroidery (embroide) Des faufils = Some tackings or basting thread Le tic-tac des = The tic- tac envahit = invades Des armoires vitrées = Wardrobes, cupboards with mirror.
Des vêtements = Some dresses, some garments Des sous-vêtements = Some under-wears.
Des modèles exposés = Some displayed Styles La maitresse-couturière = The head seamtress, La patronne = The boss Un corsage = A blouse L’essayage = Fitting, trying on.
3.3.1 Word Formation (cid:1) Form new words from the following words as indicated in brackets: La couturière (noun),la couturière (verb), sa rencontre (verb), une attente (verb), gentiment (adjective, m/f) grâce (adverb), délicatesse (adjective, m/f), des boutonnières (verb), des broderies (verb), des faufils (verb), les mesures (verb), l’essayage (verb).
(cid:1) Use the new words you have just formed in good and complete sentences in French.
3.3.2 Dictation Exercise (cid:1) Listen to the reading of the following breath group, and write them as exactly as they were pronounced by putting all the necessary punctuations.
LA COUTURIÈRE La fête du Nouvel An approche/.
Afi voulait/ se faire confectionner/ un costume./Elle se rend/dans l’atelier/ « Couture Rapide »/situé/125, rue/du Mono/.
Une apprentie couturière/ vient aussitôt/à sa rencontre./Elle introduit Afi/ dans la salle d’attente/ et la fait asseoir./ Une autre lui prend/ gentiment son colis/et le pose/ sur le table de coupe./ 31FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION En attendant la maîtresse./ Afi admire l’atelier./ Elle se regarde/dans un miroir en face./ Son attention est retenue/ par de nombreuses/machines à coudre/derrière lesquelles sont assises/des couturières./ 3.4 Résumé (Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And Written Forms) (cid:1) Explain orally the passage « La couturière by using your own words and expressions.
(cid:1) Write your explanation in five to ten sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read about dressmaking and styles as regards women.
You also read how a young girl named Afi went to a dressmaker’s shop to order for some dresses and how she was welcomed by the apprentices and the chief dressmaker herself.
In the process you have enriched your vocabulary.
You should also be able to pronounce the new words you have learnt, very well.
5.0 SUMMARY Unit 6 has helped you to know a few words and expressions in the area of dressmaking, which is a very important aspect to human life.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Expliquez avec vos propres mots et expressions les phrases suivantes Elle introduit Afi dans la salle d’attente.
Toutes cousent avec grâce.
2.
– Quel est le numéro de l’atelier « Couture Rapide » ?
3.
L’atelier est situé dans quelle rue ?
4.
Afi est contente de l’accueil qui lui a été réservé.
Relevez dans le texte les phrases qui parlent de cet accueil.
5.
Relisez les 3è et 4è paragraphe du texte.
Jouez à la couturière avec Afi.
De 6 à 8, encerclez la réponse juste sous chaque question : 6.
Afi voudrait se faire confectionner un costume parce qu’: a) elle veut fêter son anniversaire 32 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION b) elle veut se marier c) attendait la fête du Nouvel An approche.
7.
Arrivée chez la couturière Afi a ………………….
a) été très bien reçue b) vu que l’atelier a été fermé c) été insultée par les apprenties 8.
Afi voudrait commander: a) des sous-vêtements b) des pantalons et des robes c) une corsage et deux pagnes.
9.
Décrivez en 5 phrases l’attitude de la maîtresse –couturière.
10.
Décrivez en 5 phrases votre dernière visite dans l’atelier d’une couturière ou d’un tailleur.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Mon quatrième livre de lecture – NEA/EDICEF – 1984.
Introduction to Practice in Oral French (revised edition) by Tunde Ajiboye – Bounty Press Ltd. Emmanuel A. ADENIYI (2005): Basic Elements of French Pronunciation – Agoro-Publicity Company – Ibadan.
33FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 2 UN MARCHÉ DE VILLAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Un Marché De Village 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Word Substitution 3.4 Resume (Presentation of the Passage In Oral And Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of units 5 and 6 based on human activities.
The unit “Un marché de village” (A village market) is relating one important activity of human beings; buying and selling.
The study of the unit will help you to acquire more expressions on human activities, and also make you to be familiar with names of farm produces in French.
The unit will introduce you to names of means of transport common in many African villages.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) read, understand and answer questions on the passage.
(cid:1) get familiar with the words and expressions used in buying and selling.
(cid:1) identify key words used in the commercial language and form new words from them.
(cid:1) imagine and describe one day you will spend or have spent in a market place as a buyer or a seller.. Now listen to the reading on the CD and tape then read on your own.
34 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Un Marché de Village Le marché de Bouzalou est situé au bord de la grande route Sokodé- Bassar.
C’est le principal lieu de rencontre des habitants des hameaux environnants.
Il a lieu tous les six jours.
Le jour du marché, déjà vers neuf heures du matin, les gens commencent à arriver de partout ; les uns sont à pied et portent sur la tête de grandes cuvettes ou des paniers pleins de grains, de farine, de légumes ou des canaris remplis de bam, d’autres tirent derrière eux des moutons ou des cabris récalcitrants qui bêtent à tue-tête ; d’autres encore arrivent à vélo avec un porte-bagages lourdement chargé d’ignames.
Dans la mêlée arrive un âne traînant derrière lui une charrette remplie de patates douces, de fruits divers et de régimes de noix de palme ; dans la charrette ont également pris place un jeune garçon et sa mère.
L’animal s’arrête sous un manguier.
Un cercle de curieux se forme aussitôt autour du véhicule.
Des enfants reconnaissent Abalo et sa maman et les acclament chaleureusement.
« Comme c’est ingénieux !
s’exclame un vieux paysan.
Avec un tel moyen de déplacement on peut, sans se fatiguer, transporter beaucoup plus de produits agricoles et voyager agréablement ».
Peu à peu, les curieux se dispersent.
Chacun retourne à sa place sous une paillotte ou sous un arbre ombrageux et étale sa marchandise.
Le marché s’emplit et s’anime.
Vers quinze heures, il bat son plein.
Des cris s’élèvent de partout.
On discute les prix, on plaisante, on achète, on vend.
Avant la fin de l’après-midi, les paysans venus des villages éloignés rangent leurs bagages et prennent le chemin du retour.
Ceux des localités voisines rentreront chez eux avant le coucher du soleil.
Au crépuscule, la place du marché est à nouveau déserte.
3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud (cid:1) read the passage you have just listened to, pronounce the words properly.
(cid:1) try to observe the “liaison” as the need arises.
(cid:1) pronounce the following words or group of words several times.
Le marché, au bord, des habitants, des hameaux, partout, de grandes cuvettes, des paniers, des grains, la farine, de légumes, des 35FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION canaris, des moutons, des cabris récalcitrants, bêlent à tue-tête, un porte-bagages, des ignames, la mêlée, une charrette, patates douces, de régimes de noix de palme, un cercle de curieux, autour du véhicule, chaleureusement, c’est ingénieux, s’exclamer, un moyen de déplacement, de produits agricoles, voyager agréablement.
Peu à peu, une paillotte, un arbre ombrageux, la marchandise, il bat son plein, on plaisante, des villages éloignés, le chemin du retour, des localités voisines, le coucher du soleil, au crépuscule, la place est à nouveau déserte.
3.3 Vocabulary Identification Of Key Words The passage “Un marché de Village” (A village market) is about a market situated in a village called “BOUZALOU” along the SOKODE- BASSAR express road , in Togo.
The passage narrates people’s activities in the market, products that can be sold and purchased in that local market.
The passage also talks about the means of transport used by various villagers to convey their merchandise to and from the market.
The passage starts with the market day, the time the market starts and ends with the moment when all activities stop in the market.
Words and expressions used in the passage include the following ones: Le marché …est situé = The market is sited Au bord = Along La grande route Sokodé-Bassar = Sokodé-Bassar express road Le principal lieu de rencontre = The major meeting point Des habitants des hameaux = Habitants of hamlets Environnants = Surroundings Il a lieu = Its holds, it takes place Les gens arrivent de partout =People come from everywhere.
Les uns sont à pied = Some do trek Et portent (porter) sur la tête = and carry on their heads Grandes cuvettes = Big bowls Des paniers pleins de grains = Some baskets full of grains Des légumes = Some vegetables Des canaris remplis de vin = Some pots full of palm-wine Des cabris récalcitrants = Stubborn kid-goats Bêlent (bêler) à tue-tête =Bleat at the top of their voices Un porte-bagages = A load carrier Lourdement chargé =Heavily loaded Dans la mêlée =In the muddle up (mêlé) in the scuffles.
36 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Un cercle de curieux =A circle of curious people, inquisitive people Comme c’est génieux = Very genius Moyen de déplacement = Means of transport Peu à peu =Little by little Sous une paillotte =Under a hut Un arbre ombrageux =A shady tree (that has shade) Le marché bat son plein =The market is at its height; Au crépuscule = At dusk 3.3.1 Word Formation (cid:1) Form new words from each of the following words.
The new word must be in line with the part of speech indicated in bracket.
Des habitants (verb), lourdement (adjective), curieux (adverb), des produits (verb), agricoles, (noun), agréablement (adjective).
• Transporter (noun- 2 possibilities), ombrageux (noun), marchandise (noun-2 possibilities), marchandise (verb), s’anime (noun), on plaisante (noun), on achète (verb),on vend (verb) (cid:1) Use the new words you just formed in good, complete and correct sentences in French.
Pronounce the sentences and write then down.
3.3.2 Word Substitution Listen to the passage and fill in the gaps with the missing words.
Le marché de …….est situé au ….
de la ……..route Sokodé-Bassar.
C’est le ….
lieu de….. des ….. environnants.
Il a lieu tous……….
Le jour du marché, déjà …… du matin, les gens …… à arriver de …..; les uns sont……et portent…… de grandes …….ou des …….pleins de grains, ………, de légumes…….remplis de vin ; d’autres……….eux ………..ou des ………….qui bêlent……….., d’autres ……….à vélo avec un ………..lourdement……………….. 3.4 Resume (Presentation of the Passage in Oral And Written Forms) (cid:1) Explain orally the passage by using as much as possible your own words and expressions ; (cid:1) Write down your résumé in 10 sentences.
37FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read about a village market.
You also read about the people who either buy or sell in that market.
You are now familiar with many words and expressions.
It will be wonderful as you use them in your speech.
5.0 SUMMARY Unit 7 has helped you to know more about human activities.
The unit has given you knowledge as regards farm produces, means of transport and moments of the day.
In addition, the study of this unit has made you to know words and expressions used in commercial circles.
A practical application of the words and expressions will do you much good.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Encerclez la réponse convenable sous chaque question de 1 à 5 1.
Le marché est situé : a) au bord de la lagune b) dans la cour de l’école c) au bord de la grande route Sékodé-Bassar 2.
Le marché a lieu: a) tous les six jours b) tous les quinze jours c) tous les dix jours.
3.
Les gens commencent par arriver au marché : a) à partir de neuf heures b) à partir de cinq heures c) à partir de dix-sept heures.
4.
Au marché du village on peut acheter: a) des produits agricoles et des animaux domestiques b) des voitures et des chaises c) des téléphones portables.
5.
Pour se rendre au marché, les habitants vont: a) à pied, à vélo et à dos d’âne.
38 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION b) en voiture c) en train.
6.
Comment Abalo et sa maman se rendent au marché ?
7.
Les enfants acclament chaleureusement Abalo et sa maman quand ils sont arrivés au marché.
Pourquoi ?
8.
Expliquez avec vos propres mots la phrase suivante : "Vers quinze heures, il bat son plein" 9.
A quel moment du jour la place du marché devient déserte ?
10.
Racontez en 5 bonnes phrases votre expérience un jour au marché de votre quartier ou de votre village.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Emmanuel A.ADENIYI (2005) Basic Elements of French Pronunciation – Agoro Publicity Company – Ibadan.
Introduction to practice in Oral French (revised edition by Tunde Ajiboye – Published by Bounty Press Limited.)
Mon quatrième livre de lecture – NEA/EDICEF, 1984.
39FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 3 BRICOLAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Bricolage 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Dictation 3.4 Resume (Presentation of the Passage In Oral And Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is the last in module II which is focussed on human activities.
The unit tittled “BRICOLAGE” (DO IT YOURSELF) or (ODD JOBS) is about practical handiworks that school children learn and do in schools.
As you study this unit, you will know more expressions on human activities.
It will also enrich your vocabulary in the areas of professions, tools used by various professionals and objects fabricated by various artisans and workers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of the study of this unit will help you to: read, understand and answer questions on the passage.
(cid:1) identify key words used in the passage (cid:1) form new words from the one used in the passage (cid:1) describe one or many things you do yourself (cid:1) describe the tools you use in doing it.
Now, listen to the passage and read after.
40 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Bricolage Nous effectuons beaucoup de travaux pratiques dans notre classe.
Nous savons prépaper du lait de chaux et mélanger les couleurs.
L’autre jour, pendant les travaux manuels, nous avons fabriqué une échelle et nous savons badigeonné les murs et le plafond de notre salle de classe.
Nous avons fabriqué une brouette en bois pour transporter les fruits du jardin.
Tout le monde sait faire des briques, réparer un mur en mauvais état ou consolider un blanc cassé.
Nous sommes aussi capables de relier un livre, de greffer un arbre.
Nous réalisons ces petits travaux à l’aide d’un outillage très varié et grâce aux nombreux exercices que notre maître nous fait faire.
Notre caisse à outils contient des marteaux, des arrache-clous, des pinces, des canifs, des couteaux, des scies, des rabots, des truelles, des rapporteurs, des équerres, un niveau d’eau… Monsieur l’Instituteur nous dit souvent que chaque élève doit pourvoir faire chez lui certains petits travaux.
Il ne faut pas confier à un ouvrier ce qu’on peut faire soi-même.
Ainsi, l’argent qui servirait à le payer peut aider à acheter des livres, des chaussures, des habits ou des fournitures scolaires.
Un jour, Abalo a apporté un livre de bricolage en classe.
Sur la couverture il est écrit : « GUIDE DU BRICOLEUR ».
Ce matin, un autre camarade est arrivé en classe avec un beau catalogue.
On y trouve des titres d’ouvrages pour apprendre le tissage, la peinture, la décoration et beaucoup d’autres choses sur les activités manuelles.
Monsieur l’Instituteur est très content.
Il nous a promis de se procurer le livre de bricolage et le catalogue.
3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud (cid:1) Read the passage you have just listened to, pronounce the words correctly.
Try as much as possible to observe the “liaison” where necessary (cid:1) Pronounce several times the following words or group of words: Bricolage, nous effectuons, travaux pratiques, lait de chaux, mélanger, les travaux manuels ; nous avons fabriqué, une échelle, 41FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION badigeonner le smurs, le plafond, une brouette en bois, les fruits du jardin, faire des briques, réparer un mur, mauvais état, consolider, un banc, nous sommes aussi capables, relier un livre, greffer u arbre, un outillage varié, grâce aux exercices, caisse à outils, des marteaux des arrache-clous, des pinces, des canifs, des scies, des rabots, des tuelles, des raporteurs, des équerres, un niveau d’eau, confier, un ouvier, des chausssures, des fournitures scolaires, guide du bricolleur, un beau catalogue, le tissage, la peinture, la décoration, se procurer de.
3.3.1 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words The passage “BRICOLAGE” relates how school children do many jobs, fabricate many objects themselves instead of paying artisans or using money to buy the objects.
The passage relates also to what the school children are capable of doing manually by themselves and the material they use in fabricating them.
In addition, the passage relates the economic importance of “Bricolage” in a school environment and in the society at large.
Words and expressions used in the passage include the followings: Bricolage = Do it yourself, doing odd jobs Travaux pratiques = Practical works Lait de chaux = Lime water Mélanger des couleurs = To mix colors Travaux manuels = Manual work (jobs) Une échelle = A ladder Nous avons badigeonné = We painted Le plafond = The ceiling Une brouette en bois = A wooden wheelbarrow Le jardin = A garden Réparer un mauvais mur = repair a bad wall Consolidez un banc cassé = To mend a broken bench Relier un livre = To bind a book Greffer un arbre = To transplant a tree Petits travaux = Odd jobs Un outillage varié =Different set of tools Nombreux exercices =Many assignments Caisse à outils = Tools’ box Des marteaux = Some hammers Un ouvrier = An artisan Des arrache-clous = Nails –remover Des pinces = Pair of pliers Des canifs = Pocket knives, pen knives Des scies = Saws (wood saws) 42 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Des rabots = Planes Des truelles = Trowels Des équerres = set squares Faire soi-même = Do it yourself Des fournitures scolaires = Materials for school (books, exercice books, biros, pencils) etc.
Le tissage = weaving La peinture = Painting La décoration = Decoration 3.3.2 Word Formation (cid:1) Form new words as indicated in brackets in front of the following words.
Bricolage (verb), mélanger (noun), couleurs (verb), relier (noun), greffer (noun), travaux (verb), un outillage (noun), couteaux (verb), scies (verb), rabots (noun), rabots (verb), scie (noun), marteaux (verb), tissage (verb).
(cid:1) Use the new words you have just formed in good and complete sentences in French.
3.3.3 Dictation Listen to the reading of the following breath groups and write them as exactly as they were pronounced.
Put all the necessary punctuations.
Bricolage Nous effectuons / beaucoup de travaux pratiques / dans notre classe /.
L’autre jour / pendant les travaux manuels / nous avons fabriqué / une échelle / et nous avons badigoenné les murs / et le plafond / de notre salle de classe /.
Tout le monde sait / faire des briques, / réparer un mur en mauvais état / ou consilider un banc cassé /.
Nous sommes aussi capables / de rélier un livre /, de greffer un arbre/.
3.4 Resume (Presentation of the Passage In Oral And Written Forms) (cid:1) Explain briefly and orally the passage by using your words and expressions in the passage “BRICOLAGE”.
(cid:1) Write down your explanation in not more than 10 good and complete sentences in French.
43FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read how school children assisted by their teacher learn how to do many practical and manual jobs themselves, instead of calling on professionals or skilled artisans each time.
The unit has also revealed names of tools used in “Bricolage” and certain activities that can be carried out during “BRICOLAGE”.
You must have greatly enriched your vocabulary.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has given you more words and expressions on manual jobs.
In addition, the unit has helped you to know names of more instruments or tools used in making or performing various activities by different artisans.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT De question 1 à 5 encerclez la réponse juste parmi les options sous chaque question.
1.
Faire du bricolage veut dire: a) Donner n’importe quel travail à un artisan b) Faire quelques petits travaux soi-même c) Travailler tout le temps.
2.
Un bricoleur est un travailleur: a) spécialiste b) qui ne fait rien c) qui fait de petits travaux lui-même.
3.
Selon le texte, tous les élèves savent : a) faire des briques, réparer un mur etc b) chanter et danser c) manger et dormir.
4.
Ils utilisent la brouette en bois pour : a) rentrer à la maison le soir b) fabriquer des bancs cassés c) transporter les fruits du jardin.
44 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 5.
Le lait de chaux sert à : a) badigeonner un mur b) prendre le petit déjeuner c) soigner un malade.
6.
Relevez au 2ème paragraphe, deux conseils de l’instituteur.
7.
Mentionnez 5 outils dans la caisse.
8.
Mentionnez deux outils qui vont ensemble avec "les marteaux" 9.
Lisez le premier paragraphe et mentionnez deux métiers.
10.
Quel artisan utilise les outils suivants ?
le marteau, la scie et un arrache-clou 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Basic Elements of French Pronounciation, by Emmanuel A. ADENIYI.
Introduction to Practice in Oral French: Revised edition by Tunde Ajiboye.
Mon quatrième livre de lecture.
NEA /EDICEF - 1984 45FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 4 LE SQUAT, UN LIEU DE RESISTANCE–LE MONDE DIPLOMATIQUE OCT. 2005.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Le Squat, Un Lieu De Résistance 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud 3.3.1 Vocabulary – Identification of Key Words 3.3.2 Word Formation 3.3.3 Written Expression 3.4 Resource (Presentation of the Passage In Oral And Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This third unit of Module III is a continuation of units 9 and 10.
It involves listening to recorded programmes from radio, reading of excerpts from magazines.
Like units 9 and 10, this unit is to develop your understanding of newscast or information passed through magazines and the radio.
The excerpt from “Le monde diplomatique” of October 3rd 2005 titled “Le squat, un lieu de résistance” relates problems faced by many immigrants and many decisions taken by various governments of European countries.
The excerpt also relates why immigrants do come together to fight and revolt against governmental decisions to evict and send them (immigrants) out of France in particular and Europe in general.
Finally, the excerpt through the expressions related to housing and immigration will give you more foresight about life particularly in France and in Europe.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of the study of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) read, understand answer questions related to the life of immigrants in France and in Europe.
46 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) identify and know more new words and expressions related to immigration and governmental decisions.
Now read these excerpt 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Le Squat, Un Lieu De Résistance Eviction des occupants de squats, Rafles Matinales de sans papiers, charters communautaires affrêtés par plusieurs pays de l’Union Européenne pour renvoyer des immigrés illégaux : A Paris, la machine à épulser est relancée.
Le 9 septembre, le Ministre de l’intérieur Nicolas SARKOZY exhortait les préfets à passer à l’action et à « faire du chiffre ».
Dans les lycées ou les foyers de travailleurs, la Résistance s’organise.
Par Florence Bouillon Le 26 août 2005, 17 personnes (dont 14 enfants) périssent dans l’incendie d’un immeuble vétuste boulevard Vincent-Auriol, dans le 13è arrondissement de Paris.
Le 19 août, 7 autres décèdent dans l’incendie d’un squat rue du Roi-Doré (3è).
Toutes les victimes sont originaires d’Afrique noire.
Le ministre de l’intérieur, M. Nicolas Sarkozy, annonce alors sa décision de procéder à un recensement et de fermer « tous les immeubles insalubres et les squats présumés dangereux » de la capitale.
Trois jours plus tard, sous l’œil des caméras, des dizaines de familles – majoritairement africaines – sont délogées par les forces de l’ordre de deux grands squats parisiens, siutés rue de la Tombe-Issoire (14è) et rue de la Fraternité (19è).
Elles sont provisoirement relogées dans des hôtels de la région parisienne.
Puis, le 16 septembre, une trentaine de personnes sont elles aussi expulsées d’un squat de la rue de Maroc (19è), alors qu’une partie d’entre elles venaient de se voir proposer un relogement.
Les images de cette éviction prêtent à confusion : doit-elle permettre de sauver des personnes vulnérables d’un danger imminent, ou bien chasse-t-elle des individus menaçant la propriété et l’ordre public ?
Les propos du ministre de l’intérieur, insistant sur l’irrégularité des occupants – alors même qu’une mqjorité d’entre eux dispose de titres de séjour – attisent encore les soupçons de « parasitisme ».
Le terme « squatteur » désigne une personne sans logement qui s’installe illégalement dans un local inoccupé.
Etre squatteur n’est 47FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION pas un état : c’est une situation.
Pour une très grande majorité de personnes, l’occupation illicite s’inscrit dans un parcours résidentiel marqué par la précarité.
Le squat fait suite à l’hôtel meublé, à l’hébergement chez des proches, à la location vétuste et bon marché, à la rue parfois.
Une partie des familles maliennes du Roi-Doré avaient campé quai de la Gare, puis à Vincennes en 1991, pour protester contre leur expulsion de logement insalubres : c’est dire s’il est difficile de s’extraire des circuits du mal-logement.
C’est donc bien, d’abord, dans une problématique de l’exclusion du logement que doit s’inscrire la compréhension du squat.
La parallèle avec les bidonvilles qui s’étendaient à la périphérie des villes pendant « les trente glorieuses », vient facilement à l’esprit.
Le bidonville comme le squat sont les derniers échellons de l’habitat précaire.
Ils abrittent les plus pauvres, ceux qui restent à la porte du logement social, qui n’ont même pas de quoi payer un hôtel meublé, qui ne peuvent plus bénéficier des solidarités familiales.
Dans le baraques de Nanterre comme dans les squats de Paris, on trouve avant tout des immigrants, pour la plupart de « première génération ».
La vie y est difficile, sur les plans matériel comme psychologique.
Occuper un logement sans titre, c’est habiter dans un environnement souvent insalubre, privé d’eau, de chauffage et parfois d’électricité.
C’est aussi devoir supporter une cité.
C’est aussi devoir supporter une grande instabilité résidentielle, vivre avec l’angoisse de se retrouver subitement à la rue.
Les bidonvilles avaient certes une espérance de vie plus longue que les squats : beaucoup ont perduré pendant plusieurs décennies, avant leur éradication au début des années 1970.
Mais ils étaient régulièrement menacés.
Un squat est, lui, généralement menacés.
Un squat est, lui, génénalement fermé au bout de quelques mois, à la suite d’une procédure en justice sur dépôt de plainte du propriétaire, et de l’intervention des forces de l’ordre sur autorisation du préfet.
3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud (cid:1) Read the passage and pronounce the words with correct articulation and acceptable intonation.
(cid:1) Pronounce the following words several times: Eviction, squat, raffles, des sans-papiers, des charters, communantaire, affréter, expluser, exhorter, périr, périssent, l’incendie, vétuste, immeuble, arrondissement, un recensement, insalubre, déloger, reloger, majoritaire, majoritairement, provisoiement, vulnérables, parasitisme, un bidonville, la périphérie, la précarité, des migrants.
48 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification of Key Words The excerpt has to do with the poor condition of houses occupied by poor French people and many African families percieved as illegal immigrants.
The passage compares two ways of life and environment peculiar to poor people and illegal immigrants.
The excerpt also talks about government’s bad attitude towards poor people and illegal immigrants, attitude that led to revolts and unrests in Paris and elsewhere.
The words and expressions used include the following: Squat = squat Eviction = eviction Raffles matinales = early morning police round-ups Immigrés illégaux = illegal immigrants La machine à expluser = explusion system Immeubles vétustes = delapidated buildings Un recensement lnérables = Exposed, unprotected persons Un Squatteur = squater La précarité = Precarious situation A bon marché = At a very cheap rate Des bidonvilles = Shanty towns La périphérie = The outskirtch Logement social = Communal building Une espérance de vie = Life span 3.3.1 Words Formation (cid:1) Form new words from the following words.
The new words would confirm the parts of speech indicated in bracket : 4.
Des occupants (verb), cummunantaires (noun), l’union (verb), illégaux (adverb), expulser (noun), les péfets (noun), la résistance (verb), décision(verb), recensement (verb), un relogement (verb), une éviction (verb), l’irrégularité(adjective), parasitisme (verb), la précarité(adjective), l’hébergement (verb), un logement (noun), un logement (verb), l’habitat (verb) l’habitat (noun), l’intervention (verb).
49FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.3.2 Written Expression (cid:1) Use the first ten new words you formed according to the brackets in good and complete sentences in French.
(cid:1) Explain the following words or expressions in your own words : Charters cummunautaires, les squats présumés dangereux, les images de cette éviction prêtent à confusion, un titre de séjour, habiter dans un environnement insalubre.
3.3.3 Résumé (Presentation of the Passage in Oral and Written Forms) (cid:1) Narrate or present the issue in the excerpt in less than 20 sentences use your own words and expressions.
(cid:1) Write down your presentation.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read about “squats, squatteurs” and “bidonvilles”.
You also read how government decisions affect adversely people living in squats adversely.
The excerpt also reveals to you the differences between a “squat” and a “bidonville” and the kind of people living in “ squats” and bidonvilles”.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has helped you to learn and acquire information about the living conditions meted on some people travelling to Europe without genuine residential papers.
These people mostly African called illegal immigrants stay in very old, unhygienic buildings and in very large numbers.
The unit has helped you also to know the life expectancy of “bidonvilles”, “the squats”, the categories of people living in “squats” and in “bidonvilles”.
You have many new words and expressions.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Qui est NICOLAS SARKOZY dans le texte?
2.
Que s’est-il passé le 26 août 2005 dans le texte ?
Répondez par vrai ou faux aux questions du numéro 3 au 6.
3 Le 29 août 2005, Sept autres personnes sont mortes dans un autre incendie à Paris.
VRAI OU FAUX ?
4.
Toutes les victimes sont originaires d’Afrique noire.
VRAI ou FAUX ?
50 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 5.
Le bidonville comme le squat sont des échelons de l’habitat.
VRAI ou FAUX ?
6.
Après le bidonville et le squat, il n’existe plus d’autres catégories d’habitat.
VRAI ou FAUX ?
Encerclez la bonne réponse en choisissant entre a, b, c, de la question 7 à 10.
7.
Nicolas Sarkozy a pris la décision de : a) fermer tous les immeubles insalubres b) renvoyer tous les lycéens africains c) renvoyer tous les professeurs africains.
8.
Nicolas Sarkozy a pris la décision de fermer les immeubles insalubres après: a) avoir renvoyé les immigrants illégaux b) des incendies du 26 août et 29 août, 2005 c) avoir construit beaucoup d’immeubles.
9.
Le terme « squatteur » désigne: a) une maison déjà occupée.
b) une maison qui s’installe dans une maison inoccupée.
c) une personne qui s’installe dans un village.
10.
Les bidonvilles s’étendent: a) à l’intérieur des villes b) à la périphérie des villes c) à la périphérie des fleuves.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING “Le Monde diplomatique” octobre 2005.
Emmanuel A.ADENIYI (2005) Basic Elements of French Pronunciation – Agoro Publicity Company, Ibadan.
TEMPO 1 Methode de FLE 51FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 5 LA PRESSE FRANCAISE: "LES QUOTIDIENS ET LA PRESSE HEBDOMADAIRE" CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 "Les Quotidiens Et La Presse Hebdomadaire" 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification of Keys Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Oral and Written Expression 3.3.3 Word Substitution 3.4 Resume (Presentation of The Passage In Oral And Written Forms) 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Summary 7.0 Tutor -Marked Assignment 8.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Unit 5 which is the second of module III is to further develop your ability in reading and understanding excerpts from magazines radio and newspapers.
Like in unit 2 of Module 2, you will read about the “French Press” (La Presse Française”).
This unit is going to help you familiarize with various names of dailies, journals and magazines published in Paris and other towns in France.
The study of this unit will also teach you words and expressions used in one branch of the media, the press.
This unit will help you know a little about the reading culture of the French through various statistical figures contained in the two passages.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) read, understand and answer questions related to the passages.
(cid:1) be able to learn more French words and expressions used in the media.
(cid:1) be more familiar with names of journals, magazines and dailies published in France.
(cid:1) Know new French words and pronounce them correctly.
52 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) Finally you will keep on getting used to hearing and listening to French passages.
Now Read the Passages 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 “Les Quotidiens Il existe deux catégories de journaux quotidiens en France: La presse quotidienne nationale, publiée à Paris et en île de France, et la presse quotidienne régionale, publiée en province.
La pénétration de la presse nationale est, en fait très faible en région non parisienne, sauf dans quelques grandes villes.
La presse quotidienne régionale est donc le principal moyen d’information nationale, internationale et locale dans les régions françaises.
Elle touche chaque jour plus de vingt millions de lecteurs.
Une soixantaine de titres de quotidiens régionaux paraissent en province.
(Ils étaient 242 en 1914 !).
Ils tirent à 7 500 000 exemplaires.
Les principaux titres sont : Ouest- France (le premier quotidien français par son tirage de 794 000 exemplaires), la voix du Nord (Lille), Sud-Ouest (Bordeaux), Le Progrès (Lyon), Le Dauphiné libéré (Grenoble), Nice- Matin (Nice), l’Est républicain (Nancy), La Dépêche du Midi (Toulouse), La Nouvelle République du Centre-Ouest (Clermont- Ferrand), Le Provençal (Marseille).
La presse régionale doit son succès au fait qu’elle fournit au lecteur des informations sur son environnement global (actualité nationale et internationale ) mais surtout sur son environnement immédiat information locale, manisfestattions diverses, résultats sportifs, compte rendus des conseils municipaux, carnet, spectacles, petites annonces).
Quant à la presse quotidienne nationale, ses principaux titres sont : Le Figaro, Le Monde, Le Parisien, L’Equipe (exclusivement consacré à l’actualité sportive), Libération, France-Soir, L’humanité, La croix.
LA PRESSE HEBDOMADAIRE Les magazines illustrés d’information proposent à leurs lecteurs une analyse et une réflexion sur les évènements de la semaine et sur les perspectives d’évolution de l’actulaité.
Ils sont apparus dans les années soixante, sur le modèle des hebdomadaires américains.
Les hebdomadaires que l’on peut trouver chez le marchand de journaux sont: L’Express, Le Nouvel Observateur, Le Point, Valeurs actuelles et – le plus récent – L’Evènement du jeudi.
Leurs lecteurs appartiennent plutôt aux cadres et professions intellectuelles et sont plutôt jeunes (50% d’entre eux ont moins de 35 ans).
53FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION D’autres hebdomadaires illutrés cherchent davantage à distraire qu’à informer leurs lecteurs : il s’agit de magazines comme Paris- Match, V.S.D (pour: Vendredi Samedi Dimanche), Le journal du dimanche, Ici Paris ou France Dimanche.
Les lecteurs de cette presse sont généralement plus âgés.Ils sont d’origine aussi plus modeste et sont en majorité des femmes.
Ces publications privilègient l’illustrtion (« le poids des mots, le choc des photos » pour reprendre le célèbre slogan de Paris-Match).
Elles s’intéressent à des secteurs de l’actualité très particuliers comme la vie de vedettes et des « grands » de ce monde, les amours des gens du spectacle et des princesses, les héros de faits divers.
Enfin, il y a en France un journal qui est une véritable institution: c’est le Canard enchainé, « journal satirique paraissant le mercredi », sans publicité, donc complètement indépendant.
Il traite l’actualité en utilisant la satire et la caricature, se moque des faiblesses de hommes politiques et dénonce les scandales.
3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud (cid:1) Read the 2 passages and pronounce as correctly as possible the words.
You should respect all the punctuations and all the “liaisons” where necessary.
(cid:1) Pronounce several times the following words: (cid:1) Les quotidiens, des journaux, la presse quotidienne, la presse nationale, la presse quotidienne régionale, la province, la pénétration, exemplaires, Ouest-France, Dauphiné libéré, Sud-Ouest, L’Est-républicain, La dépêché du Midi, Le Figaro, Le Parisien.
(cid:1) Les magazines illutrés, les lecteurs, une analyse, une réflexion, des hebdomadaires, des publications, les poids des mots, la vie des vedettes, une véritable institution, le canard enchaîné, la publicité, journal satirique, la caricature, des faiblesse, les scandales.
3.3 Vocabulary –Identification of Key Words The two passages are about the press in France, the existence; dates of publication of various journals in Paris and all over France.
The passages also give statistics of the number of readers of each category.
The words and expressions used include: 54 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Les quotidiens = dailies La presse nationale = National Press (covering the whole country press, published in the capital).
La presse régionale = Regional press (published and covering a region).
Le principal moyen d’information= The main means of information.
Des lecteurs = Readers Des quotidiens paraissent = Some dailies published in the regions.
En province = Shed in the regions.
7500.000 exemplaires = copies (7,500,000) Les principaux titres = The major ones (publications).
La presse régionale doit = The regional press Son succès = Its success Son environnement immédiat = Its immediate environment Information locale = Local news Manifestations diverses = Various demonstrations, agitations.
Résultats sportifs = Results of sports Comptes rendus = Summaries, rapports Conseils municipaux = Municipal councils.
Petites annonces =Adverts Les magazines illustrés = Illustrated magazines Les évènements = Some events L’actualité = Current news Les hebdomadaires = The weeklies Le marchand de journaux = Newspapers seller Une véritable institution = A real institution Sans publicité = Without adverts La satire = The satyre La caricature = The caricature, the cartoon, Se moquer = To mock, to make jest of.
3.3.1 Words Formation (cid:1) Form new words as indicated in brackets in front of each word: Il existe (noun), publiée (noun), la pénétration (verb), information (verb), lecteur (verb), lecteur (noun), ils tirent (noun), une analyse (verb), une réflexion (verb), l’actualité (adjective), à distraire (noun), illustrés (noun).
55FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.3.2 Oral And Written Expressions (cid:1) Use the new words you have just learnt from the ones above to form good and complete sentences in French, and also write them down.
3.3.3 Words Substitution (cid:1) Complete the passage by filling in the gaps with the appropriate the missing words.
Il existe…………….de journaux ………….en France : La presse ……… publiée à Paris et …….
de France, et la presse ……………publiée en……… La pénétration de la …………est, en fait, …………..en région …………, sauf dans ………..villes.
La presse …………..est donc le ………moyen …………nationale, ………..et locale dans …………….françaises.
Elle touche ………..plus de vingt millions……..Une soixantaine de ………………..de quotidiens……….paraissent en ……….
Les magazines ………..d’information ………….à leurs ……………une ……….et une ………..sur les …………..de la ……….. et sur les ……………….d’évolution de ………….. Ils sont apparus dans les ……………., sur le modèle……….. américains.
3.4 Resume (Presentation of the Passage of Oral and Written Forms (cid:1) Represent the two passages orally by using your own words and expressions in as much as possible.
(cid:1) Summarise your oral presentation in not more than 15 sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read about the Press and French society.
The unit has highlighted the importance of dailies and weeklies in Paris and in other parts of France.
The unit has also given you the opportunity of listening to another French passage.
By now you must be enjoying the melody of the French language.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has helped you to learn about the Press in France.
The unit also helped you to know about the reading culture of the French.
By mentioning names of dailies, magazines and various parts where various dailies are produced, you have learnt one additional fact about 56 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION one very important aspect of French life.
Most importantly, your ears must be getting attuned to the French Language.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT De question 1 à 4, encerclez la bonne réponse en choisissant entre a – c parmi les options fournies.
1.
Un "quotidien" est un journal publié: a) une fois par semaine b) deux fois par mois c) chaque jour.
2.
La presse régionale est publiée.
a) en île de France b) en provinces c) à Paris 3.
"Ouest-France" est le: a) troisième quotidien français b) deuxième quotidien français c) premier quotidien français 4.
Ouest-France tire par jour: a) 497.000 exemplaires b) 794.000 exemplaires c) 974.000 exemplaires.
(cid:1) Répondez par “Vrai ou Faux” de la question 5 à 7.
5- 60 titres de quotidiens régionaux paraissent en province : VRAI OU FAUX ?
6.
Les magazines illustrés proposent une analyse et une réflexion ; VRAI OU FAUX ?
7.
On peut trouver chez le marchand de journaux cinq hebdomadaires : VRAI OU FAUX ?
8.
Quel est le pourcentage et l’âge moyenne des lecteurs des hebdomadaires ?
9.
Mentionnez deux hebdomadaires illustrés qui cherchent à distraire plus que les autres.
10.
Pourquoi "le canard enchaîné" est une véritable institution en France ?
57FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS TEMPO 1, Méthode de FLE Emmanuel A. ADENIYI (2005), Basic Elements of French Pronunciation, Agoro Publicity – Ibadan.
La Fontaine Fables, Editions Gallimard, 1978.
Profil literature, fables de la Fontaine, Hatier, 1979 58 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION MODULE 3 Unit 1 La laitière et la pot au lait Unit 2 A ma mère Unit 3 Journal En Français Facile Sur Rfi Unit 4 Parler au Quotidien sur RFI Unit 5 L’auvergnat – De Georges Brassens UNIT 1 LA LAITERIE ET LE POT AU LAIT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 La Laiterie Et Le Pot Au Lait 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud (Recitation) 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Written Expression 3.4 Resume (Presentation of The Poem (Oral And Written – Prose) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is the first on the reading and interpretation of poems and is tittled “La laitière et le pot au lait,” a poem written by a famous 19th Century poet Jean de La Fontaine.
La laitière et le pot au lait ("The milk seller and the pot of milk") is about a young woman going to the market with a pot full of milk.
She intended to sell the milk and use the money to do so many other things.
Most importantly, she would buy some eggs and have a poultry farm.
On her way to the village market, with the pot on her head, she was busy imagining and counting her riches made out of the sale of the milk.
She was dreaming and forgot that she was carrying the pot on her head, she jumped like the calf she would have in her farm, then the pot fell from her head and all her dreams were dashed.
59FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION The unit in addition to many expressions and words on animals and birds, will teach you diction, It will also teach you a few proverbs and figurative expressions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objectives of this unit are to make you achieve the following points: (cid:1) Read, understand and answer questions on the poem and any other one.
(cid:1) Identify key French words related to dream and imaginations.
(cid:1) Form new French words from the ones in the poem and use them in good sentences.
Now read the poem 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 La laitière et le pot au lait Perrette, sur sa tête ayant un pot au lait, Bien posé sur un coussinet, Prétendait arriver sans encombre à la ville.
Légère et court vêtue, elle allait à grands pas, Ayant mis ce jour-là, pour plus agile, Cotillon simple et souliers plats.
Notre laitière ainsi trousée, Comptait déjà dans sa pensée.
Tout le prix de son lait, en employait l’argent.
Achetait un cent d’œufs, faisait triple couvée: La chose allait à bien par son soin diligent.
« Il m’est, disait-elle, facile.
D’élever des poulets autour de ma maison ; Le renard sera bien habile.
S’il ne m’en laisse assez pour avoir un cochon.
La chose allait à bien par soin diligent.
Il était, quand je l’eus, de grosseur raisonnable : J’aurai, le revendant, de l’argent bel et bon.
Et qui m’empêchera demettre en votre étable, Vu la prix dont il est, une vache et son veau, Que je verrai sauter au milieu du troupeau ?
» Perrette là-dessus saute aussi, transportée: 60 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Le lait tombe: adieu veau, vache, cochon, couvée.
La dame de ces biens, quittant d’un œil marri ?
Sa fortune ainsi répandue ; Va s’excuser à son mari.
En grand danger d’être battue.
Le récit en farce en fut fait: On l’appela le Pot au lait.
Quel esprit ne bat la campagne ?
Qui ne fait châteaux en Espagne ?
Quand je suis seul , je fais au plus brave un défi ; Quelque accident fait-il que je rentre en moi-même, Je suis gros Jean comme devant.
3.2 Oral Reproduction – Recitation (cid:1) Recite the poem as correctly as possible.
(cid:1) You should also respect the punctuations and observe the “liaison” where necessary (cid:1) Pronounce the following words several times: Le pot au lait, un coussinet, sans encombre, court vêtue, allait à grands pas, pour être plus agile, la laitière, un cent d’œufs, triple couvée, un soin diligent, élever des poulmets, le renard, un cochon, grosseur raisonable, une étable, une vache, un veau, un troupeau, faire châteaux en Espagne.
3.3 Vocabulary – Identification of Key Words The poem is talking about a woman named Perrette, a milk seller on her way to the market.
The women was dreaming and imagining how she would get to the market without any problem.
She was imagining how to sell the milk and use the money to buy some eggs, a calf and a pig and construct a modest hut and poultry.
She forgot that she was carrying the pot containing the milk on her head and as she jumped, the pot fell, the milk poured away, thus putting an end to her dream of buying calves, cows and pigs.
The key words and expressions used in this poem include: Un pot au lait = A pot of milk Bien posé = Well placed Un coussinet = A small cushion Arriver sans encombre = To get (to) without difficulty or problem Elle allait à grands pas = Walking, taking big steps, strides Un cotillon simple =Petticoat Triple couvée = Tripple clutch (hatching) of eggs 61FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Son soin diligent = Her diligent care Une étable = A cowshed Une vache = A cow Un veau = A calf Une troupeau = A herd, a flock Sa fortune ainsi répandue = Her fortune thus scattered.
Le récit en farce = The story in joke Battre la campagne = To wander in one’s mind Faire châteaux en Espagne = To build castles in the air, in Spain Oeil marri = Saddened.
3.3.1 Word Formation (cid:1) Form new words in line with the parts of speech indicated in bracket.
Le lait (verb), le lait (adjective), sa pensée(verb), Elever (noun), diligent (adverb), raisonnable (verb), grosseur (adjective) (2 possibilities), esprit (verb), le récit (verb).
3.3.2 Written Expression (cid:1) Use the new words you formed above in good and complete sentences in French.
(cid:1) Explain the following expressions in your own words.
(cid:1) Arriver sans encombre à la ville, légère et court vêtue, être plus agile, le renard sera bien habile, vu le prix dont il est.
3.4 Resume (Presentation of the Poem (Oral Written – Prose) (cid:1) The passage is a poem written and structured as such.
You will now narrate it in form of a story in not more than 5 sentences in form of prose.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read a poem about Perrette’s dream of becoming a proprietor of a poultry, a cowshed and many other things, through a “would be,” sale of milk.
Perrette was so carried away by her imaginations that she forgot that she was still carrying the pot of milk on her head.
The poem also reveals to you more names of animals and furnishes you with a richer French vocabulary.
62 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has helped you to know more words about animals and animal rearing.
Your knowledge of expressions must have increased.
Your ears too will be getting used to hearing more beautiful French words.
6.0 TUTOR -MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
D’après la première partie du poème, dites qui est Perrette.
2.
Comment vous apparaît-elle ?
3.
Quelle est la première étape du rêve de la laitière ?
4.
Que va permettre à Perrette la vente des poulets ?
5.
Qu’arrive-t-il ensuite à la laitière ?
6.
A quel moment le rêve atteint-il son point le plus élevé ?
7.
Relevez dans le poème des détails de l’élevage de l’élargissement du rêve de Perrette.
8.
Donnez un autre titre à ce poème.
9.
Donnez un titre à chacune des parties du poème.
10.
Racontez un de vos rêves qui a eu la même fin que celui de la laitière.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS FABLES DE LA FONTAINE – Editions Gallinard, 1978 Profil Littérature – Fables de la Fontaine – Hatier – 1979.
63FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 2 A MA MÈRE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 A Ma Mère 3.2 Oral Reproduction – Reading Aloud 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.3.2 Written Expression 3.4 Resume (Presentation Of The Poem) (Oral And Written Prose) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of unit 11, and it is on reading and interpretation of poems.
This unit tittled “A ma mère” (To my mother) is a poem by Camara Laye, a famous African author.
“A ma mère” relates to the love and admiration the author has for his mother.
The poem is dedicated to his mother.
In addition to the love and admiration shown by the author for his mother.
“A ma mere” also relates the origin, characters and the affection of the mother towards her son.
Finally, the unit reveals or expresses the feelings of the author for his mother.
You will enjoy the French Language more as you listen to the poem attentively.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) read , understand and answer questions on the poem.
(cid:1) identify key words related to dedication, admiration and feelings expressed by the author.
(cid:1) form new words from some existing ones in the poem and use them in sentences.. (cid:1) express your love, feelings or admiration for a person you admire.
Just as the author did.
64 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Now Read the Poem 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 A Ma Mere Femme noire, femme africaine, ô toi ma mère je pense à toi… O Dâman, ô ma mère, toi qui me portas sur le dos, toi qui m’allaitas, toi qui gouvernas mes premiers pas, toi qui la première m’ouvris les yeux aux prodiges de la terre, je pense à toi….
Femme des champs, femme des rivières, femmes du grand fleuve, ô toi, ma mère, je pense à toi… O toi Dâman, ô ma mère, toi qui essuyais mes larmes, toi qui me réjouissais le cœur, toi qui, patiemment supportais mes caprices, comme j’aimerais encore être près de toi, être enfant près de toi !
Femme simple, femme de la résignation, ô toi, ma mère, je pense à toi… O Dâman, Dâman, de la famille des forgerons, ma pensée toujours se trouve ver toi, la tienne à chaque pas m’accompagne, ô Dâman, ma mère, comme j’aimerais encore être dans ta chaleur, être enfant près de toi… Femme noire, femme africaine, ô toi, ma mère, merci ; merci pour tout ce que tu fis pour moi, ton fils, si loin, si près de toi !
Camara Laye.
L’enfant noir Librairie Plon, tous droits réservés.
3.2 Oral Reproduction (cid:1) Recite the poem.
Pronounce correctly, the words and expressions.
(cid:1) Pronounce the following words several times: O Dâman, toi qui me portas sur le dos, toi qui m’allaitas, toi qui essuyais mes larmes, toi qui gouvernas mes premiers pas, prodiges de la terre, toi qui réjouissais le cœur, patiemment, caprices, femme la résignation, ta chaleur.
65FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.3 Vocabulary – Identification of Key Words The author dedicates the poem to his mother.
The poem shows the love, admiration, feelings and the appreciation of the author towards his mother.
The words and expressions used include the following: Porter sur le dos = To back a child, carry a child on one’s back m’allaitais (allaiter) =breastfed me (To breastfeed) gouvernas (gourverner) mes pas =direct, guided (to direct, guide) my path m’ouvris les yeux (ouvrir) = opened my eyes, taught me to observe = (to open) Les prodiges de la terre =Marvels, wanders of the world Femme des champs = A local woman (village) Toi qui essuyais mes larmes = You who wwiped my tears Réjouissais (réjouir) le cœur = To made (to make) happy Patiemment = Patiently, with patience Caprices =Caprices, stubbornness, whims La résignation = The Resignation 3.3.1 Word Formation (cid:1) Form new words given according to the parts of speech indicated in bracket.
Je pense (noun), allaitons (noun), prodiges (adjective), me réjoouissais (verb), patiemment (noun), patiemment (verb), caprices (adjectives), forgeron (verb) 3.3.2 Written Expression (cid:1) Use the new words you got on 3.2.1 and the ones you got from them in good and complete sentences in French.
(cid:1) Explain the following sentences or group of words in your own words and expressions: Toi qui gouvernas mes pas, les prodiges de la terre, Femme des champs, femme de résignation, J’aimerais encore être dans ta chaleur.
66 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.4 Resume (Presentation of The Poem (Oral And Written Prose) The passage is written as a poem.
The poem is musical and is written in rhyme.
You will now re-write the passage in form of a letter to your mother and express the same feelings as Camara Laye.
You should use your own words and expressions.
Your letter should not be more than 10 sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have read a poem which is a dedication by Camara Laye to his mother.
Camara Laye was full of admiration, praises and thanks to his mother for all she did for him as a child.
The poem also reveales to you words and expressions used to express appreciation and thanks.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has helped you to know more words used in expressing thanks and appreciation to one’s parents.
In you have also learnt to describe and present a relation or a person dear to you and what he or she has done for you.
This unit has made you to know how to express your nostalgic feelings.
It has also given you appropriate words to express your gratitude to your parents for what they have done or many still be doing for you.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Comment s’appelle la mère de l’auteur ?
2.
Où habite-t-elle ?
De questions 3 à 6, répondez aux questions par VRAI OU FAUX 3.
C’est le père Camara qui le porta sur le dos VRAI OU FAUX 4.
La mère de Camara ne l’allaitais pas.
Vrai ou Faux 5.
Daman essuyait les larmes de Camara.
Vrai ou Faux 67FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 6.
La mère de Camara supportait Camara Vrai ou Faux 7.
Mentionnez trois souvenirs que l’auteur évoque quand il parle de sa mère 8.
Montrez que ce texte est un poème en recherchant le sentiment et la musique.
9.
Groupez les qualités de la mère de l’auteur.
10.
Comparez votre mère à la mère de Camara.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS L’enfant noir, Camara Laye – Libairie Plon.
68 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 3 JOURNAL EN FRANÇAIS FACILE DE 10H.30 SUR RFI –30-05-2006 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Le Journal En Français Facile 3.2 Vocabulary – Identification of Key Words 3.2.1 Word Formation 3.2.2 Written Expression 3.3 Resume (Presentation Of The Oral Written Form) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is the beginning of module IV named “listening to recorded programmes from Radio and listening to songs”.
The unit is based on “LE JOURNAL EN FRANCAIS FACILE” (News in simple French Language) recorded from RFI (RADIO FRANCE INTERNATIONAL) at 10.30 a.m. on 30th of May 2006.
This unit has no text back up.
Your understanding of the unit will depend on audio ability.
The major work you will do in this unit and in the remaining three units in this module will be done orally, and that requires your careful listening.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of the study of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) listen, understand and answer questions based on this unit in particular and on all other units in general (cid:1) transcribe what you hear exactly as you hear it without many spelling mistakes.
(cid:1) display a considerable amount of ability to grasp the essentials of the oral passage.
(cid:1) develop a habit of listening to oral passages and putting them down in written form.
(cid:1) appreciate the atmosphere in which discourse is put into practice in real life.
69FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Le Journal En Francais Facile” 3.2 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words This unit titled ‘JOURNAL EN FRANCAIS FACILE” RFI on 30th of May 2006.
As is characteric of news over the radio, the news recorded here gives a lot of information about major events happening in many parts of the world.
Before going into details of the news, the news head lines are given.
Some of the words and expressions used in this unit “Journal en Français facile include the following: La nourriture et le matériel = Food and material Le tremblement de terre =Earthquake Les Manisfestations = Demonstrations, revolts Une forte présence = A large presence Les soldats américains = American soldiers Étaient en cause =were the cause Gros dégâts matériels = Big or many destruction of materials Quartier commercial = Commercial area La cible = target (feminine) Les Maisons pillées (feminine) = Looted houses Maisons incendiées = Houses set on fire Climat très tendu = Very tense atmosphere Reprendre la situation en main = To regain control of the situation.
Au cas où = In case of Blessés graves = Seriously injured Le volcan = Volcano Des épées (famine) = Swords Le génocide = Genocide Les clandestins =Clandestin adj, clandestine, undergrand Les clandestins = Dillegal e.g illegal worker 3.2.1 Words’ Formation (cid:1) Form new word from the following according to instruction in brackets in front of each word; 70 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Manifestation (verb), la nourriture (verb), la cause (verb), violence (adjective), la cible (verb), les pilleurs (verb), les protestations (verb), les enterrements (verb), armement (verb), les Clandestins (verb).
3.3.2 Written Expression (cid:1) Use the new words you just formed in 3.2 in good, correct and complete sentences in French.
(cid:1) Use the following groups of words or expressions in your own sentences: Etre en cause, gros dégâts matériels, Au cas où , un climat très tendu, reprendre la situation en main, une certaine tension, l’aide internationale blessés graves, un camp de réfugiés, la cible.
3.3 Résumé (Presentation In Oral And Written Form) You have listened to "JOURNAL EN FRANÇAIS FACILE" on RFI.
Write down in your own words and expressions two major news items.
Your essay should not be more than 15 sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have listened to “JOURNAL EN FRANCAIS FACILE” (News in simple French) on RFI.
In the news, A lot of information was given about many events happening in many parts of the world.
In this unit you have learnt many new words and expressions about revolts, earthquake; genocide in Rwanda, the number of people that perished in the earthquake, in Indonesia and about illegal immigrants from Africa.
5.0 SUMMARY The successful completion of this unit would will enable you to; (cid:1) develop your listening ability (cid:1) listen, understand and answer questions based on the unit.
(cid:1) develop your ability to understand and transcribe without many spelling errors on oral message.
(cid:1) get information on the happenings in the world and disseminate such information to others orally in writing (cid:1) enrich your knowledge of vocabulary.
71FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Quelle est la signification de RFI?
2.
Par quoi a débuté ce journal ?
3.
Mentionnez et commentez deux titres des nouvelles diffusées dans le journal.
4.
Où vont les clandestins et combien sont-ils ?
5.
Qui est Jean-Louis Gergorin dont parle le journal ?
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS RADIO RFI – JOURNAL EN FRANÇAIS FACILE, 30 mai 2006 (1OH.30).
72 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 4 PARLER AU QUOTIDIEN SUR RFI CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Word Formation 3.2 Written Expression 3.3 Resume 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is the second in Module IV, “Listened to recorded programme from radio and listening to songs”.
The unit is based on a programme recorded from RFI titled “PARLER AU QUOTIDIEN” or “LA VIE DES MOTS”.
The programme explains words or expressions, their origin, uses and other words or expressions related to them.
It also explains how the words or expressions and words related to them are formed.
The unit is based on the expression “C’EST DU CHINOIS”.
This expression is explained in detail.
Its positive and negative usage by other nations are also given.
Finally the reasons for the various usages are also given in detail.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of the study of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) develop your listening ability a bit more.
(cid:1) listen, understand and answer questions based on this unit.
(cid:1) transcribe what you hear as exactly as possible without many spelling mistakes.
(cid:1) enrich your vocabulary.
(cid:1) appreciate the atmosphere in which discourse is put into practice in real life.
73FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Word Formation (cid:1) Listen to the recording once more and write out the first 5 words.
(cid:1) From the first 5 words form 5 others.
If the word you heard is a verb, form a noun from it, if a noun, form an adjective from it and if it is an adjective, form an adverb from it.
3.2 Written Expression (cid:1) Use, the first 5 words you heard from the recording and the 5 words you formed from them in good, correct and complete sentences in French.
This will give you 10 sentences in all.
3.3 Resume (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) (cid:1) Summarize the unit “C’EST DU CHINOIS” in not more than 10 sentences.
You Should use your own words and expressions in your summary.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have listened to “PARLER AU QUOTIDIEN” a recorded programme from RFI.
“PARLER AU QUOTIDIEN” explain the origin and usage of words or expressions and other words or expressions derived from them.
This unit “C’EST DU CHINOIS” has explained in detail why and when the expression can be used.
The unit has also explained many other expressions derived and derivable from the expression.
In the course of the explanation you learnt about one negative aspect of the character of different people of the world; “LA XENOPHOBIE” (XENOPHOBIA).
Xenophobia was one of the reasons that informed the use of this expression “C’EST DU CHINOIS”.
5.0 SUMMARY The successful completion of the study of this unit must have taught you to: (cid:1) listen, understand and answer questions on this unit.
74 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) develop your ability to listen and understand oral /verbal passages.
(cid:1) transcribe accurately what you heard without any word or expression to guide you.
(cid:1) add to your knowledge, experience and sense of understanding and interpretation.
(cid:1) add a bit to your geographical and cultural knowledge.
(cid:1) increase your ability to grasp the essential parts of an oral message and put it in the written form.
(cid:1) enrich your knowledge by the addition of new words and expressions you have acquired through this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mentionnez deux explications qui montrent l’emploi positif de "C’EST DU CHINOIS".
2.
Mentionnez deux explications qui montrent l’emploi négatif de "C’EST DU CHINOIS".
3.
Expliquez avec vos propres mots et expressions les mots suivants: Une chinoiserie, chiner un tissu, un casse-tête chinois.
4.
La "XENOPHOBIE" est un bon ou un mauvais catactère de l’homme ?
Justifiez votre réponse.
5.
A l’exemple de "C’EST DU CHINOIS" un trait de la Xenophobie, mentionnez une expression qui relève de la xénophobie dans votre langue.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS EMMISION PARLER AU QUOTIDIEN SUR RFI.
75FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 5 L’AUVERGNAT – DE GEORGES BRASSENS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 L’auvergnat 3.2 Vocabulary – Identification Of Key Words 3.3 Word Formation 3.3.1 Word Substitution 3.3.2 Written Expression 3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Unit 5 is a continuation of module IV, “Listening to recorded programmes from Radio and listening to songs”.
This unit 15 is based on “L’AUVERGNAT” a song of Georges BRASSENS who was a famous French artist.
He died years back.
Like units 13 and 14, this unit has no text back up; your understanding of the unit will depend on audio ability.
The major work you will do in this unit as in the previous two in the module will be based on your oral and listening capability.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) listen, understand and answer questions based on the unit in particular and prepare you for unit 16.
(cid:1) transcribe what you hear as exactly as possible without many spelling errors.
(cid:1) display a considerable amount of ability to grasp the essentials of the oral passage, which, in this case, is a song.
(cid:1) understand the topic of the song and the message conveyed by the artist.
(cid:1) develop your habit of listening to oral passages and render them in written form.
76 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) appreciate the atmosphere in which discourse, in this unit for example a song, is carried out in real life.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 L’auvergnat 3.2 Vocabulary – Identification of Key Words The song “L’ AUVERGNAT” is an expression of gratitude and appreciation to people who helped the singer when he was going through difficult times in life.
It is a song dedicated to kind people of the world in general and in particular those who were nice to the singer.
The composer used simple words and expressions in French.
The words and expressions used include the followings: L’auvergnant =A man from Auvergne (a town in France).
Sans façon = Without fuss, honestly Ma vie = My life Il faisait froid = It was cold Fermer la porte au nez de quelqu’un = To shut the door in somebody’s face.
Mon âme = My mind, my soul Il brûle encore = It is still burning, it is still fresh, it lingers on.
Le croque-mort =Undertaker’s assistant or mortician’s assistant Au Père Eternel = To the Everlasting Father (God) La huche, (à pain) = Coffer, bread bin Le Festin = Feast 3.3 Word Formation (cid:1) Form new words from the following ones according to the indication in bracket.
Chanson (verb), chanson (verb), les croquants (verb), brûle (noun), brûle (adjective), joie (adjective), jeûner(noun), festin (noun), mourra (noun), les gendarmes (noun).
77FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.3.1 Word Substitution Listen to the song and reconstruct the first stanza and the chorus by filling in the gaps: Elle est ………….cette ……….. Toi …………qui sans………….
M’a donné …………..bouts de …….. ……..dans ma …….
Il faisait……….
………qui m’a …..du feu………….
Les croquantes et ………… Tous les ………..bien ……….
M’avaient ……….. la porte au …….. Ce …………..rien ……….feu de…….
Mais il ……….chauffé ………….
Et dans mon ……………il brûle…….
A la ..d’un feu de …………….
Toi ……….
Quand tu ………….
…………..le croque-mort……… Qu’il te ……….à travers ……….
………..Père …………….
3.3.2 Written Expression (cid:1) Use the first 10 words you formed above in 3.2 in good, complete and correct sentences in French.
(cid:1) Make use of the following group of words in sentences of your own to show you understand the song: sans façon, il faisait froid, les gens bien intentionnés, le croque-mort, à travers ciel.
3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) (cid:1) Listen to the song and summarize the 3 stanzas in just 15 good and correct French.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have listened to a song “L’AUVERGNAT” composed and sang by Georges BRASSENS, a great French artist of blessed memory.
In this song, G. BRASSENS was expressing his appreciation and gratitude to those who helped him at different moments of life when he was in difficult situations.
In the song, G. BRASSENS also prayed for all those who helped him.
78 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 5.0 SUMMARY The successful completion of this unit must have helped you to: (cid:1) develop your listening ability further.
(cid:1) understand more verbal and oral expressions.
(cid:1) transcribe what you heard orally without many spelling errors.
(cid:1) take more interest in listening and transcribing oral conversation like songs, recorded TV and radio programmes.
(cid:1) recompose or reformulate orally in your words what you hear orally in your words orally too and reproduce it in written form.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT De question 1 à 4 répondez aux questions en cochant la bonne option entre a, b, c. 1.
Elle est à toi : a. cette récitation b. cette chanson c. ce poème 2.
Toi l’auvergnat qui m’a donné : a. à manger b. de l’eau c. quatre bouts de bois.
3.
Toi l’hôtesse qui m’a donné: a. du feu b. quatre bouts de pain.
c. quatre bouts de bois.
4.
Toi l’étranger qui m’as: a. applaudi b. sourri c. poussé.
5.
BRASSENS est reconnaissant envers tous ceux qui l’ont aidé.
Partagez-vous cette opinion ?
Justifiez votre réponse en redigeant un texte de 10 phrases.
79FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS L’enfan noir, Camara Laye, Libraiorie Plon.
80 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION MODULE 4 Unit 1 Les Collégiennes d’Abidjan – D. Kone Unit 2 Advert – I.E.S.A.
Unit 3 Photo-Couverture – “La Nation” Unit 4 Images – Tempo 1 Unit 5 Cartoon – Dessins Animes UNIT 1 LES COLLEGIENNES D’ABIDJAN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les Collegiennes D’abidjan 3.2 Vocabulary – Recognition of Key Words 3.3 Written Expression 3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is the last in module IV.
It unit is based on a song just as in unit 15.
This unit is titled “LES COLLEGIENNES D’ABIDJAN”a song by Daouda KONE an artist of great repute from the Republic of Ivory Coast (Côte d’Ivoire),.
Like other units in this module, this unit has no text back up.
Your audio ability will reflect in the answers you give.
The major work you will do in this unit will, as in the previous ones, be based on your oral and listening capability.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) develop your listening ability.
(cid:1) understand oral message a bit more.
(cid:1) listen, understand and answer questions pertaining to the unit “Les Collégiennes d’Abidjan” 81FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION (cid:1) Note some differences in the intonation, pronunciation and articulation of a pure French speaker /singer and a francophone person, who is not French.
(cid:1) transcribe more oral messages and songs.
(cid:1) display further considerable amount of ability to grasp the essential, of the oral message.
(cid:1) appreciate the atmosphere in which discourse (in this unit a song) is carried out in real life.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Les Collegiennes D’abidjan 3.2 Vocabulary – Recognition of Key Words The song “Les Collégiennes d’Abidjan" (College Girls in Abidjan) has to do with Ivorian school girls in their blue and while uniforms.
It is a song dedicated to school girls all over the country (Ivory Coast).
The song highlights the good character of girls in various schools and towns.
Finally, the song is condemns people calling the girls bad names.
The singer is expresses his admiration for the girls.
The words and expressions used include the following ones: Si jolies = So beautiful Les plus mignonnes = The most cute Les plus charmantes = The most charming Partout = Everywhere Les plus élégantes = The most elegant Les plus romantiques = The most romantic Les plus sympathiques = The most friendly, the nicest Les mauvaises langues = Spiteful, malicious, gossip.
3.3 Written Expression (cid:1) Use the following words or group of words contained in the song in good, correct and complete sentences of your own.
(cid:1) Collégiennes, mignonne, la beauté, souriantes, élégantes, tout le monde adore, avoir une mauvaise langue, les quartiers, partout, sympathiques.
82 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.4 RESUME (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) (cid:1) Listen to the song once more and summarize the 3 stanzas in just 10 sentences.
(cid:1) Write a short essay of just a paragraph of 5 sentences on the chorus.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have listened to a song “Les collégiennes d’Abidjan” composed by a famous Ivorian artist.
In this song Daouda KONE is expressing his admiration about school girls and their uniform (blue and white).
He is also condemning people criticized the girls’ uniform.
Through this unit, you have learnt about a school culture in one of Africa’s francophone countries, where by the same school uniform is worn all over the country.
5.0 SUMMARY The successful completion of this unit would help you to: (cid:1) develop more your listening skill, understanding and comprehending oral messages.
(cid:1) transcribe what you heard orally, with more accuracy.
(cid:1) develop your interest in listening to oral messages, especially songs.
(cid:1) know more about songs and the importance of the message in the songs.
(cid:1) know that one can express his /her feelings or opinions through songs.
(cid:1) know or note some differences existing between two artistes /singers (French and Francophone).
(cid:1) Brooden your horizon on one aspect of education in a francophone country.
You must have learnt and achieved a lot.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Donnez un autre titre à cette chanson.
2.
Trouvez deux raisons pour lesquelles Daouda KONE a composé cette chanson.
3.
Mentionnez 5 villes de la Côte d’Ivoire mentionnées par le chanteur.
4.
Commentez le 3ème couplet de cette chanson.
83FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 5.
Mettez-vous à la place des collégiennes d’Abidjan et envoyez une lettre de 20 lignes à Daouda KONE.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Radio RFI – Journal en Francais facile, 30 mai 2006, emission de 10H.30.
84 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 2 I. E. S. A – ADVERT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 I.E.S.
A 3.2 Interpretation – Explanation 3.3 Identification of Key Words 3.3.1 Word Formation 3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation of the Passage in Oral and In Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Unit 17 is the first of module IV which is based on drawings, photographs and cartoons from a newspaper.
Unit 17, “I.E.S.A.” (Institut d’Etudes Supérieures des Arts).
"Higher Institute of Arts Studies" is an advert on an institution of higher learning.
The advert gives full information about the institution’s location, entry qualifications, duration of courses, certificates obtainable from the institution, and the age of the institute.
The unit will help you to be familiar with words and expressions used in the advert section of the media and will prepare you to write or place advert in dailies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of the study of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) read, interprete and explain what an advert is all about.
(cid:1) answer questions on adverts henceforth.
(cid:1) identify key words used in the advert and make use of such words whenever you want to place an advert.
(cid:1) Finally, the study of the unit will enable you to know and write adverts whenever there is need to do so.
Now read the advert 85FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 I.E.S.A.
86 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.2 Interpretation – Explanation - Interprete the advert you have just read.
What is it all about ?
- Explain the advert clearly to somebody who is not familiar with the language of advert.
3.3 Identification of Key Words This is an advert about an institution of higher learning.
The advert is giving all necessary information on the institution such as locations of the school, other institution who are in partnership with I.E.S.A and those that recognizes the institution.
Words abbreviation and signs used include the following: Cycle européen = European cycle (system) En partenariat = In partnership Validé par l’université = Ratified by university Accès en 2ème année Ma = Leads or admits to, 2nd Year Masters.
Post-Bac = After Higher Level or Post H.S.C or after S. S. 3 Formation continue = Uninterrupted training Titre homologue = Approved Title Etablissement reconnu =Establishment (school /approved) Approved establishment, school Expertise = Appraisal (expertise).
3.3.1 Word Formation (cid:1) Form new words from the following ones according to the passage as the parts of speech in bracket in front of each word: Etude (verb), étude (noun), européen (noun), partenariat (verb), validé (verb), formation (verb), communication (verb), expertise (noun), l’art (noun), édition (verb).
(cid:1) Use the words you thus formed and those you formed from them in good and complete sentences in French.
3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) This is an advert using media terms and abbreviations.
You will now write the advert in full and send it to a media house to be published in a newspaper.
Your write up should not be more than 10 sentences.
87FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the language of the media as related to advertisement about an educational institution.
The unit has made you to know more about the press, publications/ newspapers /magazines.
This unit has helped to know what an advert is and how it is drafted.
5.0 SUMMARY The successful completion of the study of this unit has made you to: (cid:1) be more conversant with the language of the press in general, and as regards adverts in particular.
(cid:1) to have an insight in the advert section of the media.
(cid:1) to know more expressions and words about educational institutions in Europe in particular.
(cid:1) to be able to prepare write ups for advert in newspapers /magazines.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
La publicité est à propos de quel cycle d’éducation ?
De n° 2 à 5 répondez par Vrai ou Faux 2.
I.E.S.A.
est situé dans un pays africain VRAI OU FAUX.
3.
I.E.S.A.
est à Paris seulement.
VRAI OU FAUX 4.
I.E.S.A.
est à Paris et à Londres seulement .
Vrai OU 5.
FAUX .
6.
I.E.S.A n’est validé par une aucune université.
7.
VRAI OU FAUX 8.
Mentionnez 3 villes en dehors de Paris où se trouvent I.E.S.A.
9.
Le programme de I.E.S.A.
dure de combien de mois à Paris ?
Précisez les mois.
10.
Mentionnez deux diplômes délivrés par I.E.S.A.
d’après la publicité.
11.
I.E.S.A.
existe depuis combien d’années ?
Justifiez votre réponse.
12.
Expliquez en termes clairs et précis « en partenariat avec la Wallace Collection".
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Courier International, août 2005.
88 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 3 PHOTO DE LA COUVERTURE "LA NATION - QUOTIDIEN NATIONAL D’INFORMATION" REPUBLIQUE DU BENIN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Image De La Couverture 3.2 Interpretation of Photograph 3.3 Written Expression 3.3.1 Resume (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is based on the reading and interpretation of photographs like the previous unit.
The unit titled “le Président BONI YAYI SUR LE TERRAIN” (President BONI YAYI ON THE FIELD) shows the photograph of the President with his entourage inspecting one area in Cotonou, Commercial Capital of Benin Republic .
The photograph is on the cover page of a daily newspaper “LA NATION”.
In this unit, there are not many words or expressions to guide.
You are expected to use your sense of imagination to interprete the photograph.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will enable you to.
• interpret and explain the activity going on in the photograph and answer the questions related to it.
• Express in your own words your imaginations and make your listeners • develop a sense of imagination to describe and explain pictures orally and in form using your own words and expressions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Look At the Photograph 89FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.1 Photograph 3.2 Interpretation of the Photograph In this unit, you have few words to guide you on your imagination and interpretation of the photograph.
These are “Assainissement des quartiers marécageux de Cotonou" (Sanitation of swampy areas of Cotonou).
90 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION With this little clue, you will now imagine, interpret and describe in detail what you see on the photograph.
Your explanation should include the number of persons, objects and activities of the persons.
3.3 Written Expression (cid:1) Write down your interpretation, and explanation in good, correct sentences and in simple French language.
(cid:1) Your interpretation should be in form of an essay of not more than half a page.
3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) (cid:1) Divide the photograph in this unit into 2 parts and interpret each part in less than 5 -five sentences.
(cid:1) Describe the arrowed man in the photograph in just 5 sentences.
Use your own words.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt how to develop your sense of imagination to interprete a photograph.
This unit made of a group photograph showns many people having different expressions on their face.
In the photograph, there are also objects that have attracted your attention and aroused your imagination.
5.0 SUMMARY The successful completion of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) develop further your sense of imagination.
(cid:1) add more to your knowledge in the area of interpretation and description of photographs.
(cid:1) write down your oral interpretation for people to read and understand.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
-Une flèche indique le Président dans la photo.
Qui est celui qui est proche de lui ?
2.
Qui est celui qui montre quelque chose dans la photo ?
3.
Mentionnez deux groupes de personnes dans l’entourage du Président d’après la photo.
91FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 4.
Imaginez ce que dit la personne qui montre quelque chose au Président en 5 phrases.
Mentionnez deux objets que vous voyez sur la photo.
5.
Du n° 6 à 9, répondez par VRAI ou FAUX.
6.
Toutes les personnes sur la photo sont des béninois.
VRAI ou FAUX 7.
Toutes les personnes sur la photo sont des amis du Président VRAI ou FAUX 8.
Il y a des journalistes dans l’entourage du Président.
VRAI ou FAUX 9.
Il y a un européen dans l’entourage du Président.
VRAI ou FAUX 10.
Décrivez la partie élevée où se trouve le Président et son entourage.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS “LA NATION” QUOTIDIEN NATIONAL D’INFORMATION DU VENDREDI 26 MAI, 2006.
92 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 4 IMAGES DES ACTIVITES QUOTIDIENNES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Images / Dessins – Tempo I 3.2 Interprétation Of Images / Photographs 3.3 Written Expression 3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of Module V on reading and Interpretation of adverts, drawings /photos, cartoons from newspapers.
This unit is based on photographs of page 167 of TEMPO I.
The photographs (5 in number) show objects and human beings performing various activities.
In this unit, there are no words or sentences to guide you on the exact utterances.
However, you will use your imagination to describe the photographs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) look at the photographs critically, interpret each one of them, imagine and suggest possible activities related to each.
(cid:1) use your own words and expressions to interpret images and, photographs.
(cid:1) answer questions on each photograph by mere imagination.
(cid:1) develop a sense of imagination to describe in your own words, photographs and images.
You should describes the photographs in oral and written forms.
93FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Look At the Photographs 3.1 Photos 3.2 Interpretation of Photo /Images There are no words or texts attached to each of the five photographs shown in this unit.
You are therefore to use your own words and expressions to interpret each photo.
You should construct good sentences making use of appropriate words and expressions for the oral description.
3.3 Written Expression (cid:1) Write down your interpretation, in good and complete sentences for each photo.
(cid:1) Your interpretation in writing should not be more than 5 sentences on each image /photograph.
3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation of the Passage in Oral and In Written Forms) 94 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION Group the five images /photographs in this unit in two and write down your interpretation on each group in (5) five good and complete sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt how to imagine and interpret, what you see in a picture or photograph.
This unit is made up of 5 pictures.
The first also shows a train, some houses and a man carrying a bag who is running towards the train.
The next photo is on the tree without leaves.
The remaining 3 photo show human beings engaged in various activities.
This unit has made you to imagine and interpret what you see in a picture / image without the provision of words or expressions related to any photograph.
5.0 SUMMARY The successful completion of this unit has helped you: (cid:1) develop and use your ability to imagine and interpret pictures / photographs without any clue.
(cid:1) suggest adequate words and expressions that describe and explain activities carried out in pictures / photographs.
(cid:1) Write down your imagination and interpretation in good and complete sentences of your own.
6.0 TUTOR -MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Que voyez-vous dans la première image?
2.
Que fait la personne dans cette image, et pourquoi ?
3.
Combien de personnes voyez-vous dans la deuxième image ?
4.
Décrivez brièvement les personnes dans la deuxième image.
5.
Combien de personnes voyez-vous dans la troisième image ?
6.
Que font les personnes dans la quatrième image ?
Du n° 7 au 10 répondez aux questions par VRAI ou FAUX.
7.
Un objet est tombé du sac d’une personne dans la deuxième image VRAI ou FAUX 8.
L’une des personnes dans la deuxième image tient en laisse un mouton.
VRAI ou FAUX 95FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 9.
Les personnes dans la troisième image sont mangent.
VRAI ou FAUX 10.
Les personnes dans la troisième image sont des jeunes filles.
VRAI ou FAUX 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS TEMPO I – Méthode de Français Langue Etrangère – HATIER.
96 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION UNIT 5 CARTOON – P. 28 “COURRIER INTERNATIONAL, mars 2002 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Cartoon – P. 28 "Courrier International, Mars 2002 3.2 Interpretation of the Cartoon 3.3 Written Expression 3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Unit 5 is the last in Module V on reading and interpretation of adverts, drawings / photos and cartoons from magazines.
This unit is based on a cartoon drawn from “COURRIER INTERNATIONAL” of March 2002 on page 28.
Like other units of this module, the unit does not offer many words or expressions you can use as clue for your interpretation of the cartoon.
The greater part of your interpretation will be based on your imagination.
Use your own words and expressions.
This will show your level of understanding of the unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The successful completion of the study of this unit will enable you to: (cid:1) Use your own words and expressions to interpret the cartoon.
(cid:1) Develop your sense of imagination to interpret the cartoon more orally.
97FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Look At The Cartoon 3.2 Interpretation Of The Cartoon In this unit, there are a few words to guide you on your interpretation.
You will have to use your sense of imagination to explain what is going on in the cartoon.
(cid:1) You will now observe the cartoon closely and study the two persons and their utterances and try to interpret the cartoon orally.
3.3 Written Expression (cid:1) Write down your interpretation in good and complete sentences in French.
(cid:1) Your interpretation on each person in the cartoon should not be more than 10 sentences.
98 FRE211 ADVANCED STUDY IN ORAL AND WRITTEN COMPREHENSION 3.4 Resume (Re- Presentation Of The Passage In Oral And In Written Forms) (cid:1) Put the explanations you wrote on the two persons in the cartoon together in just 10 sentences.
You should not leave out or ignore any aspect of your oral explanation in your résumé.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt more about the interpretation of photographs and cartoons.
This unit is made of one picture comprising two persons.
The cartoons shows the two persons in different moods.
This unit has made you to put life and words in the month of the persons in the cartoon.
You have used your own words and expressions.
5.0 SUMMARY The successful completion of this unit has developed in you your creative ability.
You have used your own words to interpret the picture.
You must have acquired new vocabulary.
You have achieved a lot in this course, FRE211, Advanced Study in oral and written comprehension.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Observez bien les dessins et faites une brève description des deux personnes.
2.
Comment s’appelle celui qui sourit dans le dessin ?
3.
Pourquoi sourit-il ?
4.
Expliquez et justifiez la phrase "Je suis le président, un point c’est tout".
5.
"Voilà le discours subtil qui me manquait", pour quoi ce monsieur a-t-il prononcé scette phrase ?
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS COURRIER INTERNATIONAL – mars 2002 p. 28.
99
