 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: FRE 221 COURSE TITLE: FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Course Developer Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
Unit Writers Dr. P. O. Alo European Languages Department University of Lagos And Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor Dr. Abayomi Kizito Folorunso Nigerian French Language Village Ajara - Badagry Programme Leader Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator Ms Lucy Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii COURSE GUIDE FRE 221 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCOURSE GUIDE FRE 221 TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Introduction …………………………………………….
1 What you will learn in this course……………………… 1 Course Aims …………………………………………… 1-2 Course Objectives……………………………………… 2 -3 Working through This Course…………………………… 3 Course Materials………………………………………… 3 Study Units……………………………………………… 3- 4 Textbooks and References……………………………… 4 Assignment File………………………………………… 5 Assessment……………………………………………… 5 Tutor-marked Assignments (TMAs) …………………… 5 Final examinations and grading………………………… 5 Course marking scheme………………………………… 6 Course Overview and Presentation Schedule…………… 6- 7 How to get the most from this course…………………… 7- 9 Tutors and tutorials……………………………………… 9 Summary………………………………………………… 10 iv Introduction This course, FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION I, is a one- semester course in the second year of B.A.
(Hons) Degree in French and International Relations.
It is a three (3) credit course of twenty units.
It intends to introduce you (students) to the Grammar and Composition in French Language.
FRE 221 as FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION I, is a development on FRE 107: FRENCH GRAMMAR I and FRE 108: FRENCH GRAMMAR II.
It is an aspect of Grammar that introduces you to the heart of grammar and composition writing in French Language.
Like the two Basic Grammar courses earlier learned in Year One, the course prepares you for a more advanced grammar that will be taught in FRE 222: FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION II.
Grammar, being the life wire of any human language is highly important for it allows the learners to read, understand and analyse the grammatical structure, with which the contents of other language courses are documented.
This course is thus essential and will be beneficial to any French student because it will enhance your linguistic capability to cope with the grammatical structure of French Language.
It will also enable you to put into practice the grammar of French that you acquire in the course of this programme.
What You Will Learn In This Course The general aim of FRE 221: FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 is to introduce you to the advanced grammar of French language.
This aspect of grammar is centred on the analysis of French Morphology.
It will expose you to the origin of French Morphology and the art of writing good composition in French.
In this course guide, we hope to tell you briefly what the course is all about, the course materials you will use to achieve the objectives of the course, suggestions on some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
We also provide a detailed separate Assignment File for you.
Course Aims The aims of this course are: • To let you know the definitions, origin and importance of Morphology in the grammar of any human language like French.
FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 • To identify various methods of words formation in French Language.
• To teach you various techniques, through which you can write good compositions (Essay and Letters) in French Language.
These aims will be achieved through: • A detailed introduction of Morphology as the first and the basic step to analytical grammar.
• Presentation of various processes through which French words could be formed.
• Provision of some methods and techniques that you could follow to write good compositions (Essay and Letters) in French Language.
Course Objectives It is on completion of the entire units of this course that the aims set above could be completely achieved.
Each unit has its specific objectives.
The unit objectives are found at the beginning of each unit.
You need to read them before you start working on the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress in the course.
There is need for you to always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit to ensure that you have done what is required.
We would like to itemise the objectives of the course in an explicit and methodical manner.
If you are able to meet these objectives as stated below, you would have achieved the aims of this course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Define and trace the origin of French Morphology • State the importance of Morphology in the grammar of any natural language.
• Identify the three major processes of French words formation • Identify the three secondary processes of French words formation • Justification and application of the three major processes of French words formation in Morphological cum grammatical analysis • Justification and application of the three secondary processes of French words formation in Morphological cum grammatical analysis • Define and Explain Composition as an important end result of French grammar ii FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 • Classify Composition in French Language into Essay and Letter writing • State the techniques and steps to follow when writing good Essays • State the techniques and steps to follow when writing good Letters Working through This Course To complete this course you are required to read the study unit, read set books and other materials related to French grammar and Composition.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises.
You will also have to submit your Tutor-Marked Assignments to your tutors.
The course will take you between 10 and 15 weeks to complete.
Find below the components of the course: what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File Study Units There are twenty study units in this course.
They are: Module 1 Unit 1 Définitions et origine de la morphologie française Unit 2 Une brève histoire de l’évolution de la langue française Unit 3 Les vocabulaires français : Les trois procédés majeurs de la formation des mots en français Unit 4 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntés aux autres langues : le grec et le latin Unit 5 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntés aux autres langues : l’italien et l’espagnol Module 2 iiiFRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Unit 1 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntés aux autres langues : l’allemand, l’anglais et l’arabe Unit 2 Les bases morphémiques qui aident la formation des mots français Unit 3 L’affixation: les préfixes empruntés au latin Unit 4 L’affixation: les préfixes empruntés au grec Unit 5 Les suffixes principaux empruntés au latin et au grec Module 3 Unit 1 Les parasynthétiques Unit 2 La composition en morphologie Unit 3 Différents types de composition en français : substantifs Unit 4 Les compositions dites verbale, adverbiale et conjonctive Unit 5 Les trois procédés secondaires de la formation des mots en français Module 4 Unit 1 Condiments of Good Composition for French and Other Language Students Unit 2 Types of Linguistic and Pedagogical Composition: Essay and Letter Writing Unit 3 Logical Classification of Essays Unit 4 Structure of Good Essays Unit 5 Methods of Writing Good Letters As it could be seen above, Units 1 to 5 are based on the definitions, origin and the importance of words borrowing (les emprunts) in the morphological formation of words in French Language.
Units 6-10 elaborate on the Affixation as a major process of words formation.
These units also discuss words, base morphemes, prefixes and suffixes borrowed from other languages, most especially Latin and Greek.
Units 11 to 15 explain how words are formed through Parasynthetic as well as compounding (La composition) processes in French morphology.
As from Units 16 to 20, we will be discussing what composition (la rédaction) is, types of composition: essay and letter writing, as well as methods of writing good essays and letters.
Each unit can be studied in one week.
Each unit has its specific objective, reading materials and explanation.
It also contains self-assessment exercises and Tutor- Marked Assignments.
All this information will assist you in achieving the learning objectives of the unit and the whole course.
Set textbooks for this course Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
iv FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers.
vFRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Assignment File There is an Assignment File where more than twenty assignments are provided.
The assignments carry 40% of the total mark for the course.
The mark you obtain in the assignment will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Assessment The assessment of this course is divided into two main parts.
The first parts are the tutor-marked assignments and the second part is a written examination.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated by the tutor.
The work submitted to your tutor for assessment will count for 40% of your total course mark.
You will sit for a final examination of three hours duration at the end of the course.
This examination will also count for 60% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignment (TMAs) There are twenty tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit only six of the twenty assignments of which the highest four marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% toward your total course mark.
When you have completed your assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for FRE 221 will be of three hours’ duration and it carries a total mark of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will reflect the types of self-testing, and tutor-marked assignments.
You need to revise before you sit for the examination.
You may also need to revise the self-assessment tests and tutor marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The examination covers information from all parts of the course.
vi FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Course Marking Scheme The table below shows the breakdown of the course marking.
Assessment Marks Assignment 1-6 Six assignments, best four marks of the six count @ 10% each =40 of course marks Final examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Course Overview There are twenty (20) units in this Course.
You are to spend one week on each unit.
Assignment 1 will come at the end of the unit 3.
Assignment 2 at the end of unit six.
Assignment 3 after finishing unit nine.
Assignment 4 at the end of unit 12.
Assignment 5 at the end of unit sixteen and assignment 6 comes up after completing unit 20.
Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
Unit Title of work Activity Weeks Course FRENCH GRAMMAR AND Guide COMPOSITION I Module 1 Unit 1 Définitions et origine de la Week 1 Assignment 1 morphologie française 2 Une brève histoire de Week 1 Assignment 2 l’évolution de la langue française 3 Les vocabulaires français : Les Week 2 Assignment 3 trois procédés majeurs de la formation des mots en français 4 L’emprunt ou les mots Week 2 Assignment 4 empruntés aux autres langues : le grec et le latin 5 L’emprunt ou les mots Week 3 Assignment 5 empruntés aux autres langues : l’italien et l’espagnol viiFRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Module 2 1 L’emprunt ou les mots Week 3 Assignment 1 empruntés aux autres langues : l’allemand, l’anglais et l’arabe 2 Les bases morphémiques qui Week 4 Assignment 2 aident la formation des mots français 3 L’affixation: les préfixes Week 4 Assignment 3 empruntés au latin 4 L’affixation: les préfixes Week 5 Assignment 4 empruntés au grec 5 Les suffixes principaux Week 5 Assignment 5 empruntés au latin et au grec Module 3 1 Les parasynthétiques Week 6 Assignment 1 2 La composition en Week 6 Assignment 2 morphologie 3 Différents types de Week 7 Assignment 3 composition en français : substantifs 4 Les compositions dites Week 7 Assignment 4 verbale, adverbiale et conjonctive 5 Les trois procédés secondaires Week 8 Assignment 5 de la formation des mots en français Module 4 1 Condiments of Good Week 8 Assignment 1 Composition for French and Other Language Students 2 Types of Linguistic and Week 9 Assignment 2 Pedagogical Composition: Essay and Letter Writing 3 Logical Classification of Week 9 Assignment 3 Essays 4 Methods of Writing Good Week 10 Assignment 4 Essays 5 Methods of Writing Good Week 10 Assignment 5 Letters Revision 1 Examination 1 Total 12 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and viii FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 work through specially designed study materials at your own pace and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided with exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
The main body starts with an explanation and techniques on how to master French morphology and composition in French Language.
Self- assessment tests are spread all over the units.
Working through these tests will help you tremendously to achieve the objectives of the units and prepare you for the assignments and examination.
Do each as you meet them in the unit.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the Assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit I, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work ixFRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to space your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor-marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • you have difficulty with the exercises • you have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
x FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot by participating actively in discussion.
Summary FRE 221: GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION I intends to introduce you to the advanced grammar of French language.
This preparatory course to the advanced aspect of grammar of French Language is centred on grammatical analysis of French Morphology.
It will expose you to the origin of French Morphology and the art of writing good composition in French.
At the end of this course, you will be able to: • State the definitions, origin and importance of Morphology in the grammar of any human language like French.
• Identify various methods of words formation in French Language.
• Identify various techniques, through which you can write good compositions (Essays and Letters) in French Language.
• Use the various identified techniques to write good compositions (Essays and Letters) in French Language.
xiFRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Course Code FRE 221 Course Title French Grammar and Composition 1 Course Developer Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
Unit Writers Dr. P. O. Alo European Languages Department University of Lagos And Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor Dr. Abayomi Kizito Folorunso Nigerian French Language Village Ajara - Badagry Programme Leader Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator Ms Lucy Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xii FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria xiiiFRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Module 1…………………………………………………….
1 Unit 1 Définitions et origine de la morphologie Française……………………………………… 1-5 Unit 2 Une brève histoire de l’évolution de la langue Française……………………………………… 6-9 Unit 3 Les vocabulaires français : Les trois procédés majeurs de la formation des mots en français 10-14 Unit 4 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntés aux autres langues : le grec et le latin…………………….. 15-19 Unit 5 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntés aux autres langues : l’italien et l’espagnol……………….. 20-23 Module 2…………………………………………………….
24 Unit 1 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntés aux autres langues : l’allemand, l’anglais et l’arabe…….
24-28 Unit 2 Les bases morphémiques qui aident la formation des mots français………………….. 29-34 Unit 3 L’affixation: les préfixes empruntés au latin… 35-41 Unit 4 L’affixation: les préfixes empruntés au grec….
42-47 Unit 5 Les suffixes principaux empruntés au latin et au grec………………………………………… 48-53 Module 3…………………………………………………….
54 Unit 1 Les parasynthétiques………………………….
54-57 Unit 2 La composition en morphologie……………… 58-62 Unit 3 Différents types de composition en français: Substantifs…………………………………….
63-67 Unit 4 Les compositions dites verbale, adverbiale et Conjonctive…………………………………… 68-71 Unit 5 Les trois procédés secondaires de la formation des mots en français………………………… 72-75 Module 4…………………………………………………….
76 Unit 1 Condiments of Good Composition for French and Other Language Students………………… 76-80 Unit 2 Types of Linguistic and Pedagogical Composition: Essay and Letter Writing……… 81-85 Unit 3 Logical Classification of Essays……………… 86-90 Unit 4 Structure of Good Essays…………………….. 91-97 Unit 5 Methods of Writing Good Letters…………….
98-103 xiv FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 MODULE 1 Unit 1 Définitions et origine de la morphologie française Unit 2 Une brève histoire de l’évolution de la langue française Unit 3 Les vocabulaires français : les trois procédés majeurs de la formation des mots en français Unit 4 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntes aux autres langues : grec et latin Unit 5 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntes aux autres langues : italien et espagnol UNIT 1 DEFINITIONS ET ORIGINE DE LA MORPHOLOGIE FRANCAISE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Origine de la Morphologie française 3.2 Définitions de la Morphologie française 3.3 Justification des définitions 3.4 Comment tracer l’origine des mots en français ?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to this course.
You will read to know about Morphology in French language, its origin, its definitions as well as the basic knowledge on how words are formed in French language.
This unit will teach you the general introduction into French Morphology.
You will also learn some basic techniques of how French words are formed.
Knowledge gained from this unit will facilitate your proper understanding of how to trace the origin of French words or how to form French words.
It is important to note that your better understanding of this course depends on the way and manner you handle this unit.
Therefore, we implore you to learn to understand this introductory unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 1FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • state the origin of Morphology • define correctly French Morphology • justify correctly the definitions of French Morphology • explain the parameters of tracing French words You are now invited into the world of French Morphology.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Définitions Et Origine De La Morphologie Française 3.1 Origine de la Morphologie La grammaire de n’importe quelle langue du monde peut être grossièrement divisée en quatre grandes parties : la morphologie, la phonologie, la sémantique et la syntaxe.
Ces quatre composants majeurs de la grammaire permettent aux utilisateurs de la langue en question d’apprendre les règles grammaticales qui gouvernent cette langue particulière.
3.2 Définitions de la Morphologie française La morphologie, étant la première de ces quatre composants grammaticaux, s’occupe de la structure des mots d’une langue humaine.
La morphologie est l’étude linguistique des morphèmes d’une langue.
Elle étudie scientifiquement comment ces morphèmes sont mis ensemble pour former des mots de cette langue.
Elle parle aussi des règles qui guident la formation des mots dans une langue.
La morphologie peut se définir comme cet aspect de la grammaire qui trace l’histoire, l’origine des mots et comment les mots d’une langue sont composés, formés, développés, renouvelés ou même empruntés à une langue.
3.3 Justification des définitions Prenons par exemple, le mot ‘automobile’, dès que nous analysons que ce mot est formé de deux mots : ‘auto’ du grec qui signifie même/soi- même et mobile de ‘mobilem’ du latin qui veut dire ‘mouvement’, et que ces deux mots signifient ‘auto-mouvement’, nous parlons de la morphologie.
Dans la morphologie française, chaque mot a son histoire et sa signification.
L’histoire et la signification de chaque mot pourraient être déterminées en analysant la base, le radical, la racine ou même tout le mot dont nous parlons.
2 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.4 Comment tracer l’origine des mots en français ?
C’est la base -la base morphémique- qui nous dit si le mot en question est emprunté complément à une autre langue – (ce que nous appelons L’Emprunt en linguistique), si nous avons ajouté des morphèmes secondaires à la base pour former un nouveau mot - (ce qu’on appelle L’Affixation en linguistique) ou bien si nous mettons ensemble deux ou plusieurs mots pour former de nouveaux mots - (ce que nous dénommons la composition en linguistique).
Ceci nous dit qu’il y a trois processus majeurs de la formation des mots en français.
Autrement dit, le mécanisme de la formation des mots peut s’appliquer facilement à travers ces trois démarches principales à savoir L’emprunt, L’affixation et la composition.
Il y a d’autres démarches ou processus secondaires comme les onomatopées (qui est la formation de nouveaux mots à travers l’imitation des sons faits par soit l’animal soit l’objet), les initiaux et les mots coupés.
Nous allons les traiter en détail dans les unités qui suivent, ils ne sont pas si importants comme les trois processus majeurs de la formation des mots déjà mentionnés ci-dessus.
On ne peut guère discuter ces trois processus majeurs de la formation des mots français sans mentionner l’influence que d’autres langues comme le latin, le grec et les autres langues romaines avaient eu sur la langue française.
On n’aurait pas tort si on affirme que ces langues forment soit la base soit l’affixation – le préfixe, l’infixe ou le suffixe - pour permettre la formation des mots français.
Voilà pourquoi nous le considérons juste de tracer, même en brève, l’histoire de l’évolution de la langue française dans la deuxième unité.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Qu’entendez-vous par la morphologie ?
ii.
De quelle importance est la morphologie à une langue particulière ?
Possible Answers: i.
La morphologie, étant la première des quatre composants grammaticaux, s’occupe de la structure des mots d’une langue humaine.
La morphologie est l’étude scientifique des morphèmes d’une langue.
La morphologie étudie scientifiquement comment ces morphèmes sont mis ensemble pour former des mots de cette langue.
Elle parle aussi des règles qui guident la formation des mots dans une langue.
La morphologie peut se définir comme cet aspect de la grammaire qui trace l’histoire, l’origine des mots et comment les mots d’une langue sont composés, formés, développés, renouvelés ou même empruntés à une langue.
ii.
3FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 • La morphologie s’occupe de la structure des mots d’une langue humaine.
• La morphologie est l’étude linguistique des morphèmes d’une langue.
• La morphologie étudie linguistiquement et scientifiquement comment les morphèmes sont mis ensemble pour former des mots d’une langue.
• Elle parle aussi des règles qui guident la formation des mots dans une langue.
• La morphologie trace l’histoire, l’origine des mots et comment les mots d’une langue sont composés, formés, développés, renouvelés ou même empruntés à une langue aux autres.
• La morphologie nous permet de bien comprendre l’analyse des mots, leurs formations ainsi que leurs usages dans une langue naturelle.
Autrement dit, la morphologie française aide la compréhension facile de la grammaire française.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned the origin and definitions of French Morphology.
You have also learned how to trace the origin of these French words: either through the major or the secondary processes.
By now we believe you can define French Morphology and state at least three to six processes through which words are formed.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has equipped you with the basic techniques of how to identify French words.
You have learned the origin of some French words, definitions of French Morphology.
You have also been taught the summary of how to trace the origin of these French words.
By now we believe that your knowledge of French grammar should have been enriched through the detailed introductory explanation of French morphology we gave you in this unit.
A good grammarian must have a sound grip of the knowledge of morphology, as it is the first of the four legs of Grammar of any language.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, dites-nous tout ce que vous entendez par la morphologie ?
2.
Nommez au moins cinq importance de la morphologie à la langue française ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 4 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
5FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 2 UNE BREVE HISTOIRE DE L’EVOLUTION DE LA LANGUE FRANCAISE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 L’Origine latine classique 3.2 L’évolution du latin au Romain 3.3 La création des Gallo– Romains 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the historical perspective of the emergence, development and evolution of French Language.
In this unit, you will read to know about how Classical Latin happened to be the mother of French language.
We will also discuss the development and the evolution that came across this classical Latin to become what we know today as French language.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate you properly into how to trace the origin of French vocabularies from the historical angle.
We would like to sound a warning that your better understanding of Morphology of French Language generally depends on the way and manner you handle this unit.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of tracing the origin of French words from the historical perspectives as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Briefly state the historical perspectives of the origin of French words • Tracing the origin of French words from the classical Latin • Explain the evolution of this classical Latin to roman language • Explain the creation of Gallo-Roman language • Explain the evolution of this Gallo-Roman language to the modern day French language You are now invited into the world of historical perspectives of the origin of French words.
6 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Une Brève Histoire De L’évolution De La Langue Française 3.1 L’Origine latine classique Historiquement parlant, le français, comme les autres langues indo- européennes, avait sa source du latin.
C’est la conquête du César le Grand qui avait influencé l’introduction de la langue française dans tous les territoires de Gaule.
Nous devons noter aussi que 300 ans après cette conquête historique, la propagation du Christianisme avait commencé.
Toutes les activités communicatives de ces chrétiens seraient donc faites en latin.
Dans ce cas, le latin deviendrait une langue très importante et fameuse parmis les chrétiens, les nobles et les célèbres de cette période.
3.2 L’évolution du latin au Romain Avec l’incursion des Romains, environs du Ve siècle, le latin aurait évolué linguistiquement jusqu’au niveau qui obligerait le changement dans son nom.
Il se renommait le romain.
Cette langue romaine, à cause de son évolution et de son développement, était complètement éloignée du latin classique.
On peut dépister leur similarité, seulement, au point de vue grammaticale.
La plupart de ses vocabulaires étaient badigeonnés et on aurait des difficultés à les comparer paradigmatiquement avec les vocabulaires du latin.
Autant que la nouvelle langue romaine ait insisté sur le renouvellement et l’aspect rythmique de la langue parlée, le dynamisme naturel trouvé chez tous les aspects de la vie humaine (trouvé même dans toutes les langues naturelles) posaient un peu de problème de l’abâtardissement linguistique : très bientôt, même au commencement du VIII siècle, le dialecte romain fera jour.
3.3 La création des Gallo – Romains Les Gallo – Romains, qui sont les Français, commenceraient par parler trois dialectes différents à savoir, la langue d’oïl, la langue d’oc et la langue française provinciale.
Et vers le IXe siècle, ces dialectes commenceraient à métamorphoser à ce que nous appelons la langue française mais qui subissait l’évolution linguistique dès la période de la renaissance à travers le XVlle, le XVllle, le XIXe siècles voire jusqu’aujourd’hui.
Vous ne seriez donc pas surpris d’apprendre, dans la première unité et dans la plupart des autres unités de ce cours, que langue française emprunte presque 90% de ses vocabulaires aux langues indo- européennes (comme le grec, le latin, l’anglais, l’italien, l’allemand, l’espagnole etc.)
ainsi qu’aux autres langues du monde (comme l’arabe).
7FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 La première source de la langue française c’est le latin.
Or le latin aussi a sa source du sanscrit et du grec.
A travers l’évolution linguistique différente de cette nouvelle langue, on emprunte des mots, des bases morphémiques, des radicaux, des préfixes ainsi que des suffixes aux langues différentes pour perfectionner une nouvelle langue reconnue comme le français aujourd’hui.
Tous les processus, à travers lesquels ces opérations étaient faites, sont ce que nous allons discuter dans les unités qui suivrent.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Quelle influence du Latin avons-nous constaté sur l’évolution du français ?
ii.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, expliquez l’évolution du latin au romain.
Possible Answers : i. Historiquement parlant, le français, comme les autres langues indo-européennes, aurait sa source du latin.
C’est la conquête du César le Grand qui avait influencé l’introduction de la langue française dans tous les territoires de Gaule.
Nous devons noter aussi que 300 ans après cette conquête historique, la propagation du Christianisme avait commencé.
Toutes les activités communicatives de ces chrétiens seraient donc faites en latin.
Dans ce cas, le latin deviendrait une langue très importante et fameuse parmis les chrétiens, les nobles et les célèbres de cette période.
ii.
Avec l’incursion des Romains, aux environs du Ve siècle, le latin aurait évolué linguistiquement jusqu’au niveau qui obligerait le changement dans son nom.
Il se renommait le romain.
Cette langue romaine, à cause de son évolution et de son développement, était complètement éloignée du latin classique.
On peut dépister leur similarité, seulement, au point de vue grammaticale.
La plupart de ses vocabulaires étaient badigeonnés et on aurait des difficultés à les comparer paradigmatiquement avec les vocabulaires du latin.
Autant que la nouvelle langue romaine ait insisté sur le renouvellement et sur l’aspect rythmique de la langue parlée, le dynamisme naturel trouvé chez tous les aspects de la vie humaine (trouvé même dans toutes les langues naturelles) posaient un peu de problème de l’abâtardissement linguistique : très bientôt, même au commencement du VIII siècle, le dialecte romain fera jour.
4.0 CONCLUSION 8 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 In this unit, you have learned the basics of historical perspectives of the origin of French words from classical Latin to roman language before becoming the modern day French.
By now we believe you can trace the origin of French words going through the historical angle.
5.0 SUMMARY You must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basics of historical perspectives of the origin of French words from classical Latin to roman language before becoming the modern day French.
You must have learned also some stages of the evolution of Latin, roman and dialectal Gallo-Roman language to today’s French.
By now we believe that your knowledge of French Morphology, taken from the historical perspectives, should have been enriched through the explanation and examples we gave you in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, justifiez l’assertion de quelques linguistes qui affirment que ‘sans le latin, il n’y aura pas de langue française’ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
9FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 3 LES VOCABULAIRES FRANCAIS : LES TROIS PROCEDES MAJEURS DE LA FORMATION DES MOTS EN FRANCAIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les trois procédés majeurs de la formation des mots en français 3.2 Les Emprunts 3.3 L’Affixation 3.4 La Composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the origin of French vocabularies.
In this unit, you will read to know about the major techniques which a French grammar learner like you could apply in tracing the origin of French words thus being able to prove whether the word in question was borrowed (Les Emprunts), formed through morphological engineering cum coinage (L’Affixation) or compounded (La Composition).
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate your properly into how you could trace the origin of these words or how they are formed.
We would like to repeat our warning that you better understanding of this unit will help in your understanding of French Morphology.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of tracing the origin and formation of French words as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the registers of French vocabularies.
• Identify the three major processes of French word formation • Define Les Emprunts as one of the three major processes of French word formation • Define L’Affixation as one of the three major processes of French word formation 10 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 • Define La Composition as one of the three major processes of French word formation You are now invited to the world of French vocabularies and the three major processes of French word formation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Les Vocabulaires Français Comme nous l’avons signalé lorsque nous discutions les définitions et l’origine de la morphologie, la formation des vocabulaires français peut se tracer aux différents procédés.
Nous allons traiter et analyser au moins six procédés de la formations des mots en français dans cette unité.
Ces procédés sont classés en deux groupes à savoir: les procédés majeurs et les procédés secondaires.
Nous les présentons ci-dessous selon leur importance en morphologie française.
3.1 Les Trois Procédés Majeurs De La Formation Des Mots En Français Parlant des trois procédés majeurs de la formation morphologique des mots en français, on peut se rappeler facilement l’Emprunt, l’Affixation et la Composition.
Tous ces trois procédés sont des procédés principaux et les plus importants dans la formation morphologique des mots en français.
Nous insistons sur cette classification car nous avons constaté qu’il y a certains procédés morphologiques qui sont plus importants que les autres.
Considérons ces trois : 3.2 L’Emprunt C’est un procédé qui permet aux utilisateurs d’une langue de faire entrer (emprunter) à une autre langue particulière, quelques mots, quelques bases morphémiques, quelques radicaux, quelques affixes, d’une langue étrangère.
Pour qu’un mot soit formé dans n’importe quelle langue du monde, il doit y avoir une base morphémiques.
C’est cette base morphémique qui peut rester en soi, linguistiquement, pour constituer le lexique qui aura un sens complet ou bien se permettre d’être fusionné à un autre morphème ou même se permettre d’être composé avec un autre mot de la même ou de différente nature grammaticale pour former un nouveau mot.
Cette base morphémique est dénommée “ le radical ” en français.
La plupart de ces bases morphémiques en français sont empruntées aux langues comme le grec, le latin, l’italien, l’espagnol, l’anglais, l’allemand et l’arabe.
Ce procédé est ce que nous nommons L’Emprunt ou Les Emprunts en morphologie française.
11FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.3 L’Affixation A part les mots ou les bases morphémiques empruntés et qui constituent une large partie de vocabulaire français, les affixes jouent un rôle tellement important dans la formation de nouveaux mots en français.
L’affixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté soit à l’initial de la base morphémique (la préfixation), soit au milieu de la base morphémique (l’infixation), soit à la fin de la base morphémique (la suffixation) pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
3.4 La Composition La composition est la combinaison ou la mise ensemble de deux mots indépendants (qui peuvent exister indépendamment en eux pour avoir le sens complet) pour former un nouveau mot.
Cette opération est différente à l’affixation car dans le cas d’affixation, on parle de la mise ensemble des morphèmes dont le sens complet dépend du nouveau mot formé (ni le préfixe ni le suffixe utilisé en affixation ne peut avoir une existence autonome).
Or, dans le cas de la composition, chacun de deux ou plusieurs mots combinés pour former un nouveau mot composé peut avoir le sens lorsqu’il existe seul dans une phrase.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Nommer les trois procédés majeurs de la formation morphologique des mots en français.
ii.
Avec des exemples nécessaires, définir et expliquer les termes morphologiques suivants : a. L’Emprunt b. L’Affixation c. La Composition Possible Answers : i. Les trois procédés majeurs de la formation morphologique des mots en français sont L’Emprunt, L’Affixation et La Composition.
ii (a) L’Emprunt : C’est un procédé qui permet aux utilisateurs d’une langue de faire entrer (emprunter) à une autre langue particulière, quelques mots, quelques bases morphémiques, quelques radicaux, quelques affixes, d’une langue étrangère.
Pour qu’un mot soit formé dans n’importe quelle langue du monde, il doit y avoir une base morphémiques.
C’est cette base morphémique qui peut 12 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 rester en soi, linguistiquement, pour constituer le lexique qui aura un sens complet ou bien se permettre d’être fusionné à un autre morphème ou même se permettre d’être composé avec un autre mot de la même ou de différente nature grammaticale pour former un nouveau mot.
Cette base morphémique est dénommée “ le radical ” en français.
La plupart de ces bases morphémiques en français sont empruntées aux langues comme le grec, le latin, l’italien, l’espagnol, l’anglais, l’allemand et l’arabe.
Ce procédé est ce que nous nommons L’Emprunt ou Les Emprunts en morphologie française.
ii (b) L’Affixation: A part les mots ou les bases morphémiques empruntés et qui constituent une large partie de vocabulaire français, les affixes jouent un rôle tellement important dans la formation de nouveaux mots en français.
L’affixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté soit à l’initial de la base morphémique (la préfixation), soit au milieu de la base morphémique (l’infixation), soit à la fin de la base morphémique (la suffixation) pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
iii (c) La Composition: La composition est la combinaison ou la mise ensemble de deux mots indépendants (qui peuvent exister indépendamment en eux pour avoir le sens complet) pour former un nouveau mot.
Cette opération est différente à l’affixation car dans le cas d’affixation, on parle de la mise ensemble des morphèmes dont le sens complet dépend du nouveau mot formé (ni le préfixe ni le suffixe utilisé en affixation ne peut avoir une existence autonome).
Or, dans le cas de la composition, chacun de deux ou plusieurs mots combinés pour former un nouveau mot composé peut avoir le sens lorsqu’il existe seul dans une phrase.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned the origin of French vocabularies.
You have also read to know about the major techniques which a French grammar learner like you could apply in tracing the origin of French words thus being able to prove whether the word in question was borrowed (Les Emprunts), formed through morphological engineering cum coinage (Les Affixations) or compounded (La Composition).
By now we believe you can trace the origin of different words in French Language.
13FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 5.0 SUMMARY You must have adequately acquired in this unit some basic techniques of how to trace the origin of French words.
You must have also learned how some words are formed.
By now we believe that your knowledge of French vocabularies and techniques of tracing and forming French words should have been enriched through the explanation and examples we gave you under each classification.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguer très nettement entre: L’Emprunt et L’Affixation et La Composition.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
14 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 4 L’EMPRUNT OU LES MOTS EMPRUNTES AUX AUTRES LANGUES : GREC ET LATIN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les mots empruntés au grec 3.2 Les mots empruntés au latin 3.3 Les mots empruntés au latin et puis modifiés 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the general ideas of how Latin, as a language originated from Greek language thus making Greek a ‘grandfather’ of French language ; in view of the fact that most of the French vocabularies came from Latin that also had its origin from Greek.
The knowledge you gain from this unit will initiate you properly into how to trace the origin of French words from Latin to Greek.
We would like to insist on our warning that your better understanding of Morphology generally depends on the way and manner you handle these first four units.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of tracing the origin of French words as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify languages that loaned words to French languages • Identify words that were borrowed from other languages • Identify words that were borrowed from Greek language • Identify words that were borrowed from Latin language • Identify modified words that were borrowed from Latin language You are now invited to the world of borrowed French words from Greek and Latin Languages.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 15FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 L’emprunt Ou Les Mots Empruntes Aux Autres Langues Pour qu’un mot soit formé dans n’importe quelle langue du monde, il doit y avoir une base morphémique.
C’est cette base morphémique qui peut rester en soi, linguistiquement, pour constituer une lexique qui aura un sens complet ou bien se permettre d’être fusionné à un autre morphème ou même se permettre d’être composé avec un autre mot de la même ou de différente classe linguistique pour former un nouveau mot.
Cette base morphémique est appelée “ le radical ” en français.
La plupart de ces bases morphémiques en français sont empruntées aux langues comme le grec, le latin, l’italien, l’espagnol, l’anglais, l’allemand et l’arabe.
Le sens de ces mots empruntés peuvent rester fidèle au sens original comme il était dans la langue source ou bien il peut se modifier un peu ou bien dans quelques cas, il peut changer complètement pour s’accorder aux règles sémantologique, morphologique, structurale et structurelle de la langue française.
On a ci-dessous, dans ces unités, des exemples de quelques mots empruntés au grec et au latin.
3.1 Les Mots Empruntes Au Grec La plupart des mots empruntés au grec se trouvent jaillir dans la langue française à travers le latin.
Les parleurs anciens du latin se servaient des mots grecs pour démontrer leur compétence linguistique et pour démontrer la maîtrise extraordinaire ou spéciale dans la communication orale ou écrite de n’importe quelle profession.
Un bon avocat du latin de ce temps là était celui qui pouvait parfumer tout ce qu’il disait avec des mots grecs.
Puis, c’était très facile pour les célèbres, les élites et les érudits français (qui avaient appris la grammaire de leur langue à travers le latin) de retenir des mots grecs, dont ils s’etaient habitués à utiliser en latin, dans la langue française.
Parmi ces mots, on trouve les suivants : Ecole, église, cimetière, diable, orgue, perdrix, prêtre, anarchie, démocratie, démagogie, despote, épigraphie, auto, socio etc.
3.2 Les Mots Empruntes Au Latin Comme il a été signalé auparavant, le latin était la première langue de l’église.
Il était aussi la langue des célèbres.
A ce temps là, pour démontrer la marque d’excellence académique et d’érudition, on doit ajouter quelques mots latins dans n’importe quelle conversation faite soit en anglais soit en français.
Les mots empruntés au latin de cette époque sont restés jusqu’aujourd’hui se faisant une partie de la langue française.
On peut trouver des exemples de ces mots d’origine latine dans les mots qui se terminent en ‘tion’, té et eur.
Par exemple élection, nation, difficulté, ferveur etc.
La plupart des adjectifs comme passif, actif, fragile, fidèle, légal etc.
est emprunté au latin ainsi que des verbes 16 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 comme adorer, députer, naviguer, recenser.
Il y a des autres mots comme agenda, maximum, intérim, pensum, ultimatum.
3.3 Les Mots Empruntes Au Latin Et Puis Modifies Il y a même un cas en morphologie qui permet aux mots empruntés au latin de prendre une modification à leur forme originale avant de s’intégrer à la langue française.
On peut trouver des exemples dans les mots ci-dessus : • Advocatum (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) avocat • Articulum (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) article • Auscultare (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) ausculter • Classicum (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) classique • Hospitale (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) hôpital • Mobilem (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) mobile • Potionem (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) portion • Redemptionem (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) rédemption • Separare (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) séparer SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Énumérer très brièvement comment nous pouvons identifier les mots français empruntés au grec.
ii.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, expliquez les traits à travers lesquels nous pouvons identifier les mots français empruntés au latin ?
Possible Answers i. Les Mots Empruntes Au Grec La plupart des mots empruntés au grec se trouvent jaillir dans la langue française à travers le latin.
Les parleurs anciens du latin se servaient des mots grecs pour démontrer leur compétence linguistique et pour démontrer la maîtrise extraordinaire ou spéciale dans la communication orale ou écrite de n’importe quelle profession.
Un bon avocat du latin de ce temps là était celui qui pouvait parfumer tout ce qu’il disait avec des mots grecs.
Puis, c’était très facile pour les célèbres, les élites et les érudits français (qui avaient appris la grammaire de leur langue à travers le latin) de retenir des mots grecs, dont ils s’etaient habitués à utiliser en latin, dans la langue française.
Parmi ces mots, on trouve les suivants : Ecole, église, cimetière, diable, orgue, perdrix, prêtre, anarchie, démocratie, démagogie, despote, épigraphie, auto, socio etc.
ii.
Les Mots Empruntes Au Latin 17FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Comme il a été signalé auparavant, le latin était la première langue de l’église.
Il était aussi la langue des célèbres.
A ce temps là, pour démontrer la marque d’excellence académique et d’érudition, on doit ajouter quelques mots latins dans n’importe quelle conversation faite soit en anglais soit en français.
Les mots empruntés au latin de cette époque sont restés jusqu’aujourd’hui se faisant une partie de la langue française.
On peut trouver des exemples de ces mots d’origine latine dans les mots qui se terminent en ‘tion’, té et eur.
Par exemple élection, nation, difficulté, ferveur etc.
La plupart des adjectifs comme passif, actif, fragile, fidèle, légal etc.
est emprunté au latin ainsi que des verbes comme adorer, députer, naviguer, recenser.
Il y a des autres mots comme agenda, maximum, intérim, pensum, ultimatum.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the general ideas of how Latin, as a language originated from Greek language thus making Greek a ‘grandfather’ of French language and that in view of the fact that most of the French vocabularies came from Latin that also had its origin from Greek.
With our simplified explanation, we are convinced that you can state specifically French words that originated from either Greek or Latin.
By now we believe you can conveniently start discussing Morphology from the point of view of borrowing.
5.0 SUMMARY Having gone this far in the analyses of Definition and Historical perspectives of French Morphology, we are sure that you must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basic techniques of how to trace the origin of words coming from either Greek or Latin.
Your knowledge of French Morphology must have been enriched.
By now we are confident that you should have acquired enough grammatical background that could facilitate your discussion on Morphology from the point of view of borrowing.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, expliquez comment nous pouvons identifier les mots français empruntés au grec.
2.
Énumérer très brièvement les traits à travers lesquels nous pouvons identifier les mots modifiés dans la langue française, mais empruntés au latin ?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 18 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
19FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 5 L’EMPRUNT OU LES MOTS EMPRUNTES AUX AUTRES LANGUES : ITALIEN ET ESPAGNOL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les mots français empruntés à l’espagnol 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the methods and techniques of how to trace the origin of some French words that were borrowed from Italian and Spanish.
In this unit, you will read to know about the methods and techniques which a French grammar learner like you could apply in tracing the origin of French words thus being able to prove the means by which the said word was borrowed from Italian and Spanish; whether it was through Music, Sports, Military, Marine Operations, Architectural designs etc.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate you properly into how you could trace the origin of these words or how they are formed.
We would like to repeat our warning that your better understanding of this unit will help in your understanding of French Morphology.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of tracing the origin and formation of French words as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify French words that were borrowed from Italian language • Identify French words that were borrowed from Spanish language You are now invited to the world of borrowed French words from Italian and Spanish Languages 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 20 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Les Mots Empruntes A L’italien Si l’intellectualisme était le facteur qui avait favorisé l’introduction des plusieurs mots empruntés au grec et au latin dans la langue française, les mots empruntés à l’Italien dans la langue française sont introduits à travers l’origine variée comme la musique, les dessins architecturales, le marin ainsi que la navigation, le militaire et la guerre.
On a des exemples comme: • la musique (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) ardente • la musique (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) adagio • la musique (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) opéra • les dessins architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) arcade • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) balcon • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) banque • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) coupole • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) niche • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) pilastre • le marin/la navigation (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) galère • le marin/la navigation (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) boussole • le marin/la navigation (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) golfe • le marin/la navigation (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) pilote • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) arsenal • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) bataillon • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) escrime • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) infanterie • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) soldat • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) bandit • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) patron 3.1 Les Mots Empruntes A L’Espagnol Tout comme dans le cas de l’italien, les rapports qui existent entre les Français et les Espagnols au domaine des beaux arts, du commerce, de la vie sociale et des activités sportives favorisent l’emprunt des mots espagnols de ces domaines dans la langue française.
Ces mots espagnols se trouvent dans la langue française et avec leur usage journalier ils deviennent maintenant une partie intégrante de la langue.
Parmi ces mots, nous avons: camarade, casque, guitare, nègre, récif, tomate, épinard etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Énumérer très brièvement comment nous pouvons identifier les mots français empruntés à l’italien.
21FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 ii.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, expliquez les traits à travers lesquels nous pouvons identifier les mots français empruntés à l’espagnol?
Possible Answers i. Les Mots Empruntes A L’italien Si l’intellectualisme était le facteur qui avait favorisé l’introduction des plusieurs mots empruntés au grec et au latin dans la langue française, les mots empruntés à l’Italien dans la langue française sont introduits à travers l’origine variée comme la musique, les dessins architecturales, le marin ainsi que la navigation, le militaire et la guerre.
On a des exemples comme: • la musique (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) ardente • la musique (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) adagio • la musique (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) opéra • les dessins architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) arcade • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) balcon • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) banque • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) coupole • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) niche • les désignes architecturales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) pilastre • le marin/la navigation (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) galère • le marin/la navigation (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) boussole • le marin/la navigation (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) golfe • le marin/la navigation (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) pilote • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) arsenal • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) bataillon • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) escrime • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) infanterie • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) soldat • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) bandit • le militaire/la guerre (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) patron ii.
Les Mots Empruntes A L’espagnol Tout comme dans le cas de l’Italien, les rapports qui existent entre les Français et les Espagnols au domaine des beaux arts, du commerce, de la vie sociale et des activités sportives favorisent l’emprunt des mots espagnols de ces domaines dans la langue française.
Ces mots espagnols se trouvent dans la langue française et avec leur usage journalier ils deviennent maintenant 22 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 une partie intégrante de la langue.
Parmi ces mots, nous avons: camarade, casque, guitare, nègre, récif, tomate, épinard etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the methods and techniques of how to trace the origin of some French words that were borrowed from Italian and Spanish.
We also taught you, in this unit, the methods which a French grammar learner like you could apply in tracing the origin of French words thus being able to prove the means through which the said was borrowed from Italian and Spanish; whether it was through Music, Sports, Military, Marine Operations, Architectural designs etc.
With the way and manner that we simplified the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding French Morphology would have been alleviated.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit having tackled the Historical perspectives of how French words were borrowed from Italian and Spanish languages, we are sure that you must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basic techniques of how to trace the origin of words coming from either Italian or Spanish.
Your knowledge of French morphology must have been enriched.
By now we are confident that you should have acquired enough grammatical background that could facilitate your discussion on Morphology from the point of view of borrowing.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, expliquez comment nous pouvons identifier les mots français empruntés à l’Italien.
2.
Énumérer très brièvement les traits à travers lesquels nous pouvons identifier les mots empruntés à l’Espagnol mais modifiés dans la langue française?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
MODULE 2 Unit 1 L’emprunt ou les mots empruntes aux autres langues : allemand, anglais et arabe 23FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Unit 2 Les bases morphémiques qui aident la formation des mots français Unit 3 L’affixation : Les préfixes principaux empruntes au latin Unit 4 L’affixation : Les préfixes empruntes au grec Unit 5 Les suffixes principaux empruntes au latin et au grec UNIT 1 L’EMPRUNT OU LES MOTS EMPRUNTES AUX AUTRES LANGUES: ALLEMAND, ANGLAIS ET ARABE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les mots français empruntés à l’anglais 3.2 Les mots modifiés empruntés à l’anglais mais d’origine française 3.3 Les mots français empruntés à l’Arabe 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the methods and techniques of how to trace the origin of some French words that were borrowed from German, English and Arabic languages.
In this unit, you will read to know about the criteria through which a French grammar learner like you could apply in tracing the origin of French words thus being able to prove the source through which the said word was borrowed from German, English and Arabic; whether it was through Sports, Social activities, Naming of animals, Naming of human beings etc.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate your properly into how you could trace the origin of these words or how they are formed.
We would like to repeat our warning that you better understanding of this unit will help in your understanding of French Morphology.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of tracing the origin and formation of French words as they will be taught here.
24 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify French words that were borrowed from German language • Identify French words that were borrowed from English language • Identify French words that were borrowed from Arabic language You are now invited to the world of borrowed French words from German, English and Arabic Languages.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Les Mots Empruntes A L’allemand Aussi longtemps que le XVe siècle, la plupart des mots allemands sont empruntés dans la langue française.
Et avec le temps ces mots se sont adaptés à la langue comme s’ils étaient des mots d’origine française.
Par exemple képi, sabre, bière, blague, rosse, vampire etc.
3.1 Les Mots Empruntes A L’anglais Les activités sportives sont des facteurs majeurs à travers lesquels des mots anglais sont empruntés dans la langue française.
Nous avons des mots comme : • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le cup (le coupe) mondial • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le tennis • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) les sportsmen • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le football • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le basket-ball etc.
D’autres mots empruntés à l’Anglais sont : • Les animaux (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le lion • Les animaux (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Un Antelope • Les Etres humains (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le bébé • Les Etres humains (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le gentleman • Les Etres humains (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le touriste • Les Etres humains (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le flirt • La cinématographie (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le film • La cinématographie (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le celluloïd • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le weekend • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) express 25FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le spleen • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le raid • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) la flanelle • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le fury • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le pamphlet • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le wagon • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le tunnel • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le barguise etc.
3.2 Les Mots Modifies Empruntes A L’anglais Mais D’origine Française Il y a quelques mots français que les Anglais avaient empruntés, il y a longtemps.
On constate qu’après quelque période de l’existence de ces mots (d’origine française) en anglais, les Français les ont ‘empruntés’ à leur tour, mais pas dans leur forme originale.
Ce nouvel emprunt se fait toujours avec un peu de modification ou bien de changement de ces mots.
Prenez par exemple ces mots : • Bougette (qui signifie petit sac) devient budget.
• Mets devient mess • Etiquette devient ticket etc.
3.3 Les Mots Empruntes A L’arabe Il y a des mots empruntés à l’Arabe.
Comme ces mots arabes étaient entrés dans le français à travers l’espagnol ou l’italien, quelques lexicologues ou des profanes au domaine morphologique ont la tendance à les classifier soit comme des mots d’origine italienne soit comme des mots d’origine espagnole.
On peut avoir comme exemples les mots tels que: Alchimie, alcool, alambic, algèbre, arabesque, babouche, douane, fez, gazelle, harem, magasin, minaret, pastèque, sultan, talisman, tarif, timbale, zouave etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Énumérer très brièvement comment nous pouvons identifier les mots français empruntés à l’Arabe.
ii.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, expliquez les traits à travers lesquels nous pouvons identifier les mots français empruntés à l’Anglais?
26 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Possible Answers i. Les Mots Empruntes A L’arabe Il y a des mots empruntés à l’Arabe.
Comme ces mots arabes étaient entrés dans le français à travers l’espagnol ou l’italien, quelques lexicologues ou des profanes au domaine morphologique ont la tendance à les classifier soit comme des mots d’origine italienne soit comme des mots d’origine espagnole.
On peut avoir comme exemples les mots tels que: Alchimie, alcool, alambic, algèbre, arabesque, babouche, douane, fez, gazelle, harem, magasin, minaret, pastèque, sultan, talisman, tarif, timbale, zouave etc.
ii.
Les Mots Empruntes A L’anglais Les activités sportives sont des facteurs majeurs à travers lesquels des mots anglais sont empruntés dans la langue française.
Nous avons des mots comme : • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le cup (le coupe) mondial • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le tennis • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) les sportsmen • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le football • Les activités sportives (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le basket-ball etc.
D’autres mots empruntés à l’Anglais sont : • Les animaux (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le lion • Les animaux (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Un Antelope • Les Etres humains (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le bébé • Les Etres humains (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le gentleman • Les Etres humains (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le touriste • Les Etres humains (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le flirt • La cinématographie (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le film • La cinématographie (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le celluloïd • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le weekend • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) express • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le spleen • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le raid • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) la flanelle • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le fury • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le pamphlet • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le wagon 27FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le tunnel • Les activités sociales (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) le barguise etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the methods and techniques of how to trace the origin of some French words that were borrowed from German, English and Arabic languages.
We also taught you, in this unit, the criteria which a French grammar learner like you could apply in tracing the origin of French words thus being able to prove the means through which the said word was borrowed from German, English and Arabic languages; whether it was through Sports, Social activities, Naming of animals, Naming of human beings etc.
With the way and manner that we simplified the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding French Morphology would have been alleviated.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit to having tackled the Historical perspectives of how French words were borrowed from German, English and Arabic languages, we are sure that you must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basic techniques of how to trace the origin of words coming from German, English or Arabic languages.
Your knowledge of French Morphology must have been enriched.
By now we are confident that you should have acquired enough grammatical knowledge that could facilitate your discussion on Morphology from the point of view of borrowing.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, expliquez comment nous pouvons identifier les mots français empruntés à l’allemand.
2.
Énumérer très brièvement les traits à travers lesquels nous pouvons identifier les mots, dont l’origine initiale est francais, empruntés à l’Anglais mais modifiés dans la langue française?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
UNIT 2 LES BASES MORPHEMIQUES QUI AIDENT LA FORMATION DES MOTS FRANCAIS 28 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Tableau de bases morphémiques qui aident la formation des mots français 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the general ideas of how base morphemes were borrowed from Indo-European Languages such as Sanskrit, Greek and Latin.
We will also supply you, in this unit, with the table of various base morphemes and their meanings thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through them.
Your knowledge of this unit will be incomplete if you are unable to follow our examples in this table to analyse or form some French words on your own.
The knowledge you gain from this unit will initiate you properly into how to form French words and how to explain the morphological processes that go around each French word.
We would like to insist on our warning that your better understanding of Morphology generally depends on the way and manner you handle this unit.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of Morphological engineering of French words as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Define what base morphemes are in French morphology • Identify the importance of base morphemes in French morphology • Identify the origin of some base morphemes in French morphology • Identify the meaning and usage of some base morphemes in French morphology • Demonstrate the techniques of analysis and usage of some base morphemes in French morphology.
You are now invited to the world of base morphemes in French morphology.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 29FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Les Bases Morphémiques Qui Aident La Formation Des Mots Français A part ces différents mots empruntés aux différentes langues comme nous l’avons énuméré dans les unités précédentes, il y a des autres morphèmes qui sont empruntés aux langues indo-européennes dans la langue française.
Mais la différence significative entre l’emprunt des mots complets (dont nous avons parlé) et cet emprunt spécial c’est que nous empruntons seulement les bases ou des radicaux morphémiques (qui ont leur sens complet) et on ajoute des affixes (soit les préfixes, soit les infixes, soit les suffixes) à ces bases pour former des nouveaux mots.
Ces bases sont des morphèmes qui acceptent (et dans quelques temps, déterminent) les affixes (la préfixation, l’infixation et la suffixation) avec lesquelles ils forment les nouveaux mots: 3.1 Tableau De Bases Morphémiques Qui Aident La Formation Des Mots Français Base Le sens Les mots formés morphémique -hag- conduire, mettre en Agir, agilité, mouvement actualiser -b(v)ain écarter les jambes, Venir, avènement, marcher acrobate Cap- prendre, attraper Capture, captivité, captif accaparer, Cap- tête Capitale, chapeau, captions, capitaine, capitalisme, chapitre, capuchon Cad- tomber Cadavre, caduc Dic- montrer par la Dire, dictionnaire, parole diction, dictée Doc- enseigner, montrer Document, docile, doctorat Duc- conduire, mener Conduire, conducteur Fah- raconter, dire Fatum, fable Fac-, fec- faire Facile, difficile, effectif Fav- favoriser Favoriser, faveur, favorable Jug- lier ensemble Jugulaire, conjugal, 30 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 conjoncture Lec- lier ensemble par Lecture, élection.
l’affinité Intellectuel Lokw- parler Locution, locuteur, éloquent, soliloquer Mac- grand Maximal, magnifique Men- faculté intellectuelle Mental, mesurer Mic- petit Microbe, microscope Mob(v) mouvoir Mobile, mouvement, mobilité Mon- montrer, enseigner Montrer, monument, moniteur Noc- nuire Nocif, nocturne Ple- remplir Plein, suppléant, complément Pet- désirer, demander Pétition Pos- présenter, Position, représenter opposition, pose Rec- diriger Recteur, directeur, règle Sem- un Simple Sek- suivre Conséquent, consécutif SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez ‘les bases morphémiques en les distinguant des emprunts?
ii.
Former au moins un mot avec chacune de ces bases morphémiques: Cap- tête Cad- tomber Doc- enseigner, montrer Fac-, fec- faire Jug- lier ensemble Lec- lier ensemble par l’affinité 31FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Mic- petit Noc- nuire Ple- remplir Rec- diriger Possible Answers : i. Les bases morphémiques sont des morphèmes qui sont empruntés aux langues indo-européennes dans la langue française.
La différence significative entre l’emprunt des mots complets et cet emprunt spécial c’est que nous empruntons seulement les bases ou des radicaux morphémiques (qui ont leur sens complet) et on leur ajoute des affixes (soit les préfixes, soit les infixes, soit les suffixes) pour former de nouveaux mots.
Ces bases sont des morphèmes qui acceptent (et dans quelques temps, déterminent) les affixes (la préfixation, l’infixation et la suffixation) avec lesquelles ils forment les nouveaux mots: ii.
Cap- tête Capitale, chapeau, Cad- tomber Cadavre, caduc Doc- enseigner, montrer Document, docile, doctorat Fac-, fec- faire Facile, difficile, effectif Jug- lier ensemble Jugulaire, conjugal, conjoncture Lec- lier ensemble par Lecture, élection.
l’affinité Intellectuel Mic- petit Microbe, microscope Noc- nuire Nocif, nocturne Ple- remplir Plein, suppléant, complément Rec- diriger Recteur, directeur, règle 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we believe that you have learned the general ideas of how base morphemes were borrowed From Indo-European Languages such as Sanskrit, Greek and Latin.
We also believe that you have learned the identification and make-up of these base morphemes from the table of various base morphemes and their meanings; thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through them.
We believe by now you can analyse or form some French words on your own.
32 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 5.0 SUMMARY As a follow up to Unit six, this Unit seven has gone a little further in explaining the general ideas of how base morphemes were borrowed from Indo-European Languages such as Sanskrit, Greek and Latin.
We also laid emphasis on the structure, meaning and samples of these base morphemes and words derived from them in the table provided.
By now we are confident that you should have acquired enough grammatical background that could facilitate your discussion on Morphology from the point of view of words derived from lexical engineering through base morphemes.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez ‘les bases morphémiques en les distinguant des emprunts?
2.
Former au moins dix mots avec chacune de ces bases morphémiques: Cap- tête Cad- tomber Doc- enseigner, montrer Fac-, fec- faire Jug- lier ensemble Lec- lier ensemble par l’affinité Mic- petit Noc- nuire Ple- remplir Rec- diriger 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
33FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 3 L’AFFIXATION : LES PREFIXES PRINCIPAUX EMPRUNTES AU LATIN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 L’Affixation 3.2 Les préfixes principaux empruntés au latin 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the general ideas of what Affixation is.
In this unit, you will learn the definition of prefix, infix and suffix as part of affixation.
We will also supply you, in this unit, with the table of various principal prefixes borrowed from Latin as well as their meanings thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through them.
Your knowledge of this unit will be incomplete if you are unable to follow our examples in this table to analyse or form some French words on your own.
The knowledge you gain from this unit will initiate you properly into how to form French words and how to explain the morphological processes that go around each French word.
We would like to insist on our warning that your better understanding of Morphology generally depends on the way and manner you handle this unit.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of Morphological engineering of French words as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Define Affixation in French morphology • Define Prefix, Infix and suffix in French morphology • Identify the importance of affixation in French morphology • Identify some principal prefixes borrowed from Latin into French • Demonstrate the techniques of analysis and usage of some principal prefixes in French morphology.
You are now invited to the world of Affixation and principal prefixes borrowed from Latin into French morphology.
34 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT l’affixation: les préfixes principaux empruntés au latin 3.1 L’Affixation A part les mots ou les bases morphémiques empruntés et qui constituent une large partie de vocabulaire français, les affixes jouent un rôle tellement très important dans la formation de nouveaux mots en français.
L’affixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté soit à l’initial de la base morphémique (la préfixation), soit au milieu de la base morphémique (l’infixation), soit à la fin de la base morphémique (la suffixation) pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
Nous prenons le mot ‘CONJONCTION’ qui serait un bon exemple de notre définition et explication ci-dessus.
On peut citer le morphème CON comme le préfixe, JONC comme l’infixe et TION comme le suffixe.
En français, comme dans les autres langues européennes, l’infixe n’existe guère.
Dans la plupart du temps, c’est la base morphémique, autour de laquelle on ajoute les autres morphèmes (soit à l’initial, soit à la fin), qu’on dénomme, à tort, les infixes.
Or une base doit exister afin de pouvoir prendre des autres morphèmes pour qu’un nouveau mot soit formé.
La plupart des préfixes et des suffixes de la langue française sont empruntés, comme des bases morphémiques et des (mots) empruntés, aux différentes langues anciennes, précisément le latin et le grec.
On traite d’abord des préfixes empruntés au Latin dans cette unité.
3.2 Les Préfixes Principaux Empruntés au Latin Préfixes Sens Nouveaux mots formés ab-, a-, abs- Séparation, Abjurer, abstenir éloignement At-, ad-, ac-, af-, Vers, Adjoindre, accourir, ag-, as-, al-, an-, rapprochement affluer, allier, annexer, ap-, ar-.
apporter, arranger, attirer etc.
Ante-.
Anti- avant Anténatal, antédiluvien, antidater, antichambre Bene-, bien- bien Bénédiction, bénévole, bienvenu, bienfaisant.
Bis-, bi-, be- doubler, deux Biscuit, bicyclette, fois bipède, besace.
Circum-, circon- autour de Circonstance 35FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Cis-, en deçà de Cisalpin Com-, con-, col-, avec Compatriote, collaborer, cor-, co-.
correspondre, cohériter, contourner Contra-, contre- contre, à coté Contravention, de contrefaçon, contradicteur contredire, contrepoison.
Dis-, dif-, di-, des- détachement, Disparaître, diffusion, , de- séparation digression, déplaire, complète, désordre, dégarnir.
En-, em- extraction Enlever, emmener Ex-, es-, ef-, e-, extraction, Exporter, essouffler, el- hors de effeuiller, efforcer, éliminer.
Extra en dehors de, à Extraordinaire, l’extrême extravaser, extracorporel degré For-, four-, fau-, en dehors de Forclos, fourvoyer, hor- faubourg, hormis.
In-, im-, il-, ir-, dans, sur Inclus, importer, en-, em- illuminer, irruption, encaisser, empocher In-, im-, il-, ir- négation Inactif, impossible, illisible, irrésolu.
Inter-, entre- au milieu de, à Interposer, interner, demi entremêler entrevoir Intra-, intro- à l’intérieur de Intramusculaire, introduire.
Mal-, male-, mau- mal, négation Malfaiteur, malédiction, maudire.
Mes-, me- Négation Mésestimer, mécontent mi-, demi Minuit, mi-temps Non- Négation Non-sens, non-lieu.
Ob-, oc-, of-, op- devant, contre Obstacle, occasion, offrir, opposer objecter.
Par-, per- à travers, parfait, parcourir, presque permanent, perforer.
Pen-, pene- jusqu’au bout Péninsule, pénéplaine Post-, puis- après Postscolaire, posthume Pre-, pres- à l’avance, à la Préposer, prédominer, tête de préférer, pressentir.
Pro-, pour- en avant, à la Prolonger, proposer, place de pronom, pourchasser Quadri- quatre Quadrilatère, quadragénaire, 36 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 quadrimoteur Re-, re-, r- répétition Revenir, régression, rapporter redire, répéter Retro- en arrière Rétrograder Semi- à moitie, à Semi-Circulaire, semi- demi direct Sub-, suc-, sug-, sous Subordonner, sup-, sous-, sou-, succomber, suggérer sus- supporter, sous-estimer, soumettre, suspendre Super-, sour-, sur- en plus, au Superposer, sourcil, suprême degré surnom, surajouter, surcharge, superfin.
Supra- au-dessus de Supraterrestre, suprasensible Sus- plus haut Suspendu, susdit, susnommé Trans-, tra-, tres-, au-delà de Transporter, traverser, tre- tressauter, trépasser, traduire, transplanter.
Tri-, tris-, tre- trois Triporteur, tricycle, trisaïeul, trépied.
Ulta-, outre- au-delà de, à Ultramoderne, l’excès ultraroyaliste, outremer Vice-, vi- a la place de Vice-Amiral, vice- président, vicomte SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez ‘L’Affixation’?
ii.
Former au moins un mot avec chacun de ces préfixes latins : Ante-.
Anti- avant Bene-, bien- bien Contra-, contre- contre, à coté de Dis-, dif-, di-, détachement, des-, de- séparation complète, Ex-, es-, ef-, e-, extraction, el- hors de For-, four-, fau-, en dehors de hor- In-, im-, il-, ir- négation Mal-, male-, mau- mal, négation Non- Négation 37FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Ob-, oc-, of-, op- devant, contre Possible Answers : 1.
L’affixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté soit à l’initial de la base morphémique (la préfixation), soit au milieu de la base morphémique (l’infixation), soit à la fin de la base morphémique (la suffixation) pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
Nous prenons le mot ‘CONJONCTION’ qui serait un bon exemple de notre définition et explication ci-dessus.
On peut citer le morphème CON comme le préfixe, JONC comme l’infixe et TION comme le suffixe.
2.
Ante-.
Anti- avant Anténatal, antédiluvien, antidater, antichambre Bene-, bien- bien Bénédiction, bénévole, bienvenu, bienfaisant.
Contra-, contre- contre, à coté Contravention, de contrefaçon, contradicteur contredire, contrepoison.
Dis-, dif-, di-, des-, détachement, Disparaître, diffusion, de- séparation digression, déplaire, complète, désordre, dégarnir.
Ex-, es-, ef-, e-, el- extraction, Exporter, essouffler, hors de effeuiller, efforcer, éliminer.
For-, four-, fau-, en dehors de Forclos, fourvoyer, hor- faubourg, hormis.
In-, im-, il-, ir- négation Inactif, impossible, illisible, irrésolu.
Mal-, male-, mau- mal, négation Malfaiteur, malédiction, maudire.
Non- Négation Non-sens, non-lieu.
Ob-, oc-, of-, op- devant, contre Obstacle, occasion, offrir, opposer objecter.
38 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the general ideas of what Affixation is.
You have also been taught the definition of prefix, infix and suffix as part of affixation.
We supplied you also, in this unit, with the table of various principal prefixes borrowed from Latin as well as their meanings thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through them.
5.0 SUMMARY With this unit tackling the general ideas of what Affixation is, we are thus progressing into the second segment of the major processes of words formation in French morphology i.e.
the world of Affixations.
With numerous prefixes of Latin origin, supplied in this unit, you should be able, by now, to analyse the formation of some French words and even take a cue from there to derive meaning of some words on your own.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables et en faisant références aux préfixes, infixe et suffixe, définissez ‘L’Affixation’?
2.
Former au moins un mot avec chacune de ces préfixes latins: Ante-.
Anti- avant Bene-, bien- bien Contra-, contre- contre, à coté de Dis-, dif-, di-, détachement, des-, de- séparation complète, Ex-, es-, ef-, e-, extraction, el- hors de For-, four-, fau-, en dehors de hor- In-, im-, il-, ir- négation Mal-, male-, mau- mal, négation Non- Négation Ob-, oc-, of-, op- devant, contre 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
39FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 4 L’AFFIXATION : LES PREFIXES EMPRUNTES AU GREC CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les préfixes principaux empruntés au Grec 3.2 Les autres préfixes empruntés au Grec 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 40 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn to revise the definition of prefix, infix and suffix as what make up affixation.
We will also supply you, in this unit, with the table of various principal prefixes borrowed from Greek as well as their meanings thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through them.
Your knowledge of this unit will be incomplete if you are unable to follow our examples in this table to analyse or form some French words on your own.
The knowledge you gain from this unit will initiate you properly into how to form French words and how to explain the morphological processes that go around each French word.
We would like to insist on our warning that your better understanding of Morphology generally depends on the way and manner you handle this unit.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of Morphological engineering of French words as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Define Prefix, Infix and suffix in French morphology • Identify the importance of affixation in French morphology • Identify some principal prefixes borrowed from Greek into French • Identify some other prefixes borrowed from Greek into French • Demonstrate the techniques of analysis and usage of some principal and other prefixes, borrowed from Greek into French, in French morphology.
You are now invited to the world of Affixation and principal prefixes borrowed from Greek into French language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Les Préfixes Empruntés Au Grec Comme nous l’avons dit dans Unité 8, à part les mots ou les bases morphémiques empruntés qui constituent une large partie du vocabulaire français, les affixes jouent un rôle très important dans la formation de nouveaux mots en français.
L’affixation est définie comme l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté soit à l’initial de la base morphémique (la préfixation), soit au milieu de la base morphémique (l’infixation), soit à la fin de la base 41FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 morphémique (la suffixation) pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
Nous avons expliqué aussi que la plupart des préfixes et des suffixes de la langue française sont empruntés, comme des bases morphémiques et des (mots) emprunts, aux différentes langues anciennes, précisément le latin et le grec.
Ayant traité des préfixes empruntés au latin dans Unité 8, nous allons traiter, dans cette unité, les préfixes empruntés au grec.
3.1 Les Préfixes Principaux Empruntés au Grec Préfixes Sens Nouveaux mots formés a-, an- sans, négation Amoral, anarchie, athée Amphi- en cercle/double Amphithéâtre, amphibie Ana- renversement Anachronisme Anti-, ante contre, opposition Antidote, antéchrist, antialcoolique Apo- a partir de Apothéose, apostasie Archi-, au suprême degré Archevêque, archiatre, ach- archifou, archiduc Cata- en descendant, de Catachrèse, haut en bas catastrophe, catalogue Dia- à travers Dialogue, diaphane di- en deux, double Diphtongue, diptère Dys- en mauvais état Dyspepsie, dysenterie Epi- en plus, par-dessus Épidémie, épisode, épitaphe, épilogue.
Eu, ev- bien Euphorie, évangile, eurythmie.
Hemi- demi Hémisphère, hémiptère.
Hyper- à l’excès Hyperbole, hypertrophie Hypo- sous Hypogée, hypotension, hypodermique Meta- après, au-delà de Métaphysique, métamorphose Para- contre, à coté de Paraphrase, parasite, paramilitaire, paratonnerre.
Peri- autour de Périmètre, périscope, péristyle Syn-, sym- avec Synonyme, sympathie, synthèse.
42 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.2 Les Autres Préfixes Empruntés au Grec Préfixes Sens Nouveaux mots formés Aero- Air Aéroplane Anthropo- homme Anthropologie Auto- soi-même Automobile Baro- pesanteur Baromètre Biblio- livre Bibliographie Bio- vie Biographie Xcaco- mauvais Cacophonie Centi- centième Centimètre Chrono- temps Chronomètre Cosmo monde Cosmopolite Curvi- courbe Curviligne Deca- dixième Décagramme Deci- dixième Décilitre Demo- Peuple Démocratie Equi- égal Equilibre Gastro- estomac Gastronomie Geo- terre Géologie Hecto- centième Hectomètre Helio- soleil Héliothérapie hemo- sang Hémoptysie Hydro- eau Hydrophile iso- égal Isochrone Kilo- millième Kilogramme Litho pierre Lithographie Megalo-, grand Mégalomane mega- Micro- petit Microphone Milli millième Milligramme Miso- haine Misogyne Mono- seule Monologue Multi- nombreux Multicolore Myria- dix mille Myriamètre Necro- mort Nécropole Neo- nouveau Néologisme Oligo- peu nombreux Oligarchie Omni- tout Omnipotent Ortho- correct, droit Orthographe Pan- tout Panorama Patho- souffrance Pathologie Philo- ami Philosophe Photo- lumière Photographie Poly- nombreux Polycopie 43FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Proto- premier Prototype Pseudo- faux pseudonyme Pscho- âme psychologie Pyro- feu Pyrogravure Tele- au loin Télégraphe Tetra- quatre Tétrasyllabe Theo- dieu Théologie Thermo chaleur Thermomètre Topo lieu Topographie Typo, type- caractère Typographe Uni- unité Uniforme Zoo- animal Zoologie SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez : a.
La Préfixation, b. L’Infixation c. La Suffixation.
ii.
Former au moins un mot avec chacun de ces préfixes grecs : Préfixes Sens Nouveaux mots formés Amphi- en cercle/double Cata- en descendant, de haut en bas Dia- à travers Epi- en plus, par- dessus Hemi- demi Meta- après, au-delà de Para- contre, à coté de Syn-, avec sym- Poly- nombreux Tele- au loin Possible Answers : ia.
La Préfixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté à l’initial de la base morphémique pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
ib.
L’Infixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté au milieu 44 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 de la base morphémique pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
ic.
La Suffixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté à la fin de la base morphémique pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
ii.
Préfixes Sens Nouveaux mots formes Amphi- en cercle/double Amphithéâtre, amphibie Cata- en descendant, de Catachrèse, catastrophe, haut en bas catalogue Dia- à travers Dialogue, diaphane Epi- en plus, par- Épidémie, épisode, dessus épitaphe, épilogue.
Hemi- demi Hémisphère, hémiptère.
Meta- après, au-delà de Métaphysique, métamorphose Para- contre, à coté de Paraphrase, parasite, paramilitaire, paratonnerre.
Syn-, sym- avec Synonyme, sympathie, synthèse.
Poly- nombreux Polycopie Tele- au loin Télégraphe 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have revised with you the definition of prefix, infix and suffix as what constitutes what is called affixation.
We also supplied you, in this unit, with the table of various principal prefixes borrowed from Greek as well as their meanings thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through them.
5.0 SUMMARY With this unit tackling the general ideas of what prefix, infix and suffix are, we are progressing further into the second segment of the major processes of words formation in French morphology i.e.
the world of Affixation.
With numerous prefixes of Greek origin, supplied in this unit, you should be able, by now, to analyse the formation of some French words and even take a cue from there to derive meaning of some words, formed through use of the Greek prefixes, on your own.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 45FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez, les préfixes, les infixes, et les suffixes?
2.
Former au moins dix mots avec chacun de ces préfixes grecs : Préfixes Sens Nouveaux mots formes Amphi- en cercle/double Cata- en descendant, de haut en bas Dia- à travers Epi- en plus, par- dessus Hemi- demi Meta- après, au-delà de Para- contre, à coté de Syn-, sym- avec Poly- nombreux Tele- au loin 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
46 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 5 LES SUFFIXES PRINCIPAUX EMPRUNTES AU LATIN ET AU GREC CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les suffixes principaux empruntés au latin 3.2 Les suffixes principaux empruntés au grec 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn to revise the definition of suffix as part of affixation.
We will also supply you, in this unit, with the table of various principal suffixes borrowed from Latin and Greek as well as their meanings thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through them.
Your knowledge of this unit will be incomplete if you are unable to follow our examples in this table to analyse or form some French words on your own.
The knowledge you gain from this unit will initiate you properly into how to form French words and how to explain the morphological processes that go around each French word.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Define suffix in French morphology • Identify some principal suffixes borrowed from Latin into French • Identify some principal suffixes borrowed from Greek into French • Demonstrate the techniques of analysis and usage of some principal suffixes, borrowed from Latin and Greek into French, in French morphology.
You are now invited to the world of Affixation and principal suffixes borrowed from Latin and Greek into French language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 47FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Les Suffixes Principaux Empruntes Au Latin Et Au Grec Dans l’unité 8, nous avons défini L’Affixation comme l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté soit à l’initial de la base morphémique (la préfixation), soit au milieu de la base morphémique (l’infixation), soit à la fin de la base morphémique (la suffixation) pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
Nous avons affirmé aussi dans cette unité qu’en français, comme dans les autres langues européennes, l’infixe n’existe guère.
Ayant traité donc les préfixes latin et grec empruntés dans le français, c’est juste dans cette unité de traiter des suffixes latin et grec empruntés dans le français.
Rappelons que la suffixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté à la fin de la base morphémique pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
3.1 Les Suffixes Principaux Empruntés au latin Suffixes Sens Nouveaux mots formés -ambule qui bourge Somnambule -cide qui tue Insecticide, génocide -cole relatif à la cultivateur Agricole, apicole -culteur qui cultive Viticulteur -culture art de cultiver Horticulture -fere qui porte Calorifère -fique qui produit Frigorifique, sudorifique -forme qui a la forme de Uniforme -fuge qui fuit, qui chasse Refuge, vermifuge -pare qui enfante Ovipare, vivipare -pede relatif aux pieds Centipieds, quadripieds -vore qui se nourrit de Herbivore, carnivore.
3.2 Les Suffixes Principaux Empruntés au Grec Suffixes Sens Nouveaux mots 48 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 formés -algie douleur Névralgie -arque celui qui commande Monarque -archie Commandement Monarchie, anarchie -bole celui qui lance Discobole, hyperbole -cephale celui qui à une tête Brachycéphale -crate celui qui domine Autocrate, démocrate -cratie Domination, Bureaucratie, gouvernement autocratie -gene celui qui engendre Hétérogène, bêterogène -gramme l’art d’écrire Cablegramme, télégramme (Noun)- celui qui écrit sur, Musicographie, graphe celui qui enregistre phonographe.
V(Adj)- ce qui est écrit Logographe graphe Graphie l’art d’écrire Dactylographie -ide ce qui a la forme de Ovoïde -logue celui qui étudie Neurologue -logie étude scientifique Biologie, psychologie -mancie Divination Cartomancie -mane celui qui est fou de Mégalomane, bibliomane -manie folie ou passion Cleptomanie -metre qui mesure Chronomètre -metrie l’art de mesurer thermométrie -nome qui règle Métronome -nomie l’art de régler Gastronomie, astronomie -onyme nom Homonyme, synonyme -pathe malade de Neuropathie -pathie maladie Hémopathie -phage qui mange Anthropophage -phagie action de manger Hippophagie -phile celui qui aime Francophile -phobe celui qui a horreur Xénophobe -phobie avoir horreur de Hydrophobie -phone ce qui transmet les Téléphone sons -phonie transmission des sons Radiophonie 49FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 -phore ce qui porte Sémaphore -scope ce qui permet Télescope, d’observer microscope -scopie l’art d’observer Radioscopie -technie science Radiotechnie -technique relatif à la science Electrotechnique -theque dépôt discothèque -therapie l’art de soigner par Hydrothérapie -tomie action de couper Gastrotomie SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez Le Suffixe.
ii.
Former au moins d’un mot avec chacun de ces préfixes latin et grec : Suffixes Sens Nouveaux mots formés -cide qui tue -cole relatif à la cultivateur -culture art de cultiver -forme qui a la forme de -pede relatif aux pieds -archie Commandement -crate celui qui domine -gramme l’art d’écrire -Graphie l’art d’écrire -logie étude scientifique Possible Answers : i.
La Suffixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté à la fin de la base morphémique pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
ii.
Suffixes Sens Nouveaux mots formés -cide qui tue Insecticide, génocide -cole relatif à la cultivateur Agricole, 50 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 apicole -culture art de cultiver Horticulture -forme qui a la forme de Uniforme -pede relatif aux pieds Centipièdes, quadrupèdes -archie Commandement Monarchie, anarchie -crate celui qui domine Autocrate, démocrate -gramme l’art d’écrire Cablegramme, télégramme -graphie l’art d’écrire Dactylographie -logie étude scientifique Biologie, psychologie 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have revised with you the definition of suffix as part of affixation.
We also supplied you, in this unit, with the table of various principal suffixes borrowed from Latin and Greek as well as their meanings thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through them.
5.0 SUMMARY With this unit tackling the general ideas of what suffix is, we are concluding the second segment of the major processes of words formation in French morphology i.e the world of Affixations.
With numerous suffixes of Latin and Greek origin, supplied in this unit, you should be able, by now, to analyse the formation of some French words and even take a cue from there to derive meaning of some words, formed through the use of Latin and Greek suffixes, on your own.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez La suffixation.
2.
Former au moins dix mots avec chacun de ces suffixes latin et grec: Suffixes Sens Nouveaux mots formés -cide qui tue -cole relatif à la cultivateur -culture art de cultiver -forme qui a la forme de 51FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 -pede relatif aux pieds -archie Commandement -crate celui qui domine -gramme l’art d’écrire -graphie l’art d’écrire -logie étude scientifique 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
52 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 MODULE 3 Unit 1 Les Parasynthétiques Unit 2 La Composition En Morphologie Unit 3 Différents Types De Composition En Français: Substantifs Unit 4 Les Compositions Dites Verbale, Adverbiale Et Conjonctive Unit 5 Les Trois Procédés Secondaires De La Formation Des Mots En Français.
UNIT 1 LES PARASYNTHETIQUES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les Parasynthétiques 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn to revise the definition of prefix and suffix as part of affixation.
We will also supply you, in this unit, with the definitions as well as the descriptions of parasynthetic derivations thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through process.
Your knowledge of this unit will be incomplete if you are unable to follow our examples in this table to analyse or form some French words on your own.
The knowledge you gain from this unit will initiate you properly into how to form French words and how to explain the morphological processes that go around each French word.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Define parasynthetic process in French morphology • Identify some principal Prefixes with which words are formed in French parasynthetic process • Identify some principal Suffixes with which words are formed in French language through parasynthetic process 53FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 • Demonstrate the techniques of analysis and usage of some words formed through parasynthetic process in French morphology.
You are now invited to the world of parasynthetics in French morphology.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Les Parasynthétiques Notons que dans les unités précédentes, nous avons défini le Préfixe comme l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté à l’initial de la base morphémique pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe et que le Suffixe est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté à la fin de la base morphémique pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
Si à travers ces définitions des affixes, nous disons qu’un nouveau mot peut se former en ajoutant un autre morphème soit à l’initial (préfixe) soit à la fin de la base morphémique (suffixe), qu’est – ce qu’on dirait, dans le cas ou un nouveau mot est formé à travers la préfixation et la suffixation d’une seule base morphémique simultanément ?
Nous le nommons les parasynthétiques.
La dérivation parasynthétique est celle qui appelle l’emploi simultané d’un préfixe et d’un suffixe.
L’absence de l’un de ces deux affixes rendra le mot concerné sans sens.
Autrement dit, il faut obligatoirement l’emploi de deux affixes à la fois rattachés au morphème de base.On peut nommer cette sorte d’affixation comme ‘Hyper-Affixation’ On trouve des exemples dans les verbes, les adjectifs et les adverbes tels que: • Belle - embellir (em+belle+ir) • Branche - embranchement (em+branche+ment+) • Forme - Reformer (re+forme+er) • Herbe - désherber (des +herbe+er) • Heureux - malheureusement (mal+heureuse+ment) • Large - enlargir (en+large+ir) • Nouveaux - renouvellement (re+nouvelle+ment) • Profonde - approfondir (a+profond+ir • Riche - enrichir (en+riche+ir) • Table - entablement (en+table+ment) • Triste - attrister (a+triste+ment) • Vive - aviver (a+viv+er) 54 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Nous pouvons noter que les parasynthétiques peuvent se servir comme une base morphémique qui permettrait l’emploi de l’affixation (la préfixation ou la suffixation) pour former des nouveaux mots : • Herbe (cid:1) désherber (cid:1) redésherber (cid:1) désherbement • Belle (cid:1) embellir (cid:1) embellissement • Riche (cid:1) enrichir (cid:1) enrichissement • Courage (cid:1) encourager (cid:1) encouragement • Poison (cid:1) empoisonner (cid:1) empoisonnement.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez le procédé de la dérivation parasynthétique.
ii.
Former au moins un mot dérivé par le procédé parasynthétique a partir de chacun de ces mots : Belle, Branche, Forme, Herbe, Heureux, Large, Nouveaux, Profonde, Riche, Table, Triste, Vive.
Possible Answers : i. Définition des Parasynthétiques : La dérivation parasynthétique est celle qui appelle l’emploi simultané d’un préfixe et d’un suffixe.
L’absence de l’un de ces deux affixes rendra le mot concerné sans sens.
Autrement dit, il faut obligatoirement l’emploi de deux affixes à la fois rattachés au morphème de base.On peut nommer cette sorte d’affixation comme ‘Hyper- Affixation’ ii.
• Belle - embellir (em+belle+ir) • Branche - embranchement (em+branche+ment+) • Forme - Reformer (re+forme+er) • Herbe - désherber (des +herbe+er) • Heureux - malheureusement (mal+heureuse+ment) • Large - enlargir (en+large+ir) • Nouveaux - renouvellement (re+nouvelle+ment) • Profonde - approfondir (a+profond+ir • Riche - enrichir (en+riche+ir) • Table - entablement (en+table+ment) • Triste - attrister (a+triste+ment) • Vive - aviver (a+viv+er) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have revised with you the definition of prefix and suffix as part of affixation.
We also supplied you, in this unit, with the 55FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 definitions as well as the descriptions of Parasynthetics thus enabling you to understand how words are formed through them.
5.0 SUMMARY With this unit revising the general ideas of what prefix and suffix are, we have been able to build on this knowledge to define and describe parasynthetics.
With numerous examples of parasynthetics supplied in this unit, you should be able, by now, to analyse the formation of some French words and even take a cue from there to derive meaning of some words, formed through the parasynthetics, on your own.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, comparez la dérivation parasynthétique et L’affixation.
2.
Former au moins un mot dérivé par le procédé parasynthétique a partir de chacun de ces mots : Belle, Branche, Forme, Herbe, Heureux, Large, Nouveaux, Profonde, Riche, Table, Triste, Vive.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
56 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 2 LA COMPOSITION EN MORPHOLOGIE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 De l’affixation à la composition 3.2 Définition de préfixe et de suffixe 3.3 La composition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will revise with you the methods and techniques of how to trace the origin of some French words from affixations.
In this unit, you will read to know about the method which a French grammar learner like you could apply in combining two or more independent words together to form a new word: a process that is called compounding in English or ‘La Composition’ in French.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate you properly into how you could trace the origin of these words that are formed through the compounding processes.
We would like to repeat our warning that your better understanding of this unit will help in your understanding of French Morphology.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of French words formation through compounding as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify French words that were formed as a result of Compounding • Identify the difference between affixation and compounding • Identify the new grammatical class of French words that are formed as a result of compounding You are now invited to the world of French words formation through compounding.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 57FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 La Composition En Morphologie 3.1 De l’Affixation à la Composition Dans l’unité 8, nous avons défini L’Affixation comme l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté soit à l’initial de la base morphémique (la préfixation), soit au milieu de la base morphémique (l’infixation), soit à la fin de la base morphémique (la suffixation) pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
Nous avons affirmé aussi dans cette unité qu’en français, comme dans les autres langues européennes, l’infixe n’existe guère.
Pour bien réviser la connaissance antérieure, pour que vous puissiez bien suivre le cours que nous allons vous livrer dans cette unité, nous l’avons considéré juste de donner la définition de préfixe et de suffixe : 3.2 Définition de Préfixe et de Suffixe Rappelons que la Préfixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté à l’initial de la base morphémique pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe tandis que le Suffixation est l’ensemble des procédés dans lequel un morphème secondaire (d’une à cinq lettres) est ajouté à la fin de la base morphémique pour former un nouveau mot qui pourrait être le nom, l’adjectif, le verbe ou l’adverbe.
3.3 La composition On peut définir la composition comme la combinaison ou la mise ensemble de deux mots indépendants (qui peuvent exister indépendamment en eux pour avoir le sens complet) pour former un nouveau mot.
Nous voulons vous avertir que cette opération est différente de l’affixation car dans le cas d’affixations, on parle de la mise ensemble des morphèmes dont leur sens complet dépend du nouveau nom formé (ni le préfixe ni le suffixe utilisé en affixation ne peut avoir le sens complet).
Or dans le cas de la composition, chacun des deux ou plusieurs mots combinés pour former un nouveau mot composé peut avoir le sens lorsqu’il existe seul dans une phrase.
On trouve de bons exemples dans les noms composés comme : 1.
Chef + lieu (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Chef-lieu 2.
Bon + homme (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Bonhomme 3. pot + de + vin (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) pot-de-vin.
58 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Notons que chef, lieu, bon, homme, pot, de, vin peuvent avoir leur sens particulier quand chacun de ces mots se trouve dans une phrase comme un mot unique : • Olu est le chef de notre village.
• La réunion aura lieu à Lagos.
• Voilà un bon garçon.
• J’ai vu un homme avec ta soeur.
• On utilise le pot pour faire la cuisine.
• Je viens de Lagos.
• Tunde a bu trop de vin.
Mais lorsqu’ils se composent avec un autre mot pour former un nouveau mot composé, cette combinaison ou la composition nous donnerait un nouveau sens (quelques fois un sens différent de chacun des mots composés) et on peut remarquer aussi le changement dans la classe grammaticale de ces mots composés.
4.
Chef + lieu (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Chef-lieu (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) (N+N=N) Une préfecture 5.
Bon + homme (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Bonhomme (Adj+N=N) Un type 6.
Pot + de + vin (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) pot-de-vin (N+Prep+N=N) Un cadeau.
Autrement dit, un nom composé avec un verbe peuvent résulter en classe déterminative (adjectif) ou nominale (nom).
Ce n’est plus la classe grammaticale des mots combinés pour former les nouveaux mots composés qui comptent mais la classe ou la fonction grammaticale du résultat de la composition : 7.
Laisser + Passer (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Laissez-Passer (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) (V+V (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) N) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez La composition.
ii.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguer très nettement entre l’affixation et la composition.
Possible Answers : i.
La composition On peut définir la composition comme la combinaison ou la mise ensemble de deux mots indépendants (qui peuvent exister indépendamment en eux pour avoir le sens complet) pour former un nouveau mot.
ii.
La différence entre l’affixation et la composition c’est que dans le cas d’affixation, on parle de la mise ensemble des morphèmes dont leur sens complet dépend du nouveau nom formé (ni le 59FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 préfixe ni le suffixe utilisé en affixation ne peut avoir le sens complet).
Or, dans le cas de la composition, chacun des deux ou plusieurs mots combinés pour former un nouveau mot composé peut avoir le sens lorsqu’il existe seul dans une phrase.
On trouve de bons exemples dans les noms composés comme : 1.
Chef + lieu (cid:1) Chef-lieu 2.
Bon + homme (cid:1) Bonhomme 3. pot + de + vin (cid:1) pot-de-vin.
Notons que chef, lieu, bon, homme, pot, de, vin peuvent avoir leur sens particulier quand chacun de ces mots se trouve dans une phrase comme un mot unique : • Olu est le chef de notre village.
• La réunion aura lieu à Lagos.
• Voilà un bon garçon.
• J’ai vu un homme avec ta soeur.
• On utilise le pot pour faire la cuisine.
• Je viens de Lagos.
• Tunde a bu trop de vin.
Mais lorsqu’ils se composent avec un autre mot pour former un nouveau mot composé, cette combinaison ou la composition nous donnerait un nouveau sens (quelques fois un sens différent de chacun des mots composés) et on peut remarquer aussi le changement dans la classe grammaticale de ces mots composés.
4.
Chef + lieu (cid:1) Chef-lieu (cid:1) (N+N=N) Une préfecture 5.
Bon + homme (cid:1) Bonhomme (Adj+N=N) Un type 6.
Pot + de + vin (cid:1) pot-de-vin (N+Prep+N=N) Un cadeau.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught, through the revision with you of the methods and techniques of how to trace the origin of some French words from affixation.
We have also highlighted the methods which a French grammar learner like you could apply in combining two or more independent words together to form a new word: a process that is called compounding in English or ‘La Composition’ in French.
With the way and manner that we simplified the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding French Morphology would have been alleviated.
60 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 5.0 SUMMARY With this unit to have highlighted the method which a French grammar learner like you could apply in combining two or more independent words together to form a new word: a process that is called compounding in English or ‘La Composition’ in French, we are sure that you must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basic techniques of how to form new French words through the combination of two or more independent words.
Your knowledge of French Morphology must have been enriched.
By now we are confident that you should have acquired enough grammatical knowledge that could facilitate your discussion on Morphology from the point of view of compounding.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguer très nettement entre l’affixation et la composition.
2.
Donner au moins dix mots composés en français et indiquer leur classe grammaticale.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
61FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 3 DIFFERENTS TYPES DE COMPOSITION EN FRANÇAIS: SUBSTANTIFS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Révision de définition de la Composition 3.2 Les Types de Composition en Français 3.3 La Composition nominale 3.4 Justification de la Composition nominale 3.5 La Composition adjectivale 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will revise with you the definitions and methods of analyzing compound words in French grammar, as explained in Unit 12.
In this unit, you will read to know about the methods which a French grammar learner like you could apply in analyzing the compound words from different origins and grammatical class so as to detect the new grammatical classes of the compound words.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate you properly into how you could analyse and classes these words that are formed through the compounding processes.
We would like to repeat our warning that your better understanding of this unit will help in your understanding of French Morphology.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of French words formation through compounding processes as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Define Compounding processes • State the types of compounding we have in French grammar • Identify, analyse and justify nominal compounding • Identify and analyse adjectival compounding You are now invited to the world of French words formation through compounding processes.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 62 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Différents Types De Composition En Français 3.1 Révision de Définition de la composition Rappelons qu’en Unité 12, nous avons défini la composition comme la combinaison ou la mise ensemble de deux mots indépendants (qui peuvent exister indépendamment en eux pour avoir le sens complet) pour former un nouveau mot.
Nous avons aussi averti notre lecteur que cette opération est différente de l’affixation car dans le cas d’affixation, on parle de la mise ensemble des morphèmes dont leur sens complet dépend du nouveau nom formé (ni le préfixe ni le suffixe utilisé en affixation ne peut avoir le sens complet).
Or dans le cas de la composition, chacun de deux ou plusieurs mots combinés pour former un nouveau mot composé peut avoir le sens lorsqu’il existe seul dans une phrase.
Nous avons signalé aussi qu’un mot formé du nom composé avec un verbe peuvent résulter en classe déterminative (adjectif) ou nominale (nom) et que ce n’est plus la classe grammaticale des mots combinés pour former les nouveaux mots composés qui comptent mais la classe ou la fonction grammaticale du résultat de la composition.
C’est le cas de changement dans la classe grammaticale de mots d’origine et leur résultat morphologique après la composition de ces deux ou plusieurs mots que nous allons discuter avec vous dans cette unité.
3.2 Les Types de Composition en Français En suivant la logique de cette fin linguistique de la classe ou de la fonction grammaticale des mots composés en français, nous pouvons avoir au moins quatre classes grammaticales.
On peut avoir la composition nominale (dont les mots composés fonctionnent comme le nom dans une phrase), la composition adjectivale (dont les mots composés fonctionnent comme l’adjectif dans une phrase), la composition verbale (dont les mots composés fonctionnent comme le verbe dans une phrase) et la composition adverbiale (dont les mots composés fonctionnent comme l’adverbe dans une phrase).
3.3 La Composition Nominale Une composition est dite nominale quand deux ou plusieurs mots mis ensemble pour former la composition sont soit deux ou plusieurs noms, soit un adverbe ou une préposition plus un nom, soit un verbe plus un nom, soit un verbe plus un verbe, soit un verbe plus un adverbe, soit un nom plus un adjectif, soit un adjectif plus soit un nom, soit un nom plus une préposition plus un verbe, soit un nom plus une préposition plus un nom.
63FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Par exemple : - i.
La Composition du nom plus un nom: - Chef – lieu, chou-fleur, hôtel-dieu, voiture-restaurant, timbre-poste, station-service.
ii.
La Composition de l’adverbe ou la Préposition plus le nom : - contre-amiral, avant-propos, avant-garde.
iii.
La Composition du verbe plus le nom: - abat-jour, soutien-gorge, chasse-neige, réveille-matin, boit-sans-soif.
iv.
La composition du verbe plus le verbe : - laissez-passer, laisser- faire, va-et-vient.
v. La Composition du verbe plus l’adverbe:- passe-partout.
vi.
La composition du nom plus l’adjectif: - pied-noir, coffre-fort.
vii.
La composition de l’adjectif plus le nom: - bonhomme, jeune- fille, gentilhomme, honnêthomme, madame, mademoiselle.
viii.
Le Nom plus la préposition plus le verbe compose : - salle-à- manger.
ix.
La composition du nom plus la préposition plus nom :- pot-de- vin, eau-de-vie.
Nous voulons noter à ce stade que le soit disant classe nominale qu’on donne à ces compositions formées à travers des mots d’origines grammaticales différentes n’est pas créée en considérant les mots différents mis ensemble pour faire la composition, mais on considère seulement la fonction linguistique ou grammaticale qu’on assure avec ces nouveaux mots formés avant de leur accorder leur classe grammaticale.
Prenez par exemple comment fonctionnent ces mots composés dans les phrases suivantes: i.
Le Président de la République lui a donné un laissez-passer pour entrer dans leur pays.
ii.
Si vous chercher un passe-partout dans cette école, vous ne le trouvez point dans ma classe.
3.4 Justification de La Composition Nominale En français l’un des éléments distinctifs qui distinguent le nom des autres parties de discours en générale c’est sa capacité de pouvoir accepter des déterminants ou l’article en particulier.
Une fois que ces mots composés acceptent l’article indéfini (un, une ou des) ou défini (le, la ou les) cela signifie que ces noms composés sont des noms dans les phrases dont on parle.
En bien analysant la phrase en question on peut bien voir les fonctions grammaticales de ces noms concernés.
3.5 La Composition Adjectivale.
64 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Nous parlons de la composition adjectivale quand deux ou plusieurs mots utilisés pour former le nouveau mot composé sont un adjectif plus un adjectif, un adverbe plus une préposition plus un adverbe et tous ces mots vont jouer le rôle de l’adjectif dans une phrase.
(a) La composition de l’adjectif plus l’adjectif :– sourd-muet, nouveau-né, aigre-doux.
(b) La composition de l’adverbe ou la préposition plus l’adjectif :- contre-révolutionnaire, avant-coureur.
(c) La composition de l’adjectif plus son complément:- bon à rien, bon à jeter.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez La composition.
ii.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguer très nettement entre la composition nominale et la composition adjectivale.
Possible Answers : i.
La composition On peut définir la composition comme la combinaison ou la mise ensemble de deux mots indépendants (qui peuvent exister indépendamment en eux pour avoir le sens complet) pour former un nouveau mot.
ii.
La différence entre une composition nominale et une composition adjectivale c’est qu’une composition est dite nominale quand deux ou plusieurs mots mis ensemble pour former la composition sont soit deux ou plusieurs noms, soit un adverbe ou une préposition plus un nom, soit un verbe plus un nom, soit un verbe plus un verbe, soit un verbe plus un adverbe, soit un nom plus un adjectif, soit un adjectif plus soit un nom, soit un nom plus une préposition plus un verbe, soit un nom plus une préposition plus un nom mais qui fonctionne comme un nom dans une phrase tandis qu’une composition est dite adjectivale quand deux ou plusieurs mots utilisés pour former le nouveau mot composé sont un adjectif plus un adjectif, un adverbe plus une préposition plus un adverbe et tous ces mots vont jouer le rôle de l’adjectif dans une phrase.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught, through the revision with you, the definition of compounding.
We have also highlighted the criteria through which a French grammar learner like you could apply in combining two or more independent words together to form a new word 65FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 that can either be nominal (nominal compounding) or adjectival (adjectival compounding).
With the way and manner that we simplified the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding French Morphology would have been alleviated.
5.0 SUMMARY With this unit to have highlighted the methods which a French grammar learner like you could apply in combining two or more independent words together to form a new word that can either be nominal (nominal compounding) or adjectival (adjectival compounding), we are sure that you must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basic techniques of how to form new French words through the combination of two or more independent words.
Your knowledge of French Morphology must have been enriched.
By now we are confident that you should have acquired enough grammatical knowledge that could facilitate your discussion on Morphology from the point of view of compounding.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguer très nettement entre la composition nominale et la composition adjectivale.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
UNIT 4 LES COMPOSITIONS DITES VERBALE, ADVERBIALE ET CONJONCTIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 66 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Révision de La Composition Nominale et de La Composition Adjectivale.
3.2 Définition de La Composition Verbale 3.3 La Composition Adverbiale et Conjonctive 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall that in Unit Thirteen, we taught you the method and the methods which a French grammar learner like you could apply in analyzing the compounded words from nominal and adjectival origins.
In this unit, we are going to continue this lesson with explanation and analysis of other methods and the criteria which you could apply in analyzing the compounded words from verbal, Adverbial and conjunctive origins so as to detect the new grammatical class of the compounding.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate you properly into how you could analyse and class these words that are formed through the compounding processes.
We would like to repeat our warning that your better understanding of this unit will help in your understanding of French Morphology.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of French words formation through compounding as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Revise the definitions of Nominal and Adjectival Compounding • Identify, analyse and justify verbal compounding • Identify and analyse adverbial compounding • Identify and analyse conjunctive compounding You are now invited to the world of French words formation through compounding.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Les Compositions Dites Verbale, Adverbiale Et Conjonctive 3.1 Révision de La Composition Nominale et de La Composition Adjectivale.
Comme nous l’avons dit dans l’unité 13, une composition est dite nominale quand deux ou plusieurs mots mis ensemble pour former la 67FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 composition sont soit deux ou plusieurs noms, soit un adverbe ou une préposition plus un nom, soit un verbe plus un nom, soit un verbe plus un verbe, soit un verbe plus un adverbe, soit un nom plus un adjectif, soit un adjectif plus soit un nom, soit un nom plus une préposition plus un verbe, soit un nom plus une préposition plus un nom.
Or, nous parlons de la composition adjectivale quand deux ou plusieurs mots utilisés pour former le nouveau mot composé sont un adjectif plus un adjectif, un adverbe plus une préposition plus un adverbe et la combinaison de ces mots est un adjectif dans une phrase.
3.2 Définition de La Composition Verbale Lorsqu’on affirme qu’une composition est verbale, il y aura la combinaison de deux ou plusieurs mots indépendants qui produiront un nouveau mot appartenant a la classe grammaticale de verbe.
Ces mots qui se composent pour former la composition verbale peuvent être des verbes, un verbe plus un nom ou même un nom ou une préposition plus un verbe.
Ce qui est important c’est que tous ces mots composés occupe la position de verbe dans une phrase.
• La composition du verbe plus le verbe : verbe aller plus infinitif (cid:1) futur.
Par exemple • Je vais manger bientôt (cid:1) Je mangerai bientôt.
• La composition du verbe plus le nom :- prendre la fuit (cid:1) s’enfuir, Avoir peur (cid:1) effrayer, Avoir besoin (cid:1) vouloir.
• La composition du nom ou la préposition plus le verbe :- Main + tenir (cid:1) maintenir, Sur +charger (cid:1) surcharger.
3.3 La Composition Adverbiale et Conjonctive.
Il y a des mots adverbiaux ou conjonctifs formés à travers la combinaison de deux ou plusieurs éléments indépendants de la grammaire occupant la position grammaticale de soit un adverbe soit une conjonction dans une phrase.
Voici ce que nous appelons la composition adverbiale et conjonctive.
(a) La Composition adverbiale se forme le plus souvent avec la combinaison d’un adjectif plus une préposition plus un nom ou un autre adjectif.
Exemple : tout à coup, petit à petit, sur-le- champ.
(b) La composition conjonctive est formée avec la préposition plus le nom ou l’infinitif plus ‘que’ .
Par exemple : à mesure que, à supposer que, etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 68 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 i. Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguer très nettement entre la composition nominale et la composition adjectivale.
ii.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguer très nettement entre la composition verbale et la composition adverbiale.
Possible Answers : i.
La différence entre une composition nominale et une composition adjectivale c’est qu’une composition est dite nominale quand deux ou plusieurs mots mis ensemble pour former la composition sont soit deux ou plusieurs noms, soit un adverbe ou une préposition plus un nom, soit un verbe plus un nom, soit un verbe plus un verbe, soit un verbe plus un adverbe, soit un nom plus un adjectif, soit un adjectif plus soit un nom, soit un nom plus une préposition plus un verbe, soit un nom plus une préposition plus un nom mais qui fonctionne comme un nom dans une phrase tandis qu’une composition est dite adjectivale quand deux ou plusieurs mots utilisés pour former le nouveau mot composé sont un adjectif plus un adjectif, un adverbe plus une préposition plus un adverbe et tous ces mots vont jouer le rôle de l’adjectif dans une phrase.
ii.
Lorsqu’on affirme qu’une composition est verbale, il y aura la combinaison de deux ou plusieurs mots indépendants qui produiront un nouveau mot appartenant a la classe grammaticale de verbe.
Ces mots qui se composent pour former la composition verbale peuvent être des verbes, un verbe plus un nom ou même un nom ou une préposition plus un verbe.
Ce qui est important c’est que tous ces mots composés occupe la position de verbe dans une phrase.
• La composition du verbe plus le verbe : verbe aller plus infinitif (cid:1) futur.
Par exemple • Je vais manger bientôt (cid:1) Je mangerai bientôt.
• La composition du verbe plus le nom :- prendre la fuit (cid:1) s’enfuir, Avoir peur (cid:1) effrayer, Avoir besoin (cid:1) vouloir.
• La composition du nom ou la préposition plus le verbe :- Main + tenir (cid:1) maintenir, Sur +charger (cid:1) surcharger.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught, through the revision with you, the definition of nominal and adjectival compounding.
We have also highlighted the criteria which a French grammar learner like you could apply in combining two or more independent words together to form a new word that can either be verbal (verbal compounding) or adverbial (adverbial compounding).
With the way and manner that we simplified 69FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding French Morphology would have been alleviated.
5.0 SUMMARY Having highlighted in this unit the criteria which a French grammar learner like you could apply in combining two or more independent words together to form a new word that can either be verbal (verbal compounding) or adverbial (adverbial compounding), we are sure that you must have been adequately informed on the basic techniques of how to form new French words through the combination of two or more independent words.
Your knowledge of French Morphology must have been enriched.
By now we are confident that you should have acquired enough grammatical knowledge that could facilitate your discussion on Morphology from the point of view of compounding.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguer très nettement entre la composition nominale et la composition adjectivale.
2.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguer très nettement entre la composition verbale et la composition conjonctive.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
UNIT 5 LES TROIS PROCEDES SECONDAIRES DE LA FORMATION DES MOTS EN FRANCAIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Les Onomatopées 3.2 Les Initiaux 3.3 Les mots Coupés ou Abrégés 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 70 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall that in Unit Fourteen, we taught you the method and the criteria which a French grammar learner like you could apply in analyzing the compounded words from verbal and adverbial origins.
In this unit, we are going to continue this lesson with explanation and analysis of other methods and the criteria which you could apply in forming new words in French language.
Such processes as Onomatopoeias, Acronyms and Shortened words as part of words engineering in French morphology shall be treated in this unit.
Knowledge gained from this unit will be concluding the French morphological processes that we have been teaching you so far.
We would like to repeat our warning that your better understanding of this unit will help in your understanding of French Morphology.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of French words formation through Onomatopoeias, Acronyms and Shortened words as they will be taught here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify, analyse and justify methods of French words formation through Onomatopoeias • Identify and analyse methods of French words formation through Acronyms • Identify and analyse methods of French words formation through Shortened words You are now invited to the world of French words formation through the Secondary processes.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Les Trois Procédés Secondaires De La Formation Des Mots En Français.
A part les trois procédés majeurs de la formation des mots français que nous avons énumérés auparavant, il y a au moins trois procédés secondaires de la formation des mots dans la langue française.
Ils sont : • Les Onomatopées, • Les Initiaux et • Les mots coupés ou abrégés.
71FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.1 Les Onomatopées L’onomatopée c’est la formation des mots à travers l’imitation des sons associés à des choses, des personnes ou des objets particuliers.
Dans le plusieurs cas, nous faisons la traduction ou la reproduction directe du son ou du cri des animaux ou des objets pour former des nouveaux mots.
Voilà pourquoi nous avons des mots comme : le tic-tac (cid:1) (le son d’une horloge) miauler (cid:1) (cri d’un animal), le brouhaha (cid:1) (des bruits) etc.
3.2 Les Initiaux Nous utilisons les initiaux (les acronymes ou les sigles) des mots ou des noms pour former un nouveau seul mot dans la langue française.
Au lieu d’écrire ou de prononcer “ Organisation des Nations Unies “ on écrit souvent les initiaux ‘ONU’ de ces trois noms.
On nominalise ces initiaux même avec l’article.
Par exemple L’ONU.
Voici comment nous avons les noms comme : • L’OUA (cid:1) (Organisation de l’Unité Africaine) • OPEP (cid:1) (Organisation des pays Exportateurs du Pétrole) • OMS (cid:1) (Organisation mondiale de la santé) • CEDEAO (cid:1) (Communauté économique des etats de l’Afrique occidentale) etc.
72 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.3 Les mots Coupés ou Abrégés.
Nous avons aussi tendance à abréger ou à couper des longs mots pour sauver le temps lorsqu’on parle (ou pour sauver l’espace lorsqu’on écrit).
Au lieu de prononcer ou écrire complètement un mot très long, nous pouvons choisir la première partie ou la première moitié de ce mot pour représenter le mot entier.
Au lieu de prononcer ou écrire ‘La télévision, nous pouvons dire la télé : L’auto pour l’automobile La stéréo pour la stéréophonique ou la stéréographie La fac pour la faculté La radio pour la radiophonique ou radiographie etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez les onomatopées en morphologie française.
ii.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez les mots coupés en morphologie française.
Possible Answers : i. Les Onomatopées L’onomatopée c’est la formation des mots à travers l’imitation des sons associés à des choses, des personnes ou des objets particuliers.
Dans le plusieurs cas, nous faisons la traduction ou la reproduction directe du son ou du cri des animaux ou des objets pour former des nouveaux mots.
Voilà pourquoi nous avons des mots comme : • le tic-tac (cid:1) (le son d’une horloge) • miauler (cid:1) (cri d’un animal), • le brouhaha (cid:1) (des bruits) etc.
ii.
Les mots Coupés ou Abrégés.
Nous avons aussi tendance à abréger ou à couper des longs mots pour sauver le temps lorsqu’on parle (ou pour sauver l’espace lorsqu’on écrit).
Au lieu de prononcer ou écrire complètement un mot très long, nous pouvons choisir la première partie ou la première moitié de ce mot pour représenter le mot entier.
Au lieu de prononcer ou écrire ‘La télévision, nous pouvons dire la télé : L’auto pour l’automobile La stéréo pour la stéréophonique ou la stéréographie La fac pour la faculté La radio pour la radiophonique ou radiographie etc.
73FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the method which a French grammar learner like you could apply in forming new French words through the secondary processes; such processes as Onomatopoeias, Acronyms and Shortened words as part of words engineering in French morphology.
This unit thus concludes the morphological words formation in French grammar.
With the way and manner that we simplified the explanation in this unit, we are convinced that the complication in understanding French Morphology would have been alleviated.
5.0 SUMMARY Having highlighted in this unit the criteria which a French grammar learner like you could apply in forming new French words through the secondary processes, such as Onomatopoeias, Acronyms and Shortened words, as part of words engineering in French morphology, we are sure that you must have been adequately informed on the basic techniques of how to form new French words through the secondary processes.
Your knowledge of French Morphology must have been enriched.
By now we are confident that you should have acquired enough grammatical knowledge that could facilitate your discussion on Morphology from the point of view of the secondary processes.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, distinguez entre les onomatopées et les mots coupés en morphologie française.
2.
Avec beaucoup d’exemples valables, définissez les initiaux en morphologie française.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
MODULE 4 74 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Unit 1 Condiments of Good Composition for French and Other Language Students Unit 2 Types of Linguistic and Pedagogical Composition: Essay and Letter Writing Unit 3 Logical Classification of Essays Unit 4 Structure of Good Essays Unit 5 Methods of Writing Good Letters UNIT 1 CONDIMENTS OF GOOD COMPOSITION FOR FRENCH AND OTHER LANGUAGE STUDENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction 3.2 Composition and Grammar 3.3 What is Composition?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the recent methods and techniques of writing good Composition as a language student.
In this unit, you will read to know about the easiest techniques which a French grammar learner like you could apply in writing good composition that abides by the French grammatical structure: you will learn to know in the unit, the relationship between Grammar and Composition as well as the definitions of Composition.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate you properly into the art of writing good composition in French Language.
We would like to sound a warning that your better understanding of Composition writing generally depends on the way and manner you handle this unit and other units that we will be teaching henceforth.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of writing good composition in French Language as they will be taught in this unit.
75FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the importance of composition writing in any language • Identify the relevance of grammar of any language to composition writing • Define composition • Demonstrate how to criticise or write a good composition You are now invited into the world of methods of writing good composition in French Language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Condiments of Good Composition for French and Other Language Students 3.1 Introduction Most language students, like you, have problem in writing good composition, not because writing composition in itself is a difficult or impossible task, but because majority of them are not aware of the importance of composition to their learning a maternal, local, National, official, foreign or international language.
They often see composition as being part of literature that could be optional or required studies in language Arts.
They thus try as much as possible to dodge or devise mechanism of sailing through composition-oriented courses without really understanding what the course (or topics under it) entails.
We therefore deem it fit to state in this unit that grammar is composition in itself and composition is also grammar.
3.2 Composition and Grammar A pedagogical and structurally analysed definition of grammar could present grammar as scientific and linguistic processes that study how morphemes are put together to form words (known as morphological process), how the formed words are pronounced (through phonological process), how the formed and pronounced words are given meaning (through semantic process) and how these formed, pronounced and meaningful words are put together, after having considered their internal relationship, to form logically and grammatically correct sentences (through syntactic process).
It could then be said that grammatical study starts with morphological process and extends through phonological process, semantic process to syntactic process.
But it would be tantamount to rushing to conclusion if one should assume that the syntactic process is the end result of Grammar.
We strongly believe that 76 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 the good end result of any grammar of any language is and should be Composition.
If we are to argue it out, we could start by asking the usefulness of Alphabets, syllables and morphemes if not to form words.
The usefulness of the formed words is perceived first in the ability to pronounce it while the usefulness of the pronounced words could be felt in their significance.
The significance of these meaningfully formed and pronounced words could be seen in their ability to cohabit and form sentences.
Of what use are sentences that are logically, grammatically and correctly formed, if not to express our ideas and opinions on issues bothering on man and his society.
The expression of our ideas, opinions, logic, sentiments, feelings and arguments is nothing but composition.
Composition could therefore be seen as an integral part of linguistics or Grammar.
It is the resultant end of any grammatical study in any language.
It is that only domain through which a good grammatical acquisition could be demonstrated.
3.3 What is Composition?
Composition could be defined as an orderly disposition of parts of speech, structurally arranged with logical style, aimed at passing information and experience of the composer to his audience.
It is the art and act of putting various parts or sub-parts of a given topic, idea or domain together in order to compose a logical whole component that could be beneficial to the receiver and the society at large.
Composition therefore covers various facets of human life.
It could be Linguistic Composition (just like the one we are discussing in this unit), Literary (as in prose and some other short stories and tales), Didactic (as in composition used for propaganda and persuasion), Pedagogical (as it could be seen in composition developed by teachers to teach their pupils on method of how to compose or to appreciate the composition of other authors), Musical Composition (as demonstrated by musicians who compose their songs in writing before rendering them in oral rhythms) and Technical Composition (that is common among technicians and experts of various fields who put their thoughts together on paper so as to serve as literature and guiding documents for adherents of that profession.)
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
With a lot of examples, define composition writing.
ii.
Of what relevance is Composition to Grammar?
Possible Answers : i. Definitions of Composition: Composition could be defined as an orderly disposition of parts of speech, structurally arranged with 77FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 logical style, aimed at passing information and experience of the composer to his audience.
It is the art and act of putting various parts or sub-parts of a given topic, idea or domain together in order to compose a logical whole component that could be beneficial to the receiver and the society at large.
Composition therefore covers various facets of human life.
It could be Linguistic Composition (just like the one we are discussing in this unit), Literary (as in prose and some other short stories and tales), Didactic (as in composition used for propaganda and persuasion), Pedagogical (as it could be seen in composition developed by teachers to teach their pupils on method of how to compose or to appreciate the composition of other authors), Musical Composition (as demonstrated by musicians who compose their songs in writing before rendering them in oral rhythms) and Technical Composition (that is common among technicians and experts of various fields who put their thoughts together on paper so as to serve as literature and guiding documents for adherents of that profession.)
ii.
Composition and Grammar: A pedagogical and structurally analysed definition of grammar could present grammar as scientific and linguistic processes that study how morphemes are put together to form words (known as morphological process), how the formed words are pronounced (through phonological process), how the formed and pronounced words are given meaning (through semantic process) and how these formed, pronounced and meaningful words are put together, after having considered their internal relationship, to form logically and grammatically correct sentences (through syntactic process).
It could then be said that grammatical study starts with morphological process and extends through phonological process, semantic process to syntactic process.
But it would be tantamount to rushing to conclusion if one should assume that the syntactic process is the end result of Grammar.
We strongly believe that the good end result of any grammar of any language is and should be composition.
If we are to argue it out, we could start by asking the usefulness of Alphabets, syllables and morphemes if not to form words.
The usefulness of the formed words is perceived first in the ability to pronounce it while the usefulness of the pronounced words could be felt in their significance.
The significance of these meaningfully formed and pronounced words could be seen in their ability to cohabit and form sentences.
Of what use are sentences that are logically, grammatically and correctly formed if not to express our ideas and opinions on issues bothering on man and his society.
The expression of our ideas, opinions, logic, sentiments, feelings and arguments is nothing but composition.
Composition could therefore be seen as an integral part of linguistics or Grammar.
It is the resultant end of any grammatical study in any language.
It is that only domain 78 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 through which a good grammatical acquisition could be demonstrated.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learned the recent methods and techniques of writing good Composition as a language student.
You should have also read to know about the easiest techniques a French grammar learner like you could apply in writing good composition that abides by the French grammatical structure, the relationship between Grammar and Composition as well as the definitions of Composition.
5.0 SUMMARY You must have been adequately informed in this unit on the basic techniques of how to write good composition in French language.
You must have learned also some similarities and dependabilities between Grammar and Composition Writing.
By now we believe that your verbal vocabulary and technique of writing good composition should have been enriched through the explanation and examples we gave you in this unit.
And we believe that you can follow the explanation to either analyse an already written composition or use it as a guide to write yours.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
With a lot of examples, clearly define composition from grammatical points of views.
2.
State and enumerate different types of composition, apart from the grammatical written composition, that we could have.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
UNIT 2 TYPES OF LINGUISTIC AND PEDAGOGICAL COMPOSITION: ESSAY AND LETTER WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 79FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Essay?
3.2 Factual or practical Essay 3.3 Various classifications of Essay 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will explain to you further the recent methods and techniques of writing good Composition as a language student.
In this unit, you will read to know about the various types of linguistics and pedagogical classifications of composition.
You will also be taught the classification of Linguistic cum Pedagogical Composition into essay and Letter writing.
The Unit will not end until we tell you the various classifications of essay.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate you properly into the art of writing good composition in French Language.
We would like to sound a warning that your better understanding of composition writing generally depends on the way and manner you handle this unit and other units that we will be teaching henceforth.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of writing good composition in French Language as they will be taught in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the various classifications of composition writing in any language • Identify the relevance of linguistic and pedagogical composition • Define Essay • State various classifications of Essays • Demonstrate how to criticise or write a good Essay You are now invited into the world of methods of writing good composition in French Language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Types of Linguistic and Pedagogical Composition Having identified at least six various types of composition in the previous unit, we would like to zero our subsequent discussion and analyses of the subject matter on the linguistic and pedagogical 80 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 compositions.
Linguistic or pedagogical composition could be divided into two sub-components:- (a) Essay (b) Letter Writing 3.1 What is Essay?
Essay could be defined as a writing or write-up (often short), aimed at explaining and /or dealing with a particular subject.
As a linguistic or literary form, it is the most flexible of all forms of writing that offers writers maximum freedom with respect to choice of subject, length of composition and style of expression.
An essay could be in form of fiction or factual.
Imaginative essay is purely fiction based and creative in nature while factual essay is real essay that is practical in nature.
Creative essay is a fiction-based story created from the imagination of the author.
It does not obligatorily warrant the use of any factual or real events and persons.
If at all real events or stories are to be adapted and made use of in imaginative or creative essay, it is usually watered-down to the extent that the reality is only presented indirectly in fictitious manner.
This type of essay is common in literary essay.
3.2 Factual or practical essay A factual or practical essay is another type of essay whose form and background story are based on the reality.
The author of this type of essay must compulsorily make use of facts of the story, on the people and the events he/she is referring to or narrating in his essay.
This type of Essay is called practical or factual essay.
It is common in linguistic, pedagogical, technical and (to some extent) didactic essays.
It is this form of essay that we use in writing composition in schools, taking minutes in meetings, writing biographies and autobiographies, documenting technical books and their literature.
Writing this type of essay could be tasking for the author is not as freely loose as he would have been when writing creative essay.
The choice of subject, topic, sub-topics, style of expression, and length of the essay and even the paragraphing of the essay are largely dependent on some fixed or rigid rules that guide the type of essay he is writing.
3.3 Various Classifications of Essay Many authors come with different classifications of essay.
Some authors are of the opinion that there are four types of Essay: - (a) Descriptive Essay (b) Narrative Essay (c) Expository Essay (d) Argumentative Essay 81FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 These authors are of the opinion that a Descriptive Essay is a type of Essay used in describing and giving a detailed account of a story or situation.
Narrative Essay, to these authors, is used in narrating story or tale, giving an accurate account or report of events and relating a sequence of events.
They defined Expository Essay as an explanatory Essay that aims at explaining or interpreting a topic, phenomenon, story, situation or events.
They also agreed that Argumentative Essay could be described as essay aimed at debating a given topic thus supporting or opposing a given idea.
While many authors anchor their argument and classification of Essay on these four types, some other authors insisted that Essay could be further classified into: - (e) Discursive Essay (f) Reporting Essay The protagonists of Reporting and Discursive Essays are of the opinion that argumentative essay only aims at arguing a topic from only one angle thus pleading either for or against.
Whereas, it is only in the Discursive Essay that one could be compelled to assess and critically present points on the two sides of the argumentative topic.
They also see in Reporting Essay or the Report Writing the ability of this type of Essay to logically, clearly and sequentially give account of past events.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
With a lot of examples, define Essay.
ii.
With a lot of examples, give various classifications of essays.
Possible Answers : i. Definitions of Essay: Essay could be defined as a writing or write-up (often short), aimed at explaining and /or dealing with a particular subject.
As a linguistic or literary form, it is the most flexible of all forms of writing that offers writers maximum freedom with respect to choice of subject, length of composition and style of expression.
An essay could be in form of fiction or factual.
Imaginative essay is purely fiction based and creative in nature while factual essay is real essay that is practical in nature.
Creative essay is a fiction-based story created from the imagination of the author.
It does not obligatorily warrant the use of any factual or real events and persons.
If at all real events or stories are to be adapted and made use of in imaginative or creative essay, it is usually watered-down to the extent that the reality is only presented indirectly in fictitious manner.
This type of essay is common in literary essay.
82 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 ii.
Various Classifications of Essay: Many authors come with different classifications of essay.
Some authors are of the opinion that there are four types of Essay: - (a) Descriptive Essay (b) Narrative Essay (c) Expository Essay (d) Argumentative Essay These authors are of the opinion that a Descriptive Essay is a type of essay used in describing and giving a detailed account of a story or situation.
Narrative Essay, to these authors, is used in narrating story or tale, giving an accurate account or report of events and relating a sequence of events.
They defined Expository Essay as an explanatory essay that aims at explaining or interpreting a topic, phenomenon, story, situation or events.
They also agreed that Argumentative Essay could be described as essay aimed at debating a given topic thus supporting or opposing a given idea.
While many authors anchor their argument and classification of Essay on these four types, some other authors insisted that Essay could be further classified into: - (e) Discursive Essay (f) Reporting Essay The protagonists of Reporting and Discursive Essays are of the opinion that argumentative essay only aims at arguing a topic from only one angle thus pleading either for or against.
Whereas, it is only in the Discursive Essay that one could be compelled to assess and critically present points on the two sides of the argumentative topic.
They also see in Reporting Essay or the Report Writing the ability of this type of essay to logically, clearly and sequentially give account of past events.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught you the various types of linguistics and pedagogical classifications of composition.
You have also been taught the classification of Linguistic cum Pedagogical Composition into essay and Letter writing.
The Unit did not end until we told you the various classifications Essay.
5.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the various types of linguistics and pedagogical classifications of composition in French Language, we believe we have 83FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 initiated you well into the art of writing good composition.
You would recall also that we taught the various classifications essays.
This is to enable you identify or criticize any given essay that you come across.
Your ability to criticize the work of others will empower you to improve on theirs to write your own better.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What is Essay?
2.
With a lot of examples, give various classifications of essays.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
84 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 3 LOGICAL CLASSIFICATION OF ESSAYS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Expository Essay 3.2 Argumentative Essay 3.3 Empirical Essay 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will explain to you further the recent methods and techniques of writing good Composition as a language student.
In this unit, you will read to know about the various types of Essays we have.
You will also be taught the classification of essays into: Expository Essay, Argumentative Essay and Empirical Essay.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate you properly into the art of writing good composition in French Language.
We would like to sound a warning that your better understanding of Composition writing generally depends on the way and manner you handle this unit and other units that we will be teaching henceforth.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of writing good composition in French Language as they will be taught in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the various classifications of Essay writing in any language • Identify and define expository essay • Identify and define argumentative essay • Identify and define empirical essay • Demonstrate how to criticise or write good essays You are now invited into the world of methods of writing good essays in French Language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Logical Classification of Essay 85FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.1 Expository Essay Going through the six major classifications made by various authors in unit 17, it could be inferred that these classifications are rather prescriptive than being descriptive.
If one should consider critically these different classifications and their presentation, the entire six so- called types of Essay are not more than two.
How can somebody in this World write an Essay without describing either events or persons?
If the art of description of person or events in an Essay makes the Essay descriptive, is it possible to describe without narrating?
Or can one narrate a story without describing persons, events and environment in that story?
Is it even possible to write an Expository Essay to explain events without describing or narrating in the story?
How on Earth could one present Report Writing without describing, narrating and explaining events, situation or persons either in the present or past form?
The implication of this argument then is that the Descriptive, Narrative, Expository and Reporting essays could all be grouped under Expository Essay.
3.2 Argumentative Essay Considering the status quo of Argumentative and Discursive Essays, it would be difficult if not impossible to clearly distinguish between these two types of essay.
A Discursive Essay is aimed at discussing a topic thus taking position either for or against the topic.
A good discussant that wants to make his point clearer could therefore compare the merits and the demerits of a given topic before he pitches his tent with an angle of the topic.
This same principle applies to a good argumentative oriented topic.
A good presenter of an argumentative debate must be able to present his points in a discursive manner thus highlighting the cons and the pros of the topic before he now suggests his position.
Even if one is arguing for a topic, there is nothing debarring that same person from telling his audience what others might consider as weak points of the side he is taking.
It even shows academic erudition in any scholar, despite the fact that he is establishing an argument for a topic, if he could identify the few weaknesses or pinpoint by himself what others might identify as demerits of his argument, before propounding superior points or arguments that make his position more relevant in the argumentative essay or debate.
All this argument boils down to the fact that the so-called Discursive and Argumentative Essays could both be easily grouped and treated under Argumentative Essay.
The implication of this position is that Discursive Essay could be fully evaluated under the Argumentative sub-heading.
86 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.3 Empirical Essay One big question that could be asked at this junction is whether this writer is advocating for the classification of the six types of essay into only two divisions?
Far from it, we strongly believe that there is a third type of Essay that has not been adequately taken care of by either our Expository classification or Argumentative Essay type.
Take for instance, some types of Essay that warrant conducting research, formulating hypothesis to test a given observation after which a research findings will be written.
We would like to alert our readers that the presentation of this research findings entails description of facts, narration of process, reporting or explaining (in an expository manner) different types of concepts, discussing different types of previous ideas on the research questions thus arguing for or arguing against the position of various authors or researchers that might have earlier written or conducted similar research on this chosen domain.
This type of write-up is often named differently and variously by different groups of people.
Some name it Research Report; some call it Research Project while a lot of others see in it a Long Essay.
Certainly, it is an Essay but not necessarily long or short, for the length in this context is relative to the topic, the level, the discipline and the evaluators.
It is better called Empirical Essay.
This is a kind of Essay that is research based and whose presentations and findings are empirical and proven to be objective in nature.
The three identified types of Essay therefore are: Expository Essay, Argumentative Essay and Empirical Essay.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
With a lot of examples and arguments, define Argumentative Essay.
ii.
With a lot of examples and arguments, define Expository Essay.
Possible Answers : i. Argumentative Essay Considering the status quo of Argumentative and Discursive Essays, it would be difficult if not impossible to clearly distinguish between these two types of essay.
A Discursive Essay is aimed at discussing a topic thus taking position either for or against the topic.
A good discussant that wants to make his point clearer could therefore compare the merits and the demerits of a given topic before he pitches his tent with an angle of the topic.
This same principle applies to a good argumentative oriented topic.
A good presenter of an argumentative debate must be able to present his points in a discursive manner thus highlighting the cons and the pros of the topic before he now suggests his position.
Even if one is arguing for a topic, there is nothing debarring that same person from telling his audience what others 87FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 might consider as weak points of the side he is taking.
It even shows academic erudition in any scholar, despite the fact that he is establishing an argument for a topic, if he could identify the few weaknesses or pinpoint by himself what others might identify as demerits of his argument, before propounding superior points or arguments that make his position more relevant in the argumentative essay or debate.
All this argument boils down to the fact that the so-called Discursive and Argumentative Essays could both be easily grouped and treated under Argumentative Essay.
The implication of this position is that Discursive Essay could be fully evaluated under the Argumentative sub-heading.
ii.
Expository Essay Going through these six major classifications made by various authors, it could be inferred that these classifications are rather prescriptive than being descriptive.
If one should consider critically these different classifications and their presentation, the entire six so-called types of Essay are not more than two.
How can somebody in this World write an Essay without describing either event or person?
If the art of description of person or events in an Essay makes the Essay descriptive, is it possible to describe without narrating?
Or can one narrate a story without describing person, events and environment in that story?
Is it even possible to write an Expository Essay to explain events without describing or narrating in the story?
How on Earth could one present Report Writing without describing, narrating and explaining events, situation or person either in the present or past form?
The implication of this argument then is that the Descriptive, Narrative, Expository and Reporting essays could all be grouped under Expository Essay.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught you the various types of essays we have.
We have also taught you the classification of essays into: Expository Essay, Argumentative Essay and Empirical Essay.
5.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the types of Essays we have: Expository Essay, Argumentative Essay and Empirical Essay, we believe by now that you should be able to argue and correctly criticise any essay given to you so as to know which type it is.
The knowledge gained here should also be sufficient enough in guiding you on how to write good essays.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
With a lot of examples and arguments, define Empirical Essay.
88 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 2.
With a lot of examples and arguments, define Expository Essay.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
89FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 UNIT 4 STRUCTURE OF GOOD ESSAYS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Utilisation of COEMA Structure in Expository Essays 3.2 Argumentative Essays and TAS Rules 3.3 Structure of Empirical essays 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will explain to you further the recent methods and techniques of writing good Composition as a language student.
In this unit, you will read to know about the structure of various types of essays.
You will be taught the COEMA structure in Expository Essay, TAS Rules in Argumentative Essay and the Research Guidelines in Empirical Essay.
Knowledge gained from this unit will initiate you properly into the art of writing good composition in French Language.
We would like to sound a warning that your better understanding of Composition writing generally depends on the way and manner you handle this unit and other units that we will be teaching henceforth.
Therefore, we implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of writing good composition in French Language as they will be taught in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the Structure of various Essays in any language • Identify and define the COEMA Structure in expository essays • Identify and define the TAS Rules in argumentative essays • Identify and define the Research Guidelines in empirical essays • Demonstrate how to criticise or write good essays You are now invited into the world of methods of writing good essays in French Language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Structure of Good Essays 90 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.1 Utilisation of COEMA Structure in Expository Essays Essay is like a building or a human being that has structure.
When writing an Expository Essay, the structure of COEMA (Context, Organisation, Expression and Mechanical Accuracy) must be respected.
By Context, the essayist must understand the topic on which he is about to write very well.
Having studied the topic, he must be able to propose an attention catching introduction.
Students are advised, at this level, to avoid writing out of context.
A good understanding of context will even help the writer to build up the body of the Essay into various paragraphs.
This is where good Organisation of the writers’ facts comes in.
What should be in third paragraph must not be pushed to fifth or second.
And the whole Essay must also have a good conclusion.
If one should bear in mind that an essay to Linguists and pedagogues, is aimed at measuring nothing but the ability of the student writer to weave his ideas, knowledge and opinions together in a logical and grammatical way, we would then understand the importance of good Expression to a good essay.
Any essay full of grammatical and logical blunders puts off reader and makes comprehension difficult and sometimes impossible.
The Grammar of the essay must be logically correct; the style must be seducing; the choice of vocabulary must be adequate; the Essay must contain adequate condiments such as proverbs, idioms, dictums, quotations etc.
that could make it attractive to readers and assessors.
What is more, the punctuations, such as comma, semi-colon, full stop etc.
and even accents (in French) that are grouped under Mechanical Accuracy must be respected.
3.2 Argumentative Essay and TAS Rules As for Argumentative essay, apart from respecting these COEMA rules, the student writer should endeavour to incorporate the TAS rules (Thesis, Antithesis and Synthesis) into any Argumentative Essay.
A good debater in an Argumentative Essay must first of all establish his position, by declaring the points he has in backing the topic or the side he is supporting, thereby propounding the thesis of the subject matter.
He must be able to demonstrate academic erudition by showing the few weaknesses that his antagonists might hold on to in order to water-down his arguments by declaring the Antithesis of the arguments.
He should conclude the Argumentative Essay by Asserting and proving that his position is the best for readers despite the few weak points (Antithesis) identified against the subject matter by providing the Synthesis of the whole argument.
3.3 Structure of Empirical Essays 91FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 In order to write good empirical essays, tips on framework of good methodology that could lead to good research are stated hereunder: Identification and Selection of a Problem: It has been realised that selection of topic is a major problem to researchers.
A lot of researchers have sleepless nights in choosing a particular topic on which their investigations and research will be based.
In order to solve this problem, it is advisable that researchers should first identify and select a particular problem that needs investigation.
A research problem is an unanswered question, a gap in knowledge and an unsatisfactory state of affairs in the society.
He should therefore identify problems that need investigation, select at least one of these problems before thinking of a way of framing out a topic out of the selected problems.
(a) Sources of Research Problems: To get research problems out of which one could be selected for the choice of the topic, researcher could rely on: • Daily personal experience of the researcher.
• Observation of events around the researcher.
• Going through past works and their literature review • Innovations or changes in the society or system.
• Professional contagion and knowledge gained from seminars and workshops attended by the researcher.
• Supervisor’s wealth of experience • Departmental or faculty identified researchable areas.
• Research replication and extension.
• Professional journals and publications of various kinds.
(b) Criteria for selection of a Research Problem: In order to select a research problem, consideration is usually given to at least one or most of the following items:- • Personal interest • Professional influence • Significance and relevance of the topic to the society • Researchability of the problem/Topic • Availability of Data, information and sufficient literature on the problem • Originality devoid of duplication • Consideration of available time for the research.
• Consideration of available financial resources.
• Researcher’s academic background, ability and competence.
• Research replication and previous works.
• Objectivity devoid of sentimentality • Choice/Availability of supervisor • Compromise and Departmental Limitation.
92 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 (c) Formulation of research hypotheses: The moment the researcher solves the problem of identification and selection of problem/topic, his next stage is the formulation of Research hypotheses.
Hypothesis could be simply described as a generalised statement or intelligent guess which looks plausible but that could be tested during the period of research investigation thus leading and guiding the researcher towards proper investigation of phenomena and variables that are to be encountered and provided answers for during the course of the research.
(d) Literature review After the researcher has formulated his hypothesis, the next stage in the research is to start the collection of primary data done through the review of previous literature on the job.
This process of reviewing previous literature on the subject matter allows the researcher to test the hypothesis of the research.
(e) Research Design/Plan Research design is the plan of the research work.
It is a plan that shows how a researcher intends to fulfil the goals of a proposed study.
It is a plan that guides the researchers in the process of investigation, collection, analysis and interpretation of data aimed at testing the research hypotheses thus achieving the research objectives.
The type of research that the investigator or the researcher wants to conduct determines the kind of plan or research design he will prepare.
(f) Methods of data collection and documentation Some researchers refer to this stage as Research Instruments.
Data could be collected from the following sources: - • Primary Source: Document such as Government Acts and Laws, Official Documents, Gazettes, Treaties etc.
• Secondary Source: Publications such as Articles, comments, textbooks, reports, historical documents etc.
• Electronic Source: Facilities such as fax, Internet Website, Computer on-line facilities etc.
• Specialised Source: Oral account, interview and consultation with specialist in the investigator’s research domain.
• Questionnaire: This could be framed in open-ended or close-ended format.
(g) Methods of data analysis Some researchers also refer to this stage as Techniques of Testing Hypothesis.
In consonance with the type of Research at hand and the research design, methods of analysing research data vary 93FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 from one type to the other.
For Arts and Language oriented researches, it could be descriptive and expository in nature.
(h) Writing a research report The researcher is at this stage expected to write the research report in a formal, lucid and grammatically correct language.
The investigator presents the report of his research findings, guiding himself by the hypothesis of the research.
(i) Preparation of references and bibliography of the research The researcher prepares the list of all textbooks, thesis and publications consulted and those materials that were used during the course of the research.
Surname of Author(s) of these publications are used in arranging this list in alphabetical order.
(For further reading on this topic, please consult Olu AKEUSOLA in Appraisal of Research Methodology for Arts and Language Oriented Studies – January, 2002).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
With a lot of examples and arguments, explain the structure of COEMA in Expository Essay.
Possible Answers : i. Utilisation of COEMA Structure in Expository Essays Essay is like a building or a human being that has structure.
When writing an Expository Essay, the structure of COEMA (Context, Organisation, Expression and Mechanical Accuracy) must be respected.
By Context, the essayist must understand the topic on which he is about to write very well.
Having studied the topic, he must be able to propose an attention catching introduction.
Students are advised, at this level, to avoid writing out of context.
A good understanding of context will even help the writer to build up the body of the Essay into various paragraphs.
This is where good Organisation of the writers’ facts comes in.
What should be in third paragraph must not be pushed to fifth or second.
And the whole Essay must also have a good conclusion.
If one should bear in mind that an essay to Linguists and pedagogues, is aimed at measuring nothing but the ability of the student writer to weave his ideas, knowledge and opinions together in a logical and grammatical way, we would then understand the importance of good Expression to a good essay.
Any essay full of grammatical and logical blunders puts off reader and makes comprehension difficult and sometimes impossible.
The Grammar of the essay must be logically correct; the style must be seducing; the choice of vocabulary must be adequate; the Essay must 94 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 contain adequate condiments such as proverbs, idioms, dictums, quotations etc.
that could make it attractive to readers and assessors.
What is more, the punctuations, such as comma, semi-colon, full stop etc.
and even accents (in French) that are grouped under Mechanical Accuracy must be respected.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught you the structure of various types of Essays.
You have been taught the COEMA structure in Expository Essay, TAS Rules in Argumentative Essay and the Research Guidelines in Empirical Essays.
5.0 SUMMARY Having taught you the structure of various types of Essays: the COEMA structure in Expository Essay, TAS Rules in Argumentative Essay and the Research Guidelines in Empirical Essays, we believe by now that you should be able to argue and correctly criticise any essay given to you so as to know which structure is used in writing it.
The knowledge gained here should also be sufficient enough in guiding you on how to write good essays.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS With a lot of examples and arguments, explain the Structure and Research guidelines in Empirical Essays.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
UNIT 5 METHODS OF WRITING GOOD LETTERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Letter 3.2 Formal Letter 3.3 Semi- Formal Letter 3.4 Semi- Formal Letter 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 95FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will explain to you, in a concluding manner, the recent methods and techniques of writing good Composition as a language student.
In this unit, you will read to know about the Definitions of Letters.
You will be taught the structure, method and types of various letters such as Formal, semi-Formal and Informal Letters.
Knowledge gained from this unit will perfect in you the art of writing good composition in French Language.
We therefore implore you to learn the rudiments, techniques and methods of writing good composition in French Language as they will be taught in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • Define what is a letter • Identify and define the Structure of Formal Letters • Identify and define the Structure of Semi-Formal Letters • Identify and define the Structure of Informal Letters • Demonstrate how to criticise or write good Letters You are now invited into the world of methods of writing a good Letter in French Language.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT What Is A Letter?
A letter is a handwritten, typed, printed or electronically coded (as in E- mail) message or communication usually sent by the writer, through post, hand delivery or Electronic mail box, to the receiver.
A letter is a form of communicative composition designed to pass a written message from a given writer or set of writers to a chosen audience or set of receivers.
Just like in pure communication, letter writing entails five processes.
The encoder (Sender), the encoded message (Contents sent), the means (form of writing or sending the message), the decoded message (contents received) and the decoder (receiver of the sent message).
96 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 3.1 Types of Letter There are three basic types of Letter Writing: - (a) Formal letter (b) Semi-formal letter (c) Informal letter 3.2 Formal Letter A formal letter is an official letter written by a person to another person that is either not known or less known (to the writer) but who occupies an importantly known or even superior position to the writer.
In most cases, it is the position of the receiver that is written rather than his person.
Letters such as Application, Request, Order, Administrative, Credit, Law or Legal Complaint, Protest, Appointment, Promotion letters etc.
fall under this category.
Apart from following COEMA rules, discussed under Essay Writing, Letter Writing has its own peculiar features that must be respected.
Let us take for instance French Letters.
With French letters you need to know certain formal features, which include the date, greeting and closing phrase.
In French the date is very often preceded by the name of the town or village where you are writing the letter – Lagos, le 11 janvier 2001.
It is worth noting also that capital letters are not used for months or days – lundi, le 9 fevrier – and that cardinal figures are used for the calendar date.
If it is the first day of the month, we write the date in an ordinal form – le 1er fevrier 2002(1er – premier), but any other day of the month is presented in cardinal form - le 22 fevrier 2002.
The greeting depends on the relationship between you and the person you are writing to as well as the type of letter you are writing.
When writing a formal letter: Omit ‘Cher/Chère’ and simply write ‘Monsieur, Madame, Messieurs, Mesdames’ plus his/her title e.g.
Monsieur le Directeur, Monsieur le Docteur, Madame la Présidente etc.
These opening phrases will also suit the formal letter you are writing; • En réponse à votre lettre du 10 février 2006, j’ai l’honneur de vous informer que…….
• Je m’adresse à vous dans l’espoir que vous pourrez me fournir quelques renseignements sur…….. • Je vous écris au sujet de l’emploi de temps des examens GCE que je viens de recevoir.
• Je vous serais très obligé de bien vouloir me permettre de…… • J’ai bien reçu votre lettre datée le 5 mai et je vous en remercie.
This closing phrase will also suit the formal letter you are writing; 97FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 • Veuillez agréer, Monsieur, l’expression de mes sentiments les plus distingués.
Croyez, Monsieur, à mes salutations distinguées.
• Recevez, Madame, l’assurance de mes meilleurs sentiments.
• Je vous prie de croire, Monsieur le directeur, à mes salutations très respectueuses.
• Veuillez croire, Madame, à l’expression de mes respectueux hommages.
3.3 Semi-Formal Letter This is a semi-official letter written to a person, who although might be known to the writer but who occupies an important position and whose official position is referred to as well as his person in some cases.
There is an element of camaraderie between the writer and the receiver but this camaraderie is not completely dumped for full-blown familiarity.
It is a type of letter written by a subordinate to a known superior; from two or more colleagues in an organisation, society, association, party etc.
; from pupils or students to his/her teacher or to his/her newly linked up pen pals etc.
When writing a Semi-Formal letter: Write ‘Cher Monsieur, Chère Madame, Chers Messieurs, Chères Mesdames’ plus their titles e.g.
Cher Monsieur le Directeur, Cher Monsieur le Docteur, Chère Madame la Présidente etc.
This opening phrase will also suit the Semi-Formal letter you are writing; • En réponse à votre lettre du 8 août 2005, j’ai l’honneur de vous informer que…….
• Je m’adresse à vous dans l’espoir que vous pourrez me fournir quelques renseignements sur……..
This closing phrase will also suit the Semi-Formal letter you are writing; • Croyez, Monsieur, à mes salutations les plus distinguées.
• Recevez, Madame, l’assurance de mes meilleurs sentiments.
• Je vous prie de croire, Monsieur, à mes salutations très respectueuses.
3.4 Informal Letter Any unofficial letter that is written by a person to another person who is well known to the writer is an informal letter.
Between the sender and the receiver of an informal letter, there must be proofs of cordiality and familiarity that could allow free flow of banters, jokes and excessive 98 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 liberty of expressions, style, form and content.
It is a letter written by child to parents, friends to friends, lovers to lovers, colleagues or comrades to comrades etc.
When writing an informal letter: Write ‘(mon) cher papa, (ma) chère soeur, (mon) cher oncle, (mon) cher ami, (ma) chère amie, (mon) cher Olu, (ma) chère Fatima, Cher Monsieur Ajani, chère Madame Akeusola This opening phrase will also suit the Semi-Formal letter you are writing; • Je te remercie de ta lettre.
• J’ai été heureux de te lire et de savoir (que tu a réussi à tes examens, etc., que tu viendra passer tes vacances chez nous, etc.)
• Merci beaucoup de ta lettre.
Je m’excuse de tant tarder à t’écrire.
• J’ai bien tardé à répondre à ta lettre mais j’espère que tu me pardonneras.
• J’espère que tu es en bonne santé.
Ici, tout marche très bien.
• J’ai été vraiment heureux de recevoir ta lettre.
Je m’excuse d’avoir mis si longtemps à vous répondre.
This closing phrase will also suit the informal letter you are writing; • Je t’embrasse tendrement.
Ton fils/neveu qui t’aime bien.
• Bien affectueusement à toi.
Bien amicalement.
Bien à toi.
Bien à vous.
• Cordialement à vous.
• Avec les sincères amitiés de…… • Meilleurs sentiments.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
With a lot of examples, define what a letter is.
ii.
Explain how one can identify and write a Semi-Formal letter Possible Answers : i.
What Is A Letter?
Letter is a handwritten, typed, printed or electronically coded (as in E-mail) message or communication usually sent by the writer, through post, hand delivery or Electronic mail box, to the receiver.
A letter is a form of communicative composition designed to pass a written message from a given writer or set of writers to a chosen audience or set of receivers.
Just like in pure communication, letter writing entails five processes.
The encoder (Sender), the encoded message (Contents sent), the means (form of writing or sending the message), the decoded message 99FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 (contents received) and the decoder (receiver of the sent message).
ii.
Semi-Formal Letter: - This is a semi-official letter written to a person, who although might be known to the writer but who occupies an important position and whose official position is referred to as well as his person in some cases.
There is an element of camaraderie between the writer and the receiver but this camaraderie is not completely dumped for full-blown familiarity.
It is a type of letter written by a subordinate to a known superior; from two or more colleagues in an organisation, society, association, party etc.
; from pupils or students to his/her teacher or to his/her newly linked up pen pals etc.
When writing a Semi-Formal letter: Write ‘Cher Monsieur, Chère Madame, Chers Messieurs, Chères Mesdames’ plus their title e.g.
Cher Monsieur le Directeur, Cher Monsieur le Docteur, Chère Madame la Présidente etc.
This opening phrase will also suit the Semi-Formal letter you are writing; • En réponse à votre lettre du 8 août 2005, j’ai l’honneur de vous informer que…….
• Je m’adresse à vous dans l’espoir que vous pourrez me fournir quelques renseignements sur……..
This closing phrase will also suit the Semi-Formal letter you are writing; • Croyez, Monsieur, à mes salutations les plus distinguées.
• Recevez, Madame, l’assurance de mes meilleurs sentiments.
• Je vous prie de croire, Monsieur, à mes salutations très respectueuses.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taught and explained to you, in a concluding manner, the recent methods and techniques of writing good Composition as a language student.
You would have read to know about the Definitions of Letters as well as the structure, method and types of various letters such as Formal, semi-Formal and Informal Letters, in this unit.
This is the concluding part of this aspect of composition as well as the entire course.
5.0 SUMMARY 100 FRE 221 FRENCH GRAMMAR AND COMPOSITION 1 Having taught you the Morphological aspects of grammar, from Units One to Fifteen and having designated Units sixteen to Twenty, to teach you the arts of writing good composition, we now come to the end of this course.
We hope that you will use all the grammatical knowledge gained from these units to speak and write good grammar of French language.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Explain how one can identify and write a good Formal letter.
2.
Explain how one can identify and write an Informal letter.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akeusola, Olu (1995): French Grammar For Anglophone Students.
Lagos: Tobak Publishers.
Akeusola, Olu (2003): La Morphologie De La Langue Française.
Lagos : Tobak Publishers, Reviewed In 2004.
101
