 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ISL 212 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID ISL212 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Course Team Alhaji Mustafa Jamiu O.
(Developer/Writer) - Avi- cenna International School Dr. Shaykh Luqman Jimoh (Editor) - LASU Prof. A. F. Ahmed (Programme Leader) - NOUN Dr A. R. Mustapha (Coordinator) - NOUN ii ISL 212 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-611-3 All Rights Reserved iii ISL212 COURSE GUIDE iv ISL 212 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction…………………………….……………………..….….
1 Course Aims………………………………………………….……... 1 Course Objectives………………………………………………….... 1 Working through This Course………………………………….…… 2 Course Materials………………………………………………….… 2 Study Units…………………………………………………….…….
2 Assessment……………………………………………………….….
3 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA)………………………………….. 3 Final Examination and Grading……………………………………... 3 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………………….. 4 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule…………………………… 4 How to Get the Most from This course…………………………….. 5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials……………….…………………… 5 Summary…………………………………………………………….. 6 v None Introduction Welcome to ISL212: Introduction to Tajwiid This course is a two-credit unit Diploma course in Islamic studies.
This Course Guide gives you an overview of the course.
It also provides you with information on the organisation and requirements of the course.
Course Aims The overall aim of this course is to: • introduce you to the concept and significance of Tajwiid in Qur'an recitation • acquaint you with the major rules of Tajwiid and their application in Qur'an recitation Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, ISL212 has overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are at the beginning of each unit.
I advise that you read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check your progress.
Here are the wider objectives for the course as a whole.
By meeting the objectives, you count yourself as having met the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • define and explain the concept and significance of Tajwiid in Qur’an recitation • state, define, explain and apply the major rules of Tajwiid in Qur’an recitation • give examples of the major rules of Tajwiid from verses of the Qur’an Working through This Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
You will also need to undertake practical exercises included in this course.
The exercises are to aid you in understanding the study being presented.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: (i) Course Guide (ii) Study Units (iii) Assignments File (iv) Relevant books including the ones listed under each unit.
(v) Audio/visual aids containing model Qur'an recitations (vi) You may also need to visit the Internet to browse through some relevant websites including the ones listed under each unit.
Study Units There are 14 units (of three modules) in this course.
They are listed below.
Module 1 Concept, Significance and Preliminary Lessons of Tajwiid Unit 1 Definition and significance of Tajwiid Unit 2 Articulation of the Letters of the Holy Qur'an Unit 3 Al –Ibtidaa' (initiation) Module 2 Some Major Rules Of Tajwiid Unit 1 Nuunu 's-Saakinah wa 't- Tanwin (Voweless Nuun and Nunation) Unit 2 Al-Miim wa 'n-Nuunu 'l-Mushaddadataan (The stressed Miim and Nuun Unit 3 Miimu 's-Saakinah (Voweless Mim) Unit 4 Al-Laamaatu 's-Sawaakin (Voweless Lams) Unit 5 Haa’ of Pronoun Module 3 Other Major Rules of Tajwiid Unit 1 Tafkhiim and Tarqiiq Unit 2 Al-Idghaam (Assimilation) Unit 3 Al-Maddu wa 'l-Qasr (El ongation and Shortening Unit 4 Waqf (Stops) Unit 5 Hamzatu 'l-Wasl (Silent Hamzah) Unit 6 Manners of Tajwiid ii ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Textbooks and References Certain books and websites addresses have been recommended in the course.
You may wish to purchase the books and visit the website for further reading.
Assessment File An assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the works you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course: the tutor marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) Every unit in this course has a tutor-marked assignment.
You are required to attempt all the questions and you will be assessed on all of them but the best four performances from the (TMAs) will be used for your 30% grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with a tutor-marked assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submission.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a test of three hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Find time to revise the units before your examination.
The final examination will represent 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which ref1ects the kinds of self-assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignment you have previously encountered.
All aspects of the course will be assessed in the examination.
You should use the time between completing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
iii ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Course Marking Scheme The following table shows how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1-4 (the best four of Four assignments, marked out of all the assignments submitted) 10% totaling 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity (end of unit) Module 1 Concept, Significance and Preliminary Lessons of Tajwiid 1 Definition and Significance of Week 1 Assignment 1 Tajwiid 2 Articulation of the Letters of the Week 2 Assignment 2 Holy Qur'an 3 Al-Ibtidaa' [Initiation] Week 3 Assignment 3 Module 2 Some Major Rules of Tajwiid 1 Nuunu 's-Saakinah wa 't- Tanwiin Week 4 Assignment 1 [Voweless Nuun and Nunation] 2 Al-Miim wa 'n-Nuunu 'l- Week 5 Assignment 2 Mushaddadataan [The stressed Miim and Nuun] 3 Miimu 's-Saakinah [Voweless Week 6 Assignment 3 Mim] 4 Al-Laamaatu 's-Sawaakin Week 7 Assignment 4 [Voweless Lams] 5 Haa’ of Pronoun Week 8 Assignment 5 Module 3 Other Major Rules of Tajwiid 1 Tafkhiim and Tarqiiq Week 9 Assignment 1 2 Al-'Idghaam [Assimilation] Week 10 Assignment 2 3 Al-Maddu wa 'l-Qasr [Elongation Week 11 Assignment 3 and Shortening] 4 Hamzatu 'l-Wasl [Silent Hamzah] Week 12 Assignment 4 iv ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 5 Waqf (Stops) Week 13 Assignment 5 5 Manners of Tajwiid Week 14 Assignment 6 Examination 16 Total 17 How to Get the Most from This Course You will be required to study the units on your own.
However, you may arrange to meet with your tutor for tutorials on an optional basis at the study centre.
Also, you can organize interactive sessions with your course mates.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor wil1 mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and assist you during the course.
You must submit your tutor- marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings; • you have difficulty with the exercises; or • you have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary This Course Guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course exposes you the concept and significance of Tajwiid and also the major rules of Tajwiid in the Qur'an recitation with illustrations from verses of the Qur'an.
v ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID We wish you success in the course and hope that you will find it interesting and useful.
vi ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Course Code ISL212 Course Guide Introduction to Tajwiid Course Team Alhaji Mustafa Jamiu O.
(Developer/Writer) - Avi- cenna International School Dr. Shaykh Luqman Jimoh (Editor) - LASU Prof. A. F. Ahmed (Programme Leader) - NOUN Dr A. R. Mustapha (Coordinator) - NOUN vii ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-611-3 All Rights Reserved viii ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………….…………………………….. 1 Unit 1 Definition and significance of Tajwiid……………..… 1 Unit 2 Articulation of the letters of the holy Qur'an ……….
7 Unit 3 Al- ’Ibtidaa’ (Initiation)……………………………… 16 Module 2 ……………………………………………………….. 20 Unit 1 Nuunu ¢s-Saakinah wa ’t- Tanwin (Voweless Nuun and Nunation)………………………………………… 21 Unit 2 Al-Miim wa ’n-Nuunu ’l-Mushaddadataan (The Stressed Miim and Nuun)………………..….…... 28 Unit 3 Miimu ’s-Saakinah (Voweless Mim)………….….….
31 Unit 4 Al-Laamaatu ’s-Sawaakin (Voweless Lams) …….… 34 Unit 5 Haa’ of Pronoun……………………..…………….… 40 Module 3 ………………………………………………………... 43 Unit 1 Tafkhiim and Tarqiiq………………………………… 43 Unit 2 Al- ’Idghaam (Assimilation)………………………… 47 Unit 3 Al-Maddu wa ’l-Qasr (Elongation and Shortening)..... 50 Unit 4 Hamzatu ’l-Wasl (Silent Hamzah)………………….... 58 Unit 5 Waqf (Stops)………………………………………..….
62 Unit 6 Manners of Tajwiid……………………………………...… 66 ix NoneISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID MODULE 1 Unit 1 Definition and Significance of Tajwiid Unit 2 Articulation of the Letters of the Holy Quran Unit 3 Al- ’Ibtidaa’ (Initiation) UNIT 1 DEFINITION AND SIGNIFICANCE OF TAJWIID CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Methods of Applying the Rules of Tajwiid 3.3 Position of Tajwiid 3.4 Significance of Tajwiid 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Tajwiid [ديوجت] is an Arabic word for elocution, meaning proper pronunciation during recitation, as well as recitation at a moderate speed.
It is a set of rules, which govern how the Qur'an should be read.
It is derived from the trilateral root j-w-d, meaning to make well, make better, or improve.
It is required by fard.
There are altogether 14 recognised schools of Tajwiid with seven being the most popular.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define Tajwiid • mention and explain the methods of applying the rules of Tajwiid • state and explain the position of Tajwiid • mention the significance of Tajwiid.
1 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition In defining Tajwiid, the following terms must be understood: Tajwiid, ‘ilmu ’t-Tajwiid and Tajwiidu ’l-Qur’an.
Tajwiid is from the verb 'jawwada' which literally means to decorate, make better or to perfect.Tajwiid therefore literally means betterment, decoration or perfection of an act.
Technically, it means the pronunciation of every letter of the Qur'an from its point of articulation with its attributes.
‘llmu ’t-Tajwiid (the art of Tajwiid) is the science dealing with the rules and regulations governing the recitation of the Qur'an the application of which makes the correct recitation of the Qur'an possible.
‘Abdul Warith Sa'id defines ‘ilmu’t-Tajwiid as the science which explains the rules and principles to be followed in the recitation of the Qur’an in accordance with the standard handed down by Prophet Muhammad (SAW).
You should understand from ‘Abdul Waarith’s definition that ‘ilmu ’t-Tajwid means the scientific recitation with which the Qur'an was revealed.
Tajwiidu ’l-Qur'an, according to Luqman Jimoh, is the art of reading the Qur'an pronouncing its letters distinctly, giving each of them its full compliment by producing it from its point of articulation and in the correct manner.
From the above definitions, the following points were observed.
1.
Quran was revealed to Prophet Muhammad with Tajwiid.
2.
Quran and Tajwiid are inseparable.
3.
The art of Tajwiid (‘ilmu ’t-Tajwiid) primarily has to do with the recitation of Quran.
4.
Prophet Muhammad (SAW) recited the Quran with Tajwiid.
5.
Prophet Muhammad taught his students, the companions, the Quran with Tajwiid.
6.
Reading the Quran without Tajwiid is equivalent to not giving the Quran its due respect.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the following terms: Tajwiid, 'ilmu ’t-Tajwiid and Tajwiidu ’l- Quran.
2 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.2 Methods of Applying the Rules of Tajwiid The knowledge of Tajwiid can be leanrt and applied in Qur’an recitation through two methods.
These are: 1- Talqiin (Guide reading): In this method, a teacher teaches a learner the Qur'an through guide reading method.
The teacher reads the Qur'an, applying the rules of Tajwiid, while the learner repeats what the teacher says after him.
Ultimately, though ignorant of the principles of Tajwiid, the learner will be able to correctly recite the Qur'an with Tajwiid.
This was the only method available to the students of Qur'an throughout the first two centuries of Islam and the major part of the third.
Prophet Muhammad learnt the Quran from Jibril and taught it to his students (that is, the Sahabah) through this method.
2- Ta'liim: By this, we mean learning the theoretical principles of Tajwiid along with the practicals.
This method was developed by Abuu Muzaahim al-Khaqaanii (d. 325 A.H../947 C.E) towards the end of the third century of Islam.
He was the one who first codified and laid down the rules of Tajwiid.
He produced the first work on the rules of Tajwiid in poetry.The work is referred to as Raa’iyyat 'Abii Muzaahim, meaning 'Abuu Muzaahim’s Ra'- ending verses of poetry.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention and explain the two methods through which the knowledge of Tajwiid can be learnt and applied in Quran recitation.
3.3 Position of Tajwiid Application of the rules of Tajwiid while reading the Quran is compulsory (fard ‘ayn) for every individual reader.
What this means in essence is that application of the basic rules of Tajwiid is compulsory.
Whoever reads the Quran while deliberately ignoring the rules of Tajwiid is adjudged a sinner, because he deliberately removes from the Quran one of its paramount features.
Note however that the science of Tajwiid ('Ilmu’t -Tajwiid) is wide in scope.
Therefore, to have mastery in the science is considered as fard kifaayah.
This means that specialisation in the field of Tajwiid is not compulsory on every individual once there are some members of the community who are specialists in the field.
3 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
What is the position of Tajwiidu ’l-Quran?
2.
What is the position of 'Ilmu ’t-Tajwiid?
3.4 Significance of Tajwiid The significance of Tajwiid is stressed with an injunction of the Quran where Allah says in al-Muzammil 73 verse 4:"لايترت نآرقلا لترو" The Arabic-English dictionary by Mr. Hans Wehr gives the meaning of tartiil to be tajwiid.
If we are to go by this meaning, the above verse could be interpreted in Arabic to mean "اديوجت نآرقلا دوج و" which in English means “beautify the Quran with Tajwiid”.
Every injunction of the Quran has a reasonable objective behind it.
The objective behind this injunction is to beautify the Quran by reading it in the best way possible; and by guiding against committing solecism in the course of its recitation.
The commitment of solecism in the articulation of vowels and letters of the Quran has great effects on the meaning of the words of the Quran.
These effects are errors that result in distortion of the meanings of the Qur'an.
These errors are divided into two.
1.
Al-lahnu ’l-jalii (Manifest errors): These errors occur when the reader wrongly places the vowels of the Quran and/or articulates its letters wrongly.
Examples of wrong placement of vowels a reader could commit are: [a] تُ ولاج دَ وؤاد لتق meaning: Goliath killed David instead of تَ ولاج دُ وؤاد لتق meaning: David killed Goliath.
[b] ءَ املعلا هدابع نم ُﷲ ىشخي امنإ meaning: God is only afraid of the scholars among His servants instead of: َﷲ ىشخي امنإ ءُ املعلا هدابع نم meaning: Only the scholars are conscious of God among His servants.
2.
Al-lahnu ’l-Khafii (Hidden errors): These are minor and pardonable errors.
They can only be noticed by scholars of Tajwiid because they are not as conspicuous as the manifest ones.
These include: a. soft pronunciation of heavy letters b. pharngealisation of soft letters c. excessive rolling of letter Raa' d. shortening or excessive elongation of nasalisation e. elongation of short vowels and so on 4 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID The following are given as some of the importance of Tajwiid.
i.
When a reciter reads the Quran with Tajwiid, he convinces himself that he is reading correctly and that his reading is in line with the exact way and manner the Prophet (SAW) and his immediately Sahabah used to read it.
ii.
Applying Tajwiid affords the reciter the opportunity of articulating Quranic letters correctly and distinctly while the reciter also enjoys his reading as well as his listeners.
iii.
Allah (SWT) becomes happy and pleased with a reciter who recites the Quran in a manner that pleases Him (that is, by applying the rule of Tajwiid).
iv.
While reading the Quran without Tajwiid is considered sinful, reading it with Tajwiid attracts great rewards.
Observing the rules of Tajwiid while reading the Quran prevents the tongue from making mistake when reciting the Divine words.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Give four examples of al-lahnu’l-khafii.
2.
Mention five importance of Tajwiid.
4.0 CONCULSION In this unit, you have learnt the meaning of Tajwiid, cilmu ’t-Tajwiid and Tajwiidu ’l-Quran which are the three terms that must be understood in defining Tajwiid.
You have also learnt about Talqiin and Tacliim as the two methods adopted in teaching and learning the application of the rules of Tajwiid.
The position of Tajwiid, its importance as well as the two types of lahn that could be committed while reading the Quran are other items you have learnt in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have defined Tajwiid, mentioned and explained the methods adopted in the teaching and learning of its rules.
We have also stated the position of Tajwiid as well as its significance and the kinds of errors that could be committed when reading the Quran.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give a detailed definition of Tajwiid.
2.
What do you understand by Al-Lahnu ’l-Jalii and Al-Lahnu ’l- Khafii?
3.
Explain the methods of applying the rules of Tajwiid.
4.
What is the significance of Tajwiid?
5 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L.J.
(2003).
Tajwiid Made Easy.
Lagos: Jam’iyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
Pp 14 – 18.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003).
Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Quran (Part 1).
Ontario: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. pp 1 – 4.
Visit: www.software.informer.com Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwid.
USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc. pp 18 – 20.
6 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 2 ARTICULATION OF THE LETTERS OF THE QUR'AN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Points of Articulation فورحلا جراخم 3.2 Manners of Articulation قطنلا ةيفيك 3.3 Attributes of Letters 3.4 Description of Letters 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are about to learn one of the most important lessons in the science of Tajwiid.
A good understanding of the Articulation of Quranic letters will guard you against the commission of solecism during recitation.
Here, you will learn how to properly and correctly pronounce the Quranic letters, mastering their points of articulation, manners of articulation as well as their attributes and description.
It should however be mentioned that there are two approaches when discussing articulation of Quranic letters.
There is the traditional approach and the modern linguistics approach.
We have adopted the two approaches in our discussions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention and explain the points of articulation of the Quranic letters • mention and explain the manners of articulation of the Quranic letters • mention and explain their attributes • give a detailed description of each letter.
7 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Points of Articulation In the terminology of the phonetics of the Quran, Tajwiid, makhaarij (Singular Makhraj) refers, in most cases, to the point of articulation or the place where a letter is produced on the upper part of the mouth, which is also called in modern linguistics, the passive articulator, which the active one approaches during the production of a letter.
In order to identify the place of articulation of a particular letter, the letter should be prefixed with a vowelised Hamzah while the letter itself is made voweless (Saakinah) e.g: .سأ ,لأ ,طأ ,قأ ,مأ When this is pronounced, the point of articulation of the letter is identified as the point where there is a stricture between the active and the passive articulators or the point at which the air stream coming from the lungs is obstructed.
For the first example of the ones given above (i.e مأ), the point of articulation is the lip as the air-stream from the lungs is obstructed by the two lips.
The point of articulation of Arabic letters, according to traditional scholars of Tajwiid, grammarians and classical phoneticians are seventeen while some others hold that they are 16.
However, according to modern Arab linguists, they are 11.
The following are the 11 places of articulation and the sounds produced from them as identified by modern Arab linguistics.
They are, however, arranged, not from the lips but from the larynx, which is the first place where the movement of the air stream coming from the lungs could be obstructed.
In this kind of arrangement, the last place of articulation is the lips.
PLACES OF ARTICULATION قطنلا نكامأ LETTERS PRODUCED 1- The larynx يرجنح ه ء 2- The pharynx يقلح ع ح 3- The Uvular يوھل ق 4- The Velum يقبط ك غ خ 5- The hard palate يراغ ي 6- The palate/Alveolar يراغ يوثل ش ج 7- The Alveolar يوثل ن ل ص س ز ر 8- The upper set of teeth ينانسأ ط ض د ت 9- The middle of the two sets of teeth ينانسأيب ظ ذ ث 10- The upper teeth and the lower lip ينانسأ يوفش ف 11- The lips يناتفش و م ب 8 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the places of articulation of the following letters?
: .
ض ، ش ، ي ، ق ، ف 3.2 Manners of Articulation To properly analyse the properties of sound, it is important also to know the manners of their articulation.
By manner of articulation, it is meant the way sounds are produced, the degree of closeness between the active and the passive articulators.
Traditional scholars of Tajwiid have their way of classifying the manners of articulation of sounds, which they call “Attributes of Sounds”: فورحلا تافص .
These attributes are the basic or conditional (temporary) qualities associated with sounds and it is with them that the differences between sounds are identified.
They also have terminologies for these attributes, some of which are the same with those of modern linguistics.
Traditional scholars of Tajwiid have identified 20 attributes.
These 20 attributes are grouped into two, namely: primary and secondary attributes.
The primary attributes are grouped into 10 in pairs.
Each pair has the basic attribute and its opposite.
The secondary attributes are also 10 but without opposites.
Below is a table of the primary attributes with their opposites.
◌ِ ◌ِ ◌ِ Attributes Opposites Forcefulness: ةدشلا Softness : ةواخرلا Voiceness : رھجلا Voicelessness : سمھلا Elevation : ءلاعتسلإا Depression : لافتسلإا Rounding : قابطلإا Opening : حاتفنلإا Swift pronunciation : قلاذلإا Sharp pronunciation : تامصلإا The secondary attributes are: 1.
Whistling: ريفصلا 2.
Intensification: ةلقلقلا 3.
Elongation: ةدملا 4.
Easiness: ةنيللا 5.
Diversion: فارحنلإا 6.
Roll: راركتلا 7.
Spreading out: يشفتلا 8.
Protraction: لاطتسلإا 9 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 9.
Moderacy: طسوتلا 10.
Nasalisation: ةنغلا SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How many are the attributes of letters identifird by traditional scholars?
3.3 Attributes of Letters We remarked earlier that traditional scholars of Tajwiid refer to the manners of articulation of Quranic letters as attributes of letters.
Above, we mention the 20 Attributes of Quranic letters identified by the traditional scholars of Tajwiid.
Here, we are going to explain to you some of these attributes.
1.
FORCEFULNESS AND SOFTNESS ةواخرلا و ةدشلا: Some Qur'anic letters are described as al hurufu 'sh shadidah because they sound strong in their production.
The reason why such letters come out strong is that there is a complete closure between the two organs of speech that are involved in their production.
The closure is so complete that no air can escape through the mouth.
Then, there is a sudden release of the air already built up behind the closure, which results in a form of explosion and production of strong letter.
It is because of this explosion that modern linguists refer to these letters as plosives.
They also call them stops because immediately a plosive is produced, the sound stops and does not continue like in the case of rakhawah discussed later.
According to traditional scholars of Tajwiid, the eight letters in this phrase are the huruuf shadiidah.
تكب طقدجأ Ar Rakhaawah (that is, softness) is the counterpart of ash- shiddah.
In Rakhaawah letters, the contact between the two organs of speech that are involved in their production is not a complete one.
Rather, the contact is such that there is a small passage through which air passes.
The air passing through the small passage makes audible friction.
According to traditional scholars of Tajwid, the remaining letters apart from the eight used for shiddah and the five used for tawassut discussed underneath are the huruf rakhaawah.
Note however that traditional scholars of Tajwiid also refer to some letters as At- tawassut letters.
To them, these letters occupy intermediate position between Ash- shiddah and Rakhaawah.
They are of the opinion that the degree of contact between the two organs of speech that are involved in the production of the five letters in this phrase رمع نل is in between that of shiddah and Rakhaawah.
Therefore, these five letters are referred to as huruuf tawassut.
10 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 2.
VOICENESS AND VOICELESSNESSسمھلا و رھجلا Sounds are said to be voiced when there is a vibration in the vocal cords during their production.
The vibration of the vocal cords produces a buzzing noise, which is called “VOICE”.
They are, however, said to be voiceless when there is no vibration in the vocal cord because they are in open state.
As a result, there is free passage of the air-stream coming from the lungs.
Voiceness and voicelessness of sounds can be perceived by resting the fingers on the front of the throat.
If you perceive any vibration, the letter is voiced but if otherwise, it is voiceless.
Each of the 28 letters of the Quran is either voiced or voiceless.
Fifteen of them are voiced according to modern linguistics, while the remaining thirteen are voiceless.
The voiced letters are: م ل غ ع ظ ض ز ر ذ د ج ب و ن The thirteen voiceless letters are: ه ك ق ف ط ص ش س خ ح ث ت ء 3.
ELEVATION AND DEPRESSION لافتسلإا و ءلاعتسلإا When the end of the tongue is contracted and raised up towards the palate in the production of any sound, the sound becomes thick.
The level to which the tongue rises differs with letter and the higher the tongue is raised, the thicker the sound.
This is in known as elevation, thickening or pharyngealisation.
In Tajwiid, seven letters contained in ظق طغض صخ are produced with elevation.
The rest letters of the Quran are pronounced depressed without velarisation, rather with the tongue flattened and in its normal position.
They are therefore, called depressed letters or softened letters.
4.
ROUNDING قابطلإا Of the seven velarised letters identified above, the velarisation is more pronounced in ظ ط ض ص , hence, the four are referred to as rounded letters – قابطلإا فورح .
5.
AS-SAFIIR ريفصلا This literally means whistling sound like the ones made by some beasts.
Three Quranic letters namely ص, ز and س are, naturally in their production, accompanied with whistling sound.
Describing the whistling sounds in these letters, scholars have likened the whistling sound in sad to the sound made by geese while they liken that of zayn to the sound made by bees; and that of sin to the sound of sparrows.
11 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID You should however note that the degree of the whistling vary from one letter to the other.
The whistling in sad should sound more than that of zayn and sin while that of zayn should sound more than that of sin.
6.
INTENSIFICATION ةلقلقلا In Tajwiid, the five letters contained in this mnemonic phrase دج بطق , when carrying Sukuun are referred to as ةلقلقلا فورح .
The letters are produced with instability.
Qalqalah itself is a special clacking sound that usually accompanies these letters when they carry Sukuun, either in the middle of a word or become Sukuun by virtue of a stop.
Thus, there is a kind of compression when they are produced which makes them sound like a vowel, pronounced lightly.
7.
AL-LIINAH ةنيللا This literally means ease.
Technically, it is an attribute used to describe some,Quranic letters because of the easiness experienced in the course of their production.
The two Quranic letters described with liin are waa' and yaa' when they are voweless and preceeded with vowel fathah.
Thus they become 'aw' and 'ay' respectively and referred to as harf liin.
8.
AT-TAKRIIR راركتلا This means roll, tap or vibration.
In this manner of articulation, there is a stricture of intermittent closure between the active and the passive articulators.
The active articulator vibrates against the passive one.
Raa' is the only Quranic letter that has this attribute.
Note however that our describing raa' as a roll letter does not mean that you should roll it excessively because continuous rolling will produce more raa' and that amounts to lahn 9.
AT-TAFASHSHIIيشفتلا This, in a technical sense, means spreading out of air between the tongue and the roof of the mouth in the course of production of a letter.
The only Quranic letter that is described with this attribute, according to the most acceptable opinion, is Shiin.
10.
NASALISATION ةنغلا Sounds are also classified as either oral or nasal.
Sounds produced through the nasal cavity are referred to as nasal sounds.
This process occurs when the velum is lowered to allow the air stream from the lungs 12 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID pass through the nasal cavity.
Only two Quranic letters are produced through this cavity.
They are م and ن .
However, when there is a velic stricture as a result of the velum being raised up to block the nasal cavity, the air stream from the lungs passes through the oral cavity.
Thus, the sound produced are referred to as oral sound.
All other Quranic letters apart from م and ن are oral sounds.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What do you understand by voiceness and voicelessness of sounds?
3.4 Description of Letters Letters are described based on the three attributes known as the “three term label” in modern linguistics.
These three term labels are the point of articulation, the manner of articulation and the state of the vocal cord, which determines the voiceness, and voicelessness of letters.
Where the letter being described is a velarised one, the fourth attribute is added in Arabic.
Below is a three (or four, where necessary) term label description of all the 28 Quranic letters.
/ء/ Voiceless glottal stop سومھم يفقو يرجنح توص /ب/ Voiced bilabial stop روھجم يفقو يناتفش توص /ت/ Voiceless dental stop سومھم يفقو ينانسأ توص / ث/ Voiceless interdental fricative سومھم يكاكتحإ ينانس أيب توص /ج/ Voiced palato alveolar blended sound روھجم يجزم يراغ يوثل توص /ح/ Voiceless pharyngeal fricative سومھم يكاكتحإ يقلح توص /خ/ Voiceless velar fricative سومھم مخفم يكاكتحإ يقبط توص /د/ Voiced dental stop روھجم يفقو ينانسأ توص /ذ/ Voiced interdental fricativeروھجم يكاكتحإ ينانس أيب توص /ر/ Voiced alveolar rollروھجم رركم يوثل توص /ز/ Voiced alveolar fricativeروھجم يكاكتحإ يوثل توص /س/ Voiceless alveolar fricativeسومھم يكاكتحإ يوثل توص /ش/ Voiceless palato-alveolar fricativeسومھم يكاكتحإ يراغ يوثل توص /ص/ Voiceless alveolar pharyngealised fricative مخفم يكاكتحإ يوثل توص سومھم/ض/ Voiced dental pharyngealised stop مخفم يفقو ينانسأ توص روھجم /ط/ Voiceless dental pharyngealised stopسومھم مخفم يفقو ينانسأ توص /ظ/ Voiced interdental pharyngealised fricative روھجم مخفم يكاكتحإ ينانس أيب توص /ع/ Voiced pharyngeal fricativeروھجم يكاكتحإ يقلح توص /غ/ Voiced velar fricativeروھجم يكاكتحإ يقبط توص /ف/ Voiceless labio dental fricativeسومھم يكاكتحإ ينانسأ يوفش توص 13 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID /ق/ Voiceless uvular stopسومھم يفقو يوھل توص /ك/ Voiceless velar stopسومھم يفقو يقبط توص /ل/ Voiced alveolar lateral soundروھجم يبناج يوثل توص /م/ Voiced bilabial nasal soundروھجم يفنأ يناتفش توص /ن/ Voiced alveolar nasal soundروھجم يفنأ يوثل توص /ه/ Voiceless glottal fricativeو سومھم يكاكتحإ يرجنح توص / Voiced bilabial approximantروھجم يقلازنإ يناتفش توص /ي/ Vosced palatal approximantروھجم يقلازنإ يراغ توص SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What do you understand by the three or four term label of description of letters?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the 11 places of articulation, namely;the larynx, the pharynx, the uvular, the velum, the hard palate, the palate/alveolar, the alveolar, the upper set of teeth, the middle of the two sets of teeth, the upper teeth / the lower lip and the lips.
You have also learnt about the traditional primary and secondary manners of articulation, which are referred to as attributes as well as the six manners of articulation identified by modern linguist, namely: stops, fricatives, blended, lateral, approximant and roll.
We have further explained five attributes of letters, namely: voiceness and voicelessness, nasalisation, elevation and depression, rounding and intensification.
We ended this unit with the three or four term label of description of letters.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt about the places and manners of articulation of Arabic letters, the attributes of letters and the description of letters.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by the points of articulation?
2.
Mention the 11 points of articulation and the letters produced from them.
3.
What do you understand by the manners of articulation?
4.
Mention the six manners of articulation identified by modern linguists and the letters produced from them.
5.
Mention and explain the five attributes of letters.
6.
Give a full description of the entire Quranic letters.
14 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwiid Made Easy.
Lagos: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
Pp 21-25.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003).
Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Quran (Part 2).
Ontario, Canada: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. pp 7 – 37.
Syed, K.H.
(1990).
Easy Tajwid.
Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A: Muslim Community Center, Inc. pp 22 – 36.
Visit: www.software.informer.com 15 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 3 INITIATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Formula for ’Isticaadhah and Basmalah 3.2 The Four States of ’Isti'aadhah 3.3 The Rules of al- ’Isti'aadhah wa ’l-Basmalah 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION “When thou dost read the Quran, seek Allah's protection from Satan the rejected one.” Quran 16[an-Nahl] verse 98.
This verse makes it compulsory for every reciter to mention the ’Ist'iaadhah before embarking on his or her recitation.
The rules of Tajwiid that guide the mentioning of ’Ist'iaadhah and Basmalah before a Suurah and in between two Suurah are what you are about to learn.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention the formula for ’Isti'aadhah • mention the formula for Basmalah • state the rules of Tajwiid that guide the mentioning of ’Ist'iaadhah and Basmalah before a Suurah and in between two Suurah.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Formula for Al- ’Isticaadhah Wa ’L-Basmalah A reciter about to commence the reading of the Quran should seek refuge with Allah against the accused devil.
This, in Tajwiid terminology, is known as al-’Isti'aadhah (seeking of refuge).This is in tune with the command of Allah to the Prophet thus: “When thou do read Quran, seek Allah’s protection from Satan, the Rejected one” (16Vs98).
16 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID The formula for the ’Isti'aadhah according to the practice of the Prophet is: ميجرلا ناطيشلا نم dاب ذوعأ Meaning: I seek refuge with Allah against the accursed devil.
There are four states of reading for al-’Isti'aadhah.
It is read aloud in two states and read silently in other two states.
The two states in which al-’Isti'aadhah is read aloud are: (i) In congregation (ii) During Teaching.
The other two states in which it is read silently are (i) in prayers (The five daily fundamental prayers) (ii) During individual recitation of the holy Quran.
After the ’Isti'aadhah, comes the Basmalah which is the Tajwiid ميحرلا نمحرلا ﷲ مسب terminology for [Bismillaahi ’r-Rahmaani ’r-Rahiim] menaing – In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
This formula is contained at the beginning of every chapter of the Quran with the exception of at-Tawbah (Charpter 9).
Hence, scholars agree that it should be recited at the beginning of all the chapters of the Quran except Tawbah where it should not be read.
After the Basmalah, the reciter goes straight to the beginning of the chapter he intends to read.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is the formula of ’Isti'aadhah?
2.
When is al-’Isti'aadhah read silently.
3.
What is the formula of Basmalah?
3.2 The Rules of Al- ’Isti'aadhah Wa ’L-Basmalah A reciter about to read the Quran should say the ’Ist'iaadhah, the Basmalah and commence his reading.
In doing these, there are four ways laid down by classical scholars of Tajwiid.
(i) The reciter may separate the three - ’Isti'aadhah, Basmalah and the beginning of the chapter: Example: \ ميحرلا نامحرلا ﷲ مسب \ ميجرلا ناطيشلا نم dاب ذوعأ دحأ ﷲ وھ لق 17 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID or (ii) Separate the first that is, ’Isti'aadhah and join the second and the third -the basmalah and the beginning of the intended chapter.
Example: لق ميحرلا نامحرلا ﷲ مسب \ ميجرلا ناطيشلا نم dاب ذوعأ دحأ ﷲ وھ or (iii) Join the first with the second - the ’Isti'aadhah and basmalah and separate the third that is the beginning of the intended chapter.
Example : لق \ ميحرلا نامحرلا ﷲ مسب ميجرلا ناطيشلا نم dاب ذوعأ دحأ ﷲ وھ or (iv) Join all of them.
Example: لق ميحرلا نامحرلا ﷲ مسب ميجرلا ناطيشلا نم dاب ذوعأ دحأ ﷲ وھ Also, when a reciter ends a chapter and wishes to commence another one instantly, he would not say the ’isti'aadhah again.He could however adopt any of the three methods described below.
(i) Separate the end of the concluded chapter, the Basmalah and the beginning of the intended chapter.
Example: ذوعأ لق \ ميحرلا نامحرلا ﷲ مسب \ دسح اذإ دساح رش نمو سانلا برب or (ii) Stop at the end of the concluded chapter, then join the Basmalah with the beginning of the intended chapter.
Example: ذوعأ لق ميحرلا نامحرلا ﷲ مسب \ دسح اذإ دساح رش نمو سانلا برب 18 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID or (iii) Join the end of the just concluded chapter, the Basmalah and the beginning of the intended chapter together.
Example: ذوعأ لق ميحرلا نامحرلا ﷲ مسب دسح اذإ دساح رش نمو سانلا برب SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the Tajwiid rules that govern the mentioning of Basmalah in between two chapters.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have learnt about the formula for al-’Isti'aadhah and Basmalah, the four states of al-’Isti'aadhah; where it is read aloud and where it is read silently and the rules of Tajwiid on mentioning al-’Isti'aadhah and Basmalah before a Suurah and Basmalah in between two Suurahs.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have mentioned and explained the formula for a’Isti'aadhah and Basmalah.We have also explained the states of al ’Isti'aadhah and the rules of Tajwiid on al-’Isti'aadhah and Basmalah.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by al-’isti'aadhah?
2.
What do you understand by Basmalah?
3.
Explain the rules of Tajwiid that governs the mentioning of al- ’Isti'aadhah and Basmalah before a Suurah.
4.
Explain the rules of Tajwiid that govern the mentioning of Basmalah in- between two Suurahs.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwid Made Easy.
Lagos: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
Pp 40-43.
Visit: www.software.informer.com www.AlQuranAcademy.com - Online one on one Tajwiid classes.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003).
Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al-Qur’an (Part 1).
Ontario, Canada: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. pp 40 – 42.
19 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID MODULE 2 SOME MAJOR RULES OF TAJWIID Unit 1 Nuunu ’s-Saakinah wa ’ t-Tanwiin (Voweless Nuun and Nunation) Unit 2 Al-Miim wa ’n-Nuunu ’l-Mushaddadataan (The stressed Miim and Nuun) Unit 3 Miimu ’s-Saakinah (Voweless Miim) Unit 4 Al-Laamaatu ’s-Sawaakin (Voweless Lams) Unit 5 Haa’ of Pronoun UNIT 1 NUUNU ’S-SAAKINAH WA ’T-TANWIIN (VOWELESS NUUN AND NUNATION) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 ’Izhaar (Manifestation) 3.3 'Idghaam (Assimilation) 3.4.1 Types of Assimilation of Nuunu S-Saakinah Wa ’T- Tanwiin 3.5 ’Iqlaab (Conversion) 3.6 ’Ikhfaa’ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nuunu ’s-Saakinah and Tanwiin (Voweless Nuun and Nunation) are two aspects of the Quran that have four rules of Tajwiid governing them in the rendition of Hafs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define Nuunu’s-Saakinah and Tanwiin • mention and explain the four rules of Tajwiid that govern Nuunu’s-Saakinah and Tanwin • mention the letters of ’Izhaar, the letters of ’Idghaam, the letter of ’Iqlaaband the letters of ’Ikhfaa 20 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition Nuunu’s-saakinah means any voweless letter nuun in the Qur'an which in some cases is written without the sukun sign (that is, ن ) or with the sukun sign (that is نْ ).
Tanwiin in its own case refer to fathataan [ ◌ً ], kasrataan [ ◌ٍ ] and dammataan [ ◌ٌ ] which are doubled vowel sounds.
There are four rules governing the reading of both Nuunu ’n- saakinah and Tanwiin in the science of Tajwiid.
These rules are: (a) Al-’Izhaar Manifestation راھظلإا (b) Al-’Idghaam Assimilation ماغدلإا (c) Al-’Iqlaab Conversion بلاقلإا (d) Al-’Ikhfaa’ Hiding ءافخلإا 3.2 Al-’Izhaar (Manifestation) This rule is applied when Nuunu ’s-Saakinah or Tanwiin is immediately followed by any of these six letters known as letters of manifestation: ه غ ع خ ح أ : راھظلإا فورح The Nuunu ’s-Saakinah or Tanwin and the letter of manifestation could occur together in the same word as in مھنع etc.
It is also possible that the Nuunu ’s-Saakinah or Tanwin end a word while the letter of manifestation starts the next as in فوخ نم دحأ اوفك etc.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention the six letters of ’Izhaar.
Application To apply ’izhaar, the Nuunu ’s-Saakinah or Tanwin is pronounced sharp and clear with the tip of the tongue touching the point of articulation of letter /n/ sharply and withdrawing instantly.
There should be no prolonged nasal sound.
Examples: 21 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Nuunu’s-Saakinah with letters of ’Izhaar: IN TWO WORDS IN ONE WORD متنأ نإ نوأني وُھ نْ إ مُھنْ م ميكحَ نْ م رحَ نْ او فوخَ نْ م ةقنخنم لمع نم تمعَ نْ أ ريغ نم نوضغنيسف Tanwiin with letters of ’Izhaar FATHATAAN KASRATAAN DAMMATAAN اميظع ارً جأ ميظع بٍ اذع ميظع رٌ جأ اروفغ اوً فع روفغ مٍ يحر نم نونمم ريغَ رٌ جأ اميكح اميلع ديمح مٍ يكح نم ميكح مٌ يلع نيئساخ ًةدرق ةعشاخَ ذٍ ئموي اوفاخ ٌةيرذ َ َ دحأ اوً فك دسح اذِإ دٍ ساح دحأ ابأ دٌ محم انيدھ ًلاك اھادُھ سٍ فن وُھ دٌ ولوم SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Put a ring around the words or phrases where the rule of ’Izhaar is applicable in the text below: امَ وَ ضِ رْ ﱞلااوَ تِ وَ ـمَ سﱠ لا بﱢ رﱠ - ًاباسَ حِ ءً آطَ عَ كَ ﱢبرﱠ نمﱢ ءً آزَ جَ حُ ورﱡ لا مُ وُقَي مَ وْ يَ - ًاباطَ خِ ُهنْ مِ نَ وكُ لِ مْ َي َلا نِ ـمَ حْ رﱠ لا امَ ُھَنيْ َب لَ اَقوَ نُ ـمَ حْ رﱠ لا ُهلَ نَ ذِ َأ نْ مَ ﱠلاِإ نَ ومُ ﱠلكَ َتَي ﱠلا ًاّفصَ ُةكَ ئِ ـَلمَ لْ اوَ ً اباوَ صَ .
3.3 Al-’Idghaam (Assimilation) This rule is applied whenever Nuunu’s-Saakinah or Tanwin is immediately succeeded by any of the six letters contained in the mnemonic word نولمري on the condition that the Nuunu’s-Saakinah or Tanwin ends a word and the letter starts the next word.
Where they both 22 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID occur in the same word, Izhaar is applied instead of ’Idghaam.
This is called ’Izhaaran mutlaqan.
There are four words in the Qur'an on which ’izhaar mutlaq is applied.
They are: ناونص ، ناونق ، ايندلا ، ناينب To apply the rule of ’Idghaam, the Nuunu’s-Saakinah or Tanwin will be assimilated in the letter of ’Idghaam this thus becomes doubled.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention the six letters of ’Idghaam 3.4.1 Types of Assimilation of Nuunu S-Saakinah Wa ’T- Tanwiin There are, however, two kinds of this assimilation.
There is one that is accompanied by nasalisation.
This is known as nasalised assimilation.
ةنغب ماغدإ It is also known as partial assimilation صقان ماغدإ.
This kind of assimilation occurs when the letter of ’Idghaam following the Nuunu’s- Saakinah or Tanwiin is one of the letters in the mnemonic word نموي .
Example: ةبصان ةلماع \ ﷲ لام نم \ مل و رشب \ لوقي نم The other kind of assimilation of Nuunu’s-Saakinah and Tanwin is the one that is not accompanied by any nasalisation thus, we have a complete assimilation.
Hence, it is referred to as unnasalised assimilation: ةنغ ريغب ماغدإ or complete assimilation لماك ماغدإ .
This takes place when the letter of ’Idghaam that follows Nuunu’s-Saakinah or Tanwiin is either ل or ر Example: ميحر روفغ \ بر نم \ نيذلل ليوف \ مل نئل 23 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Here are more examples of Nuunu’s-Saakinah with Letters of ’Idghaam: Letters of ’Idghaam with partial assimilation ءاش◌َ يﱠ نْ م ي لاوﱠ نْ م و ءامﱠ نْ م م ةفطنﱡ نْ م ن Letters of ’Idghaam with complete assimilation مھبرﱠ نْ م ر هﱠل نْ كي ل Here are more examples of Tanwiin with letters of ’Idghaam: FATHATAAN KASRATAAN DAMMATAAN ةيضرمﱠ ًةيضار ةيضارﱠ ةٍ شيع ذئموﱠي ٌهوجو يدھﱠن ارً ون ردصﱠي ذٍ ئموي نيلصمللﱢ لٌ يوف اريذنوﱠ ارً يشب نيبمﱡ بٍ اتك دحاوﱠ ٌهلإ SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What do you understand by ’Idghaamu ’n-Naaqis?
3.5 Al-’Iqlaab (Conversion) This rule is applied whenever Nuunu’s-Saakinah or Tanwiin is followed by letter ba’/ ب / which is the only letter of ’Iqlaab.
When this happens, substitution takes place and the Nuunu’s-Saakinah or Tanwin is converted into a voweless letter mim/ م / and uttered with nasalisation.
Examples: Nuunu’s-Saakinah with the letter of ’Iqlaab IN TWO WORDS IN ONE WORD كروب نأ نذبنيل دعب نم ينوئبنأ 24 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Tanwiin with the letter of ’Iqlaab FATHATAAN KASRATAAN DAMMATAAN ةيصانلاب اعفسنل امب سفن ديعب عجر SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 What is the letter of ’Iqlaab?
3.6 Al-’Ikhfaa’ (Hiding) This is the fourth rule governing Nuunu’s-Sakinah and Tanwiiin in Tajwiid.
The letter before which Nuunu’s-Saakinah and Tanwiin are hidden are the remaining 15 letter of the Arabic Alphabet different from the thirteen already used for ’Izhaar, ’Idghaam and ’Iqlaab.
They are indicated in the following Arabic couplet by the first letter of each word.
امس – دق –صخش – داج – مك – انﺛ – اذ – فص املاظ – عض – ىقت – يف – دز – ابيط – مد Application Whenever any of these 15 letters follows Nuunu’s- Saakinah or Tanwiin either in one word of the Nuunu’s- Saakinah or Tanwiin ends the first word while any of the fifteen letters starts the next word, the Nuunu ’s- Saakinah or Tanwiin is suppressed and moved toward the letter.
This is done by nor allowing the tip of the tongue to touch the alveola which is the point of articulation of /n/ .
Hence, the production of /n/ is not sharp.
However, the nasality (Ghunnah) that naturally accompanies nasal sounds remains.
This is similar to pronouncing ‘n’ in English words 'confab contact, bundle'.
Examples are: Nuunu ’s-Saakinah with some letters of ’Ikhfaa’ IN TWO WORDS IN ONE WORD مھتلاص نْ ع بصَ نْ اف رﱟ شَ نْ م تﱠقشَ نْ ا لكُ نْ م كَ نْ ع اھنودُ نْ م دَ نْ ع 25 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Tanwiin with some letters of ’Ikhfaa’: FATHATAAN KASRATAAN DAMMATAAN ةبرقم اذَ ًاميتي ىذِ مٍ وي ريدَق مٌ يلع اًّفص اًّفص ارًّ شَ ةٍ رذ ةيراجَ نٌ يع SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Mention the letters of ’Ikhfaa’.
Put a ring around the words or phrases where ’Ikhfaa’ is applicable in the text below.
وْ َأ - ىكﱠ زﱠ َي ُهﱠلعَ َل كَ يرِ دْ ُي امَ وَ - ىمَ عْ ﱞلاا ُهءَ آجَ نَأ - ىﱠلوَ َتوَ سَ َبعَ امَ وَ - ىدﱠ صَ َت ُهَل تَ نَأفَ - ىنَ غْ َتسْ ا نِ مَ امﱠ َأ - ى رَ كْ ذﱢ لا ُهعَ َفنَتَف رُ كﱠ ذﱠ َي تَ نَأَف - ىشَ خْ يَ وَ ُھوَ - ىعَ سْ يَ كَ ءَ آجَ نمَ امﱠ َأوَ - ىكﱠ زﱠ َي ﱠلاَأ كَ يْ َلعَ ةٍ مَ رﱠ كَ مﱡ فٍ حُ صُ ىَف ُهرَ كَ ذَ ءَ آشَ نمَ َف ٌةرَ كِ ذْ َت اھَ ﱠنِإ ﱠلاكَ - ىﱠھَلَت ُهنْ عَ .ةرَ رَ َب مٍ ارَ كِ ةٍ رَ َفسَ ىدِ يْ َأبِ ةٍ رَ ﱠھطَ مﱡ ةٍ عَ وُفرْ مﱠ 4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed the four rules of Tajwiid that governs Nuunu’s- Saakinah and Tanwin (Voweless Nuun and Nunation) which are ’Izhaar with six letters, ’Idghaam with six letters, ’Iqlaab with one letter and ’Ikhfaa with 15 letters.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the four rules of Tajwiid governing Nuunu’s-Saakinah and Tanwiin.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by ’Izhaaran Mutlaqan?
2.
Mention the letters of the following rules of Tajwiid and explain each one of them.
a.
’Izhaar b.
’Idghaam c. ’Iqlaab d. ’Ikhfaa 26 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003) Tajwiid Made Easy.
Lagos: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
pp 45 – 53.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003) Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Quran (Part 1).
Ontario, Canada.
Al-Attique Publishers Inc, pp 17 – 24.
Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwid.
USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc. pp 50 – 60.
Visit: www.software.informer.com 27 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 2 AL-MIIMU ’L-MUSHADDADAH WA ’N- NUUNU ’L-MUSHADDADAH (THE STRESSED MIIM AND NUUN) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Application 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall examine the rule of Tajwiid that govern the recitation of streesed Miim and Nuun in the Quran.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what is meant by Al-Miimu ’l-Mushaddadah wa’n-Nuunu ’l-Mushaddadah • explain the rule of Tajwiid that governs them • apply the rule in your recitation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition Al-Miimu ’l-Mushaddadah wa’n-Nuunu ’l-Mushaddadah refer to stressed Miim [ مّ ] and stressed Nuun [ نّ ] respectively.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What do you understand by al-Miimu ’l-Mushaddadah wa’n-Nuunu ’l- Mushaddadah?
28 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.2 Application The rule governing the pronunciation of al-Miimu ’l-Mushaddadah wa’n-Nuunu ’l-Mushaddadah in Tajwiid is known as ’Izhaaru’l- Ghunnah (manifestation of Nasality).
This is because the two letters (Nuun and Miim) are nasal sounds and with the tashdiid, the nasality becomes more pronounced.
The stressed Nuun and Miim are thus pronounced with nasality wherever they occur in a word.
Even where the reciter is stopping on a stressed Nuun or Miim, the nasality will still be manifested in its pronunciation to indicate the original tashdiid.
The duration of the nasality (Ghunnah) should not, because of the tashdiid exceed the normal duration of Ghunnah which is two measures of Harakah.
Examples: EXAMPLES AT EXAMPLES IN THE STRESSED MIIM THE FINAL MIDDLE OF AND NUUN POSITION WORDS مّ ﺛ ، مّ ع امﱠ م مّ نﱠ لئستل ساﱠنلا و ةﱠنجلا نم نّ SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What do you understand by ’Izhaar Ghunnah?
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt in this unit that ’Izhaaru ’l-Ghunnah is the Tajwiid rule that governs the recitation of stressed Miim and Nuun and that both are pronounced with nasalisation (Ghunnah) wherever they occur in a word because they are both originally nasal sounds.
5.0 SUMMARY The rule of Tajwiid that governs the stressed Miim and Nuun has been discussed in this unit.Stressed Miim and Nuun are treated together in Tajwiid because they are both nasal Quranic letters.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the rule of Tajwiid that governs the stressed Miim and Nuun.
2.
Underline all the stressed Miim and Nuun in the text below.
29 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID وْ َأ - ىكﱠ زﱠ َي ُهﱠلعَ َل كَ يرِ دْ ُي امَ وَ - ىمَ عْ ﱞلاا ُ هءَ آجَ نَأ - ىﱠلوَ َتوَ سَ َبعَ امَ وَ - ىدﱠ صَ َت ُهَل تَ نَأفَ - ىنَ غْ َتسْ ا نِ مَ امﱠ َأ - ىرَ كْ ذﱢ لا ُهعَ َفنتَ َف رُ كﱠ ذﱠ َي تَ نَأَف - ىشَ خْ يَ وَ ُھوَ - ىعَ سْ يَ كَ ءَ آجَ نمَ امﱠ َأوَ - ىكﱠ زﱠ َي ﱠلاَأ كَ يْ َلعَ ةٍ مَ رﱠ كَ مﱡ فٍ حُ صُ ىَف ُهرَ كَ ذَ ءَ آشَ نمَ َف ٌةرَ كِ ذْ َت اھَ ﱠنِإ ﱠ لاكَ - ىﱠھَلَت ُهنْ عَ .ةرَ رَ َب مٍ ارَ كِ ةٍ رَ َفسَ ىدِ يْ َأبِ ةٍ رَ ﱠھطَ مﱡ ةٍ عَ وُفرْ مﱠ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwiid Made Easy.
Lagos: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
pp 55 – 56.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003).
Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Quran (Part 1).
Canada: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. p. 16.
Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwiid USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc.pp 61 – 62.
Visit: www.software.informer.com 30 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 3 AL-MIIMU ’S-SAAKINAH (VOWELESS MIIM) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Labial Assimilation 3.3 Labial Hiding 3.4 Labial Manifestation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION What you are about to learn in this unit is the rule of Tajwiid that govern the recitation of Miim Saakinah (voweless letter Miim) in the Quran.This is an aspect of the Quran with three rules of Tajwiid governing it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • give the meaning of al-Miimu ’s-Saakinah • explain the rules of Tajwiid that govern Miim Saakinah • apply the rules in your recitation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition Al-Miimu’s-Saakinah refers to any voweless Miim in the Quran (that is, any Miim that carries the sign of Sukuun).
There are three rules in the science of Tajwiid that govern this Miim.
They are: 1 Labial assimilation يوفشلا ماغدلإا 2 Labial hiding يوفشلا ءافخلإا 3 Labial Manifestation يوفشلا راھظلإا SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain what is meant by al-Miimu’s-Saakinah.
31 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.2 Labial Assimilation (Al-’ Idghamu ’Sh-Shafawi) This rule is applied whenever Miimu’s-Saakinah is followed by a vowelised Miim.
The rule is applied by assimilating the voweless Miim in the vowelised one with the result that the second one (the vowelised) now becomes stressed (Mushaddadah) while it is also pronounced with nasalisation (Ghunnah).
This kind of assimilation is known as ’idghaam mutamaathilayn (meaning - assimilation of two identical letters).
Examples are: نينمؤمﱡ متنك نإ مُ مْ نوئاشي امﱠ مھل مَ مْ عوج نمﱢ مھمعطأ مِ مْ SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What do you understand by al-’Idghaamu’ sh-Shafawi?
3.3 Labial Hiding (Al-'Ikhfa'u ’Sh-Shafawi) This rule is applied to any voweless Miim that is followed by a vowelised letter Baa, in which case, the pronunciation of the voweless Miim is suppressed while the Miim sound is moved towards Baa.
This is done by not allowing a tight stricture between the two lips, which are the two articulators, involved in the production of letters /m/ and /b/.
Note that the suppression of Miim is to be accompanied with nasalisation (Ghunnah).
This can only occur in two words.
Examples are: كلذ دعب مكنإ ، ةراجحب مھيمرت ، مھب مھبر ، هب متنك ، هب مھ SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What do you understand by al-Ikhfaa’u ’sh-Shafawi?
3.4 Labial Manifestation (Al-'Izharu ’Sh-Shafawi) Whenever any letter of the Arabic alphabet with the exception of Miim and Baa' follows Miim Saakinah, labial manifestation is applied on the Miim Saakinah.
The letter Miim is pronounced clear and sharp with the two articulators (that is, the two lips) touching each other sharply and 32 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID withdrawing instantly.
However, in case the letter that follows the voweless Miim is Waaa' or Faa', the Miim must be carefully pronounced in a way that it is pronounced clearer and sharper.
Examples: IN TWO WORDS IN ONE WORD مْ كنإ ،ريغَ مْ ھيلع ، اھيفِ مْ ھ ،نورَتمْ ي ،تَ مْ عنأ ،دُ مْ حلا اموَ مدَ مْ دف SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What do you understand by al-’Izhaaru ’sh-Shafawi?
4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed the three rules of Tajwiid governing al-Miimu’s- Saakinah, namely: Labial assimilation يوفشلا ماغدلإا which has to do with two Miims [م م], labial hiding يوفشلا ءافخلإا which has to do with Miim and Baa' [ ب م ] and labial manifestation يوفشلا راھظلإا which has to do with other letters aside from letter Miim and Baa'.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt about the three rules of Tajwiid that govern al-Miimu’s-Saakinah.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give a detailed explanation of the following rules of a voweless Miim: a. Labial assimilation يوفشلا ماغدلإا b. Labial hiding يوفشلا ءافخلإا c. Labial Manifestation يوفشلا راھظلإا 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwiid Made Easy.
Lagos: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
pp 56 – 60.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003) Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Qur'an (Part 1) Canada: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. pp 38 – 39.
Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwid.
USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc. pp 22 – 36.
33 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 4 AL-LAAMAATU ’S-SAWAAKIN (VOWELESS LAAMS) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Laam of Particularisation: فيرعتلا ملا 3.2.1 Manifestation 3.2.2 Assimilation Verbal Laam: لعفلا ملا 3.
3.3 Assimilation Manifestation 3.4 Laam of Particles: فرحلا ملا Assimilation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are about to learn the rules of Tajwid that govern the recitation of the three diferent types of voweless lams in the Quran.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention and define the various types of voweless Laams in the Quran • mention and explain the rules of Tajwiid that governs them • apply the rules in your recitation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition Laamu’s-Saakinah refers to a voweless laam.
There are three kinds of voweless laam in the Quran.
They are: 1 Laam of particularisation: فيرعتلا ملا 2 Verbal Laam: لعفلا ملا 3 Laam of particles: فرحلا ملا SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention the kinds of voweless Laam present in the Quran.
34 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.2 Laam of Particularisation فيرعتلا This is the voweless laam in the definite article لا.
Since this laam preceeds only nouns, it is equally referred to as laamu’l- ’ism (nominal laam) by Tajwiid scholars.
Two rules are applicable to this voweless laam: manifestation (izhaar) and assimilation (idghaam).
3.2.1 Manifestation Whenever this voweless laam is followed by any of the moon letters contained in this mnemonic sentence: "ةميقع فخ و كجح غبا" The Laam will be made manifest.
It will be pronounced sharp and clear with the tip of the tongue touching the alveola (tooth ridge), which is the point of articulation of Laam, and withdrawing almost immediately.
Examples are: VOWELESS LAAM OF MOON LETTERS OF PARTICULARIZATION MANIFESTATION FOLLOWED BY MOON LETTERS OF MANIFESTATION لبلإا ا ْ بابلا ب ْ بيغلا غ ْ جاحلا ح ْ رابجلا ج ْ بلكلا ك ْ باھولا و ْ فوخلا خ ْ ناقرفلا ف ْ شيعلا ع ْ راھقلا ق ْ رسييلا ي ْ نيبملا م ْ ةيادھلا ه 35 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Note that there are some voweless Laams that are originally integral part of certain nouns in the Quran.
Examples are: ْ ْ ْ ناطلسب ، ناملغ ، مكتنسلأ This laam is treated as laamu’l-’ism (nominal noun) and it is pronounced clearly with ’izhaar (Manifestation).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention all the Moon letters of Manifestation.
2.
Cite examples of Quranic words that start with moon letters.
3.2.2 Assimilation Laam of particularisation is assimilated when it is followed by any of the 14 sun letters indicated in the following Arabic couplet by the first letter of each word.
معن – اذ – فض – زفت – امحر – لص – مﺛ – بط مركلل – افيرش – رز – نظ – ءوس – عد The Laam is assimilated and not pronounced at all.
Examples are: VOWELESS LAAM OF SUN LETTERS OF PARTICULARIZATION ASSIMILATION FOLLOWED BY SUN LETTERS OF ASSIMILATION ّ بيطلا ط ّ باوثلا ث دمصّ لا ص نمحرّ لا ر باوّتلا ت ءوضّ لا ض ّ ركاذلا ذ روّنلا ن ليلدّ لا د ملاسّ لا س ّ ملاظلا ظ 36 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID دھزّ لا ز ديدشّ لا ش ّ بقللا ل SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Mention the Arabic couplet that contains the Sun letters of Assimilation.
2.
Cite examples of Quranic words that start with sun letters.
3.3 Verbal Laam Verbal Laam is any voweless laam in any verb like مكاھلْا .
The two rules applicable to this Laam are Assimilation (’Idghaam) and Manifestation (’Izhaar).
3.3.1 Assimilation Voweless verbal Laam is assimilated whenever it is followed by either \ل\ or \ر\ which thus becomes doubled with the sign of Tashdiid.
Examples are: VOWELESS LAAM WITH VOWELESS LAAM WITH LETTER RAA LETTER LAAM لُقوَ ،املع يندز برﱠ لُقوَ ضرلأا نمﱢل لُق ، مكﱠل لُقأ ملأ امھمحرا برﱠ مھﱠل لُقوَ ، SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
When is the voweless verbal Laam assimilated?
2.
Give examples of assimilated verbal laam.
3.3.2 Manifestation Voweless verbal Laam is pronounced with manifestation if any of the remaining 26 letters follows it.
The Laam is pronounced clear and sharp with the tip of the tongue touching the alveola.
Examples are: VOWELESS VERBAL LAAM OF MANIFESTATION ْ ْ ريبك هيف لاتق لْ ق ، كاصع قلأ ، مكاھلا Note that imperative voweless laam that prefixes verbs with a third person pronoun to instruct or give an order is treated as laamu’l- fi'l 37 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID (voweless verbal laam) The imperative voweless laam is usually preceded by either of these three particles: مﱠ ُﺛ ، وَ ، فَ .
It is pronounced clearly with manifestation (’Izhaar).
Examples are: ْ ناسنلإا رظنيلف ف ْ قتيلو و ْ عطقيل مﺛ مﺛ SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 1.
When is the voweless verbal Laam pronounced with ’Izhaar?
2.
Give examples of manifested verbal laam.
3.4 Voweless Laam of Particles The two particles [فرح] with Laamu’s-Saakinah in the Quran are لھ and لب .
The same rules of Manifestation and Assimilation as discussed under verbal.
Laam are also applicable to these two particles.
3.4.1 Assimilation When voweless Laam of particles is followed by either letter Raa or Laam, the voweless Laam of particle is merged into the letter.
Examples are: كﱠل لھ is read as كﱠلھ نومركت ّلا لب is read as نومركت ﱠلاب is read as نار لب نارّ ب SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 1.
When is the voweless Laam of particles pronounced with ’Idghaam?
2.
Cite examples of voweless laam of particle read with ’idghaam.
38 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.4.1 MANIFESTATION The voweless Laam of particles is pronounced clearly when followed by other letters different from laam and raa'.
Examples are: لھ لب بوﺛ لھ ، ايمس هل عمست لھ اولاق لب ، قحلاب اوبذك لب SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 1.
When is the voweless Laam of particles pronounced with ’Izhaar?
2.
Cite examples of voweless Laam of particle read with ’izhaar.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed the two rules of Tajwiid, namely: manifestation [راھظلإا] and assimilation [ماغدلإا] that governs the three kinds of voweless Laams present in the Quran, namely, Laam of particularisation, verbal Laam and Laam of particles.
5.0 SUMMARY The two rules of Tajwiid governing all the voweless Laams present in the Quran have been discussed in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the rules of Tajwiid that govern each of the following kinds of voweless Laam: • Laam of particularisation • Verbal Laam • Laam of particles 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwiid Made Easy.
Lagos: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
pp 61 – 66.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003).
Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Quran (Part 2).
Canada: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. pp 50 – 55.
Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwid.
USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc. p 43.
Visit: www.software.informer.co 39 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 5 HAA’U ’D-DAMIIR (HAA' OF PRONOUN) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 As-Sillatu’l-Qasiirah 3.3 As-Sillatu’ t-Tawiilah 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you are going to learn about the rules of Tajwiid that govern the recitation of Haa’u’d-damiir (Haa' of pronoun) and the conditions under which the rules are applied.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define Haa' of pronoun • mention the rules of Tajwiid that governs Haa' of pronoun • state the conditions under which the rules are applied • apply the rules in your recitation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition Haa’ of pronoun is the pronominal suffix that denotes the third person singular pronoun when used in the accusative or genitive case.
It is either used with vowel Dammah or Kasrah and it is either a suffix to a noun in the case of the genitive or to a verb in the case of the accusative.
Note that this Haa’ is different from the Haa’ in the following Quranic words which is not a pronominal suffix but an integral part of the words: ، هتني مل ، هقفن ام ،ركنملا نع هناو ، هكاوف SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What do you understand by Haa’ of pronoun?
40 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.2 As-Sillatu’l-Qasiirah Whenever Haa’ is preceded and succeeded by vowelised letters, the rule is that it should be pronounced with Sillah.By sillah, we mean elongation of vowels Dammah and Kasrah with an addition of a voweless Waa’ and Yaa’ respectively.
This kind of elongation is known as Al-Maddu’s-Sillatu’l-Qasiirah.
The duration of the Sillah is equal to two measures of a Harakah.
Examples: و تاومسلا بيغ هل ، ادشرم ايلو هل دجت نلف و و دونكل هبرل ،ضرلأا < SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What do you understand by Sillah?
3.3 AS-SILLATU’T-TAWIILAH If the Haa’ falls in between two vowelised letters with the succeeding one being a Hamzatu’l-Qatc (cutting Hamzah), the duration of the Sillah will be between two and five measures of Harakah.
This is known as Al- Maddu’s-Sillatu’t-Tawiilah.
Examples: .دحأ ~ هري مل نا بسحيأ هدلخأ ~ هلام نأ بسحي ، و و نّ إ ~ هب < However, the two rules of Sillah discussed above are not applicable to the Haa’ of pronoun in three states.
These three states are: (a) When Haa’ of pronoun is preceded by a voweless letter as in هيلا ، هنم (b) When Haa’ of pronoun is succeeded by a voweless letter as in هل دمحلا (c) When Haa’ of pronoun falls in between two voweless letters as in ﷲ ُهيلع SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 When are the two rules of Haa’ of pronoun not applicable?
41 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 4.0 CONCLUSION Al-Maddu’s-Sillatu’l- Qasiirah and Al-Maddu’s-Sillatu’t-Tawiilah are the two rules of Tajwiid that govern Haa’ of pronoun.
The two rules are applicable to Haa’ of pronoun except in three states.
5.0 SUMMARY The two rules of Tajwiid governing Haa’ of pronoun have been mentioned and explained in this unit.Also discussed are the conditions under which the rules are applied and the exceptions to the rules.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain what is meant by Haa’ of pronoun.
2.
When is Al-Maddu’-s-Sillatu’l-Qasiirah applied on Haa’ of pronoun?
3.
When is Al- Maddu’s-Sillatu’t-Tawiilah applied on Haa’ of pronoun?
4.
State the three conditions under which Maddu Sillah is not applicable to Haa’ of pronoun.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwiid Made Easy.
Lagos: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
pp 67 – 69.
Visit: www.software.informer.com Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwid.
USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc. pp 63 – 65.
42 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID MODULE 3 Unit 1 Tafkhiim and Tarqiiq Unit 2 Al-’Idghaam (Assimilation) Unit 3 Al-Maddu wa’l-Qasr (Elongation and Shortening) Unit 4 Waqf (Stops) Unit 5 Hamzatu ’l-Wasl (Silent Hamzah) UNIT 1 TAFKHIIM AND TARQIIQ CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Tafkhiim and Tarqiiq of Laam of Lafzu’l-Jalaalah 3.2 Tafkhiimu’r-Raa’ (Heavy Pronunciation of Raa’) 3.3 Tarqiiqu ’r-Raa’ 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about Tafkhiim and Tarqiiq, that is heavy and soft pronunciation as they apply to letter Laam of Lafzu ’l-Jalaalah and letter Raa’ in Tajwid.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain Tafkhiim and Tarqiiq • explain the conditions under whiich Laam of Lafzu’l-Jalaalah is • pronounced heavily and softly • explain the conditions under whiich Raa’ is pronounced heavily and softly • apply these rules in your recitation.
43 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Tafkhiim and Tarqiiq of Laam of Lafzu’l-Jalaalah Lafzu ’l- Jalaalah refers to the word ﷲ .Laam Lafzu’l- Jalaalah is the second laam in the word ﷲ or the word مھللا.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Which Laam is referred to as laam of Lafzu ’l-Jalaalah?
Application Laam Lafzu’l- Jalaalah is pronounced heavily whenever it is preceded by either vowel Dammah or Fathah.
Examples: مھللا مَ يرم نبا ىسيع لاق ، ﷲ دَ ھش ، ﷲ مُ ھدازف If, however, it is preceded by a Kasrah, it is pronounced softly.
Examples: ﷲ مِسب ، dِ دمحلا ، ﷲ نِ اوضر SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 When is the Laam of Lafzu’l-Jalaalah pronounced softly?
3.2 Tafkhiimu ’r-Raa’ (Heavy Pronunciation of Raa’) Letter Raa’ is pronounced heavily (that is with velarisation) (a) When it bears Fathah or Fathataan, Dammah or Dammataan.
Examples: رٌ وغغ ،ارً يبك ، اھفرخزُ ، انلسرُ ، رَ خاء ، رُ كذ ، رَ مأ (b) If it is voweless (with either a temporary or a permanent [Sukuun] but prededed by a letter with Fathah or Dammah.
Examples are: ناقرُفلا ، هب متلسرْ ُأ ، رْ ُظناو ، اھسرْ مُ ، ثرْ حَ لا ، ضرْ َلأا ، ىب رْ َأ يھ (c) If Raa’ bears Sukuun and it is preceded by ’Alif or Waa’ of elongation.
Example: رْ وفك ، رْ وفغ ، رْ اﱠفغلا ، رْ اﱠنلا 44 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID (d) Also, if Raa’ bears Sukuun and it is preceded by Hamzatu’l-wasl.
Examples are: متبترْ ا ، يعجرْ ا ، امھمحرْ ا (e) Also, where Raa’ bears Sukuun and it is preceded by a permanent Kasrah but followed immediately by one of the seven letters of Tafkhiim (namely: ظق طغض صخ)which bears Fathah or Dammah, all occurring in one word.
Examples are: ساطرْ ِق ، داصرْ مِ ، ةقرْ ِف SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention any three conditions under which letter Raa’ is read with velarisation.
3.3 Tarqiiqu ’r-Raa’ (Soft Pronunciation of Raa’) Letter Raa’ is pronounced softly: (i) when it bears a Kasrah or Kasrataan.
Examples: نيمراغلاو ، تلااسر ، قزر ، رﱟ ب ِ ِ ِ (ii) when it is temporarily or permanently voweless and the letter preceding it bears kasrah.
Example: سودرْ فِ ، نوعرْ فِ ، رْ دِ اقل (iii) when it bears a temporary Sukuun and preceded by a Yaa’ of elongation.
Example: ريصب ، ريدق ، ريذن ، ريشب SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 State the conditions under which letter Raa’ is read softly.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed the Tafkhiim and Tarqiiq of Laam of Lafzu’l- Jalaalah and letter Raa’and the conditions under which both are read with Tafkhiim and Tarrqiiq.
The Laam of Lafzu’l-Jalaalah is 45 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID pronounced heavily in two states and softly in one state while letter Raa’ is pronounced heavily in five states and softly in three states.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about Laam of Lafzu’l-Jalaalah and that it is pronounced heavily in two states and softly in one state.You have equally learnt about heavy and soft pronunciation of letter Raa’, which is pronounced heavily in five states and softly in three states.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by the term Lafzu’l-jalaalah?
2.
Explain the rules of Tajwiid as regards Lafzu’l-jalaaah.
3.
Explain the rules of Tajwiid as regards letter Raa’.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwiid Made Easy.
Nigeria: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
pp 70 – 72.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003).
Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Quran (Part 2).
Canada: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. pp 43 – 49.
Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwid.
Muslim Community Center, Inc. USA: pp 43 – 48.
Visit: www.software.informer.com 46 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 2 AL-’IDGHAAM (ASSIMILATION) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 ’Idghaamu’l-Mutamaathilayn 3.2 ’Idghaamu’l-Mutajaanisayn 3.3 ’Idghaamu’l-Mutaqaaribayn 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION ’Idghaam is assimilation of a voweless letter in a vowelised one that occurs immediately after it.
Consequently, the vowelised one becomes stressed (Mushaddadah).
’Idghaamu is of three kinds.
Each one of them is discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • give the definition of ’Idghaam • mention and explain the three kinds of ’Idghaam • apply the rules in your recitation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT ’Idghaamu ’l-Mutamaathilayn This refers to two letters that have the same place and manner of articulation coming after each other with the first one voweless and the second one vowelised.
When this happens, the voweless is assimilated in the vowelised one, which thus becomes doubled.
Examples are: مھتراجﱢت تحبر Read as مھتراجﱢتحَ بر كﱠل لھ Read as كﱠلھ كاصعﱢب برضا Read as كاصعﱢبرِ ضا نّھھركي Read as نّھركي اولخدﱠ دقو Read as اولخدﱠ َقو 47 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Give an example of ’Idghaamu ’l-Mutamaathilayn.
3.2 ’Idghaamu ’l- Mutajaanisayn This refers to two letters that share the same place of articulation but differ in manner with the first one having Sukuun and the second having a vowel.
When this occurs, there is assimilation of the first in the second.
This kind of assimilation is, however, limited to certain letters.
These letters are given below with examples.
Read as Examples Letters نيبﱠتق نيبﱠت دق ت \ د امكتوعدﱠ بيجأ امكتوعدﱠ تبيجأ د \ ت ةفئاﱠطمھ ةفئاﱠط تمھ ط \ ت مُترﱠ ف مُتطرّ ف ت \ ط اوملﱠظإ اوملﱠظ ذإ ظ \ ذ SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention the letters of ’Idghaamu ’l-Mutajaanisayn.
3.3 ’Idghaamu ’l-Mutaqaaribayn This kind of assimilation takes place when two letters with close place of articulation but different manner of articulation follow each other with the first one voweless and the second one vowelised.
Examples are: مكﱡ قلخن ملأ Read as مكﱡ لخن ملأ برﱠ لُق Read as برﱠ ُق هعفرﱠ لب Read as هعفرﱠ ب Falling under ’Idghaamu ’l-Mutaqaaribayn is the voweless letter Nuun of the mystic letter Siin [س] in سي which is immediately followed by a vowelised letter Waa’ [و] i.e.
ميكحلا نآرقلا و سي .
The letter Nuun is assimilated in the vowelised letter Waa’ that follows it.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Give an example of ’Idghaamu’l-Mutaqaaribayn.
4.0 CONCLUSION There are three types of ’Idghaam.
These are: ’Idghaamu ’l- Mutamaathilayn, ’Idghaamu ’l-Mutajaanisayn and ’Idghaamu ’l- 48 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Muataqaaribayn.
’Idghaamu’l-Mutajaanisayn is limited to the following letters: ظ ، ذ ، ط ، ت ، د .
5.0 SUMMARY The definition of ’Idghaam has been given and the three kinds of ’Idghaam have been mentioned and explained to you in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How many are the types of ’Idghaam?
2.
Explain and give examples of the following types of ’Idghaam.
• Mutamaathilayn • Mutajaanisayn • Mutaqaaribayn 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwid Made Easy.
Nigeria: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
pp 72 – 75.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003).
Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Quran (Part 2) Canada: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. pp 60 – 70.
Visit: www.software.informer.com 49 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 3 AL-MADD (ELONGATION) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Kinds of Elongation 3.2.1 Basic Elongation 3.2.2 Derived or Secondary Elongation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The lesson you are about to learn in this unit is an important aspect of Tajwiid because when a letter with elongation is shortened and the one to be shortened is elongated, it could bring about a distortion in meaning.
A very good example of this is the word ''Akbar'' in the Quran.If the vowel fathat on letter Baa’ is elongated and read as ''Akbaar'', the meaning changes from 'great' to 'drums'.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this, you should be able to: • give the definition of Madd • mention and explain all the kinds of Madd under basic and derived elongation • apply the rules in your recitation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition Madd means elongation or lengthening of sounds.
Its occurrence is due to the presence of one of the letters of elongation.
There are three letters of elongation.
These include the following.
(a) Voweless letter ’Alif preceded by a Fathah.
Example: مان (b) Voweless letter Yaa’ preceded by a Kasrah.
Example: ريس (c) Voweless letter Waa’ preceded by a Dammah.
Example:لوقن 50 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention the three letters of elongation.
3.2 Kinds of Elongation There are two kinds of elongation (1) Basic or natural elongation (Al-Maddu’t-Tabici) (2) Derived or secondary elongation (Al-Maddu’l-Farci) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention the two types of elongation.
3.2.1 Basic Elongation Basic elongation occurs naturally without any extra effort in its pronunciation.
This elongation takes place whenever: (i) A Fathah is followed by voweless ’Alif.
Examples are: اَھ ، اَي ، اجَ (ii) A Kasrah is followed by a voweless Yaa’.Examples are: ، يمِ ، يسِ يشِ (iii) A Dammah is followed by a voweless Waa’.
Examples are: وُل ، وُف وغُ ، It is, however, a condition that these voweless letters are not succeeded by a Hamzah as in ءاج or another voweless letter as in نْ يمِ لَاعَ لْا بﱢ رَ .
The duration of this kind of elongation is equal to that of two measures of Harakah.
It cannot be shorter than this and anything longer than this makes it unnatural.
Other kinds of elongation that are considered basic because of their duration are Maddu’l-Badal, Maddu’l-‘Iwad and Maddu’s-Sillati’l- Qasiirah.
(1) Maddu’l-Badal This Madd occurs whenever Hamzah is followed by a letter of elongation.
The Madd is originally a voweless Hamzah.
The voweless Hamzah is substituted with a letter of elongation.
Examples are: اونماء Originally اونمأأ اناميإ Originally انامإإ اوتوأ Originally اوتأأ 51 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID (2) Maddu’l-‘Iwad Maddu’l-‘Iwad takes place whenever a reciter stops on Fathataan which is read with elongation instead of Tanwiin.
Examples are: ً اميحر Will be read as َ اميحر ً انيبم Will be read as َ انيبم (3) Maddu’s-Sillati’l-Qasiirah Whenever Haa’ of pronoun is preceded and succeeded by vowelised letters, the rule is that it should be pronounced with Sillah which is the basic elongation of vowels Dammah and Kasrah.Remember that you have learnt about this under Unit 5 of Module 2.
Examples are: ضرلأا و تاومسلا بيغ هل ، ادشرم ايلو هل دجت نلف و و SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention some other kinds of basic elongation.
3.2.2 Derived or Secondary Elongation Class under this category includes any elongation whose duration is longer than that of the basic elongation.
The duration of secondary elongation is between four and six measures of Harakah.
Secondary elongation is derived whenever a basic elongation is followed by either Hamzah as in قحلا ءاج or Sukuun as in ةقاحلا .
The Sukuun could either be a basic one or derived one due to a stop SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What do you understand by “derived elongation?” Types of Derived Elongation There are six types of derived elongation.
They are: (i) Al-Maddul’-Muttasilu ’l-Waajib (ii) Al-Maddu’l-Munfasilu’l-jaa’iz (iii) Maddu’l-Farq (iv) Al-Maddu’l-‘Aridu li’s-Sukuun 52 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID (v) Al-Maddu’l-liin (vi) Al-Maddu’l-Laazim (i) Al-Maddu 'l-Muttasilu 'l-Waajib This kind of elongation is realised when a letter of elongation is immediately followed by a Hamzah both occurring in one and same word e.g ءاج .
In this example, the letter of elongation is the voweless 'Alif that follows letter Jiim.
This 'Alif is immediately followed by a Hamzah; all constituting one word.
This explains the reason why this Madd is called Muttasil.
It is also referred to as al-Waajib because it is compulsory, based on the consensus of reciters, to prolong it longer than the duration of the basic Madd.
The duration of this Madd is between four and six measures of harakah.
Other examples include: ءيج ، ءوس ، ةكئلآلملا ، ءآم ، ةفئآطلا ، ءآمسلا (ii) Al-Maddu 'l-Munfasilu 'l- Jaa’iz Maddu ’l-Munfasil occurs when a letter of elongation ends a particular word and Hamzah starts the next word.
It is for this reason that it is called al-Munfasil.
It is also referred to as al-Jaa’iz, (optional) because some reciters prefer to shorten it.
Thus, its duration is between two and five measures of harakah.
Examples are: آﱠنإ ، ىنغأ آم ، مكسفنأ~يفو ، ﷲ ىلإ اوبوت ، كاردأ آمو كانيطعأ (iii) Maddu 'l-Farq This Madd takes place whenever hamzatu ’l-’ istifhaam used in asking question is followed by hamzatu ’l- wasl of a Shamsiyyah noun.The hamzatu ’l- wasl becomes ’Alif of elongation and because of the Tashdiid of the Shamsiyyah noun, the elongation becomes a secondary one called Maddu ’l- farq.This kind of Madd occurs in four places in the Quran.
The duration of its elongation is equal to that of six measures of harakah.
The four places are: i.
نييثنلأا مأ مرّ ح نيركذّ لآء : This verse occurs in verses 143 and 144 of chapter 6 [ماعنلأا] of the Qur'an ii.
نوكرشي امأ ريخ dآء .
Q 27 [لمنلا ] V. 59. iii.
مكل نذأ dآء لق .
Q 10 [ سنوي ] V.59.
53 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID (iv) Al-Maddu ’l-‘Aaridu li’s-Sukuun This Madd takes place whenever a temporary Sukuun that occurs due to a stop follows a letter of elongation or a letter of Liin.
The duration of this elongation is two, four or six measures of harakah.
Examples are: نَ وُنمِ ؤْ ُي Will be read as نْ وُنمِ ؤْ ُي نَ يمِ َلاعَ لْ ا بﱢ رَ Will be read as نْ يمِ َلاعَ لْ ا بﱢ رَ فٍ وْ خَ نْ مِ Will be read as فْ وْ خَ نْ مِ (v) Maddu ’l-Liin A voweless letter Waa’ and a voweless letter Yaa’ preceded by the vowel Fathah are referred to as letters of Liin.
Maddu ’l-Liin takes place where any of the two letters of Liin precedes a letter on which a stop is to be made.
The duration of this elongation is two, four or six measures of harakah.
Examples are: شيرُق Will be read as شْ يرُق ٍ فِ يصﱠ لاوَ Will be read as فْ يصﱠ لاوَ فٍ وْ خ َ نْ مِ Will be read as فْ وْ خَ نْ مِ (vi) Al-Maddu ’l-Laazim This Madd occurs whenever a permanent Sukuun comes after a letter of elongation in one and same word regardless of whether a stop is to be made on the Sukuun or not.
The duration of elongation of all kinds of al- Maddu ’l-Laazim is six measures of harakah.
Kinds of Al-Maddu ’l-Laazim Al- Maddu ’l-Laazim is of two kinds.
1.
Al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu ’l-Kalimi: This is the kind of al-Maddu’l- Laazim that occurs in words.
2.
Al-Maddu’l-Laazimu’l-Harfi : This is the kind of al-Maddu’l- Laazim that occurs in letters.
Each of these two kinds is further divided into al-Mukhaffaf and al-Muthaqqal.
Thus, we have: (i) Al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu ’l-Kalimiyyu ’l-Mukhaffaf (ii) Al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu ’l-Kalimiyyu ’l-Muthaqqal (iii) Al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu ’l-Harfiyyu ’l-Mukhaffaf (iv) Al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu ’l-Harfiyyu ’l-Muthaqqal 54 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Al-Maddu 'l-Laazimu 'l-Kalimiyyu 'l-Mukhaffaf This kind of al-Maddu ’l-Laazim appears in a word whenever a letter of elongation is followed immediately in the same word by a permanent Sukuun that appears not with a Shaddah.
Example: نائلْآء In this example, the first Hamzah has elongation.
This elongation is immediately followed by an apparent Sukuun.
Thus, the elongation of the Hamzah will be Laazim (compulsory).
It is also al-Kalimi because it occurs in a word while it is al-Mukhaffaf because the Sukuun is an apparent one.
Al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu’ l-Kalimiyyu ’l-Muthaqqal This type of al-Maddu ’l-Laazim occurs in a word if the permanent Sukuun that follows a letter of elongation is the type that is contained in a Shaddah.
Example: ةّقآحلا In this example, letter ح is followed by an ’Alif of elongation.
This ’Alif is followed by a permanent Sukuun which is hidden in a Shaddah.
Thus, the elongation of letter Haa’ will be Laazim.
It is also al-Kalimi because it occurs in a word while it is al-Muthaqqal because the Sukuun that necessitates the occurrence of al-Maddu’ l-Laazim is contained in a Shaddah.
Other examples are: نوضّ آحت لاو ، نيّلآضّ لا لاو ، ةخّ آصّ لا ، دّ آح You should know, dear students, that the letters of elongation in all these examples are immediately followed by a Tashdiid and Tashdiid is a combination of a voweless and vowelised letter, thus قﱠ is قَ ق◌ْ .
Al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu ’l-Harfi This kind of Madd occurs in the mystic letters found at the beginning of certain chapters of the Quran.
The mystic letters are 14.
They are – س ى – ه – ن – م – ل – ك – ق – ع – ط – ص – ر – ح – ا They are categorised into three: (a) The one in which there is no elongation whatsoever.
This is letter Alif in ملا 55 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID (b) Those in which there is elongation but with short duration [Qasr].
The rule of al-Maddu ’l-Laazim is not applicable to them.
They are the five contained in mnemonic phrase: رٌ ھط يﱞ ح .
(c) Those to which the rule of al-Maddu ’l-Laazim is applicable.
They are the eight letter contained in the mnemonic phrase: صقن مكلسع .
Each of these letters, when seen as a mystic letter at the beginning of a Suurah, is pronounced with six measures of harakah.
Al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu ’l-Harfiyyu ’l-Muthaqqal The only example of this Madd in the Quran is where letters Laam and Miim follow each other in succession at the beginning of some surahs.
This Madd will occur because the last letter of Laam that is, Miim is the first letter of Miim.
Thus, there will be assimilation of the /m/ of Laam into the /m/ of Miim hence the /m/ of Miim will become doubled (mushaddad.
So, ملا will be read thus: ’Alif, laaaaaammiiiiiim.
Al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu ’l-Harfiyyu ’l-Mukhaffaf This Madd will take place whenever any of the eight letters of al-Maddu ’l-Laazimu ’l-Harfi (that is.
مكلسع صقن ) stands alone for example ص .
Also, where two or more of these letters follow in succession but without any assimilation such as the laam in رلا which is to be read as ’Alif, Laaaaaam, Raa’.
Other examples are the kaaf, 'ayn and saad in صعيھك which is to be read as Kaaaaaaf, Haa’, Yaa’, 'Ayyyyyyn, Saaaaaad.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Mention the entire types of Madd under derived elongation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Madd is the elongation of sounds.
Madd is divided into two primary kinds.
These are basic and derived elongation.
Basic elongation has some other kinds of Madd under it.
These are: Maddu ’l-‘Iwad, Maddu ’l-Badal, Maddu ’s-Sillati ’l-Qasiirah.
Derived elongation has six sub- divisions of Madd under it.
These are: al-Maddu’l-Muttasilu ’l-Waajib, al-Maddu ’l-Munfasilu ’l-jaa’iz, Maddu ’l- Farq, al-Maddu ’l-‘Aaridu li ’s-Sukuun, al-Maddu ’l-liin and al-Maddu ’l-Laazim.
The last one, al- Maddu ’l-Laazim, is further divided into two namely; al-Kalimi and al- Harfi with each one of them being either Mukhaffaf or Muthaqqal.
56 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the definition of Madd.You have also learnt about the various kinds of Madd and their sub-divisions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention the two kinds of elongation.
2.
When does basic elongation take place?
3.
What is the duration of elongation for basic Madd?
4.
Mention and explain the other three types of Madd under basic elongation.
5.
When does berived elongation take place?
6.
What is the duration of elongation for derived Madd?
7.
Mention, explain and give examples of the other types of Madd under Derived elongation.
8.
Mention and explain with examples the types of al-Maddu ’l- Laazim 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwiid Made Easy.
Nigeria: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
pp 74 – 86.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003).
Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Qur'an (Part 1).
Canada: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. pp 26 – 37.
Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwid.USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc. pp 66 – 75.
Visit: www.software.informer.com 57 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 4 THE SILENT HAMZAH (HAMZATU ’L-WASL) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Rules of Hamzatu ’l-Wasl 3.2.1 Hamzatu ’l-Wasl with Fathah 3.2.2 Hamzatu ’l-Wasl with Kasrah 3.2.3 Hamzatu ’l-Wasl with Dammah 3.2.4 Elision of Hamzatu ’L-Wasl 3.2.5 Substitution of Hamzatu ’l-Wasl 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you are going to learn about Hamzatu ’l- wasl and the six rules governing it.
The rules are more grammatical in nature.
This knowledge of Arabic grammar will be helpful to you as you proceed in your course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • give the meaning of Hamzatu ’l-Wasl.
• explain the rules of Tajwiid that governs Hamzatu ’l-Wasl • apply the rules in your recitation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition In Arabic, there is a general rule that says, “Do not initiate with a letter that has Sukuun or stop on a letter that has Harakah”.
By Harakah, it means Fathah, Kasrah and Dammah.
Hamzatu ’l-Wasl will be pronounced with Harakah if it is at the initial state (that is, if a word is to be initiated with it) while it will remain silent in a continue recitation (ithat is, where a word is not to be initiated with it).
Hamzatu ’l-Wasl is present in nouns, verbs and particles.
58 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 When is Hamzatu ’l-Wasl read with harakah and when is it read silently?
3.2 Rules of Hamzatu ’l-Wasl 3.2.1 Hamzatu ’l-Wasl with Fathah Hamzatu ’l-Wasl is to be given Fathah during initiation if it starts a .
noun with Laam of particularisation.
Example is: d دمحلا This is the only state where Hamzatu ’l-Wasl is given Fathah during initiation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 When does Hamzatu ’l-Wasl get Fathah if a word is to be initiated with it?
3.2.2 Hamzatu ’l-Wasl with Kasrah Hamzatu ’l-Wasl is to be given Kasrah during initiation if: (i) It starts an indefinite noun.
Examples are: نيتنﺛا ، مسا ، تأرما ، نينﺛا ، ئرما ، ىتنبا ، تنبا ، نبا (ii) It starts a trilateral verb with the third letter having Fathah or Kasrah.
Examples are: حَتفِا ، عجِ رِا ، برِ ضِا ، بَھذِا (iii) It starts the past tense, the imperative form and the verbal noun of a five or a six-letter verb.
Examples are: جارختسِا ، جْ رِ ختسِا ، جَ رختسِا \ قلاطنِا ، قلِ طنِا ،َ قلطنِا SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 When does Hamzatu ’l-Wasl get Kasrah if a word is to be initiated with it?
59 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.2.3 Hamzatu ’l-Wasl with Dammah Hamzatu ’l-Wasl is to be given Dammah during initiation if it starts a trilateral verb with the third letter having Dammah.
Examples are: جرُ خُا ، لخُ دُا ، رُظنُا ، لُ تُا This is the only state where it can be initiated with Dammah.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 When does Hamzatu ’l-Wasl get Dammah if a word is to be initiated with it?
3.2.4 Elision of Hamzatu ’L-Wasl Hamzatu ’l-Wasl is to be erased if it comes after an interrogative Hamzah.
Examples are: بيغلا علطأ ، ابذك ﷲ ىلع ىرتفأ ، متذختأ لق ، تربكتسأ SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 When is Hamzatu ’l-Wasl erased?
3.2.5 Substitution of Hamzatu ’l-Wasl Hamzatu ’l-Wasl is substituted with an ’Alif of elongation if it falls in between an interrogative Hamzah and Laam of particularisation.
Examples are: نيركذّ لآء dآء Remember that Hamzatu ’l-Wasl is to be silent if you are not initiating a word with it.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 When is Hamzatu ’l-Wasl substituted?
4.0 CONCLUSION Hamzatu ’l-Wasl is to be silent if a word is not to be initiated with it.
Where a word is to be initiated with it, it can either have Fathah, Kasrah or Dammah as the case may be.
60 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about Hamzatu ’l-Wasl and the rules of Tajwiid governing it.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by “Hamzatu’ l-Wasl?” 2.
State all the rules of Tajwiid governing Hamzatu ’l-Wasl.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwid.
USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc .
pp 78 – 79.
Visit: www.software.informer.com 61 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT5 STOP (WAQF) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How to Stop 3.2 Where to Stop 3.3 Undesirable Stops (Al-Waqfu ’l-Qabiih) 3.4 Punctuation Marks 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Waqf (stop) in Tajwiid terminology means a break in sound and breath (At-tanaffus).
For a proper recitation of the Quran, it is essential that a reciter has sound knowledge of how and where to stop.
The absence of this knowlegde could lead to distortions of the meanings of the Quran.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • give the definition of Waqf • explain how and where to stop • state what the punctuation marks in the Quran indicate • apply the rules in your recitation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 How to Stop Words in the Quran are capable of bearing one of 10 vowels.
Thus, a stop made on any word in the Quran is made on one of the 10 vowels which are Fathah, Kasrah, Dammah, Fathataan, Kasrataan, Dammataan, long Fathah, long Kasrah, long Dammah and Sukuun.
There are, however, among these vowels those that change their structure when stops are made over them while there are those that retain their structure and do not change.
62 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID Those that change are: Fathah, Kasrah, Dammah, Fathataan, Kasrataan and Dammataan all of which change to Sukuun whenever a stop is made over them except Fathataan, which changes to a long Fathah (that is, Maddu ’l-‘Iwad).
Those that do not change are: Sukuun, long Fathah, long Kasrah and long Dammah.
Each of these retains its structure.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention the 10 vowels in the Quran.
3.2 Where to Stop The practice of the Prophet (Sunnah) is to stop at the end of every verse in the Quran regardless of whether stopping on them makes them meaningful or not.
A very good example of this is verse 4 of Q.107 [نوعاملا ] which reads thus: نيلصملل ليوف .
Stopping on this verse is permissible but terminating one’s recitation on it is prohibited.
Some verses are, however, too long for one to read without taking a breath or more.
On such instances, it is permissible to stop in the middle of the verse provided stopping there would not amount to distortion.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is the Sunnah of the prophet on Waqf?
3.3 Undesirable Stops (Al-Waqfu ’l-Qabiih) Stopping at the end of a verse or where it makes meaning and does not amount to distortion is considered Perfect Stop [ماتلا فقولا ],Sufficient Stop [يفاكلا فقولا ]or Good Stop [نسحلا فقولا ].
Stopping on a word and initiating the reading from the next that distorts the meaning of the verse is undesirable even if the verse is not a long one.
An example of this is stopping on ىحتسي لا ﷲ نإ and not joining it to ةضوعب ام لاثم برضي نأ in verse 26 of Suratu ’l- Baqarah .
This and its like are undesirable stops.
It is, therefore, in order to aid reciters to have proper stopping and initiation that certain portions in the Qur'an are marked for stopping with certain punctuation marks.
The other kinds of stop that are desirable are discussed below.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What is an undesirable stop?
63 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.4 Punctuation Marks فقولا تاملاع م - Whenever you see this mark in the text, it indicates a compulsory stopping.
You must stop and initiate your recitation on the next word.
لا - Whenever you come across this mark in the text, you must not stop.
ج - When you see this mark, you can either stop or continue your recitation.
ىلص - This mark gives you the option of either stopping or continuing your recitation.
To continue your recitation is, however, preferable.
ىلق- This mark also gives you the option of either stopping or continuing your recitation.
To stop your recitation is, however, preferable.
These two marks above are complimentary.
You have the freedom to stop on only one of them and not on the two.
Apart from stopping on these marks, you could also be forced to stop at any point due to some factors such as break in breath, cough, sneeze, and so on.
Whenever any of these happens to you, you should go back a little and resume the reading where the reading will be meaningful.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What do the following marks indicate in the Quran?
ج ، ىلق ، لا ، م ، ىلص 4.0 CONCLUSION Waqf means a break in sound or breath.
It is made on any of the 10 vowels in the Quran five of which change to Sukuun when Waqf is made on them.
One changes to a long Fathah while the remaining four retain their structure.
It is Sunnah to stop at the end of the verses of the Quran but there are punctuation marks that indicate where to stop and where not to stop in the Quran if the verse is a long one.
64 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have defined Waqf.
We have also explained how to stop and where to stop when reading the Quran, and indicated the punctuation marks in the Quran.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by Waqf?
2.
Explain how and where stop is made during recitation of the Quran.
3.
State the punctuation marks in the Quran and what they indicate.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Shaykh, L. J.
(2003).
Tajwiid Made Easy.
Nigeria: Jamiyyat Junuud Diinil-Islaamiyyah.
pp 86 – 90.
Mohammad, A. M. (2003).
Guide to the Fundamentals of Tajweed Al- Quran (Part 1).
Canada: Al-Attique Publishers Inc. pp 43 – 45.
Visit: www.software.informer.com Syed, K. H.(1990).
Easy Tajwid.
(1990).
USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc. pp 76 – 88.
65 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID UNIT 6 MANNERS OF TAJWIID CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Quantity of Reading 3.2 Frequency of Reading 3.3 Time of Reading 3.4 Reading with a Melodious Voice 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION “This is indeed a Qur'an most honourable.
In a Book well-guarded.
Which none shall touch but those who are clean.
A Revelation from the Lord of the Worlds”.
[Qur'an 56 [al-Waaqicah] verses 77 t0 80].
As you have read from the above verses, the Quran is a book of honour that must be held with respect and read with reverence of the highest order.
You are about to learn some rules that guide the recitation of the most honourable Book that has not got through revision since its revelation- the Quran.
Recitation of the Quran is considered the best form of dhikr (Rememberance of Allah).
There are, however some rules that are meant to guide the reciter during recitation.
The Quran is to be read under an atmosphere of faith, sincerity, devotion, submission and humility.
The supplication ميجرلا ناطيشلا نم dاب ذوعأ (I seek refuge with Allah against the accursed devil) must be said before commencing recitation.This is an injunction stated in Quran 16 [an-nahl] v 98.
Silence and attentive listening are expected when the Quran is being read.
This is contained in Quran 7 v 204.
There are 15 places marked in the Quran as points of prostration.
The reciter or / and the listeners are expected to prostrate at these points.
66 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention some of the rules that guide the recitation of the Holy Quran • state how to read the Quran; when to read it and how much to read.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Quantity of Reading In the Quran, Allah advises the Muslims concerning how much of the Qur'an to be read as follows; نآرقلا نم رسيت ام اوؤرقاف: “read from the Qur’an what is convenient”.
(Q73 v 20).
Going by this divine advice, it follows that the amount of the Quran to be read is based on individual’s capability.
Some companions and their followers often finish the whole Quran in two months; some in one month; some in one week and others in one day.
As regard those who finish it in one day, the Prophet was reported to have said that ‘One who reads the Qur’an in less than three days does not understand it’.
However, the Quran is divided into 30 parts each of which is called juz’and further into 60 smaller parts each of which is called hizb.
This gives an indication of what is considered desirable.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is the import of Qur'an 73 verse 20?
3.2 Frequency of Reading The remembrance of Allah is an act of worship (‘ibaadah) expected of all Muslims at all times.
If Quran recitation is the best of dhikr, then it must be recited everyday.
Quran recitation is an everyday 'ibaadah expected of Muslims.
No day must be considered complete without spending some time reading the Quran.
The Prophet was reported to have said that God loves things done regularly, even if little.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How often can the Quran be read?
67 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID 3.3 Time of Reading The Quran can be read at anytime of the day as stated in Quran 76 verse 25 which reads thus: ''And remember the Name of your Lord every morning and afternoon''.
It can be read in any physical posture as stated in Quran 3 verse 191: ''Those who remember Allah standing, sitting and lying down on their sides…'' However, some specific times and certain postures are recommended in the Quran.
Some of the recommended times are at night and at dawn.You will find reference for this in Quran 17 verses 78-79.
In Quran 73 verse 20, it is recommended to be read while standing in salat.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the recommended times of the day that the Quran should be read?
3.4 Reading with a Melodious Voice Prophet Muhammad (SAW) was reported to have enumerated the significance of reading the Quran with a pleasant, melodious and beautiful voice in many of his 'Ahaadith.
Here are some of the 'Ahaadith: مكتاوصأب نآرقلا اونيز :''Beautify the Qur’an with your voices''.
نآرقلاب نغتي مل نم انم سيل : ''He who does not chant the Qur’an, is not among us''.
The import of these 'Ahaadith is that you should always chant the Quran and beautify your voice whenever you read it.By so doing, you would have adorned the Quran because in another hadith, the Prophet is reported to have said: ''Everything has its ornament and the ornament of the Quran lies in beautiful voice''.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Mention one hadith on reading the Quran with a beautiful voice.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the need to seek refuge with Allah at the commencement of every Quranic reading and being silent and attentive when listening to the Quran.
You have also learnt among other things that reading the Quran is a daily ‘ibaadah for every Muslim; one 68 ISL212 INTRODUCTION TO TAJWIID should however read only when is convenient.The Quran can be read at anytime, in any posture and must be rendered in a beautiful voice.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have mentioned and explained the manners of reading the Quran which include how much of the Quran should be read in a specific period; how often the Qu'an should be read; when it should be read and reading it with a melodious voice.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How much of the Quran should be read at a time?
2.
How often can the Quran be read?
3.
When can the Quran be read?
4.
Why must the Quran be read with a beautiful voice?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Kristina, N. (2001).
The Art of Reciting the Qur'an.
Cairo: American University, Cairo Press.
Syed, K. H. (1990).
Easy Tajwid”.
USA: Muslim Community Center, Inc. pp 14 – 18.
Khurram, M. (2001).
Way to the Quran.
Nigeria: Hamzat Internatinal Islamic Publishing House.
69
