MAC 246 MODULE 1 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 226 COURSE TITLE: EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 1  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING COURSE GUIDE MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING Course Team Adebola A. Aderibigbe (Course Writer) – Bowen University, Iwo Dr. B. U. Nwanne (Course Editor) – Delta State University, Abraka Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede (Course Coordinator) – NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2 MAC 246 MODULE 1 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Abuja Office 5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058-029-8 All Rights Reserved 3  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ……………………………………………….
iv What You Will Learn in this Course …………………….. iv Course Aims ……………………………………………… v Course Objectives ………………………………………… v Working through this Course …………………………….. vi Course Materials ………………………………………….
viii Study Units ……………………………………………….. viii Text Books and References ……………………………… viii Assessment ……………………………………………….
x Tutor Marked Assignment ……………………………….. x Final Examination and Grading ………………………….
x Course Marking Scheme ………………………………… x How to Get the Most from this Course ………………….
xi Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials ……………………….. xi Summary ………………………………………………… xi 4 MAC 246 MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to MAC 246 EDUCATONAL BROADCASTING.
It is available for students in the undergraduate mass communication programme particularly in their second year.
It is a two credits course which means you have two hours in the week to participate in this course.
This course provides an opportunity for you as a student to be exposed to a rare area of broadcasting.
This is one course that teaches the broadcaster on the methods of reaching different segments of their audience with educational information.
Importantly, it also empowers the broadcaster with needed skills to learn as if they are in the classroom.
To achieve this, this writer has consulted widely in the field of education to put this course in proper shape.
It is however advised that you dutifully fulfill all assigned task in this course for their own development as this would be needed for the acquisition of the needed skills to produce an educational broadcaster as they are the future broadcasters.
This course guide provides you with the necessary information about the contents of the course and the materials you will need to be familiar with for a proper understanding of the subject matter.
It is designed to help you get the best of the course by exposing you to some outstanding materials and books in the field.
It also provides necessary guides on the way to approach your Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs).
Overall, this course will leave you as a great educational broadcaster.
And importantly you will acquire the skills that will help you in great ways become an encompassing and better broadcaster.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall objective of MAC 246: Educational Broadcasting is to bring to the awareness of the broadcaster the national importance of good educational broadcasting and to train the broadcaster on ways of improving educational broadcasting in Nigeria.
In this course, you will again be introduced to the foundational teachings in broadcasting.
This is intentional because I do not want to assume that you are familiar with the rudiments of broadcasting as a course because this will drive all other discussions in the course of this exercise.
From there, you are introduced to the discipline of educational broadcasting.
Here, a proper introduction has been done on education and the need for a proper education and re-education of the populace because majority of our national dilemma is a result of ignorance and nothing more.
An uneducated man will see the information that will kill him right in front 5  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING of him and will not recognise it.
Education is the only existing structure for national development.
It therefore behooves on the broadcaster to perform this role in order to corroborate other kinds of education acquired by the people in other lights.
The general classification of educational broadcasting has been highlighted so the broadcaster can know that there are other medium in a medium.
The principles of educational presentation and the qualities of a good broadcaster have been discussed.
Just like the audience of any broadcast presentation vary, so does the audience for any educational broadcast.
These are grouped into four and they are the children, the adults, men and women in urban communities and men and women in rural communities.
The reason for this grouping is to expose the student to the fact that when you are planning to teach or pass across knowledge to a group of people, know exactly who you are trying to reach so that your message will not be lost.
Lastly, this course will expose you to some skills in teaching like general teaching methods, understanding learners and the use of audio and visual aids.
COURSE AIMS The aims of this course are to:  expose you to the need for educational broadcasting  show you how best to broadcast education on radio and television  expose you to the different groups exposed to educational broadcasting  expose you to some teaching skills for educational broadcasting.
COURSE OBJECTIVES Several objectives can be delineated from this course.
In addition, each unit has specific objectives.
The unit objectives can be found at the beginning of a unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the particular unit to check on the progress you are making.
You should always look at the unit objectives before and after completing a unit.
In this way, you could easily check whether or not you have covered what is required of that unit.
At the end of this course, you should be able to:  distinguish between radio and television  provide a detailed account of the history of radio broadcasting in Nigeria 6 MAC 246 MODULE 1  provide a detailed account of the history of television in Nigeria  explain the purpose of broadcasting  justify the need for good presentation  define diction and its use in educational presentation  explain the essence of mood and emotion in educational broadcasting  distinguish between intelligence and charisma.
 identify the various classification of educational media  describe eight functions of educational media  give an account of the history of educational broadcasting  distinguish between teaching and learning  discuss reasons why children need educational broadcasting  discuss methods of reaching the children on radio and television  describe some challenges in broadcasting to children  give a short account of Adult Education in Nigeria  state why Mass Adult Education is important in Nigeria  outline ways by which Media can further aid adult literacy in Nigeria  state reasons why educational broadcasting is important to urban dwellers  give examples of past educational programmes in the country  trace the emergence of rural broadcasting  enlist strategies for rural broadcasting.
 differentiate among the categories of learners  identify possible causes of slow learning  explain the implications of the different learners to the educational broadcaster  explain the term teaching methods  list the various methods of teaching  identify useful materials in the library for the educational broadcaster.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE 1.
To achieve the best in this course you are required to read the study units.
Most of the units contain self-assessment exercises, and at some points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course is a final examination.
2.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, give your tutor a call.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, you could even send an email.
Nevertheless, do the following.
7  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 3.
Read this course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
4.
Organise a study schedule.
Design a “course overview” to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available online on the NOUN website.
5.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is late to get help.
6.
Turn to unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
7.
Assemble the study materials.
8.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
9.
You will learn a lot by dutifully doing the assignments.
Keep abreast with the deadlines given to the submission of your assignments online.
The assignments have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course, and therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
10. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
11.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
12.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for assessment, do not wait for feedback before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
13.
See that you have fulfilled the objectives listed in the course guide and in the main course materials.
After completing the last unit, prepare yourself for the final examination.
14.
Stated below are the components of the course.
8 MAC 246 MODULE 1 COURSE MATERIALS 1.
Course materials 2.
Educational programmes on radio 3.
Educational programmes on television 4.
Study units 5.
Recommended textbooks and other reference materials 6.
Assignment file 7.
Writing notes STUDY UNITS There are 14 study units in this course, as follows: Module 1 Broadcasting and Education Unit 1 Introduction to Broadcasting Unit 2 Introduction to Educational Broadcasting Unit 3 General Classification of Educational Media Unit 4 The Need for Education and Broadcasting in Nigeria Unit 5 Principles of Educational Presentation Module 2 Categories of Educational Broadcasting Unit 1 Children Education Broadcasting Unit 2 Adults in Search of Education Unit 3 Men and Women in Urban Communities Unit 4 Men and Women in Rural Communities Module 3 Useful Skills for Broadcast Education Unit 1 Understanding Types of Learners Unit 2 General Teaching Methods Unit 3 Use of Audio-Visual Aids Unit 3 Study Skills for Educational Broadcasters Unit 4 Note-Taking Skills for Educational Broadcasters TEXT BOOKS AND REFERENCES Abamba, P. (1985).
‘Military Politics and the Nigerian Economy,’ Newswatch.
Abdullahi, A.
(1982).
Science Teaching in Nigeria.
Ilorin Kwara State: Atoto Press Ltd. 9  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING Booth, W. (1983).
The Rhetoric of Fiction.
Chicago.
University of Chicago Press.
Enekwe, O.O.
(1966).
‘The Modern Nigerian Theatre.’ In: Nsukka Studies in African Literature.
Achebe Chinua.
(Ed.).
Enugu: Intellect Publishers.
Finnegan, R. (1970).
Oral Literature in Africa.
London: Oxford University Press.
Idebi, S.K.
(2008).
Fundamentals of Radio Production.
Ibadan: Impact Motion Pictures and Media Koncept Nigeria.
Klaumeier, H.J.
(1961).
Learnng and Human Abilities- Educational Psychology.
New York: Harper and Brothers.
NOUN (2008).
General Teaching Methods.
In www.nou.edu.ng/noun/Noun_OCL/Pdf2Edu233.
Okinda, C.F.
(2009).
Communication Skills, Creative and Critical Thinking in PDF Created with Desk PDF Writer- Trial::http://www.docudesk.com.
Onabajo, O.
(2000).
Principles of Educational Broadcasting.
Gabi Concepts Limited.
Lagos.
Onabajo, O.
(2002).
Elements of Rural Broadcasting.
Gabi Concepts Limited.
Lagos.
Onabajo, O.
(2004).
Introduction to Broadcasting.
Lagos.
Gabi Concepts.
Owuamalam, E.O.
(2007).
Radio-TV Production.
Owerri: Image and Slogan Consultants Ltd. Sambe, J.A.
(2008).
Introduction to Mass Communication Practice in Nigeria.
Abuja.
: Spectrum Books Limited.
Schramm, W. (1969).
Feedback for Instructional Television.
Stanford: Institute for Communication Research.
Shipley, N.M. et al.
(1972).
A Synthesis of Teaching Methods.
New York: McGraw hill Pierson.
Thakur, A. S. & Ezenne, A.N.
(1980).
A Short History of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: De Ayo Publications.
10 MAC 246 MODULE 1 ASSESSMENT There are two aspects to the assessments of this course.
First, are the tutor-marked assignments; second is a written examination.
In tackling these assignments, you are expected to apply the information and knowledge acquired during the course.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will account for 30 percent of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for final examination of three hours duration.
This examination will account for the other 70 per cent of your total course mark.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT There are a number of tutor-marked assignments in this course.
I want to implore you to try hard to submit as many as you can.
The best four (i.e.
the highest four of what you submit) will be counted.
Each assignment counts for 20 marks but on the average when the four assignments are put together, the score will count at 30 per cent towards your total course mark.
When each assignment is completed, send it together with a TMA (Tutor-marked assignment) form to your tutor.
Ensure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the stipulated deadline given.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING Please be informed that the final examination for MAC 246 Educational Broadcasting of two hours duration and with a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which will reflect the practice exercises and tutor marked assignments you have previously submitted.
You are therefore advised to pay strict attention to all the practical exercises you have encountered in the course of your studying this course.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignments Submitted four, best three counts for 30% of course marks.
Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks.
11  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE You will appreciate this course better if you consistently study the units and relate whatever you learn with the practical realities on the radio and television education broadcasting.
Lastly, you should cultivate the habit of visiting reputable institutional or public libraries accessible to you.
FACILITATORS/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are specified hours of tutorials allotted in support of the course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of these tutorials together with the name and phone number of your tutor as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your article submissions and keep a close watch on your progress.
Be sure that your tutor-marked assignments are promptly sent in, and feel free to contact your tutor in case of any difficulty with your self- assessment exercise, tutor-marked assignment or the grading of an assignment.
I strongly advise you to attend the tutorials regularly and punctually too.
And please, active class participation will be noted.
SUMMARY This is a practically driven course.
Much of the effort to excel in this course lies in your hand.
Great success will be achieved if the student takes the assigned assignments seriously and turn in exercises promptly.
But there is no doubting the fact that the students will enjoy the course.
12 MAC 246 MODULE 1 MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Broadcasting and Education …………………… 1 Unit 1 Introduction to Broadcasting …………………….
1 Unit 2 The Communication Process And Educational Media ……………………………….
10 Unit 3 General Classification of Educational Media…… 19 Unit 4 The Need for Education and Broadcasting in Nigeria …………………………………………… 24 Unit 5 Principles of Educational Presentation ………… 30 Module 2 Categories of Educational Broadcasting …….
35 Unit 1 Children Education Broadcasting ……………… 35 Unit 2 Adults in Search of Education ………………….
40 Unit 3 Men and Women in Urban Communities ……….
46 Unit 4 Men and Women in Rural Communities ……….. 53 Module 3 Useful Skills for Broadcast Education ……… 58 Unit 1 Understanding Types of Learners ……………… 58 Unit 2 General Teaching Methods …………………….. 63 Unit 3 Use of Audio-Visual Aids ……………………… 70 Unit 4 Study Skills for Educational Broadcasters …….
75 Unit 5 Note-Taking Skills for Educational Broadcasters 80 13  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING MODULE 1 BROADCASTING AND EDUCATION Unit 1 Introduction to Broadcasting Unit 2 The Communication Process and Educational Media Unit 3 General Classification of Educational Media Unit 4 The Need for Education and Broadcasting in Nigeria Unit 5 Principles of Educational Presentation UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION TO BROADCASTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Distinction between Radio and Television 3.2 History of Broadcasting in Nigeria 3.3 Ownership and Control of the Broadcast Media 3.4 The Purpose of Broadcasting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION According to Onabajo (2000), broadcasting has been defined as the transmission of information through radio waves from a radio or television station, to the audience in far and near places, through their receivers, which help in decoding such information.
Similarly, broadcasting can also be defined as the dissemination of information by an organisation by an organisation (radio or television) to a large widely dispersed heterogeneous audience through their radio or television receiver.
Broadcasting is an entirely electronic means of communication.
Unlike other forms of mass communication such as newspapers, magazines and books, broadcasting it uses electronic technology to encode, distribute and decode messages; newspaper is not a form of electronic communication because it does not use electronic technology in all the stages of encoding, distributing and decoding messages.
Broadcasting is distinguished from “cable-casting” - the transmission of television and sometimes radio signals directly into the home by means of coaxial cable - because whereas broadcasting is open to everyone provided they have radio or television receiver, cable is restricted and its services are 14 MAC 246 MODULE 1 exclusively available to only those who have the appropriate decoders.
Similarly, broadcasting, from its definition and meaning, is distinguished from narrowcasting - the transmission of special interest programmes to much smaller audiences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  distinguish between radio and television  provide a detailed account of the history of radio broadcasting in Nigeria  provide a detailed account of the history of television broadcasting in Nigeria  generate adequate information on public and private ownership of radio and television in Nigeria  explain the purpose of broadcasting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Distinction between Radio and Television By definition, radio is a medium for sending and receiving messages through the air using electronic waves.
It is also about the activity of broadcasting programmes for people to listen to the programmes being broadcast (Idebi 2008).
It can also be defined as the broadcasting of programmes for the public to listen to.
It is the system of sending sound over a distance by transmitting electrical signals BBC English dictionary (1992).
In describing radio, Onabajo (2000) says in terms of general availability, radio is the leading mass communication medium.
In today’s world, especially in the developing world of Asia and Africa, there are more radio sets than television sets, newspapers and cinemas.
Radio stations are comparatively in expensive to run, after the initial capital expenses of transmitters and receivers.
It has immediacy in a higher degree than other media of communication.
Radio can talk back to its listeners by telephone, where the technical facilities exist, thus putting members of an audience in touch with one another.
Radio is flexible because a scheduled programme can be dropped at short notice and replaced with something more topical or urgent.
On the other hand, television, according to Akpan (1988) is an electronic device that brings to us informational, educational and entertainment programmes.
It is one of the greatest communications mechanism ever designed and operated by man.
It pumps into our brains an unending 15  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING stream of information, opinion, moral values and aesthetic taste.
Television influences our perception of politics, religion, governance, fashion and culture.
Television is, therefore, defined as an audio-visual medium.
It blends pictures with sounds to produce a communication experience exhibited on the screen.
It uses sound to explain the visuals presented on the screen.
It addresses the emotion and intellect in a remarkable way.
Owuamalam (2007) in Akpede (2010) says that television uses the movement of images in a unique way or pattern to express thoughts and feelings in an exciting and appealing manner.
Television is defined by the BBC English Dictionary (1992) as the system of pictures and distance so that people can receive them on a television set.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE In two paragraphs distinguish between Radio and Television.
3.2 History of Broadcasting In Nigeria According to Onabajo (2000), the broadcast media in Nigeria have come a long way and have gone through a lot of changes, in trying to keep pace with the intricacies of an ever-changing society.
What started as a rudimentary, experimental monitoring station can now boast of direct satellite communication equipment.
Broadcasting started in Nigeria in 1932 as an experiment by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC).
Lagos was chosen as one of the centres around the world, to receive and retransmit British Empire service signals from Daventry, England.
Then the Lagos station began to experiment with re-diffusion service, under the supervision of engineers and technicians at the Posts and Telegraphs Department, who were also mandated to design a system for distributing the signals, to major population centres across the country.
This relay system of the BBC was replicated in mainly English speaking countries across the globe and succeeded in taking BBC news and programmes to many parts of the world.
The overall objectives of this innovation by the BBC were as follows:  To develop links between Great Britain and English speaking people throughout the world  To propagate the British way of life, particularly in the empire and  To keep British citizens outside Britain informed about happenings back home.
16 MAC 246 MODULE 1  As a result of this, news, music and other aspects of programming at the time, were designed towards fulfilling these objectives.
Radio Distribution Services (RDS) On December 1, 1935, radio distribution service (rediffusion) was commissioned in Lagos.
By 1939, when the Second World War started, the post and telegraph department which was overseeing the Lagos experimental station, had popularised the medium, and had extended the service to Ibadan, Oyo state.
All through the war years, the British made good the service of RDS, through which the BBC kept the King’s subjects and citizens across the globe informed about the progress of the war against Nazi-Germany.
Few years later, radio distribution services were opened in Kano, Abeokuta, Port Harcourt, Ijebu Ode, Enugu, Kaduna, Jos and Zaria.
National broadcasting service The success of the RDS motivated the British government to establish a proper radio station in Nigeria by integrating all the Radio distribution services in the country following the Turner Bryon report.
On June 1, 1952, colonial governor, Sir John Stuart Macpherson commissioned the Nigerian Broadcasting Services (NBS).
At first, BBC programmes dominated the Nigerian airwaves; efforts were also made to produce programmes that the local population could relate to.
There were programmes and news in three main Nigerian languages as well as many dialects.
The NBS was criticised based on the dominance of BBC programmes in its broadcasts, and for what critics described as lacking the Nigerian orientation.
The BBC augmented Nigerian efforts by providing all the needed training and technical equipment.
In fact, BBC’s T.W Charmer became NBS’s first director-general, while his counterpart, J.W Murray became the Chief Engineer.
Nigerian broadcasting corporation The Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation (NBS), was seen as the colonial government mouth piece, consequently, the central government thought it necessary to convert the NBS into Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation on April 1, 1957 by an act of parliament.
This was to address the issue raised against the former organisation (NBS) and to shield it from government interference, and the propagation of the view of the ruling political party.
The duties of the corporation, as spelt out in its act, included the right to speak as a public service by means of wireless telegraph and by television for general reception within Nigeria; to provide an external 17  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING service for general reception, in countries and places within the country; and to ensure that the services which it provides, when considered as a whole, reflect the culture, characteristics, affairs and opinions of the people of each, or part of the federation.
According to Sambe (2008), the evolution of television in Nigeria followed a similar pattern as that of radio.
The irony here is that while it was the Federal Government that started the first radio broadcasting station in the country, it was a regional government that first ventured into television broadcasting.
The Nigerian Constitution of 1954 provided that regional governments could establish broadcasting services.
As such, on October 1, 1959, the Western Region blazed the trail by establishing the first television station.
Western Nigeria Television (WNTV) and Western Nigeria Broadcasting Service (WNBS) though the reason for the establishment of the medium was to use it as an additional means of improving the regional school systems.
It must be pointed out that the denial of Chief Awolowo’s request for a rebuttal on comment made against his party by Governor Macpherson on NBS was the immediate cause of the establishment of WNTV/WNBS.
A year after the establishment of Ibadan station, the former Eastern Nigerian Television Service (ENTV) based in Enugu came into being with the slogan “Second to None”.
This was followed by the government of Northern Nigeria who established a television station as an arm of the former Broadcasting Company of Northern Nigeria (BCNN).
It was located in the capital, Kaduna as – RKTV Radio Kaduna Television.
Not to be left behind, the federal government established the Nigerian Television Service, Lagos in 1962.
Thus, the federal government, which had pioneered the establishment of radio station in Nigeria, now trailed behind the regional governments in establishing television station.
Immediately after independence, television stations tended to become political tools for the regional governments of the day.
In short, the mass media were used to foster regional interest at the expense of national interest.
Military intervention This development was brought to a temporary halt when the military struck and took over power in 1966.
With its unitary system of government, it means that the region would now take orders from the central government.
Beyond that, the Gowon’s regime had haltered the structure of the country by creating 12 States from the four regions in 1967, which later increased to 19 states by the Muhammed/Obasanjo 18 MAC 246 MODULE 1 regime in 1976.
This encouraged some of the new state administrations that were financially able to develop individual autonomous television broadcasting services within their respective states.
The two military regimes were at first willing to give state governments freedom to establish their television stations, but in 1976 the Muhammed/Obasanjo regime forbade states from further construction and development of television service and amalgamated the already existing ones into one service known as Nigerian Television (NTV).
It is important to know that television was established in Nigeria with the ostensible reason of providing adequate services in education, and social and economic development.
However, the reason became altered as they began to go commercial and relying on foreign programmes.
The establishment and management of television stations remained in the hands of the federal and state government until decree No 38 of 1992 that deregulated broadcasting media and established the National Broadcasting Commission.
This allowed for private ownership of both the radio and television in the country.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE In just 400 words, give a summary of the history of radio and television broadcasting in Nigeria.
3.3 Ownership and Control of Broadcasting in Nigeria Before the 1992 deregulation of the media, the broadcast media were owned, operated and controlled by the federal and state governments.
The state governments established their stations to educate, inform and entertain their people and actually did so during the second republic because they felt the national television served the interests and needs of the ruling party, by then the National Party of Nigeria (NPN) was at the federal level, and in those states where the party was in control.
According to Sambe (2008), other states administered by other political parties in opposition were either blacked out or given unfavorable coverage.
Those who challenged this form of democracy were told that the system of government that was being practiced during this time was the “winner take all”.
In order to ensure absolute control of the television, for example, the government redeployed the director-general, a seasoned broadcaster to the ministry of Information and appointed a party ally and a historian n his place.
19  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING Even these days, the federal government dictates what should be the content of broadcast and what should not.
The state-owned broadcast stations are even worse in this practice.
Try and tune to any state-owned radio or television and examine the percentage of time and attention given to the state government.
Since the state government hires and fires staff, the station dare not broadcast any news that is against the government.
News is always about what the governor and his team of politicians wants to hear.
The government even regulates news contents of private broadcast stations such as the African Independent Television (AIT).
To a large extent, almost all, if not all government-owned and controlled broadcast media have become praise singers of government policies.
At times, one listens to a one-hour broadcast news without coming up with anything news-worthy.
3.4 The Purpose of Broadcasting According to Onabajo (2004), basically, broadcasting serves three broad purposes; it educates, it informs and entertains the audience.
 Education Function.
A core purpose of the broadcast media is the education of the widely dispersed audience available and depending on it.
Through the broadcast media, people acquire new knowledge, attitude and skills, thus enabling them to cope better with life.
This education function can deal with formal, non-formal and informal learning.
 News/Information.
Broadcast stations survey the environment and give reports or information about things going on in the environment, especially those things that are likely to have impact on people, and those things that are new and of human interest.
 Opinion Function.
The broadcast media provide an avenue for the different shades of opinion in society to be aired.
Broadcast media enable us to know what different segments of the society are thinking.
 Entertainment Function.
Entertainment is an unavoidable function of the mass media.
In fact, it is the most craved among the numerous audiences.
Present research has shown that the demand for entertainment among the numerous audiences is on an incredible increase.
This has given birth to many programmes for different categories of the media audience (listeners or viewers).
20 MAC 246 MODULE 1 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, effort has been made to give a clear definition of broadcasting as well offer clear distinction between the radio and television, for easy understanding.
Furthermore, the history of radio and television was fully discussed so that students will know the antecedent of what they now see around today.
Lastly, the ownership and control of the broadcast media in Nigeria was appraised and the purpose of broadcasting also clearly discussed.
5.0 SUMMARY Radio is a medium for sending and receiving messages through the air using electronic waves.
And television is as an audio-visual medium.
It blends pictures with sounds to produce a communication experience exhibited on the screen.
It uses sound to explain the visuals presented on the screen.
It addresses the emotion and intellect in a remarkable way.
Historically, radio broadcasting was started by the federal government, while television began with the regional governments.
The federal government joined the television race later.
The ownership and control of the broadcast media were left in the hands of both the federal and state governments until 1992 when the federal government decided to deregulate the broadcast media.
Since then, a number of broadcast stations have been established and owned by private individuals and sometimes corporate organisations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What do you think are the core purposes for establishing the broadcast media in Nigeria?
Give your answers with substantial proofs.
ii.
List the key differences between radio and television as a broadcast media.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Idebi, S.K.
(2008).
Fundamentals of Radio Production.
Ibadan: Impact Motion Pictures and Media Koncept Nigeria.
Onabajo, O.
(2004).
Introduction to Broadcasting.
Lagos: Gabi Concepts.
Owuamalam, E.O.
(2007).
Radio-TV Production.
Owerri: Image and Slogan Consultants Ltd. Sambe, J.A.
(2008).
Introduction to Mass Communication Practice in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum Books Limited.
21  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING UNIT 2 THE COMMUNICATION PROCESS AND EDUCATIONAL MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Communication 3.2 The Communication Process 3.3 Types of Educational Media 3.4 Functions of Educational Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION According to Salawu (2008), communication is essential for the existence of societies, whether they are developed or developing.
It is necessary for your accumulation of knowledge and capability.
Furthermore, it serves as an instrument of social interaction.
For the desirable change in leaner’ behaviour and acquisition of knowledge and skills to be accomplished, communication must both take place between the teachers and learners.
It is important for teachers to have deep knowledge of what communication process is and also be skillful in the use of communication skills.
This unit is devoted to the study of communication process for you to be able to acquaint yourself with how you can improve your communication as an individual and more importantly as a teacher/communicator.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define the term communication  explain the concepts “Communication Process”  identify and describe, at least six elements in communication process  establish the relationship between communication process and teaching learning process  identify and discuss various factors that could constitute communication noise in a typical classroom teaching learning process 22 MAC 246 MODULE 1  identify the various classification of educational media  describe eight functions of educational media.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Communication Communication is a universal and everyday occurrence, and therefore, it is a concept that has generated a lot of interest on the part of researchers, governments and organisations.
The universal nature of communication has led to countless definitions of the term.
Some of these definitions are: 1.
Communication is any means by which a thought is transferred from one person to another (Chappel, R. and Read, W.L.
5th ed 1984).
2.
Communication is the process by which one person (or a group) shares and imparts information to another person (or group) so that both people (and group) clearly understand one another (Udall, R and Udall, S. 1979).
3.
Communication is not just the giving of information, it is the giving of understandable information and receiving and understanding the message.
It is the transferring of a message to another party so that it can be understood and acted upon.
(E.C.
Eyre 1983).
4.
Communication is the exchange of ideas, thought or knowledge between at least two people with an intention of changing the behavior of one another particularly the decoder.
(Abimbade 1997).
In terms of classroom usage, the term communication can be defined as the totality of the teacher’s efforts to ensure that all the stated instructional objectives are accomplished through effective manipulation of the task, method (s), media, learners as well as the entire teaching learning environment.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Give three outstanding definitions of communication.
3.2 The Communication Process By its nature, communication involves an exchange of ideas or information with at least two people.
By so doing, many variables are involved, and therefore account for communication being regarded as a process.
Thus, the process of communication always involves the 23  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING sender, the message/information, the medium/media and the receiver.
According to Berlo (1960), the ingredients of communication process includes; the source, the message, the channel/medium and the receiver.
Berdell (1978) referred to the sender and the receiver as the encoder and the decoder respectively.
As a process involving many interrelated parts, all the parts are expected to work harmoniously for the purpose of communication to be achieved.
It is important to note that if there is a problem why any of the elements/ingredients of communication process, communication will be impaired thereby resulting to either partial or complete communication breakdown.
The sender This is a technical term that refers to the person who initiates the exchange of idea/information.
He/she is responsible for what is to be disseminated, how it should be done, where and how it should be assessed.
The sender plays a prominent role in communication process.
If the sender is to be successful in conveying his message, he must, according to Lazarus (1981):  Know the receiver and present the information at his/her level  Speak or write clearly and concisely  Convey the desire to reach the receiver by his attitude  Obtain feedback to confirm that the message has been received correctly.
According to Salawu (2008) in order to achieve the above four points, the sender must take into account the language proficiency, cognitive ability, social status, aspirations, learning styles, psychological situation as well as the family structure of the receiver.
The sender must always use the basic skills in speaking and writing interpreted as the KISS principle which means ‘Keep It Short and Simple’.
The simpler (simple and brief) you make the information you send as the sender the better.
Furthermore, a sender has to be mindful of his attitude to the receiver during presentation.
Attitude of the sender to the receiver must be warm and friendly.
Saul (1968) said that “communication depends on the attitude of the sender towards the receiver”.
An attitude of understanding by the sender can serve as a motivating factor to the receiver.
In addition, the sender is expected to consider selecting appropriate medium/channel of communication.
When wrong channel of communication is used, communication will be impaired.
It is expected of the sender to be sure that the communication process is effective.
A way by which this could be done is for the sender to engage 24 MAC 246 MODULE 1 himself in periodic assessment of the receiver’s gains during communication process.
The adoption of the formative evaluation procedure will provide him/her the needed feedback on the receiver’s performance.
Where expected outcomes are discovered as accomplished necessary steps are taking to encourage further practice and retention.
However, where the expected outcomes are lacking, immediate steps must be taken to fine tune the communication process.
This is necessary because without the purpose of communication being achieved, the sender’s efforts are regarded as nullity and of no effect.
Salawu (2008) further suggested that in order to find out whether the communication process is effective or not, feedback can be sought by using such approaches like:  Questioning the receiver on specific points during presentation  Careful observation of the receivers facial expression and manner  Solicit suggestions, or explanations or examples from the receiver  In general, make your receiver(s) active during communication.
The decoder The decoder is the receiver of the message.
He is referred to as the decoder, communicattee, as well as the audience.
In several contexts the decoder could be the listener, the viewer or the participant.
The decoder therefore refers to the person for which the message is designed.
The extent to which communication process is effective can be determined by the degree of changes noticeable in the decoder.
For effective communication to take place, the decoder should be:  A good listener for him/her to get correct information from the sender/encoder  Psychologically ready in that he should be in right frame of mind.
Nothing should preoccupy his mind other than what the sender is imparting to him  Ready for the task in terms of maturity as well as determination to learn  Follow instruction and take active part in the communication process.
The message This refers to the information, the task; the content, the subject matter, knowledge, attitude, values, beliefs and/or skills designed and planned to be acquired by the decoder.
The message has to be correct and adequate.
25  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING The channel Anything that carries the message to the receiver is a channel.
Another common term commonly used as channel is “the medium”.
A general interpretation of means through which information is packaged and disseminated as a combination of channels and medium will include, not only oral, written, and non-verbal; but also such media like; the radio, the television, overhead projector, films etc.
Noise Noise in communication is a technical term for all forms of obstacles which conspire to reduce the fidelity of communication.
It then implies that what makes it impossible for the decoder to get the message as intended by the encoder constitutes communication noise.
Noise can be physical/environmental, physiological and psychological.
Let us then examine the categories of noise one after the other so you can understand in detail.
Physical/environmental noise Any form of disturbance to communication process traceable to the factors within the immediate physical environment is classified as physical/environmental noise, continuous or intermittent loud sound from radio sets, markets, grinding machines, block making machines, hooting by moving vehicles, outcry from the next class etc.
are all examples of this kind of noise.
Physiological noise Any form of disturbances to the communication process arising from ill health on the part of the sender and/or the receiver is referred to as the physiological noise.
Cases of headaches, stomach disorder, body pains etc, during communication process are examples of physiological noise.
Psychological noise This refers to unfavourable state of the mind of the sender and/or the receiver.
Psychological noise includes fatigue, emotional depression, annoyance and lack of enthusiasm arising from internally or externally related problems.
Other sources of communication noise especially on the part of the sender include:  Poor preparation  Lack of deep knowledge of the message/topic under discussion  Usage of wrong media  Exhibition of disturbing mannerisms  Inadequate mastery/usage of language of communication 26 MAC 246 MODULE 1  Insensitivity to the receiver and a host of others.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Imagine that you are a radio presenter; enlist the possible sources of noise for your listening audience.
Feedback This is a technical term which refers to the available facts collected to determine the effectiveness or otherwise of the interaction between the sender and the receiver during communication process.
The feedback provides opportunities for the sender to readdress, in whole or in part, deficiencies during the course of communication.
Close to feedback is assessment.
Feedback is necessary in communication because without it, decisions on whether communication is effective or not cannot be determined.
3.3 Types of Educational Media (A Broad Category) There are many ways of classifying educational media.
They may be perceived according to the levels of technology i.e low-level or high- level technology.
They may also be grouped according to the senses they stimulate: visual media, audio media and audio visual media, or classified as projected and non-projected media.
They can be further classified as printed and non-printed media etc.
in fact; there is no rigid form of classification.
Ogwo (1996) in Olagunju (2008) presented a descriptive example of a way in which educational broadcasting may be classified.
Fig 1: Classification of Educational Broadcasting EDUCATIONAL MEDIA NON PRINTED PRINTED MEDIA OTHER LOW ELECTRONIC COST MEDIA MEDIA 27  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING Wall charts Computer Overhead Books-Text- Projector Reference Flip charts 16 mm Films Film strip Handouts Panel Boards 8mm Films Opaque Journal Projector Magnetic Board Slides Slide Projector Dictionaries Models Microfilms Cameras Encyclopedia Flippers Transparencies Radio Cassettes Newspaper Recorder Specimens Video Films Computers Magazines etc Real objects Audio, Cassette Microfilm etc.
recorder Posters Pictures Graphics The table above can be seen as classification according to printed and non printed media.
The diagram is self explaining under printed media, you find books, handouts, journals, dictionaries, encyclopedia, newspapers, magazines.
Under non-printed media, we find chalkboard, wall charts, flip charts, magnetic board, models etc.
Electronic media is divided into software and hardware.
Under software, we have computer programmes, films, slides, video films and audio cassettes etc.
and under hardware, we have over head projectors, Radio cassette recorder, television sets, Radio sets etc.
SELF -ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Under what category is the television and radio in the classification of educational media?
3.4 Functions of Media in Education 1.
We are all used to the varieties of teacher-talk in class instruction, which involves only the sense of hearing i.e.
audio.
This practice as effective as it is could be boring after a while.
The use of instructional materials on the other hand calls into play the sense of hearing.
The more the number, the more enduring the learning results.
Remember the Chinese saying which states ‘I hear, I forget; I see, I remember; I do, I understand’.
So, we can conclude that instructional materials guarantee more effective hearing on the learner on the learner.
In addition to merely hearing, also sees and does 2.
Educational media serve to concretise otherwise abstract concepts and ideas.
They also help to describe matters using prompters or 28 MAC 246 MODULE 1 cues.
For example, think of a Nigerian village teacher trying to teach the word computer.
If he describes the machine using just words, try and guess what will happen.
But when he presents the film or video of the types of computer, parts and functions of a computer, the image of the abstract object will become concrete in the minds of the children.
3.
Media can provide access to a process or technique.
Now, think of the Engineer constructing a high way or building a bridge.
If you are just passing by, you will never know the process of road construction.
Think of watching a film that shows the processes.
The experience will become unforgettable.
4.
Media helps in magnifying or reducing objects for classroom use.
By means of motion pictures or television, big objects or small objects can be brought into the classroom for closer examination.
5.
Media constantly brings experiences.
Think of wars, flood, terrorism etc.
A video clip in any of the examples may transport a child from the unknown to the known.
6.
Media makes learning a reality.
Teachers and students can go at their own pace, rate and convenience.
Video, audio cassettes and computer assisted learning have made this possible.
You can record off the air some instructional programmes that can aid in learning, making use of audio and video cassette recorders.
You can also buy pre-recorded audio, video tapes and compact discs etc.
7.
Media provides a common framework of learning experience.
This is simply what we call uniformity of learning.
Whether you are in Kano or Lagos, the same telecast is reaching everyone.
8.
Media gain and hold the attention of learners.
An adage says that variety is the spice of life.
You will also remember that a picture speaks more than a thousand words.
Pictures can be still or motionless or it can be moving as in television or films.
4.0 CONCLUSION Communication is an invaluable tool for human survival.
Without communication, no meaningful development can take place.
Teaching requires sound knowledge, now the extent of impact of the knowledge is dependent on the extent to which the teacher understands the communication process.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to give detailed discussion to the communication process.
We have seen that there are six essential parts of any communication process which are the sender, the message, the channel, the noise, the receiver and the feedback.
Also, effort has been 29  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING made to examine the general classification of educational media and the functions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
With your understanding of the communication process, kindly answer the following questions.
a.
As a student in MAC 246, what stage are you in the communication process?
Are you a sender, a receiver, a noise or a medium?
b.
With your answer, justify how you can be a better broadcaster.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abimbade, A.
(1997).
Principles and Practice of Educational Technology.
Ibadan.
International Publishers Limited.
Salawu, I.O., Taiwo, S.A & Aremu, G.B.
(1994).
An Introduction to Educational Technology.
Ibadan.
Afolabi Press.
30 MAC 246 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 GENERAL CLASSIFICATION OF EDUCATIONAL MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Need for Good Presentation 3.2 Diction 3.3 Mood and Emotion 3.4 Eye Contact 3.5 Competence 3.6 Charisma 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Akpede (2010) states that presentation is a careful way of introducing a programme to the intended audience.
It gives the audience insight into what they would see or listen to in the programme.
Owuamalam (2007) says presentation provides the audience with the vital information required to adjust their listening or viewing desire.
Presentation gives stations the integrity they enjoy in attracting audience to their programmes in broadcasting.
Presentation can be compared to the paint which decorates the building from the outside which will eventually attract the onlooker who would want to see the interior of the building.
If the programme is introduced skillfully and professionally, the audience would want to watch or listen to the whole programme.
By and large, presentation is an interior to beckon to the audience to come to a sumptuous meal.
It may even capture some audience members who are in the habit of wondering from station to station seeking programme content that would fill their need.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  justify the need for good presentation  define diction and its use in educational presentation 31  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING  explain the essence of mood and emotion in educational broadcasting  distinguish between intelligence and charisma.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Need for Good Presentation Have you seen a soldier dressed in suit en route for war?
or have you seen a nurse in a swim suit while observing his/her duties?
A good educational presenter whether on radio or television must be distinguished.
If you are addressing children, set your mood and diction according to the audience you are addressing.
I once listened to a programme meant for the age group of three to five years of age and the presenter’s language was as though he was addressing the age group of 12- 14.
You need to assume the position of the audience you are to address.
You need to stoop low or climb high as the case may be to discover their needs.
The needs of your receivers whether on radio or television, are different.
Let us examine a few of the principles involved in presentation.
3.2 Diction The ability to pronounce words distinctly and clearly determines to a large extent how the audience members understand the information, which is to be shared with the presenter.
Stresses must be accurately emphasised at the relevant points in order to state exactly what the presenter intended.
Clarity of meaning is the essence of good diction.
Being a good presenter takes more than producing beautiful words.
It involves the ability to exhibit great skill in presenting issues and ideas clearly in few words so that the audience will understand at a go what the presenter is saying.
As much as possible, tribal or foreign accents should be avoided in broadcasting.
Each language has to be spoken according to its phonetic rules, and nothing more.
Anything short of this results to misunderstanding of the intention of the presenter and may become noise.
The presenter must never attempt to speak in an exaggerated manner in order to impress the audience.
It should be noted that the aims of presentation is to express a thought or feeling and the presenter should aspire to achieve the aim of presentation rather than constituting himself/herself into a public or audience nuisance.
32 MAC 246 MODULE 1 For an educational broadcaster, the diction is an important tool for achieving the set objectives for reaching the audience.
Not only that, the diction of a presenter then becomes the rule for a listener to follow.
I once met a young man in one of the countries I visited recently who pronounced a popular word wrongly as against the dictionary stipulation.
When I asked why he pronounced the word that way, he told me that it was how a prominent newscaster in the country pronounced it during a recent national newscast.
Anyone who does the job of educating the masses must be careful enough to understand that he/she is being understudied and emulated in words and sounds.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Why do you think diction is important for educational broadcasting?
3.3 Mood and Emotion The world all over is witnessing the effect of economic recession and as such there is what may be referred to as fluctuating moods all over.
The reason for this is that whether corporate or private companies and individuals are experiencing harsh times economically at this point.
This then makes the job of the broadcast media more challenging.
The job is even more challenging in Nigeria where corruption is intermixed with the global challenges.
The result of this is an inevitable national mood swings.
By mood, we mean, the way someone feels.
Have you woken up in the morning to find your father, mother or friend behaving so differently compared to the way they behaved before going to bed the last night?
If yes, that is mood swing.
Several things can cause this.
So many things can change a person’s mood and most of the time, people turn to the media whether broadcast or print to change their mood.
Therefore, the mood has to be set for any broadcast presentation.
This responsibility rests on the presenter.
The presentation of information and the manner of delivery to the audience is the work of the presenter.
If the presenter is cheerful and lively in his/her presentation, the audience would go along with him/her.
The use of the body especially body language such as facial expression certainly adds to the articulation of meaning especially when accompanied by the correct words.
The sounds that come from a presenter often indicate the mood of the presenter as they relate to the meaning and structure of the presentation.
Langer (1979) in Akpede (2010) says the various forms of human feelings range from growth and attention, flowing and slowing, conflict and resolution, speed, arrest, terrific excitement, calm or subtle activation to dreaming lapses.
It is, therefore, the duty of the presenter to 33  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING ensure that the mood and emotional feelings of the audience are aroused in conjunction with the objectives of the stations programmes.
Two ways of setting the right mood a.
Introduce a Joke- This requires a lot of skills please.
If you are inexperience or not talented in making people laugh then it is advisable that you go and read up or listen to good jokes and present them in lively manner.
Two people can tell the same joke the same way and manner, yet it can resonate differently with the audience.
When you introduce a good joke before a learning experience, you bring back the mind of a lost learner.
b.
Use a Song- There are national appeal songs that can go along your objective and as well set the right mood for your broadcast.
Please locate these songs and air them.
And you will be amased what effect this will bring to the audience.
3.4 Eye Contact Television presentation is similar to interpersonal communication just like the radio where the presenter appears to be addressing the listener, who is face to face with him.
In the case of television, the presenter is separated from the audience yet it appears as if he is addressing them in a face-to-face situation.
In most cases, presenters are seen smiling at their audience.
This is to arrest the attention and interest of the audience and make them feel relaxed.
The ability of the presenter to make frequent eye contact with the camera lens in television or a mental delivery of aural contact through the choice of words in radio can achieve the desired effect.
It radiates confidence in the presenter and provides unconstructive forum for verbal communication.
It is understood that in most cases, eye contact gives encouragement to mutual participation in communication.
It also encourages quick feedback.
Here, the source of information is easily confirmed and identified.
And if the presenter appears friendly and presentable, the audience members are likely going to stay put to consume the programme.
Akpede (2010).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE i.
Define mood.
And suggest two ways of setting the right mood.
ii.
Justify the reasons for effective eye contact in educational broadcasting.
34 MAC 246 MODULE 1 3.5 Competence It is not compulsory that a presenter of an educational programme is a graduate of education or the school of NCE.
But it is important for him to strive to know very much about the area of discuss.
For instance, a presenter of children’s programme must have acquired what it takes to attract the children.
What to say, what to do, how to say what you say, how to talk to a particular age-group, how to be funny with children and how to sustain their interest.
In other words, it is from knowledge that competence is drawn by the presenter who is now in a better position to guide his audience throughout the character of the programme.
The presenter should also show signs of competence in the other areas of production.
For instance, he or she should be able to know the signals given either by the programme director or the floor manager who is the contact person between the director and the artistes in the studio.
In fact, he or she should be knowledgeable in the production language and sign of the programme.
When he or she acquires knowledge in these and other things that are involved in production, then such a presenter is said to be competent in the performance of his or her job.
3.6 Charisma According to Akpede (2010) programme presentation in broadcasting is usually combined with special gift which tends to make the presenter acceptable to the audience.
The presenter should cultivate an acceptable behaviour that makes him loveable any time his voice is heard over the radio or his face is seen on the screen.
For it is generally believed that if people are impressed with a personality there is likelihood that such a personality would attract a lot of followership.
For example, in the late 1970s, anytime the late James Audu put his face on the screen and his voice was heard, many audience members rushed to see and hear him speak on Nigerian Television.
Such a presenter is likely going to be emulated by other talents for they too would like to be associated with such success.
The children presenter, Jimi Solanke is another charismatic presenter but of folklore on the national television, and his personality is a wonderful one.
There are no laid down rules for emitting charisma.
It is an inborn tendency that just manifests itself in a person.
Since this is a gift therefore, not everybody has this.
For presenters with weak charisma, they need efforts to win the audience to them.
A good presenter directs audience and influences individual and group activity either by viewing television or listening to the radio.
A good 35  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING presenter is capable of influencing audience to broadcast programmes, thus achieving the aims and objectives of the station.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Differentiate between charisma and competence.
And why does a presenter have to possess these qualities?
4.0 CONCLUSION The job of an educational broadcaster is not an easy one.
Because education is at the core of his objective, he needs to possess some qualities that would endear the audience to him.
Some of these qualities are naturally endowed while some are acquired through experience.
Some presenters naturally look good on the screen while others make-up to look better.
Some presenters are good orators or teachers, while others need to work extra hard to achieve similar feat.
5.0 SUMMARY Principles of presentation are those things that the presenter has to acquire, possess and exhibit in the performance of his or her job so that he or she would be accepted and believed by the audience.
The presenter should ensure that he achieves the appropriate mood and emotion and should create a welcome atmosphere before the audience in order to successfully drive home the programme objectives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT When you get home today, put on your television set and search for an educative programme.
Discover how the presenter was able to make you change your mood and sustain your interest in the programme.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Owuamalam, E.O.
(2007).
Radio TV Production.
Owerri.
Image and Slogans Consultant Ltd. 36 MAC 246 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 THE NEED FOR EDUCATION AND BROADCASTING IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Educational Broadcasting?
3.2 History of Educational Broadcasting in Nigeria 3.3 What Radio and Television can do for Education?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Educational broadcasting in Nigeria has a brief antecedent.
Anyone who claims to know a lot about anything must first and importantly know something if not very much on the history of the matter.
One important reason for this is so that one is aware of the past developments in such area of study and to discover some drawbacks and strength of the same and also find ways of improving the idea if it is a viable or sustainable one.
I believe that educational broadcasting is a productive national and international idea in a third world country like Nigeria where mass literacy is absolutely essential.
I want to encourage you to dutifully study the contents of this unit and fulfill the outline tasks.
You will be glad later in life that you did.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define urban, rural and national development deduce a chronological account of the history of educational broadcasting  define with convincing examples the concept of educational broadcasting.
37  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Educational Broadcasting?
Plato in Onabajo (2000) defines education as a process through which we foster in the individual, desirable and relevant changes in behavior and attitude.
Jarvis (1986) in Onabajo (2000) says education is planned series of incidents having humanistic basis, directed towards the participants learning and understanding.
In the same vein, broadcasting has been defined as the transmission of information through radio waves from a radio or television station, to the audience in far and near places, through their receivers, which helps in decoding such information.
From the above, we can define educational broadcasting as the transmission of education or educational programmes through radio waves from a television or radio station or any other broadcast device, to the audience in far and near places.
The concept of educational broadcasting is as old as the emergence of the broadcast industry and the objective of broadcasting is to improve the lots of society, through the dissemination of developmental information or knowledge that will bring about the desired attitudinal changes in the lives of the listening or viewing audience.
Broadcasting has been used to educate in a formal way, when formal school subjects are taught through radio and television, with the sole intention of covering certain prescribed syllabus for examination purposes.
Because informal education is incidental learning and this can take place through constant exposure to broadcast developmental programmes on health, agriculture and civic education then it is not possible to trivialise the effect of the broadcast medium on educating the people.
3.2 History of Educational Broadcasting in Nigeria According to Onabajo (2000) when Western Education Nigeria Television (WNTV) was established in October 31, 1959, education was seen as one of the main reasons for introducing television in Nigeria.
Time and facilities were made available to the then regional ministry of education which in turn directed its school broadcasting unit to produce series of educational broadcasts.
Soon, the northern, eastern and southern regions followed suit, as television was introduced in their areas.
38 MAC 246 MODULE 1 However, with the creation of states, it became the responsibility of state governments to purchase and install television sets in schools, as well as supply sets to community viewing centres (CVCs) which were established within each state.
In this arrangement, the role of the television station was merely to provide the technical facilities and those to run them.
The subjects aired were elementary science, arts, crafts, English and history.
During that time, educational broadcasts were daily from Monday to Friday, between the hours of 10am and 1:00pm.
During that period, educational broadcasting was divided into three: a.
Extensive Educational Broadcasting- The major emphasis of Nigeria television has been in the area of extensive educational broadcasting, that is, programming geared towards providing general information and informal education largely addressed to adults.
Nigeria television has used this in assisting government in its campaign to mobilise the people towards higher agricultural output and increasing industrial development.
b.
Intensive Educational Broadcasting- This is a process of harnessing television to the formal educational system.
The results have been less than satisfactory, because the programme has not been properly articulated.
Critics point to the high illiteracy rate especially amongst the people in the rural areas.
It has been opined that for television to be more effective in combating the problem of educational broadcasting, there has to be an expansion of the coverage area of television by installing more powerful transmitters and relay transmitting stations as well as creating infrastructure, such as electricity or solar energy and by providing more community viewing centres.
Irukwu (1980) noted that the former Broadcasting Corporation of Northern Nigeria (BCNN) used the community viewing centres to transmit to its rural audience, health and educational programmes.
c. Education.
Key to a Better Future- Nigerians have always realised the importance of formal education as a means of advancement and increased social status.
The early post- independence federal and regional governments realised that education was the key to a better future for the Nigerian people and that radio and television were crucial towards achieving this goal.
The first major breakthrough in educational broadcasting came in 1984 with the establishment of National Educational Technology Centre (NETC), under the auspices of the federal ministry of education.
39  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING The body which was set up to regularise educational broadcasting in the country, was set up specifically for the following objectives:  To train educational broadcasters and visual aid specialists.
 To develop and produce instructional aids.
 To produce and transmit educational programmes on Radio and Television.
 To conduct workshops and seminars on the application of audio- visual technology to classroom teachings.
Educational programmes followed this laudable initiative by the ministry of education.
The various educational programmes were run either in consonance with the curriculum and recommendation of the ministry of education or independent of the ministry, but in line with the peculiarities and philosophy of each individual station.
The various transformation and development that Nigerian broadcasting industry had witnessed so far, reflects in the educational broadcasting aspects of its activities, with a lot of programmes targeted at the various segments of its audience.
The advent of privately owned broadcasting stations also has a lot of impact on educational broadcasting in the country.
3.3 What Radio and Television Can Do For Education According to Onabajo (2000) radio and television are the most powerful means of education man has ever developed.
He further says that there is a general acceptance to the fact that they can make a profoundly significant contribution to an improved quality of education for children, youths and adults.
The following are some of what the media can do for education.
1.
Radio and television can bring to children, youth and adults the greatest achievements of our cultural heritage in art, music, drama, poetry, etc.
2.
They can bring the inspiration of great teachers, artists, statesmen and scientists into the lives of people who might otherwise never have direct contact with personalities of comparable magnitude.
3.
These media can fill an important role in making university education available to our rapidly increasing student enrollments and to adults who were unable to secure a university education in their youth.
4.
Radio and television can lessen the gap between the rapidly growing body of scientific knowledge and public understanding of the social implications of modern science.
40 MAC 246 MODULE 1 5.
They can be a major agency in all types of adult education from “do-it-your-self” skills to science and philosophy.
6.
It is possible to acquaint the people rapidly with major social, civic and international issues on radio and television.
7.
New events around the world can be brought to people everywhere in a few hours by radio and television.
8.
They contribute to the pre-service and in-service education of teachers by making the quality of educational practice available for observation and analysis.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Give three definitions of educational broadcasting from the point of view of a mass communicator.
4.0 CONCLUSION Educational broadcasting can be defined as the transmission of education or educational programmes through radio waves from a television or radio station or any other broadcast device, to the audience in far and near places.
6.0 SUMMARY In this unit, our discussion has been a rather brief one and issues discussed were simply the evolution of educational broadcasting, the history of educational broadcasting in Nigeria and what radio and television can do for the education of a country.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you think radio and television can do for the education of the educated and uneducated Nigerians?
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Onabajo, O.
(2000).
Principles of Educational Broadcasting.
Gabi Concepts Limited.
Lagos.
41  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING UNIT 5 PRINCIPLES OF EDUCATIONAL PRESENTATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Education?
3.2 What is Broadcasting?
3.4 The Educational Qualities of Radio 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION I remember as I write this, introduction the words of my grandmother of great memory.
When I was travelling for my higher education several years ago, she called me back from the cab and told me what was going to be a part of my guiding philosophy in life.
She said, “education remains the only answer to the problem you see everywhere, so strive to be educated and not only schooled”.
I did not understand that statement until years after.
Because my higher education was from a private university, I learnt under an impressive media-driven knowledge transfer.
Our professors projected to us their ideas and principles either through a projector or film or video or recording devices.
With this, we longed to attend classes, even when our health failed; we wanted to see the next practical film projections etc.
When I compared this with my initial background, I became sorry for our state of education in Nigeria.
In this unit, we want to examine the role of education and the role of broadcasting in the Nigerian context.
Please, follow me as we explore this terrain.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define education  define broadcasting  enumerate the qualities of radio for broadcasting.
42 MAC 246 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Education?
According to Abdulkareem (1992) in Babafemi (2000), education is as essential to man as life itself on this planet earth.
Societies through ages have one form of education or the other, whether indigenous or western education.
Education varies from place to place and from time to time.
In fact, it is a very important means of developing any nation.
The term education has not lent itself to any strict consensual definition as it depends on the perspective from which one views it.
It can be considered as the process of acquiring knowledge, skills, attitudes, interest, abilities, competence and the cultural norms of a society by people to transmit this life to the coming generations so as to enhance perpetual development of the society.
History has it that long before the advent of both Islamic and western education, Nigeria has an indigenous type of education (ie education for the survival of the people; subsistence education).
However, modern influences, at about 300 year’s interval to each other, robbed the country of its indigenous education to a great extent.
For instance, Christian education was later promoted by the colonial administration to suit its purpose of colonisation.
Adesina (1985) in Lawal (2008) noted that education is always related to variable such as purpose of the learner, the aim of the teacher as well as the technological problems of the society.
He therefore defines education as:  The tool for the integration of the individual effectively into a society so that the individual can achieve self-realisation, develop national consciousness, promote unity and strive for social economic, political, scientific, cultural and technological process.
While relating education to culture, Nduka (1982) in Lawal (2008) sees the concept as the process of cultural transmission of the people at least part of such culture from one generation to the next.
Education, according to Lester Smith cited by Osokoya (1987) is the culture which each generation purposely gives to those who are to be its successors in order to qualify them for at least keeping, and if possible for raising the level of improvement which has been attained.
Horton, cited in Lawal (2008) sees education as an enhancing agency by which the Africans could restore their self confidence, and make those 43  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING who doubt the humanity of African begin to revise their views and learn to respect Africans.
Education, according to Nyerere (1982) is the transmission of accumulated wisdom and knowledge of the society from one generation to the next and also to prepare the young people for their future membership of the society in which they find themselves.
According to Salawu (2008) education is a term that means many things to many people.
According to Oxford English dictionary (2000), the term means “a process of teaching, training and learning, especially in schools or colleges to improve knowledge and develop skills”.
There seems to be a consensus among definers of the term education.
Education is regarded as that which is given to an individual to make him develop socially, morally, and intellectually as to allow for his/her personal overall development and the development of the community in which he/she finds himself/herself”.
By implication, education, whether formal or informal, is goal-oriented.
It is to be functional, qualitative and socio-personal driven.
Socio-personal in the sense that it must be tailored toward serving the society and the personality involved.
This accounts for why every society is concerned and deeply involved in the content and quality of education given to the individuals in the society.
It is because of the role attributed to education by society that account for its being defined as “transmission and renewal of culture from one generation to another”.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Attempt a definition of education different from the above.
3.2 What is broadcasting?
Broadcasting is an activity strictly limited to the electronic media.
The electronic media may best be defined as all media forms appearing in electronic form that is radio, television, films, projectors, computers etc.
In fact, Onabajo (2000) defines broadcasting as the transmission of information through radio waves from a radio or television station, to the audience in far and near places, through their receivers, which help in decoding such information.
Also, broadcasting can be defined as the dissemination of information by an organisation to a widely dispersed heterogeneous audience through their radio or television receivers.
Brief Information on Nigeria Nigeria is a country described severally as one-third larger than Texas and the most populous country in Africa.
It is situated on the Gulf of 44 MAC 246 MODULE 1 Guinea.
Nigeria operates a multi-party system of government transitioning from military to civilian government.
On October 1, 1960, Nigeria gained independence and became a member of the Commonwealth of Nations thereby joining the United Nations.
Organised as a loosed federation of self-government states, these states face the overwhelming task of unifying a country with 250 ethnic and linguistic groups.
For 33 years, Nigeria endured a pretty ravaging military government until May 1999 when General Abdulsalam Abubakar fulfilled a long- awaited pledge of stepping aside for a democratically elected leader and this informed the election of Chief Olusegun Obasanjo who governed the country for eight years.
Current statistics show that contrary to the 140 million population estimate, Nigeria is now of over 160 million people.
This has implication for all the sectors of the country, especially education.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE With the brief information on Nigeria, do you consider education an urgent priority in the country?
If yes: why?
3.3 The Educational Qualities of Radio According to Onabajo (2000) radio has the following teaching qualities; which are absent in other media, whether its programmes are pre- recorded or transmitted live.
a. Immediacy- One can listen-in on the event itself.
While textbooks used for teaching may be five or 10 years out of date, radio messages can be as current as the latest broadcast.
b. Realism- Report of events on radio as they unfold may be more impressive than a newspaper reporter dealing with the same events.
The broadcaster is on the scene and the tones of his voice communicate shades of meaning that the newspaper cannot convey.
World history becomes real and personal during live broadcast of the London 2012 Olympic Games or some other events, as students are transplanted to scenes of momentous decisions.
c. The conquest of space and Time- Radio can overcome the barriers of space and time through on the spot broadcasts or simulated history.
d. Emotional Impact- Radio brings dramatic feelings into the classroom and can carry to the listener all the emotional 45  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING overtones of the broadcast materials.
The human voice is the most significant way of reading people and can convey feelings and attitudes even when the eyes of the listeners are closed.
e. Authenticity- Since it is rare for a teacher to be expert in every phase of the subject he teaches, experts have often been brought on radio to bring into classrooms expertise and authority in subject matters.
Radio can also provide expertise in methods.
f. Cost- Radio is relatively cheap to run because its per capital cost is small, because it can reach millions of people at the same time.
It can be used inexpensively when there is need to emphasise local problems or conditions and the solutions to such problems.
4.0 CONCLUSION Nigeria is a country described severally as one-third larger than Texas and the most populous country in Africa.
The same country is still struggling with giving its citizens good and quality education.
If education is the life-blood of any nation, can we say that Nigeria has done well with education over the years?
Can we also say that the broadcast has been put to good use for educational purpose?
5.0 SUMMARY So far in this unit, there has been a look at the definition of education and broadcasting.
Also, the qualities of radio for the purpose of education have been examined.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Do you think radio is an important tool for mass education?
If yes: how?
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Onabajo, O.
(2000).
Principles of Educational Broadcasting.
Gabi Concepts Limited.
46 MAC 246 MODULE 1 MODULE 2 CATEGORIES OF EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING Unit 1 Children Education Broadcasting Unit 2 Adults in Search of Education Unit 3 Men and Women in Urban Communities Unit 4 Men and Women in Rural Communities UNIT 1 CHILDREN EDUCATION BROADCASTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Why is Educational Broadcasting Important?
3.2 Educational Broadcasting and the Children 3.3 Methods of Educational Broadcasting for Children 3.4 Some Challenges of Broadcasting to the Children 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Perhaps the most difficult audience of any broadcasting medium is the children.
Why is this so?
The definition of a child is given only with a range.
The most popular definition puts a child as being between the unborn ages of zero to 18.
Now, tell me, are you going to serve the same content to a two year old and 17 year old and expect a meaningful result?
But despite this challenge, this unit has proffered some solutions to reaching the various groups of children.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define a child  list reasons why children need educational broadcasting  describe methods of reaching the children on radio and television  describe some challenges in broadcasting to children.
47  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Why is Educational Broadcasting Important?
Nigeria currently operates the 6-3-3-4 system of education.
This is a type of educational system wherein the recipient would spend six years in the primary school, three years in the Junior Secondary School, three years in the Senor Secondary School and four years in the tertiary institutions.
In these stages, we have primary schools, secondary schools and tertiary Institutions such as colleges of education, polytechnic and universities respectively.
Primary education as regards the 6-3-3-4 system of education is the elementary type of education for children between ages six to 11 years.
This is the foundation of education upon which all others are built.
It therefore determines the success or failure of the whole system, (National Policy on Education 1981).
Now, let us adopt our working definition of a Nigerian child as between the ages of six and 11 for broadcast purposes.
This set of children resume school from the hours between 8:00am and 2:00pm.
In many schools, they are engaged in after-school lessons that will keep them in school for another one hour, 30 minutes.
It is therefore assumed that these children will be at home from about 3:30 and 4:00 pm.
Research has shown that these kids engage themselves most of the time after school with the television.
The question therefore is to what extent these children obtain educational information on the television or radio after school.
3.2 The Importance of Educational Broadcasting for Children a.
It facilitates their learning experience- The television in this part of the world has not done quite well in educating our children.
In some parts of the world, children look forward to solving their homework or school quizzes at home through the mass media.
This way, a practical re-demonstration of what they have learnt in school is again projected to them.
b.
Helps in the Childs Phonic education- If for instance, a child learns in school a series of word pronunciation and is perhaps confused, when that child gets home and tune to the television, and hears the exact way the teacher has pronounced the word, the child’s education is however enhanced in the process.
c. Because children learn faster when what they learn are played before them, broadcasting offers to the child a greater advantage 48 MAC 246 MODULE 1 over the class situation.
A child who has been taught that aero- plane works by flying in class, and gets home to see an aero- plane in the television doing exactly what the teacher described will no doubt be a better student.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Quickly think of other importance of educational broadcasting for children.
3.3 Methods of Educational Broadcasting for the Children By methods, we mean the various ways through which education can appear on television for children.
These are the various programmes packaged with major and minor educational contents for the children.
And they are: a. After-school programmes (A Lagos Example) - educational broadcasting began in LTV 8 in November 1981.
It went off the air after four months and resurfaced in March, 1982 with the teaching of Yoruba, English and French languages for the beginners.
The teaching of Yoruba language became an important focus of educational broadcasting as a result of the decision reached by the federal ministry of education, that all school certificate holders must pass a Nigerian language at senior secondary certificate of education level.
This however, led to the creation of Aditu which was aimed at broadcasting the teaching of Yoruba language, grammar and literature.
Education broadcasting of Aditu was based on school curriculum syllabus of Nigeria Educational Research and Development Council (NERDEC).
Towards the end of 1982, Areweyo another Yoruba educational programme for primary school started to be relayed from 5-5:45pm every Tuesday.
The teaching of English language and mathematics based on NERDEC curriculum was on air for two years 1984-1986.
On the stable of African Independent Television (AIT), programmes like Scrap Palace (a programme on the art) and Kiddies Radio on Sunday (a quiz programme designed for children between the ages of five to 12) was aired every Sunday on Ray Power from 2 - 3pm.
b. Moonlight tales on television- An important instrument or means of educating our children or the coming generation is by rendering tales.
This is a long practice in Africa.
Our national television at a time prioritised this practice but all of a sudden, the practice has declined.
Tales by moonlight was NTA’s longest 49  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING running children’s educational programme.
The programme won the 1991 prized pieces International Video/Film Competition, organised by the National Black Programme Consortium in Columbus, Ohio, USA.
The consortium adjudged tales by moonlight, the best youth educational programme in Ohio.
The programme is a typical Nigerian educational programme in traditional folklore and the episodes are usually recorded in an environment that reflects the actual scenery in specific stories.
A similar programme of the NTA is story-land.
It is a folklore that teaches the children not to tell lies.
It is a story of wisdom which is illustrated graphically.
Storyland made its debut in 1990, and featured Jimi Solanke and Dede Mabiaku as story tellers.
c. Television debates/quiz-Debate programmes are educational programme whether on radio or television.
This is an avenue where children could easily pick the skills involved in argument.
The NTA network service at a time included the Jets Quiz Competition.
Also, the Bournvta Brain Match, a form of quiz competition was on air among others.
The purpose of these programmes was to prepare the children for the future ahead of them.
d. Educational drama- Children love drama programmes where they can find children of their age, who speak similar language like they do.
They could be educated through this avenue.
Such drama could address some of their social education needs like etiquettes, moral and ethical conducts etc.
e. Cartoons- The dictionary defines cartoons in two contexts.
The first is that it is an amusing drawing in a newspaper or magazine, especially one about politics or events in the news.
The second is (animated cartoons) which is a film/movies made by photographing a series of gradually changing drawings or models, so that they look as if they are moving.
Cartoons attract children because of the colouration of the drawing.
The voice of the characters is another delight.
These days, with the advancement in computer technology, there is an amazing improvement in the quality of cartoons that appear on our national/international televisions.
3.4 Some Challenges of Broadcasting to Children a. Language- When broadcasting for children, the instructor or broadcaster needs to be mindful of the choice of words.
Because different children converge in front of the television, there is the need to understand the fact that these children are of different educational background.
Therefore, assumptions should not be made that there will be a general understanding of an idea or 50 MAC 246 MODULE 1 instruction.
As an instructor on radio or television, the use of the simplest word to drive your idea is unavoidably important.
b.
Audience analysis- A fatal mistake that broadcast instructors make is to generalise the children population.
The definition of children given earlier in our discussion gives a range of (zero to 18 years) for children.
The question an instructor should ask is ‘what segment of the population am I going to reach and how will I achieve this?’ The broadcast content for ages 10-14 may not make sense to ages 1-4 years.
c. Appropriate instructional materials- There are different instructional materials for teaching children.
This is because, children learn faster when they see.
Tell a child a dog barks and he may still be confused.
But show a child a dog barking and there is a connection to the dog either at home or of the neigbour and you have succeeded in passing loads of information.
4.0 CONCLUSION Education plays a pivotal role in a nation’s development.
The extent to which the children are educated will either spell a great future or doom for any nation.
The structures that we build today will only become reliable legacies tomorrow only if our children are truly educated.
One of the avenues of mass education is the mass media; whether radio or television.
But for the youngsters, television seems to be the fastest way of connecting them.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, efforts have been made to define a child from different contexts.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify educational broadcasting method that you can find on our national television stations today.
Are they really educating the children?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Onabajo, O.
(2000).
Principles of Educational Broadcasting.
Gabi Concepts Limited.
Lagos.
Schramm, W. (1969).
Feedback for Instructional Television.
Stanford: Institute for Communication Research.
51  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING UNIT 2 ADULTS IN SEARCH OF EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of an Adult 3.2 What is Education?
3.3 What is Adult Education?
3.4 Purpose of Adult Education 3.5 Brief History of Adult Education in Nigeria 3.6 Functions of the Broadcast Media 3.7 Methods of Educational Broadcasting for the Adult Learners 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION By Adult Education, we refer to definition by experts for deep understanding.
In this unit we will go down history lane to the history of adult education in Nigeria.
The reason for this is to aid our understanding on subsequent issues to be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  narrate a short account of adult education in Nigeria  state why mass adult education is important n Nigeria  outline ways by which media can further aid adult literacy in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of an Adult Nzeneri (2008) described an adult as a person who is physically and psychologically mature and who is socially, economically, and politically responsible.
In his words, physical maturity implies that the adult is capable of being a parent, picking a life partner, raising a family and managing a home.
52 MAC 246 MODULE 1 In some communities, an adult is known by his age.
Some say that adulthood starts at 14 years of age.
To many, one has attained adulthood when he is up to 18 years of age.
To Ume (no date) an adult is not known by his age or physical and psychological maturity but by the circumstances in which he or she finds herself.
In this case, a boy of 14 years may be a more adult than another who is 20 years.
3.2 What is Education?
To many scholars, the term education means learning which starts from the cradle to the grave.
Okafor (1987) defined education to embrace all experiences through which an individual acquires knowledge or ideas, develops his intellect and strengthens his will.
3.3 What is Adult Education?
We can see the relevance of experience in Ume and Okafor’s definitions.
Using their definitions of adult and education, we can safely say that adult education is just a process by which a mature person acquires knowledge, ideas etc.
some other scholars saw adult education as a comprehensive term describing not merely literacy education but non-formal, out of school education and training.
A summary of United Nations Economic, Social and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) presents adult education as a process by which a matured member of a society acquires knowledge and skills to make himself relevant in his community.
3.4 Purpose of Adult Education According to Nzeneri (2008) the purpose of adult education and non- formal education of the Nigerian National Policy on Education include:  To produce functional literacy education for adults who have never had the advantage of any formal education.
 To promote functional and remedial education for those young people who prematurely developed out of the formal school system.
 To provide further education for different categories of completers of the formal education system in order to improve on their basic knowledge and skills.
 To provide in-service on the job vocational and professional training for different categories of workers and professionals in order to improve their skills.
 To give the adult citizens of the country necessary aesthetics; cultural and civic education for public enlightenment.
53  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 3.5 Brief History of Adult Education in Nigeria Before the advent of the western education in Nigeria, some form of adult education has been given in the traditional societies, and Muslims, through the Quranic schools have also been teaching not only children, but also adults.
The aims were to prepare people to master skills in order to earn their living, to learn about the cultural heritage, to behave according to society’s codes of conducts and to lead moral life so as to enter the blissful thereafter.
However, the western concept of adult education came with the Christian missionaries in the 1840s to start with, the missionaries taught adults along with children and emphasised religion.
The three Rs were also imparted as the knowledge of these helped them to understand the Bible.
Sunday school activities and classes in the evenings when adults were free were taken up quite seriously, both by the missionaries and their congregation.
The missions emphasised moral training, and the literacy was to help the learner to master western values.
According to Online Researchers (2010) the history of adult education dates back to the 40s.
in Aderinoye’s opinion, adult education started as evening classes in Kano in 1940.
He further informed us that experiments in community development and literacy began in Udi in 1942 with Chadwick ER as the organiser.
He also wrote that as far back as 1958 before Nigeria’s independence, an association had been formed.
The association constituted what was called an Interim committee in their conference at the University of Nigeria Nsukka.
The committee was changed with the preparation for launching of a natural body and a constitution to be examined in a conference proposed to be held at the University of Ibadan in December 1967.
Unfortunately, the civil war made the realisation of this dream impossible until 1971 when the association was transformed into a national body called Nigerian National Council for Adult Education (NNCAE).
The aim of the council was to achieve 100% literacy in Nigeria.
Also in 1971, Chief A.Y.
Eke the then minister for education called for a 10 year (1974-1984) mass literacy campaign and served as the founding chairman of the National Mass Education Commission.
Following the pressure by the federal government for recognition of the discipline of adult education, a unit called adult education was created at the Federal Ministry of Education in 1974.
The administration of Alhaji Shehu Shagari in 1982 following call by the United Nations Economic Social and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) for total eradication of illiteracy from the world 1982-1992 as a 10 year mass literacy campaign period.
In 1987, the federal 54 MAC 246 MODULE 1 government directed all state government in the federation to establish adult and non-formal education agencies to execute literacy education.
In 1990, a decree was promulgated establishing a national mass literacy commission.
To buttress the unseasoned effort of our government to respond to the global trend for Education for All (EFA) in line with the United Nations declaration, the Universal Basic Education was launched in September 20, 1999.
3.6 Functions of the Broadcast Media According to Marsh & Knox (1966) mass media serve two basic functions and that is to provide information and to provide escape.
Communication theorists identify two major functions of mass media.
The first is that it is a medium for contributory effects; to reinforce existing opinions or recent decisions.
To increase knowledge and information on a wide range of topics, or to provide a tool for personal growth and development, the second function is that it serves as a means of escape that is to provide mental and physical relaxation, to stimulate the imagination and to act as a means of vocation interaction.
The first function represents a search for instrumental information.
The second therefore is a search for entertainment.
In the words of Idebi (2008) education could not be limited within teacher and taught without social environment.
Therefore, mass media is one such potent force in the social environment of education.
Through modern electronic techniques and technologies (i.e the broadcast media), mass media prove that education is really comprehensive and not confinable to the four walls of the classroom.
Some of the functions of the broadcast media as stated by Sharma (2012) are as follows: 1.
Provides various information - The broadcast media disseminates various information for the mass of people to acquire different knowledge as quickly as possible.
2.
Provides vocational information- The broadcast media helps in providing vocational and professional information to a large group of people.
3.
Spreading awareness and civic responsibility- People can be aware of different problems of the society and their role in changing society through mass media.
People know their rights and duties for the nation clearly.
4.
Provides educational programmes- The broadcast media help in forming suitable habit for different programmes and they utilise their leisure time in a productive way.
It also influences the behavior of the people through different programmes.
55  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 5.
Role as a non-formal agency- In advanced societies of the world, mass media are not treated as informal agencies of education.
They are called non-formal agencies due to its wide coverage of educational items in a systematic way.
It is viewed that the mass media can substitute the classroom teaching in future.
Therefore, mass media are the main means of educating the society.
These are the cheapest and quickest means of educating the people.
3.7 Methods of Educational Broadcasting for the Adult Learners The discipline of Sociology assumes that a child has what is called tabula rasa (a situation in which there is no fixed idea about how something should develop).
In simple terms, they believe the child’s mind is like a clean board where nothing has been written.
In essence, when fixing ideas, knowledge or information, because of their inexperience to life, such dissemination should ordinarily take a most simple, descriptive, illustrative and dramatic form.
This is why educational technology for teaching children keeps evolving simpler methods of teaching.
An adult coming into education learning environment as a new comer already has innumerable ideas affixed in his mind especially through informal education.
There is no such thing as a tabula rasa in such an adults mind.
In fact, what we should expect is altering or reshaping such a mind.
Let me make myself clearer.
We have a child of six years of age in primary one.
We also have an adult of 28 years in primary one.
You can’t but agree with me that their view of life is totally different.
They will be learning the same thing, but their response will be different.
One will learn as an innocent and vulnerable learner while the older will learn with several beckoning questions.
The question that arises therefore is how do you pass knowledge across to the adult learner knowing quite well the challenges involved?
The following points are no less useful.
 Radio education- The tendency that an adult is easily exposed to the radio is high in many situations.
They could access it in the car, in the public cab/bus, at work, through the mobile phone etc.
Children cannot easily access the radio except the conditions are programmed for them or perhaps it happened on chance.
Because of this advantage for adults, radio is one of the most appropriate media for disseminating instructions to adults.
It is unfortunate that this is not happening in Nigeria the way it should.
56 MAC 246 MODULE 1 Programmes could be aired specially for the purpose of educating the adult population.
 Experience-infused teaching- Because the adult learner has had loads of life experiences whether while growing, during marriage, through disappointments etc, the instructor could mix these hypothetical experiences together as a method in reaching out to the adult.
 Language- English is the official language in Nigeria; therefore, it is the acceptable language of instruction in schools.
For the children we can achieve substantial success at instructing in English, but for the adult, I envisage problems.
Let us take for instance the 28 years old leaner in primary one that we discussed above.
Let us assume that he has not had frequent exposure to the English language over the years, now he finds himself in the classroom where English language is the only medium of expression.
No matter his brilliance, he will have some problems.
The way out is educational instruction should be given through the indigenous languages on radio and television.
4.0 CONCLUSION Education being vital in a nation’s development, adult education is not less important than children education in the building of a nation.
The brief history of adult education is enumerated in this unit.
You learnt some of the functions of the broadcast media especially how it could be used for adult learners.
7.0 SUMMARY In this unit, efforts have been made to examine different contexts of adult learning.
8.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why is mass adult education important in Nigeria?
Outline two ways by which media can further aid adult literacy in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Idebi, S.K.
(2008).
Fundamentals of Radio Production.
Ibadan: Impact Motion Pictures and Media Koncept Nigeria.
Thakur, A.S. & Ezenne, A.N.
(1980).
A Short History of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: De Ayo Publications.
57  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING UNIT 3 MEN AND WOMEN IN URBAN COMMUNITIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Past Mass Education Programmes in the Nigerian Mass Media 3.2 Media Methods for Educating the Urban Population 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Another category of people in need of constant education are the men and women in the urban communities.
These are heterogeneous population of men and women widely distributed in town and cities.
They need to be educated on a daily basis on the issues around their vicinity, state or nation.
This kind of education is for their well being and overall survival.
In this unit, we shall examine in what capacity, people in the urban areas need to be educated.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  state the reason why educational broadcasting is important to urban dwellers  give examples of past educational programmes in the country.
58 MAC 246 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Past Mass Education Programmes in the Nigerian Mass Media 1.
Currency change In 1971, the Nigerian Currency changed from the pound and shilling to naira and kobo.
Both the print and broadcast media were actively involved in educating Nigerians about the equivalent of old rate to the new one and the advantages of the new currency, which included making trade relationship easier with other countries.
Despite the wide coverage given by the electronic media, the rural population seemed to have been lost in the process of innovation, as media messages were distorted, as it passed from hand to hand.
For some time after the introduction of the new currency, there were reports of confusion in the rural areas, about the equivalent of the new coins to the old ones.
Up till now, many illiterate traders still insist that buyers should first convert to the old currency, before paying for the goods bought in the new currency.
All in all, the change was successful and has received a high degree of acceptance and compliance by the public, because people did not have a choice of alternatives in dealing with their innovation, because after a certain date, it became illegal to use the old currency.
2.
Traffic change (1972) Anyone who wanted to use the roads after April 6, 1973 did not have much of a choice.
They had to drive on the right side of the road, or face the consequences.
Earlier there had been media campaigns.
Jingles were made for radio and were repeatedly broadcast.
The television messages were more effective, as it pictorially illustrated the change over, through animation.
However, in this case, the information was directed to the city dwellers, who owned cars and the drivers of commercial vehicles.
3.
National census (1973) In 1973, a national census was conducted.
It aimed at knowing the population of Nigeria for effective planning.
Again, the mass media was used.
It provided all the information and education on why people must ensure that they were counted.
Jingles meant to educate the citizenry were produced and aired by both radio and television.
However, because the community and opinion leaders were not mobilised before hand, the event was misconstrued, the rural population thought it was election time and demanded to be paid before registration.
Other political leaders fuelled unpatriotic acts, by ensuring that their people were counted numerous times, while some census officials inflated figures.
Hence, the results generated a lot of controversy.
59  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING According to Onabajo (2000) studies on the 1973 national census campaign showed that the radio was more versatile on the census campaign than other media.
4.
Operation feed the nation (1976) The Operation Feed the Nation (OFN) of 1976 was a generalised appeal through the mass media to Nigerians.
It aimed at taking farming and food production more seriously.
According to Opubor (1985) in Onabajo (2000) the government attempted through the media to highlight economic and social support and reinforcement for people who wished to participate in the programme through making fertiliser and seedlings available and thorough social approval and commendation of those who were feeding the nation.
However, participation was on voluntary basis, except for the short lived attempt to compel all university students to work on the farms during their long vacations on some stipends.
The print and broadcast media was flooded with persuasive messages asking people in all walks of life to participate be they farmers, civil servants, doctors, engineers, soldiers, businessmen, policemen, students, housewives etc.
Political Education: Transition from Military to Civil Rule 1978- 1979 According to Onabajo (2000) from the outset of the transition to civil rule, the Nigerian mass media enlightened and acquainted the public with the political activities in the country.
Olorunsogo in Onabajo (2000) examined the roles played by the Nigerian Television Authority, the Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria (FRCN) and federal ministry of information and the federal electoral commission in mobilising and educating the Nigerian people about the transition from military to civil rule between 1978 and 1979.
Many programmes and approaches were designed for effective coverage so as to be able to catch the flavour and fury of political campaigns.
Interviews were conducted with House of Representatives, senatorial, gubernatorial and presidential candidates on radio and television The federal ministry of information embarked on mass public enlightenment campaigns in the then 19 states of the federation.
A 15 minute documentary was commissioned by the defunct Federal Electoral Commission (FEDECO) and produced by the film division of the ministry of information.
The film titled “Voting in Election 79” was aimed at educating the voters in correctly exercising their civil rights 60 MAC 246 MODULE 1 during the 1979 general elections.
Copies of the film were distributed to television stations, mobile cinema vans of federal and state ministries of information and some public cinema houses.
The ministry also recorded some jingles for distribution, among radio stations in the country, informing and motivating the electorate to vote.
War against Indiscipline (WAI) When Buhari/Idagbon military regime seized power from the Shagari government on the 30th December 1983, the country was thought to be in a decadent state and that there was the need for discipline to be restored among Nigerians.
With the complete mobilisation of the mass media, late Major General Tunde Idiagbon launched the famous War Against Indiscipline (WAI) in five phases.
The first phase was queue.
Nigerians were being asked to do things orderly by forming a queue in their day to day transactions.
This was directed at the urban population where the rush-rush syndrome was prominent.
Both radio and television producers made appropriate jingles to ensure that people not only took their turns during transactions, but also discouraged others from jumping existing queue.
Posters were also designed and pasted at strategic places to educate the city dwellers, that it was more desirable to be orderly.
The Nigerian Television Authority (NTA), in one of its numerous jingles to create awareness, used a canteen situation, where a man of the people was disallowed from jumping queue.
Because the city dwellers have access to the media, the queue campaign was successful.
Another phase was environmental sanitation.
People were shown on television clearing their surroundings.
There was great compliance by the people.
The exercise was to take place at the last Saturday of every month.
People kept their houses and surrounding environment clean between the periods of 7:00am to 10:00am in the afternoon.
This was given great prominence on radio and television as there was constant reminder and education.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Using the above past mass education programmes as a guide, enlist current mass education programmes of recent time especially since the democratic transition on May 1999.
61  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 3.2 Methods of Reaching the Urban Communities Educationally 1.
Talk-shows- Let me give you the dictionary definition of talk- show.
It is simply a television or radio programme in which famous people or persons are asked questions and they talk in an informal way about their work and give opinions on various topics.
Another definition is a method where a presenter introduces a particular topic which is then discussed by the audience.
Depending on how the presenter can handle this method, talk- shows are powerful medium of education for the urban dwellers.
This method most times bring notable, knowledgeable and skilled people from all works of life, be it the university, polytechnic, colleges of education, politics, media, entertainment industry etc.
to air their views on either a topic assigned to them on a wide variety of topics thrown to them.
Imagine a talk-show that hosts the likes of the Nobel Laureate, Professor Wole Soyinka or Chinua Achebe to air their views on a variety of topics or importantly on literature and national development.
According to Onabajo (1999) every talk show should have the attribute of informing, educating as well as entertain its viewers.
However, there are talk-shows in our television industry, which show little or no creativity.
A situation where a presenter sits in the studio, in front of a phone-service, asking viewers to contribute to a topic of discussion without a resource person, is at its best insulting to the viewers.
It is a lazy approach to programming, which is fast gaining momentum.
2.
Drama- The simple definition of drama is that it is a performance which tells a story through action and dialogue.
It takes us into the lives and thoughts of people and exposes their character and how these change as a result of the conflicts which face them and how these are resolved.
When the conflicts are inconsequential, the drama is a comedy and when they are deeply disturbing or profound, it is a tragedy.
In Iyiola (2009) drama is a composition that tells a story through action and dialogue which is planned and written into a script, with the aim of entertaining, education or informing a target audience.
It is a medium of communication in which reality is deliberately and purposely initiated.
Because drama is an imitation of the real world, it therefore makes it a tool for the transformation of the society.
The deteriorating level of the nation’s educational system can best be expressed in drama to educate our people on the need or importance of education in our society.
Important education 62 MAC 246 MODULE 1 could be passed across through a 30 minutes drama on television or radio.
Health and development communication experts are now beginning to see the opportunities that abound in the use of radio drama for rural education these days.
3.
Documentaries-Documentaries stem up from documents.
Therefore, materials for a documentary have been preserved in time past.
A documentary is narrative in nature and may be planned or unplanned.
A documentary therefore is an assembly of many pieces of information.
All documents are meant to educate which distinguish them from the magazine.
The magazine simply informs, while documentary largely educates.
If a magazine programme educates, it is purely incidental.
A documentary may have the urgency of news, but not hard news.
It deals more with the soft aspects of news and has an element of drama, hence, it is entertaining.
There is however a difference between a radio documentary and a television documentary.
This difference is the difference that exists between radio and television.
If the radio documentary does not make use of embellishments like sound effects, such as the sound of rain or thunder, the radio documentary will be boring to the listeners.
In radio documentary, the musical breaks are used to eliminate too much of talking.
The narrator must put together every illustration through a beautiful narration.
Types of documentary 1.
Historical documentary- Historical documentary may tell us the story of something that is happening or has happened.
It may tell us about an important national event about to take place, or one that occurred in the past.
It could do with the history of a nation and its people.
According to Onabajo (2000) historical documentary is not a regular feature on our air waves, but it is used to mark occasions.
Most of the materials are archival in nature, but since it is historical in concept, it also features contemporary history.
Where documents are not available for particular information, the events are often acted out.
2.
Biographical documentary- It is usually about the life and times of nation’s heroes, their achievements, frustrations, their thought processes and the lives they affected they were alive.
This type of documentary thrives on whether there are enough audio, visual and pictorial representations about remarkable events that the heroes participated in.
The missing gaps are acted out, using characters that have close resemblance to the hero in question.
Such documentaries include “The Life and Times of Chief 63  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING Obafemi Awolowo”, “Zik of Africa-the demise of a Titan”, Fela- the passing away of a legend”.
3.
Scientific documentary- This deals with breakthroughs in the field of science and technology.
It may be on marine engineering, space technology and travels, medicine, agriculture etc.
4.
Religious documentary- Most religious documentaries are acted out because religious heroes date back to a long and remote time in history.
The religious characters are simply representations or artistic impressions of the original characters.
Other types of documentaries include docu-drama, institutional documentary, cultural documentary, mythical documentary, habitat documentary and news documentary.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate the types of documentary.
4.0 CONCLUSION An important category of people in need of constant education are the men and women in the urban cities like Lagos, Abuja, Port Harcourt, Benin City, and Ibadan etc.
This is because these people constitute the working class whose access to constant information is through the media.
To effectively reach these set of people there are some methods and this methods have been dutifully discussed in this unit.
7.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed the past mass education programmes in the Nigerian mass media with the aim of taking the students especially the younger ones on an historical excursion, so that they can appreciate the role of the mass media in giving education.
Also, in this unit the methods used in reaching people in the urban centres have been seriously outlined.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT When you get home today, turn your television to a city station.
Look out for other methods where the station communicates to the urban dwellers.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Hasling, J.
(1980).
Fundamentals of Radio Broadcasting.
USA: McGraw-Hill Book Publishing, Co. Inc. 64 MAC 246 MODULE 1 Onabajo, O.
(1999).
Essentials of Broadcast Writing and Production.
Lagos: Gabi Concept.
Onabajo, O.
(2000).
Principles of Educational Broadcasting.
Lagos: Gabi Concepts Limited.
UNIT 4 MEN AND WOMEN IN RURAL COMMUNITIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Composition of Rural Dwellers 3.2 Some Strategies for Rural Broadcasting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION According to Onabajo (2002) rural broadcasting is a recent concept in Nigeria broadcasts history and it is a phenomenon that is prevalent in the developing or emerging world.
The concept takes cognisance of the larger percentage of the rural population when compared with urban residents.
Mabogunje (1981) in Onabajo (2002) contends that about 70% of Nigerians reside in the rural areas hence the need to educate them and lift them from the doldrums of poverty into opportunities.
To achieve this, the broadcast media needs to be fully employed for the task.
Further, according to Onabajo (2002) rural educations is a subset of rural development and rural broadcasting can only but have one major focus- that is transmitting developmental information to educate the rural citizenry, with the overall intention of developing their well-being through innovative ideas that will stimulate them into action.
65  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the purpose for rural broadcasting  trace the emergence of rural broadcasting  list some strategies for rural broadcasting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Composition of Rural Dwellers Some of the characteristics of the rural area occupants are poverty and illiteracy.
Because majority of the population are farmers and artisans, the level of education is pretty low.
Again access to education is not as abundant and easy compared to the city.
Until recently, adequate attention has not been paid to the rural areas in Nigeria.
Majority of the educational infrastructures found in the rural areas are the elementary and secondary school levels.
And their conditions are even as deplorable as the life in those areas.
We can therefore say that the level of education in the rural areas is next to nothing; they are very low.
Because of this, this area is plagued with a lot of avoidable challenges majorly health.
Emergence of rural broadcasting According to Onabajo (2000) rural broadcasting in Nigeria came about when broadcasting made efforts to discover basic information about their listenership.
Such efforts were sporadic and have not produced far reaching and enduring results.
Rural broadcasting sprang up as a result of the regions which longed for broadcasting; first the West in 1959, then the East in 1960 and the north in 1962, set up their own broadcasting corporations and began transmitting their own programmes on both radio and television particularly in local languages.
Although in 1950s, rural community listening was apparently uncommon in Nigeria, however, some native authorities in Northern Nigeria were recorded as installing community listening kiosks with dry battery receivers in the mid 1950 and the Nigerian broadcasting service at that time proceeded cautiously with experiments in community listening.
66 MAC 246 MODULE 1 About 11% of indigenous programmes was translated into nine languages- Hausa, Yoruba, Ibo, Fulani, Kanuri, Tiv, Ijaw, Edo and Efik, which are mother tongues of significant sections of the Nigerian population.
The most conventional way to estimate the rural broadcasting systems relative stage of development is a receiver-to-population ratio expressed as the average number of rural receivers available for every thousand persons in the area.
UNESCO stipulated 50 radio receivers per 1000 inhabitants as a minimum target level for development in the 1960s.
In 1988, according to UNESCO, Nigeria averaged only 85 radio receivers per thousand inhabitants, as against a world average of 159.
3.2 Some Strategies for Rural Broadcasting According to Onabajo (2002) radio is the only medium of mass communication which makes information available to the widest possible audience in developing societies.
It is radio’s ability to reach people even in the remotest parts of a country.
This is why radio is a popular choice as agents of rural development.
Despite this, there are some strategies for reaching out through radio especially when the purpose is to educate.
McAnany (1973) gave five strategies for radio broadcasting.
And they are: 1.
Open broadcasting- this is the strategy through which broadcast is directed to an unorganised audience.
It is based on the assumption that a good message is capable of being accepted by the individual on his own, and the best way to attract and hold a mass audience is to offer spontaneous and continuous satisfactory programmes on education.
A small core of educational programme here is broadcast (usually in local language) on health, agriculture, family life, sanitation and child care, among others, in addition to the usual programmes, such as talks, features, music and drama.
Because of the unorganised nature of the audience, there is always doubts as to whether the people are listening, and if they are, whether they are benefitting from the programmes.
Open broadcast strategy is bedeviled by all the problems that affect the use of radio for the education of the rural population.
Under this type of broadcast, programmes are being produced in assumed knowledge both of the subject matter and of the environmental conditions of the audience.
2.
Radio study groups- this strategy is used in Tanzania to teach practical skills, cooperative and civic responsibility to rural 67  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING communities.
Using the strategy requires much more than mere broadcasting.
It requires a structure for organising listening and learning practices, support materials, monitors or teachers and some kind of assessment.
Tanzania uses this strategy as part of a national plan to develop the people’s awareness, their spirit of nationalism and co-operation, and to strengthen their sense of integrity and bring out defined changes in the people’s behavior and attitudes and in their physical environment.
Radio is used in conjunction with the printed word.
How does this work?
Before broadcast, texts on the subject matter for study are distributed to the audience.
Paraphrased versions of the text materials form the content of broadcast materials.
This strategy gives Tanzania the opportunity to launch out mass education campaign to the people.
This is highly supported by the nation’s government.
In 1970, the Institute of Adult Education, University of Dares Salam, Tanzania in collaboration with government departments, organised a national political education campaign for the Tanzanians using radio and study group methods.
People got organised in radio listening groups and discussed issues under specially trained leaders.
3.
Radio rural forum- radio rural forum is the strategy which makes use of radio with discussion and decision for rural groups.
The strategy involves the presentation of a regular weekly 15 to 30 minutes magazine programme to rural audiences formed into listening groups.
The programmes usually comprise rural news, answers to listeners question, family advice, a talk and discussion.
The groups- usually between 10-30 listeners each, listen to the programmes and discuss their contents under the guidance of a group leader, and then take decisions on the points raised.
The leader sends monthly reports to the source of the programme for review and possible inclusion in subsequent programmes.
4.
Radio schools- according to Onabajo (2000) this is the most widespread strategy for using radio for rural community education in Latin America.
It was originally tried in Sutatenza, Columbia, where it has now permeated the life of the rural population.
The schools have small organised listening groups meeting in houses or churches under a guide.
The audiences of these radio schools are primarily illiterate rural adults.
The basic aim of this strategy is to offer fundamental, integral education which goes beyond mere reading, writing and cognitive skills and tries to change the passive and dependent attitude of the rural man, creating a deepening of his sense of dignity and self-worth and turning him into a new man.
68 MAC 246 MODULE 1 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Why do you think rural education is important?
4.0 CONCLUSION The rural population constitutes the highest mass of uneducated persons in any country.
Any country that fails to pay attention to this set of people stand a chance of drifting back in the nearest future.
There are however methods of reaching this population and research are still ongoing on newer methods to educate these people.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, efforts have been made to discuss the composition of the rural dwellers with the need to discover their educational need and how to meet these needs.
Some strategies to reach this population have been discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Can you think of a better method for reaching the rural populace?
Write out your thoughts in one or two pages.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Moemeka, A.A. (1981).
Local Radio Community Education for Development.
Zaria: Ahmadu Bello University Press Ltd. Onabajo, O.
(2002).
Elements of Rural Broadcasting.
Lagos: Gabi Concepts Limited.
UNESCO (1995).
Year Book Report.
Paris: UNESCO.
MODULE 3 USEFUL SKILLS FOR BROADCAST EDUCATION 69  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING Unit 1 Understanding Types of Learners Unit 2 General Teaching Methods Unit 3 Use of Audio-Visual Aids Unit 4 Study Skills for Educational Broadcasters Unit 5 Note-Taking Skills for Educational Broadcasters UNIT 1 UNDERSTANDING TYPES OF LEARNERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Learners 3.2 Gifted and Talented Learners 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit has been designed to make you understand the different types of learners, their characteristics and the implications to broadcasting.
By the end of this unit, you would have had an overall view of the different types of learners and the ways by which they can be helped.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  differentiate between the categories of learners  identify possible causes of slow learning  explain the implication of differences in types of learners to the teacher.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 70 MAC 246 MODULE 1 3.1 Types of Learners Since students are centers of teaching/learning processes, teachers must be able to identify the different types of learners in order to be able to help them.
According to Rasaq (2003) understanding the different types of learners will be of immense value in assisting the teachers or broadcasters in preparing suitable materials to cater for the varying learning needs.
There are mainly three categories of learners and they are:  Slow learners (backward learners)  Gifted and talented learners (fast learners)  Normal learners (average learners) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE With short explanations, enlist the categories of learners.
Slow learners Slow learners are the category of students who lag in virtually all that they do, and especially in their school work.
They exhibit numerous learning difficulties that seem to defy all learning methodologies and procedures.
This category of learners is made up of mentally retarded and the learning disabled (LD).
Some characteristics of slow learners 1.
The slow learners have a short attention span, that is, they cannot concentrate for long.
2.
They have short memory and they do not remember easily what they have been taught.
3.
The slow learners are always bored and generally have no interest in learning.
4.
They have poor communication skills.
They are poor in both oral and written languages.
5.
They have poor eye-hand coordination.
They cannot see properly nor even copy correctly.
6.
Their numeric ability is very low and they are very poor in calculation.
7.
They have poor social interaction and cannot get along with others easily.
In fact, they exhibit aggressive behaviour most of the time.
Some causes of slow learning 71  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING The following are some of the causes of slow learning according to research: 1.
Health problems- A child’s mother might have had measles, venereal diseases, etc that might have caused mental retardation in the child.
Also, the mother might be malnourished during pregnancy.
The child’s health might also be affected after birth.
2.
Psychological problems- Mothers who experience intense and excessive anxiety, worry, stress and the like may give birth to disturbed children, since the mother’s state of health affects the child.
3.
Genetic problem- If slowness or dullness runs in the lineage, inherited characteristics from parents may influence the general intellectual development of the child.
4.
Home based problems- Broken homes and extreme poverty on the part of the parents may affect the child.
5.
School based problems- Poor methods of teaching, poor teacher- pupil relationships; for example when a child constantly experiences hostility from the teacher; and poor learning environment is not conducive to learning.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE i.
What are the possible causes of slow learning?
ii.
What are the implications of these to the educational broadcaster?
3.2 Gifted and Talented Learners The gifted and talented learners are those whose intellectual abilities are exceptionally and constantly outstanding.
Some characteristics of gifted learners 1.
They rank high in academic achievement and cover a wide ground within a short period of time.
2.
They are fast thinking, highly creative and imaginative with very high constructive abilities.
3.
They have very good cordial relationships.
They make friends easily.
4.
They have outstanding leadership qualities and can work well under pressure.
5.
They are mostly invariably good in all subjects i.e science, languages, arts and even sporting activities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 72 MAC 246 MODULE 1 List four characteristics of a gifted child.
Normal learners Majority of learners can be classified as normal learners.
That is, the majority of learners are of average abilities.
Some characteristics of normal learners 1.
They manifest average ability.
2.
They have their own learning problems like lateness to school, truancy, wrong peer group, etc.
3.
They manifest giftedness when faced with challenges.
The physically handicapped learners This category of learners has physical deformities like blindness, deafness, lameness and paralysis.
They need special provision to assist their learning, like school for the handicapped nationwide.
Some special equipment may be necessary to facilitate their learning and movement such as a wheel chair, brail books, tape recorders, etc.
Some characteristics of the handicapped learners 1.
They have physical deformities that people can see 2.
They have sound intellectual powers 3.
Some of them may be gifted/talented 4.
They generally have feelings of inadequacy 5.
They generally have feeling of low self esteem.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Outline two characteristics of the normal and handicapped learners.
4.0 CONCLUSION Having been exposed to the different types of learners, broadcasters must be able to script their messages carefully to carry along majority of the learners in the audience targeted.
Since the learners of an educational broadcaster are most of the time not seen or easily assessable, this learning variations will no doubt arouse the consciousness of the broadcasters to know that among a particular audience there are innumerable learning difficulties within the group.
5.0 SUMMARY 73  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING The following are the major highlights of what we have examined in this unit:  There are mainly three categories of learners; the slow, the talented and the average learners.
 The fourth category of learners is the physically handicapped who can be gifted, normal or slow learners.
The educational broadcaster is therefore advised to be careful when preparing materials for broadcast as it is clear that even among a target audience, there could be many responses due to the physiological and psychological make-up of the audience members.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are five implications of the different types of learning for the educational broadcaster?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Klaumeier, H.J.
(1961).
Learning and Human Abilities.
Educational Psychology.
New York: Harper and Brothers.
NOUN (2008).
General Teaching Methods.
In: www.nou.edu.ng/noun/Noun_OCL/Pdf2Edu233.
UNIT 2 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 74 MAC 246 MODULE 1 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Teaching Methods 3.2 Various Types of Teaching Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Teaching through any medium has different methods or approaches to it.
Just like one must learn how to drive before picking a car, one needs to expose himself to the principle guiding the dissemination of knowledge before we attempt to do it.
The professional training of mass communication is not enough for an educational broadcaster.
That is why I have decided to expose you to the teachings in the department of education so you can better be taught by the experts in the field of teaching.
This unit among other things will expose the students to some methods of teaching as well as some of the advantages and disadvantages of it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the term teaching methods  list the various methods of teaching  state when and where each method is applicable.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Teaching Methods By teaching methods, we mean approaches to effective teaching that are appropriate for an audience at a particular time for a particular purpose only to achieve the desired end.
Education scholars believe that to reach a certain people educationally, it is best that one selects the most appropriate teaching method.
The various methods are as follows: 75  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 1.
Lecture or the chalk and talk methods 2.
Discussion method 3.
Demonstration method 4.
Discovery method 5.
Assignment method 6.
Field trips method (Excursion/ 7.
Individualised instructional method 8.
Laboratory method 9.
Inductive and deductive method 10.
Open education method.
3.2 Various Types of Teaching Method The lecture method This method is a popular one.
You are probably familiar with it.
It has been termed a didactic method.
It involves verbal presentation of ideas, concepts, generalisation and facts.
The objective of this method is just to stuff the students with information.
You do most of the work by talking while students are just passive or slightly involved by taking down notes and asking few or no questions.
In the universities and other institutions of higher learning, the lecture method is the acceptable means of imparting information.
At the secondary school level, the students have not been trained to follow chains of reasoning.
Therefore lecture method should not be used in its pure forms.
Advantages of the lecture method 1.
It is cheap to operate as no special apparatus is needed 2.
It makes fewer demands on the teacher’s time for planning and preparing and is therefore an attractive and easy method of teaching.
3.
It is an efficient means of giving a vast amount of knowledge in a limited amount of time.
4.
Large classes of students can be handled by the teacher.
5.
It serves to channel the thinking of all students in a given direction.
Disadvantages of the lecture method 1.
Students are passive listeners and do not participate in the development of the lessons.
76 MAC 246 MODULE 1 2.
The desired learning outcomes may not be accomplished.
3.
The method is inadequate for teaching certain types of concepts e.g attitudes and feelings which are not learned through mere telling.
4.
Students’ progress cannot be evaluated during the lesson since they are passive.
5.
It cannot meet the different needs of the students as regards individual differences.
6.
It rarely affords students the opportunity to practice communication skills.
7.
It encourages cramming.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Study both the advantages and the disadvantages of the lecture method again.
Do you think it is useful for educational broadcasting?
Justify your answer in just seven lines.
The discussion method The discussion method is based on the philosophy that knowledge arises within the students and not from any external source.
The students take over the subject from various points of view and the teacher serves as a moderator.
Advantages of the discussion method 1.
Students maintain a high degree of mental alertness to develop clear thinking.
2.
Both interest and a feeling of confidence are maintained as students learn to express themselves freely.
3.
Students learn through discussion method owing to active participation and involvement in the lesson.
4.
Discussion method provides good practice for problem solving.
5.
It provides the teacher with information about the students which can aid in a better understanding of the students.
6.
Teaching by discussion leads to positive attitudinal change because a student may find his or her own values and beliefs challenged by the views of fellow students.
Disadvantages of the discussion method 1.
A lot of time would be wasted before the students arrive at satisfactory answers 77  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 2.
Discussion method cannot be used so often as it does not allow for easy coverage of the syllabus.
3.
In most cases, most students do not participate in the lesson because they do not know much about the topic of the lesson.
They may even be shy or fearful.
4.
Students who have no background of the topic being discussed may become bored or disinterested in the lesson.
5.
Since the attention span of the students (young ones) is very short; they cannot maintain high level of attention.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Study both the advantages and the disadvantages of the discussion method again.
Do you think it is useful for educational broadcasting?
Justify your answer in just seven lines.
The demonstration method In this method, you the teacher will do a display or exhibition while the students watch.
It typically involves showing students the correct use of science apparatus illustrating a technique (for example, using chloroform to anaesthetise toads or guinea pigs) performing an “experiment” which is dangerous, risky, difficult or expensive for individual students use.
Demonstration method can be used in the drilling of shorthand outlines, for example manipulation of various office equipment could be demonstrated by the teacher during office practice lesson.
Sometimes, demonstrations can be performed by students either individually or in groups.
Also, in trades like sewing, weaving, barbing, pot making and the like demonstration method is best adopted using the teaching learning processes.
Advantages of the demonstration method 1.
It is an inexpensive method since only the demonstrator needs materials.
2.
It shows how something is accomplished properly or expertly, since the teacher is supposedly more competent than most students.
3.
Demonstration method is especially beneficial in the areas of skills and attitudes.
4.
The proficiency displayed reduces the length of trial and error time.
5.
It can reduce hazards e.g.
breakage and accidents before students embark on individual or group work with materials involved.
78 MAC 246 MODULE 1 6.
A good demonstration method holds the learners attention thus facilitating learning by giving students the opportunity to see and hear what is actually happening.
Disadvantages of the demonstration method 1.
The assumption made that all the students see and hear equally well does not necessarily follow.
Visibility of details of what is being demonstrated is not assured in large classrooms or in circumstances where small objects are used.
2.
Where the demonstration is restricted to the teacher or broadcaster alone, students or learners will be denied the opportunity to acquire manipulative skills in handling of the materials and apparatus.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is your opinion about the demonstration method?
Do you think it is appropriate for educational broadcasting?
Discovery method The discovery method is a teaching strategy which enables students to find the answers themselves.
It is a learner centered approach hence; it is called a heuristic method.
It is of two types, notably, the guided discovery and the unguided discovery.
In the guided discovery, the teacher (you the educational broadcaster) guides the students to discover for themselves solutions to given problems by providing them with general principles, but not the solution to the scientific problem.
The unguided discovery type involves the students discovering for themselves both the general principles and solution to a scientific problem.
It is sometimes called the pure discovery.
Advantages of the discovery method 1.
Discovery method, whether it is the directed type or undirected, makes the student an active participant rather than a mere passive recipient.
2.
Since the method poses a challenge for the students to discover the information or knowledge for himself, retention of any information or knowledge so discovered will be increased.
3.
The training acquired in finding out things for oneself independently can be applied to new learning and problem solving.
4.
The joy in discovering something provides the students with intrinsic motivation.
79  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 5.
The method brings home to pupils their notions of the nature of scientific evidence; students learnt that answers to questions can often be obtained from investigations they can carry out for themselves.
6.
Discovery method helps students develop manipulative skills and attitudes which constitute one of the fundamental objectives of science teaching.
7.
Since discovery operates at the highest levels of the cognitive domain, it encourages analytical and synthetic thought as well as intuitive thinking.
Disadvantages of the discovery method 1.
Discovery method is time consuming and progress is comparatively slow.
Apparatus have to be set up and results of the investigation waited for.
2.
The method leaves open the possibility of not discovering anything.
Students may end up discovering things often other than what is intended to be discovered.
This could be highly demoralising to them particularly of great effort has been expended.
3.
The method is expensive considering the equipment and materials needed.
4.
Discovery method is only good for a small class where effective teacher supervision is possible.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE With the disadvantages of the discovery method, do you still consider it an appropriate method for the educational broadcaster in anyway?
4.0 CONCLUSION From our foregoing discussion, you would have noted that every teaching method has its advantages and disadvantages.
You should also note that each of these methods has a part to play in the promotion of effective transmission of knowledge by teachers and assimilation of the same by students.
As a potential educational broadcaster, you should sit and consider the appropriate teaching method usable for the identified audience before going on air.
80 MAC 246 MODULE 1 9.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to expose the students to:  The meaning of teaching methods  And four teaching methods namely lecture, discussion, demonstration and discovery methods.
10.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Assume that you are an educational broadcaster on NOUN television.
Your next broadcast is teaching “Use of English” to secondary school students.
What do you think is the most appropriate method for this broadcast presentation and why?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdullahi, A.
(1982).
Science Teaching in Nigeria.
Ilorin Kwara State: Atoto Press Ltd. Shipley, N.M. et al (1972).
A Synthesis of Teaching Methods.
New York: McGraw Hill Pierson.
81  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING UNIT 3 USE OF AUDIO-VISUAL AIDS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Audio-Visual Aids 3.2 Characteristics of Good Audio-Visual Aids 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Audio visual aids or instructional materials are different forms of information carriers which are used to record, store, preserve, transmit or retrieve information for the purpose of teaching and learning.
They also transmit information in such a fashion that will modify the attitude, habits and practices of student.
In a general way, audio visual aids facilitate learning.
We will examine how some of these aids are used to enhance learning on the broadcast media.
In so doing, it must be emphasised that audio-visual aids are supplements and should not replace teaching by the broadcaster.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define audio-visual aids  list the various types of audio-visual aids  list the characteristics of good audio-visual aids  explain how audio-visual aids can be used effectively  point out the specific situations some audio-visual aids can be used.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Audio-Visual Aids a. Picture- Pictures can help to suggest or help to explain things which are omitted when teaching.
They direct learners’ attention, especially children to the point you want to impress upon them, by guiding their observation with questions and suggestions you 82 MAC 246 MODULE 1 will train them to acquire the habit of looking for things that matter in pictures.
Pictures give general impression of a lesson.
We should use varieties to give the desired impression when we teach on the television.
b. Illustrations- The term illustration is commonly applied to the wise use of teaching aids, pictures and drawings to the employment of examples and comparisons, to elucidate either an argument or to enliven an argument.
But to the teacher it means more than.
It includes geological specimens, chemical and physical apparatus or anything that appeals to the sense or the imagination of the learner; throwing light upon a piece of description or reasoning.
Illustrations should therefore lead from known to unknown, simple to complex and definite.
Illustrations are of three kinds.
1.
Material illustrations- These include actual object, specimens, models or apparatus of various kinds.
These are appropriately employed among junior pupils of a school.
2.
Pictorial illustrations These consist of pictures, diagrams, cardboards, sketches of objects or models of things unobtainable.
The broadcaster should endeavour to employ them step by step as the broadcast proceeds.
Drawing or diagrams and sketches on the cardboard projected through a zoom in will have more lasting impression.
The use of colours, coloured chalks, shading etc makes impression on the children.
The following should be noted when using pictorial illustrations:  They must be large and bold  They must be accurate  They must be self illustrating as much as possible  They must be hidden until they are required 3.
Verbal illustrations These are used exclusively in the absence of both material and pictorial illustrations.
Such is the case in some processes in arithmetic e.g interest, stock and shares etc in oral and written composition, literature grammar and civics.
Here the use of examples, compositions, contrasts, analogy and so on is most appropriate.
The broadcast must be careful to see that he does not abuse the use of any of these illustrations among the learners.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List different kinds of illustrations and pick out the one you think is most appropriate for educational broadcast.
83  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING c. Blackboards The- basic visual aid used in most schools is the blackboard and the chalk.
It can be used with advantage in the teaching of subjects like geography, biology and the first stage of language.
Children learn more quickly and surely by fitting words and pictures together.
For the educational broadcaster, the use of the blackboard may become a little difficult yet achievable.
But this will depend on how good the camera man is in projecting it to learners at home.
d. Recorded Video Take- for instance, you want to show the learners the characteristics of a particular animal, let us say an eagle.
Playing a recorded video of an eagle will most definitely drive your point better than just drawing it.
e. Photographs- A picture, they say tell more than a thousand words.
Pictures and photograph have the greatest value for what they are designed to illustrate if used at the time when explanations or comments are being made on them.
f. Charts - Charts represents desirable permanent equipment for teaching purposes.
To achieve the best results, they should be in a natural colour, large enough and sufficiently clear to be seen easily from all parts.
Good charts may be constructed rapidly by using either of the following methods: 1.
Tracking a magnified image 2.
Using a photograph to magnify a diagram map or sketch, filling filmstrips and slides.
Film, filmstrips and slides should be closely integrated with standard lesson procedure and not used merely as embroidery or entertainment.
For a successful use, the teacher or broadcaster should be thoroughly familiar with the filmstrips or slides and should indicate to the class the specific areas to be observed.
The relevance of these features to the lesson or lessons should be pointed out.
3.2 Characteristics of Good Visual Aids  The pictures, maps and charts should be attractive with suitable colours  Writing must be large enough and clear enough to be easily read  It must be neat  It is logically arranged, in short, clear steps (a model for exercise e.g mathematics and geography).
 The charts and posters should be accurate in spacing and planning  The figures and the letters should be well formed  Objects and pictures should be big enough for children to see  Apparatus must be accurately prepared and be ready before the lesson 84 MAC 246 MODULE 1  Let all pupils first see any material or apparatus before individuals or age group can see it  All pictures on the television must be clear and the radio should have a clear sound  When preparing apparatus, the correct, accurate language and spelling must be considered.
Effective Use of the Audio-Aids The following are some of the suggestions for effective use of audio- visual material.
 They should be relevant to the curriculum.
 They should be previewed or tried out in advance before use in the class.
 They should be taught, not merely shown.
 Provision should be made for definite follow-ups.
 Records should be kept of the results obtained, evaluation should be made.
 Too many teaching aids should not be used at a time.
 The types of materials used should be within the knowledge and experience of the learners.
 All teaching aids should be tactically and technically correct.
 No one type of material s best for all living situations.
Each has a specific role in order to provide maximum effects.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Visual aids cannot teach by themselves, they need the teacher or broadcaster indicating how and when to use them, and the benefits derived from their use.
Explain.
4.0 CONCLUSION For effective learning to take place the teacher or broadcaster ought to use audio-visual aids.
There are a wide range of these aids ranging from illustrations on the blackboard to the more complex ones as computers which was not treated in this unit.
They all have their relevance depending on the situation.
The important thing is that the teacher or broadcaster chooses the right aid and prepare well before the commencement of the broadcast.
85  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING 8.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to define audio visual aids in respect to educational broadcasting.
Also, various types of audio-visual aids have been discussed with characteristics.
And lastly, we have explained how audio-visual can be used for effective teaching.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Suggest five ways through which audio-visual aids can be used for effective educational broadcasting.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Association for Education Communication and Technology (AECT) (1977).
The Definition of Educational Technology.
Washington DC Author.
Kemp, J.E.
& Smailie, D.C. (1989).
Planning Producing and Using Instructional Media (60th ed.).
New York: Harper and Row Publishers.
86 MAC 246 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 STUDY SKILLS FOR EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Using the Library 3.2 The Dictionary as a Research Tool 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Not many people have the enduring capacity to study.
To be the best at any discipline or chosen endeavour, one must study hard.
There is virtually no field or discipline that does not have its own documentation somewhere, either online or offline.
Any serious broadcaster should always find the library interesting.
The scope and depth of his delivery will be a function of his searches in the course of planning.
Study skills are important.
Welcome to this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  identify useful materials in the library  identify functions and roles of a dictionary as a research material.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Using the Library A library is not just a collection of books.
Rather, it is a highly organised system of obtaining, classifying, storing and retrieving information and knowledge.
It is in fact the repository of knowledge.
As a result, the library is very valuable educational centre in any institution.
The ability to use the library effectively is, therefore necessary in enhancing the chances of success for the writer and the researcher no matter the level.
The library contains written, printed and other information storages such as films, slides, phonographic video cassettes and types.
These are stored and preserved in a well-organised form so that retrieval is easy for the learner through the assistance of the library staff.
87  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING Useful materials in the Library for the educational broadcaster Reference work Libraries keep a collection of reference materials, usually in the reference room.
These materials may not be removed from the library.
They are often bulky in size and contain general information.
They contain useful information which acts as introductory hint that lead the student into more detailed study or research.
The reference room contains encyclopedias, dictionaries, yearbooks, guides and bibliographies.
General Encyclopedia The two major general encyclopedias are encyclopedia Britannica and Encyclopedia Americana.
There are other encyclopedia’s which the student can also refer to.
These belong to the major subjects such as Encyclopedia of philosophy, social sciences, literature, engineering and the sciences.
In whatever form, the encyclopedia contain useful information on a general and introductory basis that guide the student into more detailed reference.
The encyclopedia also contains useful bibliographies.
Dictionaries (Unabridged) The dictionaries give the meanings of terms, concepts, words or phrases.
There are general dictionaries and those of the specific subject areas such as a dictionary of literature terms, A dictionary of music, A dictionary of geography, etc.
These give full meanings of words or terms used in each field.
Bibliographies These are reference works which contain bibliographical information of people in various subjects.
They are usually bibliographical information about inventors, statesmen, writers, artists and composers of music.
Yearbooks and Directories Yearbooks are devoted to the chief occurrences or events of the preceding year and are published as soon as possible the following year.
Information in yearbooks can be in the form of statistics in economics, trade and population.
Directories are updated information about persons and organisations, giving details of their addresses, telephone numbers and official designations and functions.
Examples are the Nigerian yearbook and the telephone directories.
General publications and documents Government releases certain important information to the public at intervals.
This could be yearly or quarterly or at certain periods it chooses.
These information are contained in publications such as the 88 MAC 246 MODULE 1 official gazette, annual reports, budget speeches and reports of the various commissions set up to look into aspects of national life.
Such publications are secured with extra care by the libraries.
Serial and newspapers Any publication that is issued in successive parts and appearing at regular intervals for an indefinite period is called a serial publication.
The term covers all periodicals, newspapers, magazines and monographs.
The newspapers are daily publications containing news about current events.
Indexes and abstracts Indexes are useful guides to different periodicals on different subjects and they help students to know about relevant works in their field or any field.
The abstract contain a summary of a published article.
An abstract can carry brief statements on the published article in journal but this requires that one needs to read the article itself before understanding the topic.
Other abstracts however may be very informative which means they contain sufficient information on the article and the reader need not read the original article to gain the required information.
3.2 Using the Dictionary The dictionary enables the writer to become familiar with or gain knowledge of words.
The meanings, usage, pronunciation and spellings of words must be known by the writer.
The words in a dictionary are arranged in alphabetical order and explanations and meanings of each word are given.
A dictionary is designed to improve the learner’s use of language; one cannot claim to know all the words in a language.
As a result, everybody needs to use the dictionary at one time or another.
The dictionary is a guide to all users of a particular language.
Functions/roles of the dictionary as a research tool As a vocabulary guide A dictionary is intended primarily to give the meanings of words.
The reader has to look up the meaning of words he comes across which are new or strange to him.
Sometimes, he may be able to derive or infer the meaning of words from their contexts but at other times he must look up the words in the dictionary before the meanings can become clear.
The alphabetical order in which words have been arranged in the dictionary makes them easy to locate.
Pronunciation The dictionary provides a guide to pronunciation.
There are undoubtedly, slight variations in the way different people pronounce 89  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING words but these variations should not lead to misunderstanding in the meaning of words.
As a result, there are guides provided in the dictionary to enable the learners realise sounds of the language as nearly as they should be in order to communicate effectively in English.
The guides are in the form of sound patterns or phonetic symbols usually enclosed in bars/ and which come before the meaning of each word in the dictionary.
Spelling guide The dictionary is a final authority in matters of spelling.
Often, when disputes arise over the correct spelling of a word, the dictionary is the right authority to consult.
A user of the language is expected to be familiar with the spelling of words that he comes across.
The spelling guidelines often have expectations to them and these create difficulty for the learner.
To overcome spelling problems, particularly when the writer is in doubt, the dictionary offers the required solution to them.
The learner may run into difficulty when words of similar sounds are involved.
Such words may have just one letter that differentiates them from other words of similar sound.
In such cases, the meaning of each word will enable the learner identify the word for which spelling he seeks.
Dictionary as a research guide The dictionary provides information on how to use a particular word and the possible context in which the word or its form can apply.
The learner will find these guides useful if he uses them as models upon which he can construct his own sentences.
The probable guides on usage which a dictionary provides are: the various tense forms and the occurrence of the word in, various grammatical structures such as in sentences, phrases, clauses and in figurative or idiomatic expressions.
The learner is expected to acquaint himself with the various forms of word usage a dictionary provides.
Etymological functions of a dictionary Many words in English have been borrowed from Greek, Latin or French.
This is a result of the various external influences to which the English culture has been subjected over the centuries.
The origin of most borrowed words in English is given in dictionaries.
These words are usually broken into syllables or roots from which such words are formed.
Through the knowledge of the origin of a word, a learner will be able to trace the changes in meaning that may have occurred to the word over the years.
The knowledge of the origin of a word will also enable the user derive the various forms of the word and use them with a greater measure of confidence and exactitude.
90 MAC 246 MODULE 1 4.0 CONCLUSION The knowledge of the Library is the key to understanding the importance of study skills.
Many writers do not know what could be found in a library.
Many assume that what they can find is simply books.
No, it goes beyond this.
In fact, in a standard library, there are provisions for Video, Audio, Journals, some artifacts etc.
The moment a writer knows this, he takes the library seriously.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to identify and elaborate on the useful materials for the writers in a library environment.
The dictionary was also identified as important resource materials.
The roles and functions of the dictionary were carefully enlisted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Go to a nearby library, either public or private.
Move around the library and enlist other materials found in the library that have not been captured here.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abamba, P. (1955).
Military Politics and the Nigerian Economy, Newswatch.
Booth, W. (1983).
The Rhetoric of Fiction.
Chicago.
University of Chicago Press.
Enekwe, O.O.
(1966).
The Modern Nigerian Theatre in Nsukka Studies in African Literature.
(Ed).
Achebe Chinua.
Enugu: Intellect Publishers.
Finnegan, R. (1970).
Oral Literature in Africa.
London: Oxford University Press.
91  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING UNIT 5 NOTE-TAKING SKILLS FOR EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Important Reasons to Take Notes 3.2 Guidelines for Note Taking 3.3 Some Methods of Note Taking 3.4 Note-Taking Tips 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The skill to take down notes is a must for every broadcaster.
Research has shown that over 80% of the information from lectures, reading or observation is lost within two weeks if no effort is made to record or remember the material.
Note taking helps you to remember both what you heard and what you understood.
It is learning about the subject and not simply recording all that the speaker says.
Note taking helps you to pay closer attention to and become more familiar with the new information.
In this unit, effort has been made to expose the students to some reasons why note taking is essential, some guidelines for note taking and some methods of note taking.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  state five reasons why note taking is essential for a broadcaster  explain and use two Note taking Methods of their choice.
92 MAC 246 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Important Reasons to Take Notes Every broadcaster, regardless of the depth of knowledge will still find research a matter of must.
To carry out effective research, whether through interviews, lectures, reading etc.
note taking is an effective tool to this effect.
Because of the enormity of information the writer needs and the various and scattered sources he needs to consult, note-taking is then a means to collect all these sources together for later consultation and use.
The following are the reasons why writers have to take note: a.
To track down information b.
To help to remember information taken down c. Your notes often contain information that cannot be found elsewhere (i.e.
in textbooks) d. Notes help you to concentrate while writing e. Note serves as a guide to your write-up.
This is because most of the information you need to flesh your work has already been noted f. A writer’s note serves as a reminder.
3.2 Guidelines for Note-Taking To take down note from any research effort, the following needs to be noted: a.
Concentrate on the interview, reading, observation or lecture so as to capture all the necessary facts or figures.
b.
Be Consistent.
By being consistent, I mean, do not feel any information is not necessary, if you look closely, the information you trivialise can become very important later.
So capture it.
c. Be brief.
Because of the enormity of information a writer could find in any information centre or study, there is a need to be brief.
By this, I mean write down only the major points and important information.
d. Write legibly.
Be careful to write in such a way that is readable to a poor reader.
Sometimes, because of the exigency of time, writers write in such a way that even they themselves may find it hard to read later.
Please avoid this.
Notes are useless if you cannot read them.
e. Do not be concerned with spelling and grammar.
One mistake amateur writers make when taking down notes is to ensure the 93  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING appropriateness of grammar and spelling.
This is a time waster.
Do not bother about this.
Just keep writing.
3.3 Some Note-Taking Methods According to Okinda (2009) the common methods of note-taking include: 1.
Cornell method 2.
Outlining method 3.
Mapping method 4.
Charting method 5.
Sentence method.
The Cornel method This method provides a systematic format for condensing and organising notes without laborious recopying.
Write notes in the main space and use the left-n space to label each idea and detail with a key word or “cue.” Method a.
Rule your note with two and a half margin on the left leaving a sic-inch area on the right in which to make notes.
b.
During any research session, take down information in the six- inch area.
c. Move to a new line when the interviewee seems too fast or has gone off-point.
d. After the research session, complete phrases and sentences as much as possible.
The mapping method This method uses comprehension/concentration skills and evolves in a not taking form which relates each fact or idea to every other fact or idea.
It is a graphic representation of the content of a lecture.
It is a method that maximises active participation, affords immediate knowledge as to its understanding, and emphasises critical thinking.
Method a.
Create a graphic representation of what is heard, read or observed.
b.
Use any symbol, draw, do all you can to capture the information as vividly as possible.
c. Be simple.
94 MAC 246 MODULE 1 Advantages of the mapping method 1.
Helps you to visually track your lecture regardless of conditions.
2.
Little thinking is needed and relationships can easily be seen.
3.
Easy to edit your notes by adding numbers, marks, and colour coding.
4. Review by covering lines for memory drill and relationships.
5.
Main points can be written on flash or note cards and pieced together into a table or larger structure at a later date.
3.4 Note-Taking Tips General Tips for taking notes a.
Determine which pieces of information in any research situation are important and which pieces are not by being critical when you read or listen.
b.
Take information that is important, relevant and credible.
c. Distinguish between facts, opinions, and examples.
d. Write down important, relevant, educated opinions e.g.
if the interviewee is giving a point that compares the ideas of different theorists, it would be important to write down a summary of each theorist’s opinion in your note.
e. Be critical of the material you are listening to or that you are reading.
f. Use shortcuts that you will understand and that make the writing process quicker.
Abbreviations (e.g instead of for example), symbols (instead of “equals”).
g. Do not write down notes word for word (notes should be a summary of the main ideas and should be used to help jog your memory).
Tips for taking notes from readings a.
Understand what you are looking for in the reading.
b.
A well structured reading, should begin by outlining the main premise, argument or ideas in the first few sentences, and certainly in the first paragraph.
c. Pick out the main premise and write it down.
d. If you understand the premise, do not read the examples given to support it.
Never include examples in your notes.
Only include the facts, avoid experiences and anecdotes where possible.
95  MAC 246 EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTING Tips for taking notes from lectures a.
Understand why you are attending the lecture.
b.
Prepare for the lecture and think about what you are hoping to achieve.
c. Always revisit your notes as soon as possible after taking them and never rely solely on someone else’s notes.
4.0 CONCLUSION Note-taking is essential to any writer who wants to write well.
This is because with good note-taking, a broadcaster has given himself the edge of summarising all the needed information in a single note.
It would then be easy to make consultation later when he is about to flesh up the topic.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to expose the students to important reasons to take notes, guides to note-taking, some methods of note- taking and some general tips to effective note taking.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Okinda, C.F.
(2009).
Communication Skills, Creative and Critical Thinking in PDF Created with desk PDF PDF Writer- Trial::http://www.docudesk.com.
96
