MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 232 COURSE TITLE: ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 1 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS MAIN WORK MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS COURSE TEAM COURSE WRITER Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com CONTENT EDITOR Joseph Bel-Molokwu School of Media and Communication Pan-Atlantic University, Lagos 08033030017 beljoseph@yahoo.com HEAD OF UNIT Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria 2 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2013 First Printed 2013 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by 3 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS PAGE MODULE 1: UNDERSTANDING PUBLIC RELATIONS 4 Unit 1: Meaning and Definitions of Public Relations 4 Unit 2: Media of Public Relations 12 Unit 3: Need for and Functions of Public Relations 21 Unit 4: Approaches and Techniques to Public Relations 29 Unit 5: Problems Facing the Practice of Public Relations 38 MODULE 2: ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC RELATIONS AGENCY 42 Unit 1: Structure and Organisation of a Public Relations Agency 42 Unit 2: Why Organisations Require the Services of Public Relations 50 Unit 3: Factors Responsible for the Growth of Public Relations 54 Unit 4: Qualities of a Public Relations Practitioner 59 MODULE 3: PUBLIC RELATIONS AND THE ENVIRONMENT: THE INTERFACE AND IMPERATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 64 Unit 1: The Nature of the Environment 64 Unit 2: The Destructive Challenges Facing the Environment 70 Unit 3: Need for Environmental Public Relations 77 Unit 4: Conceptual Exploration of Environmental Public Relations 85 MODULE 4: ACHIEVING ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY: PUBLIC RELATIONS AND COLLECTIVE ACTIVISM 90 Unit 1: Organisational and Collective Approach to Environmental Public Relations 90 Unit 2: Public Relations and Communication as Tools for Attaining Environmental Public Relations Goals 97 Unit 3: Some Strategic Tools Environmental Public Relations 108 Unit 4: Achieving Environmental Public Relations Objectives: Expanding the Scope of the Pursuit 113 Unit 5: Challenges Facing Environmental Public Relations 119 MODULE 5: URGENT NEED AND CURRENT MEASURES FOR SAVING THE EARTH 125 Unit 1: Planning Environmental Public Relations Programmes 125 Unit 2: Protecting the Earth Through Environmental Public Relations: Safeguarding Man’s Sustainability 131 Unit 3: Ethical Considerations in Environmental Public Relations 141 Unit 4: Case Studies of Environmental Public Relations 146 Unit 5: Laws and Legislations of Environmental Protection 155 APPENDEXES 162 4 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS MODULE 1 UNDERSTANDING PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1 Meaning and Definitions of Public Relations.
Unit 2 Media of Public Relations.
Unit 3 Needs for and Functions of Public Relations.
Unit 4 Approaches to and Techniques of Public Relations.
Unit 5 Problems Facing the Practice of Public Relations.
UNIT 1 MEANING AND DEFINITIONS OF PUBLIC REALTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Universality of Public Relations.
3.2 Historical Background of Public Relations.
3.3 The Advent of Public Relations in Nigeria.
3.4 What Public Relations Is.
3.5 What Public Relations Is Not.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public relations rates to state of the mind.
It has to do with man’s alertness and consciousness to shield him from any kind of negativity or anything that is capable of casting aspersion on him or his person.
Interestingly, such awareness and mindfulness is not peculiar to man, but also to animals.
To both, it is crucial for consistent public favourable disposition and preservation of one’s personal image, integrity and reputation.
To man it dates back to biblical times.
In Genesis 1:7, Adam and Eve became conscious of their nakedness and the need to cloth themselves and consequently “sewed fig leaves together and covered themselves”.
With increase in population, inter-dependentness, need for closer affinity with each other and corporate promotion is among the factors that have enhances the growth and development of public relations over time.
And it is a universal phenomenon.
Globally, every individual or corporate organization wants to be seen in the best of light.
To attain the goal, people embark on and take series of measures in order to boost their positive public perception.
This, most of the time bother on communication and often involve means of warding off negative opinion or publicity about them.
At least from its inception, this represents the idea and philosophy behind the concept of public relations.
At present, its scope, diversity and dynamism has gone beyond anyone’s imagination, hence we today we an arm of public relations focusing on man’s very sensitive neighbour, companion and locality, 5 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS environment.
Public relations diversity is today to do a level of sophistication.
Yet, it is clear understanding and appreciation must stem from knowing its humble beginning and of course the many way people perceive it.
1.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to:  Appreciate the universal nature of public relations  Understand the historical background of public relations.
 Explain its emergence and growth in Nigeria.
 Identify what constitute public relations and what does not.
2.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Universality of Public Relations With all intents and purposes, public relations canvases for Godliness, good neighbourliness and mutual relations.
These, it portents whether the practice is at individual, community, organization or government levels.
This too, is the case both in the past and presently.
Even at a time large oceans inhibited man’s interaction following absence of means of transportation and communication, the urge and zeal to maintain cordiality and mutual relations with neighbours prevailed.
Such quest minimized conflicts, crises, and wars and resulted in healthy and beneficial relations like friendships and marriages, communually and inter- tribally.
Undoubtedly, even under the primitive situation man existed then, the intent and message were the same.
As well, public relations can be adjudged one of the foremost professions, having been practiced both consciously and unconsciously, even when man was in an unorganized habitats, Skinner, Von Essen and Marsham (2001: 19) echo this by asserting that “we are inclined to think of public relations as a 20th century phenomenon, but efforts to communicate with others and deal with the force of opinion go back to antiquity”.
3.2 Historical Background of Public Relations Public relations, which, though assumed modern status in the 20th Century, is certainly a way of life and hence as old as man.
It has its origin at the time of Adam, as observed by such authorities like Skinner, Essen and Marsham (2001) and Daramola (2008:38).
Man quest to use communication enhance others’ perception of him, thereby improving his outlook and impression up to prehistorical days.
In Egypt pharaoh word-pictures and festivals for publicity and promotions; in Greece, it was verbal persuasion, while in the Roman Empire, oratory and public opinion to endear the government to the people, all aspects of public relations, according to Skinner, Von Essen and Marsham(2001:19).
In their view, these were improved when St. Paul and other Christians extensively used communication for propagating their faith.
This was to later receive a boost, in their words, when the printing press was invented by Gutenberg, followed by 6 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS other printing process.
These communication media were extensively applied by both politicians and the business class, to the advantage of their trades in the United States of America.
Veterans like PT Barnum, Edward L. Barneys, Ivy Ledbetter Lee, Arthur Wilson Page, Rex Harlow, John Hill, Henry Ford, among others, Skinner, Von Essen and Marsham (2001:20) and Nweke (2001:1) harnessed public relations, though at its infancy, and consequently benefitted from the booming business and entrepreneurial outfits at the time.
Such publicity elements like press agentry, publicity, advertising, information and public opinion were vigouriously used to the benefit of the growth and development of business enterprises as well as the rejuvenation of the democratic process.
However, another organization which later played a major role in the evolution of public relations is the Catholic Church.
With the apparent dwindling fortunes of the church, following Martin Luther reformation, pope Gregory XIII appointed the congregation for propagation of faith.
The body used the public relations tools and strategies like communication, persuasion, sensitization, mobilisation, and positive propaganda, to woo and entice people to embrace and maintain the catholic faith.
Aliede(2005) and Nweke(2001).
As is always the case with every beginning, this early period of the profession in the United States, saw massive and gross abuse and misapplication of public relations, in some cases intentionally, in others inadvertently.
These included deception, fabrication, falsehood, exaggeration, distortion, exploitation and mis- information, Nweke(2001:2).
These notwithstanding, the sweeping revolutionary changes which followed, not only overhauled the system, but also positively revised it for the eventual metamorphosis which culminated in today’s modern public relations.
That way, it played a key role in the socio-economic resurgence which formed part of the Industrial Revolution of the 18th century and as well aided in preparing the United States for its global robust economic status of the past three centuries.
3.3 The Advent of Public Relations in Nigeria This successful experimentation in the united states eventually assonated across the Atlantic.
Public relations as well became an instrument for personal, corporate, and government publicity, promotion and repositioning in the United Kingdom, in addition to other European nations.
Its debuts in Nigeria followed the presence of the colonial masters, who equaled harbingered western education, religion, administration and communication.
Therefore, with its practice obviously prevalence in every level of government in Nigeria, what perhaps remained was its institutionalization and professionalization.
To actualize this, the foremost public relations practitioner in the country, Dr. Sam Epelle, took the initiative.
His efforts led to the formation of Public Relations Association of Nigeria (PRAN) in 1963, Oyekan (1993:11).
Earlier, the growth of the practice of public relations in the country was boosted by two world wars.
With Nigerian colonialist, Britain heavily involved in the wars, alongside the United States, Nigeria naturally became involved.
Public 7 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS relations became a veritable tool for rationalizing the war.
Equally, it was propaganda machinery for government information on the war, support for it and mobilizing requisite resources for its implementation.
To strengthen the capacity for realising these goals, the colonial government established an Information Office in Lagos, Aliede (2005:131) and Nweke (2001:6).
That was in 1940.
Four years later it was changed to public relations office and a year later, it was changed again to public relations Department.
And to widen the scope of its operations, it regional offices were opened in Ibadan, Enugu and Kaduna.
The role of the department went beyond that of just managing government information to assisting communication practitioners in assessing government information severed the hitherto bureaucratic red tapism which earlier hindered the smooth operations of the media, its operators and effective service delivery to the public.
The Public Relations Department later transformed in the federal Ministry of Information.
As the country grew and decentralized from regions to state, the news of information ministry increased, thereby creating additional platforms for the improved operations of public relations.
The private sector, Nweke (2001:8) observes, was not left out in the quest to invigorate the profession.
The pioneering role was played by UAC which in 1949 established an information office.
This later became its Public Relations Department.
To professionalise the practice, the government in 1990 promulgated decree No.16.
This created the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations, charged with the responsibility of controlling and regulating the practice of public relations in Nigeria.
Today, the institute has endowed a chair in the faculty of business administration of university of Nigeria, Enugu campus, for PGD, Masters and PHD in Public Relations Aliede (2005:132).
Aspirants also join its membership through its professional certificate and diploma in Public Relations, with all these developments the foundation has been laid for effective and impactful practice of the profession, in the country.
Its operation is formidable in both private and public sectors and needed now is strategic strengthening of its key areas for enhanced professional output.
3.4 What Public Relations Is Daily the world becomes more complicated and sophisticated.
With such complexity, certainly, no organisation, social, cultural, economic or political can survive without accurate and right dose of communication.
And as a result of its strategic nature, potentials and efficacies, public relations is the most suitable prescriptive measure for dealing with the issue.
To effectively cope with rapid global trends and changes, every corporate organizations even individuals requires the services of public relations.
To Nwosu and Idemili (1992:5), public relations is a means of winning friends, keeping them; doing good and getting rewards for it, as well as “being guided by public interest considerations or being socially responsible in order to be socially acceptable”.
Black (1989) sees it as the art and science of achieving harmony with 8 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS the environment through mutual understanding based on the truth and full information “.
In the view of Stan (1968) Public Relations is planned to influence public opinion, achievable by effective service delivery and symbiotic communication.
In all, it involves programmes, activities and policies which are deliberated evolved, planned and specifically targeted at given publics, stakeholders, clients or customers.
At the end, the overall aim is to attract support, rapport, solidarity, goodwill, trust and cooperation for the source.
Extolling the qualities of public relations and their implication, Baxter (1986) quotes Abraham Lincoln as observing: Public Relations is everything: with sentiment nothing can fail: with it nothing can succeed.
He who moulds public sentiment goes deeper than he who executes statute or pronounces decision.
He makes statutes and decisions possible or impossible to execute.
Public Relations News sees it as: …a philosophy and function of management which evaluate public attitudes, identifies the policies of an individual or organisation with public interest and execute a programme of actions to earn public understanding and acceptance.
Similarly, Nwosu and Idemili (1992:5) states the international Public Relations Association (IPRA) looks at Public Relations as an act and social science used to analyse trends, predicts their aftermath and for “counseling organisational leaders and implementing planned programmes of action, that will serve public interest”.
The British Institute of Public Relations, in its view says, it is: “…a deliberate, planned and sustained effort to establish and maintain mutual understanding between an organisation and its publics” To the institute, Public relations is intentional and aimed at attaining set goals, among them bilateral understanding, favourable disposition between a corporate body, its publics and stakeholders, and this is done on relentless basis, not in hit and run style or fashion.
Public relations has varied and multiple definitions as it has many practitioners.
Notwithstanding, pertinent is , that no matter the source of the definition, it deals with concerted bid to project oneself or an organisation in such a way that understanding, mutuality, cordiality, and healthy relationship are attained, to the collective benefit of the practitioners and the end user/ receiver.
These are the intentions, aims and what public relations stand for, and these clarification is vital following misconstrusion, misapplication , misinterpretation and misuse of the concept by quacks and interlopers, often intentionally for selfish reasons, and ugly phenomenon we can still further elaborate on.
9 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.5 What Public Relations Is Not As quacks and charlatans distort and bastardise the noble profession, it becomes necessary to bring it to the knowledge of potential practitioners and indeed to none practitioners and the general public which should also protect, guide and guard the profession from such ruinous practices and misuse.
So, what is public relations not?
To Nwosu and Idemili(1992:7)it is not journalism, public or press agentry ,although it can use these as instruments for accomplishing its objectives.
It uses both works and well planned, focused and executed programmes of action in order to influence the audience and impact on them as well.
Public relations applies persuasion, truth, full information, in addition to empathy.
This is opposed to using force, coercion, lies, half truths, deception, fabrication, misinformation, disinformation, misleads and pernicious propaganda.
Continuing, Nwosu and Idemili (1992:7) insists that it is not offering of bribes, call-girls or use of mere beautiful and unintelligence receptionist to serve in organisations.
Among other things it is far from the stress, include: not dependent on chance: fire-fighting or fire brigade measure: magic or voodoo practice: window dressing: white-washing or cover-ups.
All these tilt to negativity, hence, they have no place in Public relations practice.
The practice is somewhat a systematic, planned and concerted action, sustainably used to achieve organizational long term objectives.
It is therefore, not trial and error, hit and run or experimentation.
It is preceded by galvanized, articulated and data-based decisions, in order to stand the taste of time.
To avoid the above misapplications and rather understand and appreciate the vital tenets, we persist that all practitioners must: 1.
Go through the requisite education, training and retraining.
2.
Posses the required and necessary certification and qualification.
3.
Registered and become members of the regulatory authority of the profession, the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations (NIPR).
4.
Strictly adhering to the ethics and social responsibility of the profession.
5.
Most importantly, ensuring that the professional practitioner operate from the management cadre of his corporate body.
This is Nwosu and Idemili (1992:8) and Nweke’s (2001:14) position.
As a management insider, the practitioner will be in better position to handle his professional obligations, especially those bothering on counseling organizational management on its ethical and social responsibilities.
A management should be educated on the need for utilizing Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) as management strategies for mitigating crisis and conflicts, like oil spillage and other environmental problems.
This, the insider practitioner is better positioned to handle than otherwise.
10 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Explain why public relations is a universal concept.
2.
Trace the genesis of public relations to the period of its emergence in Nigeria.
3.
Show how colonialism is intertwined with the advent of public relations in Nigeria.
4.
Explain what constitute public relations.
5.
What are not public relations?
4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed the meaning, definitions and background of public relations.
Though as old as man and hence supposedly very familiar to everyone, public relations as an art, social science and a profession requires elucidation and amplification to the clear understanding of all, especially potential practitioners.
Most of the misuses and misconceptions inherent in the field today occur because of the poor background knowledge of the field by some practitioners, who naturally cannot give what they do not have.
This attempt at going beyond mere highlighting the necessary points becomes a necessity in order to prepare you as a professional practitioner, who will use the field for contribution to self- actualisation, professional growth and national development.
3.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we appraised the historical genesis of public relations, from its modern inception in the United States of America to its emergence in Nigeria.
As well, we explored the influence of colonialism on the profession in Nigeria, in addition to detailed look at some conceptual definitions.
Treated too, is an examination of what is and what not public relations are.
This imperative as you must be able to distinguish it from the myriads of misinterpretation unqualified practitioners have hoisted on the noble, dignified and distinguished profession.
4.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT a) Show how modern public relations emerged and contributed to socio- economic and political growth of the united states .
b) Explain the notion that public relations is old as man.
c) Give and explain at least four definitions of public relations.
d) With clear instances, show how public relations is an object of misconception and bastardisation.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READING.
Aliede, Jonathan E. (2005).”Repositioning the Public Relations Personnel for Reputable Practice” in Nwosu I.E, J.E.
Aliede and I. Nsude (ed.)
Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions, Enugu: Prime Targets Ltd. 11 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Baxter, Bill (1986).
“Public Relations Professionals Offer Courses Recommendations”, Journalism Educator, Vol.
40, No.4.
Black, Sam (1989).
Introduction to Public Relations.
London: Modino Press.
Daramola, A.C. (2008).
Fundamentals of Public Relations: A Global Overview.
Lagos: CMCIN.
Good News Bible (2010).
The United Bible Society, Lagos.
Nweke, Okechukwu (2001).
Public Relations Practice: Concepts and Strategies.
Hanson Publishers Enugu.
Nwosu, I.E.
and S.O Idemili (1992).
Public Relations: Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: ACENA Publishers.
Oyekan, Jibade (1993).
“Nigerian Institute of Public Relations: 30 years of Growth”, in NIPR 30 Years of Public Relations in Nigeria, Lagos: NIPR.
Stan, Edward (1968).
What You Should Know About Public Relations.
New York: Oceana Publications.
Skinner, Chris, L. Von Essen and G. Mersham (2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Sixth Edition.
Cape Town: Oxford University Press 12 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 2 MEDIA OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Diversity and Dynamism: Hallmark of Public Relations Media 3.2 Food/Instruments and Media of Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Most of the activities, actions, programmes and services of public relations are conveyed through the media.
These media are not only the known traditional vehicles for channeling messages information, ideas, values, ideologies and policies, like radio, television, newspaper, among others.
This unit, therefore, offers the opportunity for us to explore these numerous avenue and platforms additional used in communicating public relations messages while executing its programmes and campaigns.
It is a necessity for every practicing and potential public relations practitioner to fully understand these so as to be able to effectively apply them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES When you successfully read, understand and comprehend this unit, you should be able to:  Understand the multiplicity of means of conveying public relations messages available to the practitioner.
 Appreciate the wide choice and accessibility these present to the practitioner and his audience respectively.
 Explain how each can assist the practitioner in carrying out specific public relations assignments and responsibilities.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Diversity and Dynamism: Hallmark of PR Media There exist multifarious areas of problem public relations should tackle.
They are as numerous as there are many fields, facets, spheres and sectors of human endeavours: political, economic, social, cultural, educational, environmental, medical, scientific, agricultural, government, industrial, religious, linguistic, to mention but a few.
In like manner, there is the prevalence of divergent public of public relations: internal, external and stakeholders.
13 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS To be able to meet the specific public relations needs of these heterogeneous public, these has to be avalanche of tools, instruments, avenue, devices and platforms suitable and appropriate enough for executing public relations issues in the diverse areas.
Reasons for this multiplicity of areas requiring public relations attention are not farfetched.
They include: 1.
The daily sophistication and complexity of the society, each time requiring the interpretation and explanation of communication experts and professionals like public relations practitioners.
2.
The inevitable prevalence of conflicts and crises at all levels of human relationships, always requiring authorities in conflicts and crises resolution and management for their resolution 3.
The strife competition among and between corporate, business and commercial organisation as the as the vie for the favourable disposition and patronage of their public, customers, consumers and clients 4.
Growing enlightenment, socialisation and education of members of the society making them crises as they chose among contending goods and services.
5.
The need for providers of goods and services to more qualitatively back up their products with professionally packaged information and communication.
6.
The growing importance of communication today, including public relations, regarded as the fourth need of main, with its “mercuric, dynamic, diverse, pervasive, sensitive, intrusive, indispensable, octopus and massive” as their attributes, Aliede (2005 : 101).
Continuing, he asserts that “with its persuasive influence, particularly when strategically employed and professionally applied, using its techniques and tactics, communication is a strong weapon for bringing about change”.
7.
Besides, the astronomical growth in global population posses yet another challenge of the need to mould global public opinion in sensitive common concerns like in the areas of would peace, security understanding, food, climate, among others.
8.
Globalisation is another factor that has enormously influenced the practice of this field.
This is because the more the world becomes a global village; the more people want to emulate what they see and hear others do elsewhere.
Moreso, with the involvement of the media, no area of the world is today independent of any attitude, behaviour or privileged with a 14 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS particular form of information or culture.
Indeed, Marshall McLuhan’s prediction of the concept of global village has materialized.
The diversity of the areas public relations services are needed, therefore, can hardly be over stressed.
It is as multiple as human needs are numerous.
Accordingly, the subsequent arising public relations problems are as well diverse.
3.2 Tools/Instruments and Media of Public Relations The tools, instruments, channels, vehicles and platforms for conveying public relations messages and communication are numerous and diverse.
The diversity has been aided by the dynamism of science and technology.
This has dramatically enhanced the availability of information and communication technologies now abundantly at the disposal of today’s public relations and other fields of communication practitioners.
In all, all these assist to address the diverse need of the various customers and publics of the industry, summer, von Essen and Mersham.
For the purpose of clarity, these tools are classified into three.
These include: print, pertaining instruments which have to do with printing processes and as well displayed and used as printed means of communications electronic, tools packaged or utilized electronically, activities, programmes and events that all relate to messages and communication: They are as follows: a.
Print:  Newspapers  Magazine  Books  Billboards  Journals  Periodicals  Booklets  Bulletins  Pamphlets  Leaflets  Posters  Notice boards  Tracts  Press releases  House journals  Letters  Brochures  Catalogues  Calendars  Almanacs  Dairies  Photonews 15 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Photospeaks  Press kits  Advertorials  Direct mails  Supplements  Pullouts  Newsletters  Handbooks  Manuals  Annual reports  Charts  Pictures  Handbills  Letters to the editor  Rejoinders  Maps  Flags  Pin-ups  Signboards  Biographies  Coat of arms  Logos  Badges b.
Electronic:  Radio  Television  Cinema  Film/movie  Internet  Audiovisual  Video cassette  www  Facebook  twitter  blog  Youtube  MySpace  2go  Wikis  E-mail  SMS  GSM  BBM 16 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Company websites  Company webcast  In-store television  Mobile television  Social network sites  Visual advents  WOM  Flashmob  Buzz  Chat groups  Web television  Net  Videos  Documentaries  CDS  MP 3  Podcasts  Ipad  Ipod  Laptops  Digital cameras  CDC  Neon lights  Telephone  Chat rooms  Slides  Computer  Netscape  Computer  Linkin  Teleconferencing  Extranets  Intranets  Music  Tapes  Cassettes  Computers  Fax machine  Video cameras c. Activities/Events:  Advertising  Promotions  Publicity 17 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Events packaging  Exhibitions  Bazaars  AGMs  Plant tours  Launchings  Trade fairs  Convocation  Matriculation  Press conference  Seminars  Conferences  Colloquium  Conventions  Retreats  Orientations  Crusades  Interviews  Personal selling  Direct selling  Cocktail  Courtesy call  Meeting  Rallies  Carnivals  Fund raising  Inaugurations  Dedications  Congresses  Shows  Oral festivals  Sports tournaments  Sponsorships  Endorsements  End-year parties  Awards  “Day”/”Week”  Foundations  Anniversaries  Parades  Processions  Competitions  Receptions  Campaigns 18 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Displays  Presentations  Synods  Drama  Dances  Songs/singing  Banquets  Public address system  Tele-conferencing  Trade fairs  Point of sale  Reunions  Lobbying  Music  Suggestion boxes  Phone-in programmes  Skywriting  Balloons  Open houses  Send-offs  Graduations  Side attractions  Souvenirs  Paintings  Sculptor  Decorations  Drawings  Lectures  Rallies  Summit 19 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Show why the tools for conveying public relations communication have to be as diverse as it is.
2.
Mention at least ten tools of public relations and as well explain whose it is most suitably applied.
3.
Show the advent of science and technology has aided the practice of public relations and other related fields.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit has treated the various means for disseminating public relations message, information, ideas, and values, among others.
We as well saw the factors responsible for the multiplicity of public relations problems and issues, in addition to the many tools for tackling them.
The unit, therefore, offers us clear perspective of the wide application of public relations today and the universality of its importance and relevance.
It as well as adds to our understanding and better appreciation of the basics we need to know as potential practitioners in the field.
5.0 SUMMARY These many avenues for channeling public relations messages provide very opportunities for practitioners to choose from wide available means.
Required in this circumstance is to systematically and strategically assess what is available in order to be able to make wise, suitable and appropriate choice and application for rest effectiveness and optimum results.
Wherever the public relations problem, conflict and crisis exit, whether it is in the area of environmental management, labour relations, accident or natural disasters, the professional practitioner, with these many choices available to him, is well equipped and positioned to succeed.
All that is needed is wise choice from the available tools.
Today’s public relations practitioner is luck.
Science and technology has added to what was available to him, hence too to his service delivery.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Justify the prevalence of many public relations problems.
b.
Why are there many tools available to the public relations practitioner for conveying his messages and communications?
c. In what ways has the advancement in science and technology aided today public relations practitioner.
20 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 7.0 REFERENCES/FUTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E (2005), “Repositioning the Public Relation Personnel for Reputable Practice” in Nwosu, I. E, J. E. Aliede and Ifeyinwa Nsude (ed) Mass Communication: One Cause, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets Limited.
Skinner, Chris, L.von Essen and G. Mersham (2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Sixth Edition.
Cape Town: Oxford University Press.
21 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 3 NEED FOR AND FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main content 3.1.
Purposes, Objectives and Functions of Public Relations 3.2.
Aims, Branches and Kinds of Public Relations 3.3.Areas and Things Public Relations Practitioners Do 3.4.Similarities and Distinctions Between Public Relations and Some Related Disciplines 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.Summary 6.0.Tutor-marked assignment 7.0.References/further reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION Public relations is a carefully planned and executed discipline.
It is not a half hazard measure.
It is properly organized, based on concrete decisions, and equally hinged on empirical data or evidence.
Accordingly, public relations is not an aimless undertaking.
It is a purposeful venture anchored on intentional goals, hence most of the time it is a success.
There, every student and practitioner in the field must understand, hence the aim of this unit.
It is geared to acquainting you with those critical goals on which public relations is pivoted.
As well, the branches and the specific activities practitioners do will also be indeptly explored with a view to enabling you understand and appreciate them.
Very often, people misunderstand and misconstrue some other fields, disciplines and professions to be public relations.
These the case, the need to clear this by setting out the similarities and distinction between them arises.
That is one other goal this unit intends to achieve.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to:  Understand the reasons behind the practice of public reasons  Explain the various branches of public relations practitioner engage on  Identify those specific activities public relations and other related fields.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Purposes, Objectives and Functions of Public Relations Public relations is an interdisciplinary field, a multidisciplinary which domiciles in both arts and science.
It is a social science and functions as a tool for social engineering, behaviourial change and attitudinal transformation.
22 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS In the words of Nwosu (1996) “As a function and philosophy of modern organisational managements, public relations and its practitioners and managers perform many specialised functions that acquire varied specialised knowledge and skills...”.
Towards this end, Nwosu (1996:5) and Nweke (2001:4) state the purposes, objectives, functions, aims and duties of public relations as follows: 1.
Analysing present trends and predicting their consequences 2.
Preventing and resolving conflicts, crises, misconceptions, misunderstanding and prejudices.
3.
Using communication to influence and mobilise public opinion and attitude for the mutual benefits of the organisational management and the publics’.
4.
Establishing and maintaining prestigious, sound and credible organisational/corporate image 5.
Assisting organisations to cope with competition 6.
Attracting more customers, clients and consumers 7.
Building bigger business organisations 8.
Combating negative publicity and propaganda 9.
Explaining management attitudes and opinions to the public 10.
Embarking on communication and other persuasive programmes 11.
Facilitating marketing of products and services 12.
Interpreting organisational policies, activities, plans and programmes to their public and stakeholders 13.
Maintaining loyalty, respect and acceptance of organisations 14.
Securing favorable legislations for their organizations 15.
Winning and sustaining acceptance of organisation policies and programmes.
16.
Wooing customers, clients, consumers, patronisers, friends and well wishers of organisations 17.
Ensuring harmonious management/labour relations.
18.
Work towards improved and repositioned corporate image of the organisation 19.
Facilitate the prevalence of conducive working and operational environment for the business of the organisation 20.
Act as a bridge and link for constant liaison between the organisation and its various publics and stakeholders 21.
Ensure organisational fulfillment of its corporate social responsibilities, community neighbor, environmental friendly; and philanthropic and good citizenship entity.
3.2.
ARMS, BRANCHES AND KINDS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS As a result of these many different areas of services public relations has to attend to, there exist almost corresponding branches which handle each of these areas, sectors and issues.
There, therefore, exist many kinds of public relations: 1.
Employee/labour relations 2.
Community relations 23 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.
Shareholders/investors relations 4.
Customers/ consumers relations 5.
Government relations 6.
Media relations 7.
Financial relations 8.
Corporate affairs 9.
Environmental public relations 10. International relations.
Each arm of public relations is used to take care of the public relations needs and services of these specific spheres Nwosu (1992) and Nweke (2001:29).
This presents a scenario of indepth way of handling public relations issues in every area.
This is almost unlike in any other profession.
It, therefore, affords the profession the opportunity for detailed and specialised treatment of specific public relations issues, cases and challenges in each of these areas, whether it concerns relations with workers, community where the organisation is located, customer or clients; at local/state, federal government, media, among others.
The specialty nature has enabled practitioners to specialise in these specific areas and as well perfect in handling matters in each area.
This is good for excellence and professionalism which are the hallmarks of public relations.
3.3.1 AREAS AND THINGS PUBLIC RELATIONS PRACTITIONERS DO By now it should have been clear how diversified and versatile the field is.
It involves a lot of areas so vast and wide.
Indeed, it is extensive and limitless, clearly indicating how knowledgeable every practitioner must be in order to be able to function effectively in the profession.
Right from the time of conceptualising and visualising the nature of a particular public relations issue or problem, to implementing suitable programmes of actions, to the time what is done is appraised, reviewed, assessed and re- examined; a lot of other activities take place.
These involve key management decisions and actions very pertinent to the success of the specific campaign.
Although a particular public relations campaign or programme may not involve the application and utilisation of all these activities and actions, yet every professional practitioner should have good knowledge of all of them so as to conveniently apply them whenever their need arises.
After all, they mainly revolve around management decisions and judgments every and an average public relations manager must have knowledge of and accordingly be able to apply in the course of handling any programme or campaign, Nwosu (1996:6) Skinner, von Essen and Mersham (2001), and Nweke (2001:27).
Such activities and actions include: 24 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Research  Planning  Writing  Budgeting  Editing  Attitude management  Corporate advertising  Corporate communication  Corporate identity  Corporate image  Corporate strategy  Corporate Social Responsibility  Counseling/advising  Crisis management  Events management  Event marketing  Audio-visual production  Image auditing  Information management  Issues management  Market support  Opinion management  Negotiation  Persuasion  Policy formulation  Promotions  Protocol  Public affairs  Public communication  Public enlightenment  Public speaking  Publicity  Publication  Press agency  Journalism  Reputation management  Evaluation.
3.4.
SIMILARITIES AND DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN PUBLIC RELATIONS AND SOME RELATED DISCIPLINES Distinguishing public relations from other related professions, what Nwosu(1996:11) calls “clear boundary delineation” is one of the tasks facing public relations as a profession.
Identifying the cause, he attributes it to “the close affinity between public relations practice and other older management or 25 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS professional practices like marketing, mass communication or journalism, publicity, advertising and propaganda.
Whatever are the reasons responsible for this apparent confusion and ambiguity, pertinent is equipping the potential public relations practitioner, to not only be able to demarcate public relations from other fields, but also be able to avoid mixing them up in the cause of his professional practice, as Nwosu (1996:11), Nweke (2001:18) and Daramola (2008:27) unanimously content.
Some of those areas of correlation are as follows: Public Relations and Advertising Public relations aims at cultivating and sustaining relationship between an organisation and its publics.
On the other hand, advertising which is often a tool for attaining public relations goals, is a promotional and marking instrument as well, and is a communication message, channeled through the media, usually persuasive in nature and aimed at wooing consumers to patronize a product, with the sponsor identified.
The later most of the time concentrate on selling of goods and services.
Accordingly, public relations is wider in scope than advertising.
Public Relation and Marketing Particularly in the area of business, Daramola (2008:33), the two often work hand-in-hand with advertising and sales promotion.
Yet, marketing is specifically concerned with, through management, identifying, anticipating and satisfying customers’ needs and wants, in anticipation of profit making.
Often both utilise the same techniques and could best serve their goals when combined, Nweke (2001:21).
Nonetheless, a marketer with good knowledge of public relations is better placed to pursue his goals, due to the latter’s high regard for persuasion, ethical and social responsibility considerations in the course of handling any campaign or programme.
Public Relations and Journalism Although both use communication vary often as means of conveying their messages, both public relations and journalism or mass communication, Nwosu (1996:12) and Daramola (2008:34) still have some areas of differences.
The latter’s main concern is to, through news coverage and reportage, inform members of the society, analyse issues of the day, act as the voice of the voiceless and watch-dog of the society.
It places high premium on accuracy, fairness, balance and objectivity, same tenets public relations respects as it involves ethical values and social responsibility.
An area of blurring, however, may arise between the two following the fact that they involve writing and other journalistic practices, as Nwosu (1996: 13) puts it.
To him, a number of journalistic practices, which also are similar to what public relations practitioners do, actually are another area of close affinity between the two fields.
26 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Public Relations and Sales Promotion Daramola (2008:31) sees sales promotion as “a meantime designed to boost or increase the volume of sales of a product or service directly and immediately or in the short run.
Therefore, like public relations, it aims at promoting favourable disposition between the consumer/customer and the service provider to organisations.
Sales promotion is mainly interpersonal in approach and also centres on selling, unlike public relations.
Equally, as Nweke (2001:20) observes, every organisation needs public relations, but not all may require sales promotion.
The former is used consistently.
Not so with sales promotion.
The former involves more credibility compared with the letter.
Public Relations and Publicity Public relations applies publicity strategies and techniques in achieving some of its objectives, Nwosu (196:13), yet they are not exactly the same.
Publicity provides news and similar materials to its audience through the media.
It evolved from press agency.
It is narrower in scope and practice than public relations.
Public Relations and Propaganda Public relations presents all shades of opinion and all available ideas and angles.
Propaganda does not do this.
Somewhat, it is often biased, one-sided, partial, deceptive, half truth, distortion, lies, fabrication, misinformation, disinformation and subjective.
It is most of the time selfish and does not care for the consequences of its deceit.
It is, therefore, bound to lead to disaffection, contrary to public relations whose ultimate goal is understanding, trust, goodwill, cooperation, support and mutual relation, Nweke (2001:22).
Ironically, these negative attributes are opposed to the original concept of propaganda when it originated, Nwosu (1996:14) and Aliede (2005:131).
It was then a positive and persuasive instrument for motivating people to action.
The current misrepresentation, misconception and misconstruction originated during the World War II when Adolf Hitler drastically misused and bastardised the hither to positive concept.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Explain the functions and objectives of public relations 2.
Show the various arms/branches of public relations and what each involves 3.
What are those major activities public relations entail?
4.
X-ray the interface between public relations and at least three related disciplines 4.0.
CONCLUSION The unit has attempted to dissect some major conceptual elements of public relations.
First, there is an expose of those responsibilities public relations tackle, whether seen as duties, functions, roles, aims, purposes or objectives.
27 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS As well, we delved into these into those versatile areas one can call aims or branches of public relations.
Their numerous numbers clearly show the diversity of the profession and point at the closeness of everyone to public relations, no matter where one finds himself.
This is similar to the multiple activities the discipline involves and also point at why every practitioner is jack of all trade.
The unity is ended with an assessment of the interface between public relations with other interdisciplinary areas in the humanities, social sciences and management sciences.
You are, therefore, further equipped with additionally knowledge on the variety, depth and universality of public relations, knowledge which is a must for future practitioners of the diverse profession.
5.0 SUMMARY This presentation, no doubt, enhances your knowledge of the principles and practice of public relations as a necessity for everyone living in this modern time and information age.
This assists you fully appreciate what public relations does, does not do, how it does it and the very areas of life, sectors and spheres public relations influence our lives and why.
The unit is, among others, gradually preparing our minds to fully appreciate the strengths, potentialities and efficacies of public relations in addressing the central issue of the course material: environmental problems.
The earlier our future public relations practitioners have full grasp of the positivity of the profession, the better.
This is crucial as it is going to be his duty to effectively and professionally apply it in solving prevailing public relations problems, but also more importantly educating, enlightening and persuading the public to be part of the vanguard for vigorous environmental public relations activities and crusades.
Therefore, we are systematically going through public relations scientifically fighting “fierce battles” without lethal weapons and subtly involving and co- opting everyone as part of the eventual winning team.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGMENT a.
With critical analysis, show the objectives of public relations.
b.
How do the existing branches of public relations assist it handling the various problem besieging humanity.
c. Discuss how a particular arm of public relations aid the growth and development of the banking and insurance industries.
d. Justify why classification of the often ambiguities between public relations and other related disciplines is crucial.
e. Distinguish between public relations, on one hand, and marketing, advertising and propaganda, on the other.
28 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E. (2005).
“Repositioning the Public Relations Personnel for Reputable Practice” in Nwosu, I.E, J.E Aliede and Ifeyinwa Nsude (ed) Mass Communication.
One Course, Many Professions, Enugu; Prime Targets Limited.
Nweke, Okechukwu (2001).
Public Relations Practice; Concepts and Strategies.
Hamson Publishers; Enugu.
Nwosu, I.E and S.O.
Idemili (1992), Public Relations; Speed, Media Writing and Copy.
Enugu; ACENA Publishers.
Relations: A Global Overview.
Lagos; CMCIN Nwosu, I.E (1996).
Public Relations Management; Principles, Issues and Applications.
Lagos; Dominican Publishers.
Skinner, Chris, L. Von Issen and G. Mersham (2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Sixth Edition.
Cape Town: Oxford University Press.
29 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS MAC 232 Unit 4 APPROCHES AND TECHNIQUES TO PUBLIC RELATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Techniques and strategies of public relations 3.2 Processes of public relations 3.3 Qualities of a professional publics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- marked assignment 7.0 References / furthers readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The successful and affective implementation of any public relations programmes or campaigns is never by chance of or stroke luck.
It happens usually because the right tools, methods, processes, techniques and strategies are used.
As well, the practitioner must be disposed to applying the available resources to where they are most needed.
And this must stem his being qualified, knowledgeable and experienced enough, in addition to being versed in the dynamics and intricacies of the profession.
To this end, this unit is devoted to x-raying and assessing the techniques, tactics and strategies of public relations, and how they must be creatively and intelligently utilized for the attainment of organizational goals and objectives.
As scientific enterprise public relations follow some systematic and laid down procedures for a logically ended programme execution.
Consequently, the unit further affords us the opportunity to examine the processes of public relations, and the requisite qualifications needed of any intending public relations practitioner.
Accordingly, the unit is very important for so many reasons among which is its laying the critical foundation for the crucial knowledge a potential practitioner must have before venturing into the noble profession for the effective performance of the roles expected of him.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit you therefore should be able to:  Have knowledge of those crucial techniques and strategies necessary in the practice of public relations in general and environmental public relations in particular.
 Identify the processes of public relations.
30 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Explain the qualities required of any intending public relations practitioner.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Techniques and Strategies of Public Relations As a professional practitioner, the public relations personnel is required from time to time, to through rendering of public relations services, solve problems facing his clients.
To be able to do this effectively he will employ relevant techniques, tactics and strategies as “practical guides,” as a matter of necessity, Nweke (2001:47).
These include models, concepts, paradigms and theories central and efficacious to solving specific and each public relations problem facing the client.
They are the tools needed by the practitioner to effectively and efficiently plan, formulate and apply his professional knowledge, skills and ingenuity.
The step-by-step and systematic approaches are vital, irrespective of the nature of the public relations campaign programmes, whether in the area of ecology, environment, health, education, agriculture, politics, business, sports, among others.
Following years of practice and experience, practitioners have acquired knowledge, skills, ingenuity and expertise which act as direction, examples and “models” for futures practices.
These are the approaches; procedures and methods practitioners fall back on as they tackle similar public relations problems and challenges.
To Nwosu (1996:9), a model is “a theoretical construct used to describe and explain complex phenomena or process, usually to guide understanding, decision and action.
They are based usually on research or long practical field experience, or on both.
They, therefore, act as guiding principles, serve as beacons and play the role of source of direction to the public relations practitioner who must get it right, avoid wastage of scare resources and live up to the result-orientation of his client and as well safeguard his professional integrity, image and reputation.
The following are some of the public relations models at the disposal of practitioners: RACE Model This stands for Research, Action, Communication and Evaluation.
RACE is self explanatory and applicable, and as a result serves as useful, workable and effective tool and guide for executing public relations programmes and projects.
It was proposed by John Marston in 1983.
Transfer Process Model The model enunciated by Frank Jefkins in 1988, is a very popular concept, which as Aliede (2005:129) puts it.
“…when effectively applied, public relations itself has the potentiality of reverting adverse or negative situations into suitable, positive and favourable achievements”.
As echoed by Nwosu (1996:9), Benson Eluwa (1999:28) and Nweke (2001:53), the Transfer Process model is the panacea for the task of revising an ugly trend, turning around a bad situation into a 31 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS favourable one and changing a repulsive condition to a pleasant circumstance.
The model is: NEGATIVE SITUATION POSITIVE SITUATION Hostility - Sympathy Prejudice - Acceptance Apathy - Interest Ignorance - Knowledge Ten- Points (Steps) Systematic Model The proponent was C. Coulson Thomas.
It encompasses the main critical components of any public relations programme’s process.
Therefore, if religiously followed and implemented, it constitutes a realistic road-map for realizing any campaign’s set objectives.
The content is as follows:  Situation analysis/problem identification  Selecting the objectives/public selection  Public classification/programme planning  Programme development  Costing programme  Programme modification  Programme reporting  Programme evaluation.
FOUR-Steps Model  Research and listening  Planning and decision making  Communication and action  Evaluation and assessment.
Proposed by Scot Cultip and Allen Center, this model is of the same pattern as RACE.
It appraises the situation, packages the needed tool(s), executes it and reviews the outcome.
It is practical, as it is applicable.
IPCM or OP-Matrix Model This was John Marston recommendation in 1986 and is of four components as well:  Information gathering, processing and application  Public affairs management  Communication management, and  Marketing According to Nwosu (1996:10) the model lays emphasis on communication and marketing.
He, therefore, insists that today’s public relations professionals should 32 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS as well specialize in integrated marketing communication which is “modern, utilitarian and broad-based”.
FOUR-Step Public Relations Model This model was authored by a team of public relations experts, among them Allen Center and Frank Walsh.
Its contents are practically not far from the components of others like RACE and the FOUR-Step model.
They are:  Facts-finding or research  Planning and programming  Action and Communication  Evaluation The next four which are “related or sequential models” were developed by James Gruining and Todd Hunt in their 1984 book, Managing Public Relations.
To Nwosu (1996:10), the models x-ray the “Origin, development and contemporary understanding, uses or applications of public relations” and accordingly very relevant to every practitioner.
The first is: Press Agentry/Publicity Model  Entails passing on information  It is one-tier flow of information  There is no feedback  It is often propagandistic and pernicious Public Information Model  Passes information from management to its publics only.
 There is no feedback  It is, however, more objective than the earlier one.
The Two-Way Asymmetric Model  Information flow is both to and fro  Its gives room for feedback The Two-Way Symmetric Model  Mutually beneficial two-way communication, involving dialogue and the like.
 Entails positive change in perceptions and attitudes.
Six –Point Public Relations Model This proposition by Frank Jefkins is, undoubtedly, an extension of some others like RACE and the FOUR-Steps, as can deduced from its components, as shown below:  Situation analysis 33 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Defining the objectives  Defining the Publics  Media Choice  Budgeting and  Evaluation.
RICE Model Proposed by Nwosu (1996: 10), the RICE Model “deals with the topical issue of environmental public relations or how public relations can be applied in managing and controlling environmental issues and problems.
Seen by the proponent as “more or less a public enlightenment or mass mobilisation model of public relations”, the model falls squarely on the central theme of the course and will, consequently later feature as a proposed practical tool for resolving ecological and environmental issues and crises.
It is, though not yet widely noticed by scholars, researchers and practitioners in this profession, however, partly due to the newness of Environmental Public Relations as a recent concept and area of study, one of the pioneering, indelible and remarkable contributions the late erudite scholar, Prof. Ikechukwu E. Nwosu, made to the public relations profession.
It is incontrovertible as it is eloquent and revolutionary, as it is attestable to by all apostles of this noble field and industry.
3.3 Process of Public Relations As a serious business undertaking, public relations does not rely on chance.
This is understandable; after all, it is social scientific exercise, which must be systematic, procedural, logical and replicable.
It, therefore, must be planned, deliberate and sustainable.
It as well follows that it must be pivoted on some set objectives and goals in line with organizational vision, mission and direction.
The RACE Model by John Marston, Four-Step Public Relations Model by Scot Cutlip and Allen Center, Frank Walsh and others are ideally the simplest form of processes of public relations.
For one, they each contain the basic component needs of activities vital for public relations execution.
For example, the RACE Model encompasses Research, Action, Communication, and Evaluation.
On its past; the Four-Step Model has its elements: Research and listening, Planning and decision making, Communication and action, and Evaluation and Assessment.
On the other hand, the Four-Step Public Relations Model contains Facts-finding or research, Planning and programming, Action and Communication, and Evaluation.
The embodiments of the three models are basically the same.
In practical terms, they each talk of obtaining data on which to hinge all the vital decisions; plan or package or produce all relevant programmes of actions, execute or carry them out, and finally appraise, review, analyse and assess the outcome.
Ordinarily, they are basic steps a practitioner must undergo in implementing any public relations campaign Nweke (2001:8).
They may though look simply, however, within them are buried some other vital components still critical to the successful handling of 34 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS any programme.
It is in the light of this that we hereby present a more comprehensive and yet simplified processes of public relations.
1.
Conceptualisation Preliminary to the very main stages of public relations is what can best be described as conceptualization.
Also known as ideation or visualization, it is a step at which the practitioner ponders, meditates or frames a mental picture of what he is going to do, how he is going to do it and the probable results.
This gives him a clear direction of the nature and what to do in each of the processes before him.
2.
Brief At this stage, the client provides detailed information about the public relations problem, conflict or crisis.
This is crucial as it is the data he provides that will form the main ingredient for the packaging of suitable publications, messages or actions/events capable of solving the existing problem.
3.
Research The information garnered through the second stage, brief, may not be sufficient.
What follows then is the collection of more relevant data, statistics, facts and figures that are essential to finding enduring solutions to the client’s anxieties, fears and aspirations.
Vital data must form the basis of every component decision in the various planning and implementation processes of the public relations campaign programme and research is the right source.
4.
Planning Under this process comes wide array of actions and activities pertinent to the effective execution of the programme.
These must be treated with every carefulness and professionalism, as on them depends the success of the campaign efforts.
a Media Selection This involves the careful choice from the available media or other communication tools, the most suitable in carrying out of campaign.
At any point in time are available wide varieties of media from which the agency or practitioner can select from.
While choosing, he must be guided by the number of factors: cost, coverage, accessibility, availability, competition, economic and purchasing power of the potential customer, for instance.
He, therefore, must be guided by professionalism, ethical values, social responsibility considerations and sound judgment.
He may also be guided by the concept of SWOT, meaning strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats.
This enables him to critical study the merits and disadvantages of each medium and then make comparative assessment of its usage.
It is instructive to note that the choice of wrong or unsuitable medium/media may ruin the entire campaigns.
35 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS b. Copywriting This involves scribing the communication messages which form a major aspect of the public relations exercise, especially if advertising is the tool (commercial jingles and print advertisements).
The writer must have good knowledge of the issue, available media, the audience, competition, good command of the language, grammar; ensure ethical considerations, among others.
The messages must be attractive and convincing enough, just as other tools, events and activities must be suitable and appropriate to attaining the set public relations goals.
c. Recruitment The right and qualified personnel for the execution of the programme should include administrative, technical, professional and other staff, permanent and casual.
They would train, rehearse, before the final action, assuming commercials and jingles or stage performances are needed as in public enlightenment and social mobilization campaign programmes.. d. Budgeting Money will be spent at every stage, processes and items of the public relations programme.
For effectiveness and positive results, fund should be adequately allocated to all these areas of needs.
Of course, moderation should be the watch word as excess money means wastage, while inadequacy of fund would not lead to the expected positive and profitable results.
To budget effectively, a number of factors/methods are considered.
According to Nwosu and Nkannebe (2006:161), some of these include affordability, objective, competition and percentage of profit.
e. Production This stage involves the actual designing, devising, building, inventing or constructing the tools of public relations for the specific programme.
The items to be used should be properly packaged.
If advertising is to be involved, production would include shooting the pictures, video, editing and post editing them, among other vital activities.
This hallmark stage, not only determines how judicious available resources have been applied, but also how positive or negative the output or final result will be.
Hence, special attention must be given to the quality and finishing of the items.
6 Placement/ Scheduling Under this process, the packaged public relations tools are sent or forwarded to the media or vehicle of their dissemination.
In addition, agreements on their timing and spacing are reached.
Are they to be aired (if television or radio) in morning, afternoon, evening or night; before, after or within new?
If it is any other instrument, agreement is reached 36 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS with those involved in its implementation on how best it should be done to ensure optimum results.
7 Monitoring and Supervision The public relations agency and its personnel do not handover the investor’s scarce and often huge resource and go home to relax.
The execution of the programme, whether by the media, musical groups, specialized organs, consultants, among others, has to be closely monitored and supervised.
This is to ensure their execution according to the letters and terms of the contractual agreements.
With this, any aspect that is not properly handled is rescheduled and re-executed.
8 Evaluation At the end of the entire programme execution, the level of success or failure is assessed.
That is evaluation.
It involves, call it research or whatever that enables the review, analysis, appraisal and examination of the extent of success recorded in the course of the programme or campaign.
Evaluation is at best post mortem.
It, therefore, provides the requisite data with which to analyse the outcome of any campaign.
It as well affords a road-map on how next to handle a similar project, need for reinforcement, retargeting, refocusing and re-strategising.
A number of factors have made imperative that the practitioner has no reason to give for not actualizing the business and profit motives of the client.
On the other hand, succeeding means having the right knowledge and possessing the required qualities with which to serve the customer.
Some of those factors include the cut-throat competition in the industry, globalization and existence of very wide area of choice for client.
All these must be at the back of your mind as you look forward to practicing public relations and environmental public relations.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  A commentator describes public relations techniques and strategies as road-maps for practitioners.
Support or refute the statement.
 Discuss the process of public relations.
5.0 SUMMARY Knowledge of the techniques, strategies, processes and modalities of handling public relations programmes is a must for potential practitioners like you.
That practitioner, who must live up to the expectations of clients, withstand competition and safeguard his agency’s reputation, should fully understand and be able to apply them.
We are at a time all lovers of the profession must care for its image and also work towards excellence and professionalism which are the hallmark 37 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS of the field.
That can only be done through knowledge-based practice.
It is, too, a sure way of rubbishing the hand work of quacks who are bent of destroying the noble profession.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 That practitioner who must succeed must pay attention to techniques and strategies of public relations, one analyst has said.
Underscore the truthfulness of the statement.
2 Show why the knowledge of the processes of public relations is vital for an intending practitioner in the field.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E. (2005).
“Repositioning the Public Relations Personnel for Reputable practice”, in Nwosu, I.E., J.E.
Aliede and Ifenyinwa Nsude (ed) Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets Ltd. Benson-Eluwa, Virginia (1999).
Public Relations: A Practical Approach.
Enugu: Virgin Creation.
Nweke, Okechukwu (2001).
Public Relations Practice: Concepts and Strategies.
Enugu: Hamson Publishers.
Nwosu, I.E(1996).
Public Relations Management: Principles, Issues and Applications.
Lagos: Dominican Publishers.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Anayo D. Nkamnebe (2006).
Triple-P Advertising: Principles, Processes and Practices.
Aba: Afri-Tower Ltd. 38 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 5: PROBLEMS FACING THE PRACTICE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Problems Facing the Practice of Public Relations in Nigeria 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION There is virtually no organisation or field without any problem.
Therefore, those of public relations are no exemption.
Such problems do emanate from the operational environment, attempt at regulation, actions and inactions of operators, among others.
Indeed, they are inevitable.
Since the existence of such problems is unavoidable, what is necessary then is containing them, that is managing them.
Doing this must begin with clearly understanding such challenges.
And grasping will assist in providing means of overcoming them.
Challenges are natural companions of every profession and organisation.
In the case of public relations, what is very important is for practitioners to fully understand them and by so doing devise means of tackling them.
In reality, if effectively understood, fallouts of such problems should become vital ingredients for managing public relations programmes, projects and campaigns.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Explain the challenges facing the profession in the country.
 Be positioned to provide solutions to the problems.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problems Facing the Practice of Public Relations in Nigeria Like any other institution, the public relations profession and industry is besieged by myriad of challenges, some from within and others from the environment.
Some of them include: 39 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 1.
Effects of its negative application during the World War II The nefarious, malicious and sinister manner the profession was used during the World War II still haunts it.
Till date, a number of people cannot be convinced and corrected of the misrepresentation and misconception trade mark it was given then due to the high level of its misapplication.
Indeed, from all indications, it will take concerted and strategic measures, as well as time to erase the created negative image.
2.
Attitude of Some Organizational Managements Managements of some corporate organizations seek the services of public relations only during emergencies.
To them, it is a means of “damage control in a fire brigade approach,” Aliede (2005:135).
Nweke (2001:43) echoes this.
To managements, it is used “…to dispose of its heaps of garbage of numerous atrocities.
But as soon as sanity is restored, the practitioner is relegated to the background and eternally forgotten.” Such misuse and basterdisation is most noticeable in the Nigerian local government system and the need to reverse the ugly trend, is not only very urgent, but also herculean.
3.
Inadequate Manpower and Professional Background There is gross inadequacy of manpower in the field.
This is not surprising as unlike its related disciplines, every organization, government and individuals require the services of public relations practitioners and yet what is available is not enough.
Still, some of the existing practitioners lack the needed professional attributes.
In absence of these, inaction to ethical values, they are in the field to sustain their meal tickets.
They have no image, reputation, integrity or profession to protect.
4.
Poor Remuneration Most practitioners are poorly paid.
This could lead to frustration and engagement in unethical practices, like acceptance of brown envelopes and other gratifications.
5.
Dumping Ground of Never-Do-Wells People who have failed in other areas easily see public relations as a suitable alternative.
If only they can afford coat and briefcase, they parade themselves public relations practitioners.
This class has nothing to offer as they lack the calling, skills, expertise, training, experience and rather will constitute danger and liability to the industry.
40 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 6.
Nigeria’s Corrupt Society The issue of corruption in Nigeria is no more news, just as it incalculable damage is no more an issue in public debate.
At the same time, public relations practitioners are still part of the segments of the society.
Some of them, therefore, join the bandwagon, unable to resist the cankerworm, thereby soiling their hands and tarnishing the image of the profession.
7.
Poorly Positioned Regulatory Authority The regulatory agency, NIPR, was a military creation.
As a result, a number of loopholes exist which constitute hurdles to the attainment of the Institute’s statutory objectives.
The prevailing weak legislative framework is easily circumvented by nefarious practitioners who have no interest of the profession at heart.
Besides, the agency lacks sufficient institutional mechanism and regulatory and context enforcement instruments with which to effectively police practitioners in the country, notes Aliede (2005: 137).
8.
Dearth of Data There is little or no relevant statistics, facts, figures, and data on most areas of need, like demography, psychography, sociological and market data and information.
These are musts for smooth operations in public relations units and department.
Their absence jeopardizes meaningful practice of public relations, anytime, anywhere.
9.
Improper Recognition of Practitioners In some corporate organizations, practitioners are not allowed to operate from the right place: the management cadre.
When this is the case, they merely act as errand boys, receiving second hand management decisions.
They must operate from the top, so as to be in the proper position to make contributions and also advice management on its ethical and social responsibility.
4.0 CONCLUSION Notwithstanding its steady progress since inception in the country, public relations has been encountering some challenges.
Some of the gains came from governments’, organizations’, and individuals’ unquenchable desire for information and communication, especially in organised manner, others are the uncontrollable way science and technology have flooded information and communication technologies, which are today major boosts to the practice of public relations and other related disciplines like advertising.
41 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Contrarily, challenges facing the profession come from within and externally.
These are numerous, including institutional ones which seriously affect the effective control and regulation of the industry.
Urgent solutions must be found in order to ameliorate their ugly implications.
5.0 SUMMARY Every student of public relations must see himself as a solution to the multiplicity of challenges facing the profession.
It is the expectation that after proper and effective education and continues training and retraining, you as a potential practitioner, will in no small way impact on the field.
That way, you will assist in providing solutions to these prevailing problems, thereby revising the misfortunes of the industry.
This must be at the back of your mind as you go through this and other courses preparing you to practice in this noble field.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is the nature of the problems facing the practice of public relations in the country?
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Name and explain five of the problems facing the practice of public relations in Nigeria.
 Why has the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations been unable to successfully tackle these challenges?
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E. (2005).
“Repositioning the Public Relations Personnel for Reputable Practice,” in Nwosu, I.E., J.E.
Aliede and Ifeyinwa Nsude (ed.)
Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets Ltd. Nweke, Okechukwu (2001).
Public Relations Practice: Concepts and Strategies.
Enugu: Hamson Publishers.
42 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS MODULE 3: ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC RELATIONS AGENCY Unit 1: Structure and Organisation of Public Relations Unit 2: Why Organisations Require the Services of Public Relations Unit 3: Factors Responsible for the Growth of Public Relations Unit 4: Qualities of a Public Relations Practitioner UNIT 1: STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION OF A PUBLIC RELATIONS AGENCY CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Public Relations Agency Explained.
3.2.
The Structural Organisation of a Public Relations Agency.
3.3.
Assessing the Qualities of a Public Relations Agency.
4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Reading.
1.0.
INTRODUCTION A public relations agency is an organisational team of practitioners specialized in various aspects of the profession and therefore, render services to clients.
Accordingly, it is a team of management experts.
It can be likened to a law firm usually made up of several attorneys who give legal services to litigants.
It is a necessity that intending practitioners are versed with its structure, components and roles.
Such knowledge guide students who, one day, are expected to take up positions in such professional organizations.
It must be highlighted that agencies in developing countries lack the complex structural composition of such bodies in developed and industralised nations like the United States and Britain.
Though the case, yet their roles remain the same.
It is expected that as the fortunes and endowments of the agencies in developing countries improve, 43 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS they will grow in stature that will measure up with their counterparts elsewhere.
2.0 OBJECTIVES  At the end of the unit, you should be able to:  Explain the meaning of a public relations agency.
 Understand an agency’s organizational structure.
 Assess the quality of a public relations agency.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public Relations Agency Explain In lay man’s language, a public relations agency is a corporate organisation made up of public relations professional practitioners who teamed up to work as a group and render public relations services to individual and corporate clients.
Public relations agencies’ hands are filled.
This stems from the wide range of areas requiring their services.
Dominick (1993:368-369) names some of these to include: 1. Business Business organizations need public relations in marketing their goods and services, harmonizing management/labour relations, ensuring customer, financial, community relations, among others.
2.
Government and Politics Government agencies and politicians need public relations for constant liaison with the citizens and the electorate.
Too, their policies, programmes and manifestoes are also publicized with the aid of public relations practitioners.
3.
Educational Institutions Such institutions and similar establishments use public relations services in such areas like communicating with their publics, fund raising, and linkage with regulatory agencies, among others.
4.
Health Institutions Medical establishments like hospital and pharmaceutical bodies use public relations to reach out to their numerous internal and external publics and stakeholders, in order to maintain mutual two-way communication understanding.
44 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 5.
Non- Profit Organisations Such charitable bodies like Boys Scout, Girls Guard, and Red Cross use public relations to seek moral and financial supports in addition to encouraging voluntary involvements of members of the public.
6.
Professional Organs Such bodies like NBA, NMA, NUT, NSE, NUPENG and ASUU require public relations services for effective public liaison and management of their organizations.
7.
Entertainment and Sports.
Performers in these two areas, just like musicians and actors/actresses, are public figures and celebrities who always seek favourable publicity and media visibility.
Public relations prepare and package them for all these.
With their various specialized personnel, public relations agencies assign duties to their staff as plan package and execute programmes of action in line with the specific service-demands of their clients.
Although the tendency is for some organizations to attempt handling their own public relations services, by establishing public relations departments and employment of their personnel, agencies have come to stay.
This has the merit of cutting cost and using staff good knowledge of the organisation, but has some disadvantages.
Among other: problems will not be treated with the needed independence and professionalism, in addition to the probable absence of some basic and vital operational resources, such as manpower, expertise and technology required for the proper handling of such problem.
3.2 The structural Organisation of Public Relations Agencies Like advertising agencies, public relations agencies are organizationally structured to effectively, efficiently, flexibly and functionally operate to the satisfaction of customers and professional happiness of practitioners.
This is the case whether the agency is corporate (serving just its organizational needs) or consultancy/counseling (serving external clients).
In the former (diagram below), the agency is located in the CEO’s office and caters for the public relations needs of the entire organisation.
Its unit (departments) is limited and not as elaborate as in a full agency.
However, it still services both the external publics of the corporate entity, Dominick (1993:369), as shown in the diagram below: 45 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Figure1: Corporate Public Relations Agency President CEO Director Of PR Press Relations Corporate Communication Community Relations Source: Dominick (1993:370).
On the other, counseling and consultancy public relations agency is more elaborate and complex.
A number of reasons account for its extensiveness, among them the nature and large services it renders and availability of resources at its disposal, according to Dominick (1993: 370).
It is, therefore, structured into departments unlike the way it is in internal corporate public relations.
The diversity of its structure is invariably to take care of the numerous services it gives to clients as shown below: Figure 2: Public Relations (Consultancy) Agency President CEO Creative Services Research Publicity & Marketing Accounts Administration Editorial Services Polling Merchandising Account Exe.
Personnel Advertorial Media Info Retrieval Sales Promotion Finance Legal Source: Dominick (1993: 370).
An agency could be more elaborate the than as presented above.
For instance, with more resources, such units like finance, media services, clients services, production, public relations, among others, could stand as 46 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS individual departments.
Each of these departments is headed by a director or head, who reports to the chief executive officer, with other subordinates under him.
The CEO could answer any name, depending on choice of nomenclature or corporate policy.
Such names range from president, general manager, director general, chairman, executive director to managing director.
Whatever the structure, it must be such that will enable it flexibility, capacity and capability to so effectively function as to optimally fully attain corporate objectives, including meeting clients’ aspirations, withstand competition and achieve profitability.
The chief executive officer in the words of Baran (2012:314) “…sets policy and serves as the spokesperson of the organisation’s operations.” Account executives handle accounts, ensuring their successful management.
On their parts, Baran (2012:314) notes that creative personnel prepare copies, graph designs, art works, audio, video and photographic materials.
Through opinion polling, interviews, focus group, content analysis, among others, the research department provides the data and statistics with which decisions are taken on needs of clients/customers.
The administration department takes care of personnel recruitment, promotions, appraisals, reprimands, retirements and trainings.
Public relations agency has come to stay as a formidable institutional structure for sustaining the profession and industry.
Particularly, consultancy public relations agencies will continue to flourish.
Corporate bodies and similar institutions will ever cherish getting counsels and advise from public relations agencies on consultancy basis, and periodically too, as the needs arise.
To many, it is more efficient, economic, independent, reliable and therefore beneficial.
3.3 Assessing the Qualities of a Public Relations Agency Agencies can be classified into two.
This categorization is based on two factors: level of their resource endowment and the quantity/class of work they do.
4.1 General Agency This kind of public relations agency accepts and handles divers and all sorts of jobs.
Just like in the case of advertising agencies, Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006: 131) and Bovee and Arens(1936), it can also be called full service agency.
47 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS This kind of agency, whether it is in public relations or advertising, is so well endowed with resources that it is equipped to handle all sorts of services, from planning to evaluation.
Such endowments include in finance, manpower, materials, logistics, infrastructure and technology.
With these, it can serve all levels of customers, no matter the sophistication of their jobs.
4.2 Specialty Agency This type of agency renders only some aspects of the range of services available to agencies and required by clients, as Ozoh (1998:34) puts it.
Some engage only in creative services or research services.
Others may render media planning and buying or copywriting services.
Another name for this is non-full service agency.
Clearly and undoubtedly, the standards, quality and excellence of any public relations agency is contingent on its level of resource endowment.
The available resources directly and indirectly have influence on the quality and quantity of services an agency renders.
The major determinant of the attributes of a public relations agency, therefore, is the available resources, especially human and financial.
According to Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006:130), the following are the criteria for measuring “a successful agency:” 1.
Creative talent 2.
Talent to listen to client and audience 3.
Organised performance 4.
Consistence quality service 5.
Good client relationship 6.
Integrity and honesty 7.
Understand client’s operation 8.
Quality people.
They also insist the following factors are indicative of “Poor and inefficient agency”: 1.
Poor knowledge of cost estimation 2.
Lack of creativity 3.
Poor account executives 4.
Misrepresentation 5.
Personnel turnover 6.
Inconsistent service 7.
Missing of deadline 8.
Bad media buying.
48 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What is a public relations agency?
 In a graphic presentation, show the structure of an agency.
 When is a public relations agency not qualitative?
4.0 CONCLUSION Public relations agency is the engine room/ life wire of the practice of public relations.
In addition, these agencies are structured and organized in such a way they are not only functional, innovative and creative in their services to their clients and customers, but also conscious and proactive in safeguarding their image and reputation.
The capacity and capability of any agency is dependent on its resource possessions.
Resources, especially manpower and finance, are crucial for the optimal performance of the agency.
They, too, determine the level of quality of service rendered to clients.
The public relations agency is the port of call for that corporate organisation which actually deserves qualitative service.
The bulk ends there.
5.0 SUMMARY Good knowledge of the structure, organisation, workings and roles of public relations is fundamental to your having full grasp of the nature, principles and functions of public relations.
It is an area that must be given full attention as it epitomizes public relations, its organization, functions and responsibilities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Give a detailed explanation of a public relations agency.
 In what way does the structural organisation of public relations agency affect its functionality?
 Show a graphic presentation of a full-service public relations agency.
 When is a public relations agency qualitative and not quantitative?
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING Baran, Stanley J.
(2012).
Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Litracy and Culture, Seventh Edition.
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc. Bovee C.L and Arens (1986).
Contemporary Advertising.
Illinois: Richard D. Irwin, Inc. 49 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Dominick, Joseph R, (1993).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication.
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc. Nwosu, I.E.
and A.D. Nkamnebe (2006).
Triple- P Advertising: Principles, Processes and Practices.
Aba: Afri-Towers Ltd. Ozoh, H.C. (1998).
Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON.
50 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 2: WHY ORGANISATIONS REQUIRE THE SERVICES OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Reasons Why Organisations Need the Services of Public Relations 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Some people often wonder why the desire for public relations services do not wane in the face other prevailing disciplines which could offer substituting services.
To such school of thought, journalism, publicity, promotions, and some others could easily take the place of public relations.
But it has not and would not, Nwosu (1996:11).
Public relations provides distinct and unique services which none of those rival fields can offer.
It is, therefore, very essential we acquaint ourselves with justifications for this.
It is then can we as professionals in the field strive to assist its growth, development and sustenance.
Its services will ever be sought, provided public relations offers them with all deserved ethical standard, professionalism, social responsibility and patriotism.
More so, for now, the services public relations render to consumers have no other reliable alternative or substitutes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to:  Appreciate the reasons for the demand of public relations services  See reasons why practitioners should be proud of the profession.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 REASONS WHY ORGANISATIONS NEED THE SERVICES OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Funds available to organizations are hardly earned and so will not be merely thrown away in the name of just getting any kind of service.
Corporate bodies continue to seek for the services of public relations 51 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS practitioners.
It is as a result of the relevance of such services.
Organizations spend on such goods and services that assist them achieve their set objectives, including serving their costumers well, retaining the goodwill and trust of their internal and external publics and being in the favourable disposition of the general public.
These are some of the vital benefits organizations derive from public relations for which the former will continue to go for such services and hence the huge amount on it yearly: $11.0 billion was spent on public relations globally in 2010, Baran (2012:308).
The following are the reasons for such continuous patronage: 1.
Countering Adverse Publicity Very often some organizations are inundated with avalanche of negative publicities orchestrated intentionally or inadvertently by rivals, either vying for market share of the industry or just to sinisterly and maliciously damage the integrity and reputation of the corporate entity.
In this circumstance, conceited and effective public relations are the only means of refuting, rejoindering such negativities, setting the record straight and reclaiming the battered corporate name and image.
2.
Withstanding Competition Survival instinct is among the factors that unleash stiff competitions among rival organizations in every industry.
A veritable instrument for outwitting rival competitors is, no doubt, sustainable public relations.
It provides the professionally packaged communication and event/actions necessary for eliciting and retaining customers and their patronage, thereby rebuffing the negative implications of competitions.
3.
Sensitivity and Adherent to Ethical and Social Responsibilities Values Without public relations, most organisations’ attitudes and activities would be antithetical to the tenet of ethics and social responsibility.
Public relations advises and counsels them to stick to these in their long term interest, engaging on things like corporate social responsibility and philanthropism, portraying organisations as responsible, responsive and rational corporate citizens.
4.
Responding to Inevitable Crises Public relations services are indispensable to organizations which must respond to unsolicited conflicts and crises, like natural disasters, accident within or without the organisation and which directly and indirectly affect them.
Labour unrest, industrial accident, plane crashes, famine, epidemics, 52 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS flood, drought, and boycott of corporate goods and services are instances of the problems organisations must require public relations to contain.
5.
Consumers Growing Awareness and Consciousness On daily basis, citizens acquire more and more education, enlightenment and socialization.
These change their value systems and product demands, influence their perception of things and consumption behavior.
As well public relations is the appropriate tool for addressing these challenges.
Professionally and persuasively packaged communication strategies are critical in handling such repeatly occurring issues.
6.
Acting in Line with Global Trends It will be difficult to imagine any reputable corporate organisation that would not be take advantage of public relations.
Indeed, making use of their services is currently a global trend no modern organ can afford not to be part of.
7.
Reacting to Globalisation The effect of globalization affect anywhere worldwide, no body or organisation is immune from its influence.
In fact, even local orgaisations have to act globally in order ward off some of the negative implications of the octopus phenomenon.
And surely making use of public relations is a way of providing such protection and shields.
.
International advertising, other forms of communication and more recently the entrant of the social media, have drastically exposed even locally provided goods and services to global competition.
To counter and overcome this, one of the available rival measures, is making effective use of public relations and its strategies.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Of what importance is public relations to organizations?
 Justify why NOUN requires the services of public relations.
4.0 CONCLUSION Public relations services can be linked to oil used in lubricating an engine.
If the engine must operate smoothly and durably, it must be lubricated with oil.
It is in the same vein that public relations works in the life and system of an organisation.
Every level and segment of an organisation requires daily doses of well planned and deliberately packaged communication.
The internal publics: workers , and the external publics, among them customers : consumers, retailers, wholesalers and 53 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS distributors.
They need constant messages of assurances of high qualities, availability, confidence, trust and goodwill.
These messages are conveyed through public relations, and with its cost effectiveness unbeatable, no organisation can afford to miss its soothing effects, for its sustainability.
5.0 SUMMARY Public relations is a true companion of every organisation.
This is almost incontrovertible.
Important now is for future practitioners in the noble field to take advantage of this, to be well grounded in their knowledge of the principles and practice.
One can only make a mark in any field whose study one takes seriously, after all, the days of half-bakery and quackery in the profession is over.
The in-thing now is excellence and professionalism, nothing less.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  How sustainable are the values of public relations to organizations?
 Prove that even newly established organizations need the services of public relations.
 Although it has mass communication programmes and an FM Radio station, NOUN still needs the services of public relations.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Baran, Stanley J.
(2012).
Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Literacy and Culture, Seventh Edition, New York: McGraw-Hill Inc. Nwosu, I.E (1996).
Public Relations Management: Principles, Issues and Applications.
Lagos: Dominican Publishers 54 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 3: FACTORS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE GROWTH OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Reasons for Rapid Growth of Public Relations in Nigeria 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Reading.
1.0.
INTRODUCTION The progress recorded in the field is not totally a surprise to many, for one, it has been in existence since ages.
As a result, if for no other thing, some improvement and growth were expected.
Public relations has being almost a way of life among traditional Africans who cherished and reciprocated goodwill, trust, support and cooperation, as seen during festivities like new yam festivals, marriages, burials, naming ceremonies and even crises resolutions.
Therefore, westernization only added to its modernization, according to Nweke (2001:5-6).
Indeed, colonialism and Christianity were of immense boost to the practice of the profession.
They brought about its capacity building, institutionalisation and proper positioning.
Along the line, too, the entrant of modern communication technologies came as additional impetus to its development.
These media brought about such benefits like convenience, speed, massive outreach, versatility, greater accessibility, among others.
In fact, the entire outlook of public relations practice is totally changed for good.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to;  Understand the factors which influenced the growth and development of public relations in Nigeria.
 Discuss how these factors have affected public relations operations in Nigeria.
55 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Reasons for the Rapid Growth of Public Relations in Nigeria Although public relations practice is inundated by a numbers of challenges, it must also be admitted that it has made some significant progress.
Indeed, the level of its growth and advancement will be best appreciated if we spear thought over its humble beginnings.
There is enormous practical evidence of the practice of public relations by our forefathers, though in its crude form, Nweke (2001:5-6).
This has gone through evolutionary processes and later strengthened by the modern methods brought about by the process of colonialism and westernization.
These have come a long way in progressively shaping the destiny of public relations practice in Nigeria.
Yet, understandably, every progress begets challenges, which when resolved leads to further advancement.
An assessment of the two: the growth and challenges is crucially necessary.
It will expose the inherent interface and the discernable lessons that will further propel development in the enviable industry.
First, the reasons why it is blossoming.
Over the years public relations has flourished in Nigeria and elsewhere as a result of the following factors: 1.
Astronomical growth in global population This has led to a boost in social, business and political organisations and activities at all levels.
The need to on daily basis, through communication, galvanize and cordially relate with the publics and stakeholders has in no small way necessitated greater attention and hence the growth of public relations, Aliede (2005:132).
2.
Growth and development of the media Orchestrated by advancement in science and technology, the level of growth and improvement of the media over the years have been unimaginable and beyond prediction.
The rate of information revolution has been hire-wire and has had overbearing influence, directly and indirectly, on the fortunes of public relations, everywhere, including Nigeria.
3.
Commercial production of goods and services Massive production of goods and services was enhanced by the industrial revolution.
Consequently, articulated and systematic management of information and communication is a necessity if the goods and services 56 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS are to be profitable marketed.
To attain the goal, public relations has some roles to place.
4.
The pivotal role of colonialism Through systemised and bureaucratic management of information, the colonial masters introduced public relations in Nigeria.
It was later entrenched with the establishment of Information Office, Public Relations Department and Ministry of Information, in addition to its further decentralization to regional capitals and other major towns in the country.
5.
The auxiliary role of corporate organizations Pioneered by the then United Africa Company (UAC), these organizations established their public relations departments with which the practiced and groomed pioneer practitioners in the country, Nweke (2001:8) in 1949, UAC started with an information department.
It was transformed into a full public relations department in 1960.
Others like Shell BP, Nigerian Railway Corporation, Cadbury, Leventis, Liver Brothers, among others followed.
6.
Consistent government interest in business control and regulation This it does through legislations and taxations.
Public relations afforded means of mutually relating with the government, but also ensuring the adherent to ethical standards and social responsibilities, Aliede (2005:133).
7.
Enhanced opportunities for training public relations personnel There is steady growth in the number of universities, polytechnics, monotechnics and similar institutions for training public relations and mass communications practitioneres.
From Jackson School of Journalism, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, in 1960, today there are over 200 places for training public relations practitioners nationwide.
8.
Improved education and enlightenment of the citizenry With the citizens’ higher level of education, enlightenment and socialisation, organisations no more take them for granted.
Somewhat, some strategic and more efficient way of information management through public relations are put in place in order to sustain mutual relationship and patronage.
57 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 9.
Adherence to ethics and social responsibilities Organizations do not do this today just to run away from government harsh responses, but also to present themselves as responsible, legal and civilized corporate entities.
Such high moral standards like fairness, honesty, integrity, truth and objectivity are accorded high premium in their own interests.
Openness, probity and accountability are as well adhered to for the same purpose.
10.
Occurrence of certain events Some of these events do have colossal and often collateral effects on organisations and individuals.
They, therefore, inevitably require public relations responses in order to lessen and abate their consequences and implications.
Instances include disasters and calamities like plane clash, famine, floods, epidemics, volcanic eruptions, earthquakes and the like.
The December 26, 2004 Tsunami in Asia is a good illustration of this.
These entail massive public relations activities and events in order to manage their effects, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:3) and Aliede (2005: 134).
11.
Improved standard of practice Enhanced training, better training facilities and availability of overseas technical programmes have all combined to provide more quality skills, expertise, ingenuity and experience for public relations practitioners.
12.
Institutionalisation of regulation and control With Decree No.
66 of 1990, the Federal Government empowered and charged the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations with the responsibility of controlling and regulating public relations practice in all its ramifications in the country.
It is then no more business as usual; standard and excellence became the watch words of all practitioners who have no choice than to comply with the rules and regulations in their professional interest, national growth and development, as Aliede (2005: 132) notes.
SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE Justify the rapid growth of public relations in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION Growth, advancement and progress are natural follow-ups to dedication and committed performance in any field.
It is a welcomed development in the profession as we look forward to members assisting to overcome any 58 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS existing challenges.
It is only that which will ensure the pragmatic consolidating of the gains made over the years.
Practitioners should be apprehensive of the intensive competition between public relations and its sister disciplines.
It is even more so, at a time most and more herculean problems face mankind and which the profession is looked up to as the only source of credible prescription.
Instances include climate change, other environmental challenges and crisis management.
It, therefore, underscores why all public relations students should adequately prepare for effective practice in the field.
5.0.
SUMMARY You are being exposed to all the relevant angles, principles practices, techniques and procedures of public relations in order to be able to practice professionally in a veritable field.
All these are necessary arrangements in order to be ready for the more recent and challenging arm and branch of public relations: environmental public relations, an area very crucial for the survival of every living organism on earth.
6.0.
TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Distinguish between the local and external factors which influenced the accelerated growth of public relations in Nigeria.
2.
Show how intending practitioners can proactively take advantage of these in preparing for their effective performance.
7.0.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E. (2005).
“Repositioning the Public Relations Personnel for Reputable Practice” in Nwosu, I .E., J. E. Aliede and Ifeyiwa Nsude (ed.)
Mass Communication, One Course, Many Professions, Enugu: Prime Targets Ltd. Nweke, Okechukwu (2001).
Public Relation:; Concepts and Strategies; Enugu; Hamson Publishers.
Nwosu, I. E and V. O. Uffoh (2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu: IDS/ UNN.
59 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 4: QUALIFIES OF A PUBLIC RELATIONS PRACTITIONER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Qualities of a Public Relations Practitioner 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further/Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Just as public relations is related to so many other disciplines, so is its practitioner expected to have relatively very good knowledge of all those vast areas and fields.
And when this is the case, the public relations practitioner is bound to have versatile knowledge, skills, ingenuity, expertise, creativity, innovation and experience that would literarily amount to jack all trade and master of all.
It is under this scenario that he would be able to effectively and efficiently manage any public relations programme or project irrespective of its magnitude.
Still, the wide range of qualities and attributes expected to be possessed by the public relations personnel need not instill fears into intending practitioners.
Fundamentally, the primary requirements are education and training.
Other characteristics are acquirable in the course of education, training and retraining and on the job.
Public relations practitioners’ acquisition of these qualities is in the overall interest of the possessors, as with them, they effectively measure up with professionals in other fields like Law and Medicine.
Equally, they would also be able to stoutly safeguard their professionalism, integrity, image and reputation.
As well, they are able to protect their jobs in view of the current saturated labour market all over the world.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to:  Understand the various qualities of a public relations practitioner.
 Explain when the public relations personnel are well equipped to perform his duties.
60 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.1 QUALITIES OF A PUBLIC RELATIONS PRACTITIONER The public relations practitioner may go by any name.
It is all dependent on the chosen and preferred nomenclature.
Any of these may suffice: public relations manager, public affairs manager, corporate affairs manager, public relations officer, press secretary, information officer, protocol officer, among others.
The place of work may be the decider.
However, irrespective of his name or title, overall, most important is the practitioner’s output and contribution to his agency, the profession and the society.
Doing this in turn depends on his qualities and attributes.
On the other hand, of the numerous positive characteristics the public relations professional must possess, a lot depends on his level of training and education.
This is Aliede’s (2005:139) view when he opines, that “the more qualifications they earn, the more equipped they would be to appreciate the values of honesty, honour, trust, goodwill, integrity, reputation, confidence and credibility as critical requirements of a public relations personnel”.
The practitioner should be a jack of all trades and master of all.
Wherever he is working and whatever his position, the personnel will do better on the job, understand his organisation and appreciate its goals, objectives, programmes and policies, if he possesses the needed qualities and credentials, some of which include: Adaptable Accommodating Authoritative Certificated Communicating Controlling Committed Coordinating Creative Credible Charismatic Confident Computer literate Dedicated Directing Educated Ethically-oriented 61 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Evaluating Expert Effective Efficient Friendly Flexible Fulfilled Fair Foresighted Honest Humourous Ingenious Innovative Intelligent Inquisitive Knowledgeable Kind Knowledge of budgeting Legally-oriented Liberal Logical Managing Membership of NIPR Monitoring Motivating Mobilising Negotiating Organising Observing Planning Patient Patriotic Pragmatic Respectful Recruiting Researching Resourceful Skill-seasoned Sociable-strategic Speaking Supervising Superintending 62 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Trustworthy Trained Tolerant Trustful Tactful Versatile Vibrant Write Wise.
Of all these many features, education is the very first and most fundamental.
In fact, it is the basis and prelude to others.
Nwosu (1996:213) reaffirms this when he said “Education is indeed the foundation to professionalism in virtually all occupations.” 4.0 CONCLUSION The unit has treated a number of issues that are pertinent to assisting practitioners to effectively render public relations services to their clients.
Among these are the attributes and qualities of public relations personnel.
A versatile field, public relations practitioners equally are required to have good knowledge of all these areas to be able manage programme.
It is no wonder it is necessary you are acquainted with these in order to be adequately prepared and grounded not only on the principles, practices, but also on the technicalities, modalities, tactics, techniques and strategies, and more importantly acquire those needed features that will enable you to apply them.
5.0 SUMMARY As naturally acquirable as some of these characteristics are, yet they can be imbibed by a keen and seriously-minded practitioner.
As well, to that personnel who merely regard his person as a meal ticket, many years in the field may not guarantee the possession.
You are, therefore, advised to take every step and element of this profession with every seriousness it deserves.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain at least ten of the qualities required of a public relations practitioner.
63 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why are education and training central to the qualities a public relations practitioner must possess?
2.
Of what importance is the possession of these qualities by public relations personnel?
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E (2005).
“Repositioning the Public Relations Personnel for Reputable”, in Nwosu, I. E., J. E., Aliede and Ifeyinwa Nsude (ed) Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets Ltd. Nwosu, I. E. (1996).
Public Relations Management: Principles, Issues and Applications.
Lagos: Dominican Publishers 64 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS MODULE 3 PUBLIC RELATIONS AND THE ENVIRONMENT: THE INTERFACE AND IMPERATIVE OF ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1: The Nature of the Environment Unit 2: The Destructive Challenges Facing the Environment Unit 3: Need for Environmental Public Relations Unit 4: Conceptual Exploration of Environmental Public Relations.
UNIT 1 THE NATURE OF THE ENVIRONMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 People, Animals and Plants: Components of the Environments 3.2 The Non-living Components of the Environment.
3.3 The Synergy that Result in Natures Balance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In his magnanimity to mankind, providence bequeathed to him the entire ecosystem.
In its fullness as created, the earth has in abundance all needed for man’s sustenance: plants, soil food, sea food, water air sunshine, darkness, among others.
However, with time, man was to run into trouble over handling of some the embodiments of his gift: the environment.
The over, misuse and misapplication of these resources has today unfortunately resulted, not only in their depletion, but also in the erosion of the harmony, tranquility and opulence hitherto handed over to mankind.
Initially, the actual cause of the disequilibrium were not known, taken seriously or noticed to be as destructive as they are.
Hence, it if any measures were taken to contain them, they could best be described as belated; to a little too late, tokenish.
Today, the full negative impact of missing the environment has dawned on many; hence the current frantic measures man is adopting and adapting in order to resolve the crisis.
Several programmes have been used to no avail.
Hence, among the recent methods in use is environmental public relations seen as more friendly and sustainable means of pressing and conserving the environment, the concept is catalytic, all and embarrassing and affectionate.
To, therefore appreciate and understand its application, it is pertinent we start with an exploration of the environment.
65 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you will be able to:  understand the meaning and components of the environment  explain the non-living elements of the environments in addition to positive and negative c contributions.
 grasp the relationship between the components of the environment.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 People, Animals and Plants: Components of the environment God wrapped up creation, Genesis 1:28, with a hefty change to man to “Be fruitful and multiply; fill the earth and subdue it; have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air and over every living thing that move on the earth”.
Within the proclamation too, is a classification of the environment, which Hornby (2005:490) describes as “The natural world in which people, animals and plants live”.
These are not the only inhabitants, components or elements that make up the environment.
However, they be regarded as special in view of their functional roles towards the perpetuation of the earth as the creator directed.
Away from the historian and religious points of view, these three organic elements not only constitute the major components of the earth but, but also make its habitation lively and subsistable.
This emanates from symbiotic relationship between them, as well as the vibrancy and potency of their habitation.
Among these, man was given special features that enabled him to dominate and control others as charged.
His knowledge, intelligence and subsequent experience and skills broadened his strengths, opportunities responsibilities and control over others.
Indeed, man’s subsequence progress, emancipation, growth and development were direct culmination of his planned deliberate and effective application of these features.
Any close examination of the sequence or genesis of man’s advancement through agricultural, industrial, information technological revolutions, shows his vivid manipulation of all other providential resources toward attainment of greater heights, the intensity and veracity of this improved and increased with time, as a result repeated application, dexterity and specialisation, Another constituent of the environment are plants.
Occupying sizeable proportion of the earth surface and water plants of various categories and sizes are sources of variety of means of meeting the needs of man.
They came under numerous classifications like monera, for instance bacteria; protists, eg.
protozoa and algae and fungi, for example Molds and mushrooms.
However more sizeable pants include: Flora Flowers 66 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Grasses Shrubs Trees.
In various forms, plants provide man with several of his needs among which are basic necessities of man including: Food Fibres Fruits Seeds Drinks Beverages Medicines Ornaments Fuel Wood Tools Protection.
Next of these tripartite living occupants of the environments are animals.
Animals possess most of the features of man.
Indeed they are of more developed level than plants, they are various classifications.
They are, however, multicellular, with specialized complex cells according to Mader (1998:10) and include: Sponges Worms Insects Fishes Amphibians Reptiles Birds Mammals.
3.2 The Non-Living Components of the Environment These non-living elements of the environment include the physical environment.
They beneficially coexist with plants and animals in relationship called ecosystem.
Hornby (2005:466) describe it as “all the plants and living creatures in a particular area considered in relation to their physical environments”.
Biggest in size of physical environment is water.
This said to occupy about 70% of the earth surface and come in various sizes, among them: Streams Lagoons Springs Deltas Lakes Rivers 67 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Seas Oceans Rain.
More of the non-living parts of the environments are: Land/soil Hills Mountains Plateaus Deserts.
Others are non-living and non-physical and include air, sky and darkness.
The mutual co-existence of all these components: plants and living creatures along side other elements of the environment is a necessity for man’s continuous sustenance on earth.
That symbiotic relationship is what we call ecology.
Such collective co-existence has been necessitated by nature and it has come to stay for ecological balance to be maintained.
3.3 The Synergy That Results in Nations Balance Man’s persistence habitation on earth is predicated on the maintenance of this natural balance and synergy already in place.
It is the realisation of this that has led to global interest in efforts to more fully understand the way these relationships work.
Already, global bodies, governments and even professional bodies now serious engage in researches and studies in order to know how to maintain this delicate balance.
For now, it is clear that man, animals or plants can not successfully exist alone without the other.
He depends on plants for food.
The plants on the order hands produce fresh air we breadth.
The plants also depend on the soil for their food and water.
Death animals also decay to form manure for plants.
The full realisation of this relationship has necessitated man’s present conscious efforts to put measures in place with which to ensure that the balance is unaltered.
Altering it is not in man’s interest.
It is a direct call for self-destination.
The full realization of his relationship has necessitated efforts to put measures in place with which to ensure that the balance is unaltered.
Altering it is man’s interest.
It is a direct call for self-destruction.
Incidentally, events that tend to change the balance do not often deliberately take place.
Some are parts of the measures man engage in other to survive.
Examples include mining of minerals, fishing, clearing forests for farming and urban development and producing of goods in factories.
But we now know that these legitimate and necessary activities assault inimical to safeguarding this important balance.
Some of these include deforestation, emission of fumes that deplete the ozone layer, among other, hence, there must be some consented deliberate and planned measures 68 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS to assist nature ensure the equilibrium.
Failure to do this is a call for self-extinction and man would have no other person to blame.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What are the main components of the environment?
 How do non-living elements of the environments influence the existence of living components?
CONCLUSION It is essential we understand the complexity of nature and man’s relationship with his neighbours: plants, animals and the physical environment.
It is a delicate balance man has to live life of caution aspect and responsibility.
As the most intelligent of all creations and if his existence is to be prolonged he has to be more prudent and judicious in utilising other earthly recourses.
It is, however heart warning to realise that globally, there is growing awareness coupled with calculated measures to maintain this critical and crucial balance.
Past of this consciousness and endeavours towards altering this has led to the emergence of environmental public relations.
It aims at enhancing environmental awareness, consciousness and enlightenment so as to maybe even living a participant in the crusade to save the east from extinction.
Aliede (2001:22).
4.0 SUMMARY The study of this course is awake up call and every of its student has to see it as such.
It may take long for the message to be well circulated; yet important is that it has begun.
Therefore, it is more of a moral duty for everyone to assist in this mobilisation.
Fundamentally, we must start with clear understanding of the nature, composition and relationship among components of these components elements.
It is then we would be in better position to be part of the fight and insist it is won.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
How and why do man, animals and plants need each other in order to continue to exist?
2.
Of what relevance are the elements of the physical environment in sustaining man’s existence on earth?
3.
Are any roles expected of man in man maintaining the balance necessary to sustain the earth?
7.0 REFRENCES AND FURTHER READING Aliede, J. E, (2001).
“Environmental Public Relations and the Ecological Imperative of the New Millennium”, Journal of Public Relations Management, Vol.1, No.2 pp 18-22.
Bible, Genesis 1: 28.
69 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Hornby, A.S, (2005).
Oxford Advanced Learners’ Dictionary of Current English.
Oxford University Press.
Mader, S. S. (1998) Biology.
Sixth Edition.
Boston: WCB McGraw-Hill.
70 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 2 THE DESTRUCTIVE CHALLENGES FACING THE ENVIRONMENT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Destructive Challenges Facing Environment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Before now, it was an intensive global controversy whether global warming was real or a makeup of some fly-by night scientists who are seeking recognition.
By then, whenever it came up in interactional forums, particularly some of those industrialized nations which constitute the major sources and causes of the phenomenon either dismissed it with a wave of hand or treated it with levity.
The result was absence of major decision or mustering of the political will to frontally face the courage.
That was the ugly situation before 1972, when an international conference in Stockholm, Sweden, Aliede (2001:22) and Nwosu (1996:141) harped on the consequences of man’s misuse of the environment.
That United Nations Conference on the Environment was unequivocal on the calamity awaiting mankind if environmental issues were swept under the carpet.
In any case, that pessimism was then.
For now, the issue of global warming is at the front of burner of international discourse.
For instance, in 2005, the Kiyoto Protocol/Convention on global warming was already in place, underscoring the high premium now placed on the issue, according to Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:4).
Yet, all these seem to be too little too late, in view of the enormity and consequences of the damage already done by the monster, global warming and other environmental destructive activities, as we will discuss below 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: 71 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS ● Identify some of destructive challenges facing the environment.
● Understand the direct and indirect aftermaths of these environmental impediments.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Destructive Challenges Facing the Environment The destructive forces facing the environment are numerous as their consequences are diverse.
They, therefore, will best be explored in a classification manner, as follows: 1.
Man-induced destructions Although man is the primary victim of environmental degradation, he is main source of such destructive tendencies, as noticeable in following areas: a. Over-population and depletion of global resources Following God’s change to man to take control of the earth and multiply, global population started with two people and today we are counting over 7 billion people on earth, with a United Nations Population Division’s “revised projection for a more crowded earth in 2100”.
According to TIME (2013: 6), by that year, global population will hit 10.509 billion.
The fear is that the growth rate is out of proportion with the resources required for human substance.
Worst still, the rate of consumption of available resources is not at par with the growth and multiplicity of such resources.
This possesses danger to mankind, Mader (1998: 387) and Solomon, Berg and Martin (2002:1138).
The adverse effects of uncontrolled population growth and density on global resources have been overwhelming, notwithstanding the positive impact of science and technology.
They are evident in the areas of food scarcity, soil degradation, epidemics, availability of clean water, decent accommodation, among others.
Therefore, it is not only weighing on available resources, but also devastating the natural environment.
b.
Improper dispersal of wastes Man’s recklessness and care-face attitude has led to another form of environmental abuse and degradation This is in the form of improper dispersal of wastes, which later constitute environmental hazards.
Examples include poor savage treatment and disposal; improper disposal of among others.
These bad habits lead to 72 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS health risks like epidemics, killing of fishes, birds and other marine animals, besides blocking of drainages and gutters, thereby causing flooding and erosion.
c. Mining oil and gas exploitation Man’s activities while mining minerals and exploiting oil and gas constitute major environmental hazards.
Wastes and acidic water that come from mining and drilling fumes and flaring of gas and pollution, as well as spillage from oil are serious danger to the soil, crops, fishes, birds, coral reefs and other aquatic and marine life.
They, therefore, mar and jeopardize people’s means of livelihood and destroy sensitive and rare animals and species.
Infant, careless handling mining and oil/gas exploitation is a major source of danger to environmental sustainability.
The crisis of the Niger Delta of Nigeria is a clear example of the havoc these can create.
d. Transportation The fumes, gases and oil which come from vehicular combustion are another sources danger to the environment.
They damage streams and other sources of water, and marine life, make the air unsafe for man and add to the problem of ozone layer depletion and green houses gasses.
Also, in the process of transporting oil, spillage do occur in seas and oceans, causing severe damage to marine and aquatic life, sources of drinking water and fish for consumption.
e. Industrialisation This causes two-pronged damages to the environment.
Firs,t to acquire and clear lands to site industrial establishment, plant and factories entail the damaging and destruction of the ecosystem where lost land, plants often water, cannot be regained.
Besides, these plants’ operation goes with fuel combustion.
This is singularly the highest sources of air pollutions.
According to Mader (1998:473), Nitrogen oxide, Carbon oxide, Photochemical oxidant, Hydrocarbon organics, Halogens and Aerosols are the major sources of air pollution.
These damage the biosphere which we rely on for fresh air, pure and drinkable water, food, fibres, medicine and other needs of life.
It is, in addition, the main source of depletion of the ozone layer.
73 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS e. Domestic appliances Such gadgets like refrigerators, fire extinguishers, insecticides, among other products produce emissions, fumes and gasses injurious to human, animal aquatic heath and also dangerous to the soil, water, atmosphere, indeed, the entire environment.
Their uses need to be regulated and controlled in order to lessen their harmful effects.
f. Urbanization Man’s efforts to expand his place of habitation, modernize his living and enhance his comfort are achieved, often, at great cost.
Urban development requires the expansion of frontiers of settlements, which is only possible with the cleansing of lands and forests.
It is, therefore, the direct sources of soil erosion and degradation, deforestation and damage of sources of water like river, lakes, delta, lagoons and their sensitive and raise marine lives.
Deforestation, of course, is the lead course of depletion of the ozone layer, which in turn causes climate change.
h. Ignorance, Superstition, Religion and Culture.
These are another set of sources of environmental degradation.
Most of the havoc done to the environment, especially by the uneducated and uninformed is as a result of these.
To these people, God or nature has the capacity to replenish whatever they damage.
As sources of creation no damage can be done to them, they believe.
The same perception guides their attitude towards child bearing, hence uncontrolled and unguided disposition to procreation.
2.
Natural Causes A number of environmental damages result from natural causes some examples of which include: a.
Soil Erosion and Degradation These phenomena rip off the upper surface and often the humus part of the soil where crops grow.
Such damages impair food cultivation, animal husbandry and other profitable and gainful uses of the soil.
b.Earthquakes Earthquakes destroy lives and property and lead to the displacement of survivors.
It has wiped whole households, communities and settlements, sometimes claiming lives as many as hundreds of thousands.
The December 26, 2004 Tsunami in South Asia was triggered by an undersea 74 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS earthquake which caused massive tidal sea waves.
Its effects reached as far as North America and parts of Eastern Africa, Nwosu and Uffor (2005: 3).
It claimed over 86,000 lives across the region.
c. Volcanic eruptions These can cause calamities stretching to thousands of kilometers away.
Behind their trials are usually deaths of people roasted or buried alive, properties damaged, unclean air and polluted water, as well as destroyed farmlands and animals.
d. Storms, cyclones and hurricanes These are heavy and massive water movements usually very destructive and catastrophic in nature.
The entire environment is at their mercy: lives, buildings, infrastructure, public utilities, transportation and communication facilities, among others.
One of their results is floods, soil erosion and degradation, and annihilation of coasted and marine life.
The Katrina which had devastating effects in the United States of America is recent example.
e. Droughts and desertification These are characterized by dry land and absence of life plants.
Although the former may be caused by prolonged absence of rainfall, the later is caused by uncontrolled desert encroachment.
Their consequences are famine, epidemics and loss of farm soils to sand storm and the likes.
These are some of the most catastrophic and disastrous natural phenomena challenging man and his environment.
f. Fire outbreaks Though this can be caused by man through carelessness attitudes, fire outbreaks can result from natural causes.
This has been the case in parts of the world, like in USA, Australia, Spain and Italy.
The damages are usually incalculable: loss of lives, property and vital components of the environment, like cultivatable part of the soil.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Name and explain five man-made causes of environmental destruction  Show how man in an attempt to improve his living standard destroys the environment.
 Discuss five ways natural causes can damage the environment.
75 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 4.0 CONCLUTION The unit is elaborate and clear on the destructive forces facing mankind and the environment.
These sources of calamities are divisible into two categories man-and natural.
Ironically, most of the man-induced causes emanate, often, from man’s quest to improve his lot on earth, such as transportation, urbanisation, mining/drilling and oil explosion and industrialization.
Others, however, are not wholly his cause, like over- population (as he attempt to obey providential directive) and ignorance, superstition, illiteracy, religious and cultural practices also constitute sources of these problems inimical to environmental sustainability.
Yet, other causes classifiable under natural causes include erosion, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, droughts, desertification, storms and fire outbreak.
They are numerous as they are diverse and very destructive to level they are capable of short-circuiting man’s existence on earth.
Consequently; drastic measures are required to forestall such disastrous end.
Happily, globally, the awareness and enlightenment is spreading as can be seen in various international conferences on the subject.
Yet, more concerted and strategic measures are needed to consolidate these efforts and further mobilize fellowship.
A crusade is needed and should involve all living beings, who too are affected and effected by these chains of events with their severe consequences on man and his environment, if left unchecked.
5.0 SUMMARY Of all measures and strategies that must be taken in order to withstand environmental hazards, Environmental Public Relations stands tall.
It is, though relatively novel, a widely acknowledged and recognized as a very affective and efficacious instrument for checking environmental challenges.
Crucial, therefore, is the persistent creation of more awareness and consciousness, using all the known techniques, tactics, skills and expertise the course and field offer to check the cankerworm.
That will pave the way for a conducive friendly and subsisting environment this and generations to come can peacefully and happily exist in without fear of its extinction or total degeneration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
To what extent is man responsible for some of the forces attempting to terminate his existence earth?
76 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 2.
Of those forces possing environmental hazards, which ones are natural and most devastating?
3.
How does man’s quest to modernize his settlements constitute source of environmental problem to him?
4.
Is the level of the knowledge of how to sustain the environment and environmental public relations now to an extent it can adequately assist successful fight against environmental destruction, and lead to the correction of the damages already done to the environment?
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E (2001).
“Environmental Public Relations and the Ecological Imperative of the New Millennium” Journal of Public Relations Management, Vol.
1, No.2, pp.
18-22.
Nwosu, I. E. (1996).
Public Relations Management: Principles, Issues and Applications.
Lagos: Dominican Publishers.
Nwosu, I. E. and V. O. Uffoh (2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu; IDS/UNN Mader, Sylva S. (1998).
Biology, Sixth Edition.
Boston: WCB McGraw- Hill Solomon, E. P., L. R. Berg and D. W. Martin (2003).
Biology, Sixth Edition, Vols.
1and 2.
California: Brooks/Cole.
TIME (2013).
July 29, p. 6.
77 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 3 NEED FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Far-reaching Effects of the Rot and Damage 3.2 Environmental Public Relations as the Answer 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The destruction of global environment consisting of ecosystem, ecology and biosphere, the life sustaining parts of the earth and the hope of man’s continuity as living being, is grinding to a crescendo, unless serious measures are put in place to check it.
Already a number of efforts have already been tried to no avail, hence the need to adopt a new programme.
It is here that the place and relevance of Environmental Public Relations comes in.
Concern for the environment has been heightened and brought to the front burner of global discourse.
By now it is no more controversial an issue, including that of global warning.
And in the words of Aliede (2001:18): The heat the debate is generating has made every country developed on still developing sensitive to the vulnerability of the adverse effects of the scourge.
Hence, the need to mobilize and sensitise individuals, groups, agencies and governments to the importance of global awareness and education on environmental preservation, sanitation, conservation and protection.
This is very crucial as its degradation and degeneration do not allow for sustainable development.
The above statement says it all.
It is a task that must be done and the tool for tackling it is Environmental Public Relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Appreciate the full extent environmental destruction.
78 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Appreciate the principles and practice of Environmental Public Relations.
 Explain why Environmental Public Relations is sustainable to for restoring environmental dignity.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The far-reaching affects of the rot and damage: Apart from the need to create awareness and consciousness of the evils of environmental destruction, it is also very imperative to highlight and emphasis the magnitude of the damage already done and the danger it further possesses to mankind.
Perhaps, this will motivate the necessary action that will eventually lead to enduring solution to the crisis.
It, therefore, suffices to showcase some of these areas where the damage has been most pronounced: 1.
Causes rise in diseases and epidemics Poor and illegal disposal of industrial and domestic wastes constitute serious danger to public health in the short and long run.
These include hazardous items like fertilizers, pesticides, metals and plastics.
These come in tons of trash into rivers, seas and oceans.
Equally, offshore mining and oil drilling are other sources of contaminants constituting health risks and destroying sources of water supply.
Solomon, Berg and Martin (2003:1226) note that disease-causing viruses and bacteria from human swage contaminate fish and seafood, thereby posing threat to public health.
This brings to mind the controversy which trailed the origin of some epidemics, pandemics and diseases, like HIV/AIDS.
2.
Extinction of animals and plants It is also instructive to note that human activities are responsible for the extinction of some plants and organisms.
Typically, over exploitation of resources, like hunting and pollution are also responsible for this.
Mader (1998:485) is categorical on the adverse implications.
Her word: Human activities are on the verge of causing a massive extinction of species and the loss of ecosystems throughout the biosphere.
The loss of biodiversity will most likely be detrimental to humans since they depend on the natural environment for raw materials, food, medicines, and other goods and services.
79 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.
Food scarcity Adverse climate conditions have hampered farming activities in some parts of the world.
Notably, floods in Asian regions, like Bangladesh and Philippine have incapacitated farming activities and affected food supply.
In the case of the horn of Africa, Ethiopia and Eritrea were hit by droughts.
These negatively affected farming and naturally resulted in severe famine.
These unfriendly weather conditions are known to be aftermaths of climate change which is a consequence of man’s misuse of the environment.
4.
Floods On yearly basis, various parts of the world witness severe floods with destructive and devastating consequences.
Elsewhere, it is either cyclones or hurricanes, with similar cataclysm.
The United States’ experience with Katrina in 2008 and 2012’s?
is untold.
Lives as well as property worth millions of Dollars perished.
The same thing has been the case in parts of Europe, Caribbean, Southern Africa and even Nigeria last year.
All these are results of climate change following man’s unguided alteration of the environment.
Minimizing these and their negative effects means taking calculated measures that will drastically reduce the events or the inducing-factors.
They cannot be lessened by mere wishful thing, but by efforts geared towards stopping deforestation, desertification, improper disposal of human and industrial wastes, among others.
The complexity and dynamism of these challenges make them everyone’s concern.
Everyone, individuals, organizations, corporate bodies and governments are all stakeholders in finding lasting solutions to this protracted problem.
3.2 Environmental Public Relations is the Answer The expanse of public relations is best understood when we appreciate that Environmental Public Relations is just an arm, a branch of the former.
On the other hand, the significance of the later is best realized if we assess its importance visa vice the enormity of the problems it is solving or junta- posed on the responsibility reposed on the field.
Prof. Ikechukwu E. Nwosu, the guru and pioneer scholar of this specialty field in Nigeria, underscores the high premium accorded this arm of public relations.
As he puts it in Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:37), it “is a specialized area of public relations and reputation management practice that focuses 80 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS on how best to apply relevant public relations principles, practices, strategies, techniques, models and tactics in an effort to properly manage environmental issues, problems and projects and so ensure the achievement of sustainable development objectives at the communal or local, national, regional and global or international level”.
Justifications are further adduced for the emergence of this rare arm of public relations, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:37 - 39):  Utter neglect of concerted strategies with which to handle environmental issues and management.
 Those earlier engaged in the exercise did so on ad-hoc and half – hearted basis.
 Prevailing gap in knowledge in public relations studies and practice.
 Need to produce enough body of knowledge relevant to handling Environmental Public Relations issues and management.
 Required to tackle issues of life and death patterning the critical problems of the ecosystem and man’s existence.
 It is furtherance to the concern the UN, agencies, nations, governments non-governments organizations are already showing by spending billions of dollars in managing the scourge.
Aliede (2001:21) earlier echoed the same view: “The full realization of the obvious consequences of leaving the environment to degenerate led to the popularity of the new concept of environmental communication and Environmental Public Relations.
To underline the importance, the United Nations came up with the United Nations Environment, Programme (UNEP), a body charged with “global environmental monitoring and regulation.” At home, Nigeria set the Federal Environments Protection Agency (FEPA) “to monitor and coordinate the efforts of individuals and corporate bodies geared towards a harmonious environment, Aliede (2001:21).
Nwosu (1996:141) observes that the UN Conference “drew attention to the many unfortunate consequences that arise from human and corporate neglect or abuse of the environment.
It warned that the environment can no longer be taken for granted and that deliberate concrete actions should be taken by individuals and corporate organizations to conserve, protect, renew and maintain a healthy environment for continued human survival, 81 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS growth and sustainable development.” With this, the urgency of finding solution to the crisis is laid bay, its energy exposed and where to go for the panacea clearer.
If it was earlier in doubt the right prescriptive recommendations to make as the right answer to this crisis, it is no more so.
Environmental Public Relations has all it will take to arrest this scourge and further lay the concrete foundation on which sustainable environment capable of enduring mankind’s sourjourn on earth will be laid.
Required is the systematic, meticulous, effective and professional application of the principles, practices, tactics and strategies of this arm of public relations.
The goal can be attained by following these steps: a.
Through systematic, periodic and detailed research and environmental scanning, identify and analyse the environmental problems facing the community, organization, corporate body, government or country.
This is the diagnostic stage and is critical to eventually finding an enduring solution to it, as Aliede (2001:20) and Nwosu (1996:144) note.
b.
Through appraisal and review of the source of the problem, will assist in using the available data to make correct forecasts and predictions necessary for a lasting solution, Nwosu (1996; 144).
c. As professional managers, we are then in very good position to counsel and advice the management on its responsibility of getting the environmental problem tackled.
d. Leaning on Black’s (1989) insistence that public relations should ensure sustained harmony with the environment, Nwosu (1996:145) further recommends that environmental public relations strategies should be used to make organisations ensure consistent and positive contributions towards “an environment in which man is at “harmony” with his natural environment by maintaining constant environmental equilibrium or helping to combat anything that will disturb his environmental equilibrium”.
The activities and actions of organisations must be in tandem with social, economic, political, cultural, religious, community, geographical, technological and other environmental factors relating to the organ.
82 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS e. Additionally, in line with the tenets of public relations all the activities of the organisation, especially as it relates to environmental issues and problems, must be based on truthful, accuracy, fair and objective information and communication.
All the publics and stakeholders, including the community, employees, customers, shareholders and the media must be given the correct information of the crisis, Nwosu(1996:146) insists.
f. More importantly, all strategic and persuasive measures must be taken to ensure that the chief executive officers throw the weight of the management behind all the efforts.
He must back all the policies, programmes, projects, campaigns and activities morally and financially.
These are crucial to their full and effective implementation.
There should be no half measures.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  With well discussed three examples, show the high level of damage already inflicted on the environment due to its poor usage and management.
 What are those qualities of environmental public relations you believe are capable of revising the trend?
 Enumerate and explain those strategies applicable in environmental public relations.
4.0 CONCLUSION Man cannot just continue to bemoan the destructive inflictions method by individuals and corporate organisations to the environment.
It is high time solutions are found to it.
Already, the needed policy frameworks are been formulated.
This is evident in the interest being shown by all relevant stakeholders, the United Nations, non-governmental organisations, industrialised nations, multinational companies, research institutions and even individuals.
With these in place, needed now is the harmonisation and articulation of these efforts and the application of relevant public relations measures in order to engender the necessary tools for solving the problem on sustainable basis.
Environmental public relations has all the required potentials and efficacies to put permanent measures in place with which to guide, maintain, improve, preserve and protect the environment in the interest of posterity.
83 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS SUMMARY Relatively a new concept, field and practice, a lot needs to be done to put environmental public relations in the right perspective, where it will full perform its responsibilities.
Its knowledge and application has to be massificated.
For now, a lot of CEOs of corporate organisations and heads of governments are yet to fully appreciate and understand its meaning, roles and advantages.
The need enlightenment and education start here.
Every student of the noble field should be ready to not only acquire knowledge of the practice, but also be prepared to spread, teach and impact others with and about it.
Conserving and protecting the environment is a collective duty, hence everyone should be involved and it is only the informed who would care to be involved.
5.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Show in clear teams how man’s misuse and misapplication has put the environment in a state of jeopardy.
2.
What are those attributes of environmental public relations you think are capable of correcting the damages?
3.
Discuss the salient strategies required and applicable in environmental public relations for remaking the damaged environment.
4.
Show how cardinal the chief executive officer is in successfully implemented environmental public relations programme.
6.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E. (2001).
“Environmental Public Relations and the Ecological Imperative of the New Millennium”, Journal of Public Relations Management, Vol.1, No.
2, PP.
18 – 22.
Solomon, E. P., L. R. Berg and D. W. Martin (2003).
Biology, Sixth Edition, Vol.1 and 2, California: Brooks/Cole.
Mader, S. S. (1998).
Biology, Sixth Edition, Boston: WCB McGraw- Hill.
Nwosu, I. E. and V. O. Uffoh (2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principle, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu: IDS/UNN.
84 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Nwosu, I. E. (1996).
Public Relations Management: Principles, Issues and Application.
Lagos: Dominican Publishers.
Black, S. (1989).
Introduction to Public Relations, London: The Modino Press Limited.
85 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 4 CONCEPTUAL EXPLORATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction.
2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Further Exploration of Some Key Related Terms 4.0 Conduction 5.0 Summary 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Environmental public relations is relatively a new field and practice.
Accordingly, knowledge of it is yet to be enough to elicit the required fellowship and apostleship the needed enlightenment and education.
It is no wonder that among public relations specialists and practitioners are those who have little or no knowledge of the new concept.
It, therefore, become imperative to widen the scope of spreading the information and knowledge of this sensitive brand of public relations to enable a greater number of people take advantage of its potentials and functions to improve environmental well being.
One of the means of attaining this goal is the intensification of the spread of every information students, lecturers, researchers and indeed the general public need to know about the novel field.
This Unit will be used to further throw more light, explain and elucidate some of the key and related terms and definitions which closely align with the arm of public relations profession.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you could be able to:  Know some of the key terms associated with environmental public relations.
 Explain some of these relevant terminologies.
 Apply the terms in the cause of your practice of the disciplines.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Further Exploration of Some Key Related Terms Some of the key related terms requiring further elimination include the following: Environmental Public Relations Most notable is that environmental public relations is a specialised arm of public relations, whose activities and practice have a lot to do with reputation 86 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS management.
In same vein, according to Nwosu and Uffor (2005: 37) it applies ‘’public relations principles, practices, strategies, techniques, models and tactics’’ in managing environmental issues, problems and projects, all geared to attaining sustainable environmental goals at the level of organisational operations.
Although it uses existing principles, practices, strategies, among others, which are already applicable elsewhere, they are applied in novel and special way in handling sensitive and delicate issues of environmental sanitation, protection, control, regulation, improvement, transformation, preservation, conservation, promotion, maintenance, renewal, management and sustainability.
To attain this objective, all resources at organisational disposal are judiciously, effectively and skillful harnessed and applied towards the set goal.
In the long and short teams, the effectiveness, functionality and livelihood of the membership, inhabitants, publics or stakeholders of any community or organisation is contingent on the cohesion, mutual benefits and evidence of perpetuity there in.
The management must at all time work towards the attainment of these ideals if its host, publics and stakeholders must continually lend their support and cooperation towards the success and growth of the organisation.
On the other hand, the absence of such cordiality and perhaps organisational management’s insensitivity to it is surely a recipe for anarchy, crises and retardation.
Hence, though profit making is the primary goal of every business organisation, it must not be made at the expense of sustainable environment.
There must always be some budget appropriation for consistently taking care of the environment.
This should be apart from other strategic measures for ensuring mutual relationship with the host community, neighbors and employers, like Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).
Indeed, environmental public relations is a novelty, an innovation and a timely intervention for handling the conservation and preservation of the fragile components of man’s environment.
Everyone contributes to environmental degradation.
Every man’s intentional and unintentional action and inaction are squarely responsible for this.
Therefore, the most reliable solution to it is the involvement of every Tom and Harry in environmental public relations activities.
This augments and complements organisational managements’ programmes, projects and policies and gaurranties the achievement of the set environmental sustainability objectives of the organisation or community.
Community This concept consist of either the host or/and neighbours to an organization.
The community could be source of land, raw material and other resources the organisation requires in order to function grow and be sustained.
Reciprocally, the organisation should show interest in the welfare and wellbeing of the community.
This could include involvement in their social and cultural activities, provision of amenities and most importantly showing enduring interest in the environmental sustainability of the area.
These wards off immediate and future crises which could be costly and to the detriment of the organisation.
87 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Environment According to Hornby (2005: 490), this is the natural world in which people, animals and plants live, It can, therefore, be associated with the biosphere which he also describes as “ the part of the earth’s surface and atmosphere in which plants and animals can live“, Hornby (2005: 136).
This explanation underlines the critical importance and role of the environment to man’s existence.
With his food, water, air, shelter, protection and information/communication directly and indirectly derived from the components of the environment, man has no choice than to take special care of these elements.
And that is the tacit and cardinal message and principle of environmental public editions.
Ecosystem This is the connectivity of all plants and living creatures in a particular area considered in relation to their physical environment hereby (2005:466).
That is man, animals, plants, soil/land, source of water and other small and invisible living organisms.
The balance or equilibrium within, this system must be maintained if posterity is to subsist.
The consciousness of this must be with man at all times.
The only being created in God’s image, man has the onerous task of consolidating and sustaining life on earth, through planned deliberate and enduring programmes of actions as is the dictates of environmental public relations.
Ecology “The relation of plants and living creatures to each other and to their environment,” Hornby (2005:465) says.
Such relation we already know is symbiotic and mutually beneficial.
Our existence is hinged on this sustenance, a role that should be the concern of everyone, in accordance with the tenets of environmental public relations.
As a fragile and delicate setup, it similarly takes sensitive arrangement as encompassed in the principles, practices, tactics, strategies, techniques among others of environmental public relations to sustain the synergy.
Environmental Campaign Stakeholders No matter the level the crusade is championed, local, regional, organisational, national or international level, apart from the internal and external publics of the implementers, stakeholders is another critical component of those to be involved in other to achieve lasting results.
It is an embodiment of all major key players in an enterprise.
It is their interests, ideas, viewpoints, decisions, and actions which determine the success of any campaign, policy and programme.
For instance, stemming the consequences of the 2012 flooding in various parts of Nigeria needed the collective efforts of many stakeholders.
Some of them include: the Federal Government; State governments; Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA); National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA); the counterparts in states and the 88 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS FCT; donors/philanthropists; multinational companies, the Red Cross, Hospitals, the Police, FRSC, Fire Service, NSCDC, NYSC, Army, Navy, Air Force, local governments, volunteers, among others.
Under the difficult circumstances unleashed by the floods across the country, this group of people worked in partnership to find solutions to the sufferings, devastation and destruction to lives and property, in order to find succour and pacification to the victims and all concerned.
The amplification of these terms and concepts is with a view to widening the knowledge and application of items crucial to the attainment of the goals of the practice.
This is very essential since environmental crusades should involve everybody.
Hence, the earlier knowledge horizon of all is widened the more likelihood of better understanding and fuller participation in any of such programmes in any area.
This will also aid in enhancing the body of knowledge available in the new discipline.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain the meaning and functions of environmental public relations.
 What are the similarities and differences between ecology and ecosystem?
 Underscore the relevance of stakeholders in any environmental public relations exercise or campaign.
4.0 CONCLUSION All measures and avenues must be engaged to broaden public and practitioners’ knowledge, world view and awareness of environmental public relations.
This is very imperative following the low level of its awareness among even professional public relations practitioners.
This, of course, stems from its relative newness and dearth of data as well body of knowledge in the field.
These terms are key to fully acknowledge and undertaking of the intricacies and applications of the practice.
Especially, their knowledge and usage is a sure prelude to getting everybody involved in a discipline that should be everyone’s responsibility.
5.0 SUMMARY The crucial necessity of environmental public relations is no more in doubt.
Required now to improve on the gains already made is to spread the news and gospel and by so doing enhance capacity and expertise in the profession.
We cannot over-emphasise that realising the goal is a collective responsibility.
Everyone must be part of it, including you.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give an exhaustive definition of environmental public relations, showing the relationship between it and public relations.
2.
Of what benefit is the clear understanding of these keys teams to potential practitioners in the field of environmental public relations?
3.
Defend the relevance of stakeholders in any environmental public relations campaign.
89 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER RESIDENCE Honby , A.S.(2005).
Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary of Current English, Seventh Edition.
London: Oxford University Press.
Nwosu I. E. and V. O. Uffoh(2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu: IDS/UNN, 90 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS MODULE 4: ACHIEVING ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY: PUBLIC RELATIONS AND COLLECTIVE ACTIVISM Unit 1: Organisational and Collective Approach to Environmental Public Relations Unit 2: Public Relations and Communication as Tools for Attaining Environmental Public Relations Goals Unit 3: Some tools of environmental public relations Unit 4: Achieving Environmental Public Relations Objectives: Expanding the Scope of the Pursuit Unit 5: Challenges Facing Environmental Public Relations UNIT 1 ORGANISATIONAL AND COLLECTIVE APPROACH TO ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Organisational Structural of an Environmental Public Relations Agency 3.2 All Hands on Deck; The Collection Involvement of Relevant Partners 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUTION With time, every student of environment public will be working in an agency or else.
You need to have knowledge of and understanding of the structural organisation of such a setup.
Like any other organisation, whether an agency or something else, a public relations or environmental public relations organ is organised and structured in a way to assist its functions, flexibility and existence with a system.
The structural organisation defines its work, functions and importance with and within the dynamic system.
Accordingly, anyone who must play a role with the unit and/or system, should, first understand it so as to be able to fit in properly and too be able to eventually act actively and 91 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS effectively.
This is more so in a novel setup where a number of things are still evolving.
The unit, therefore, provides us with information and knowledge on who does what, with what effects within the ever functional structure.
It is one among the whole lot of segments we must have knowledge of in order to fully end up as seasoned environment public relations practitioners.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Understand the organisational structure of an environmental public relations agency or organisation.
 Explain the specific roles of individual staff of such an agency.
 Appreciate the inter-structural relationship between the one unit/department and the other within the organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.1 The Organisational Structural of an Environmental Public Relations Agency Primarily, the roles and functions of public relations and environmental public relations are the same.
It is also the same thing with their agencies.
However, it is known and understood that some distinctions do still exist in view of the areas of peculiarities between the two.
Accordingly, corporate bodies, especially those which are prone to facing environmental crises should structure their public relations units in a manner it would be equipped to effectively respond to such matters.
In other words, though it handles other public relations issues, it is organised and equipped to promptly tackle environmental issues like erosion, oil spillage or industrial fire outbreak, should they occur, as seen in the diagram below: Figure 3: Corporate Environmental Public Relations Agency President (CEO) Director EPR Technical Liaison Liaison Press Corporate Community Service Environmental Donors/NGOS Relations Communication Relations Agencies 92 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Redesign of Dominick (1993: 370) The traditional corporate public relations agency as presented by Dominick (1993: 370) can be restructured to adopt and adapt an environmental public relations agency.
Such an amendment will see an addition of three critical units focused on environmental matters.
These are to take charge of technical equipment for handling environmental crises; liaison, environmental agencies, e.g., FEPA, FEMA, SEPA, SEMA, among others; and liaison, donor agencies and Non-Governmental Organisations and other related bodies.
The additional units and their functions are clear reflection of the roles and functions of such relevant bodies.
In line too, at environmental public relations consultancy level, such an agency should as well differ from the traditional consultancy agency.
This is minding that its major focus is handling environmental issues and crises.
Its structure and organisation, therefore, reflects this.
This new concept can also as well be adapted from Dominick’s (1993: 370).
Accordingly, the restructuring and amendment takes cognisance of the focus of the consultancy agency on managing environmental issues and crises.
It is still manned by a chief executive officer who goes by any name, chairman, president, name it.
Under him are heads of departments or directors, with subordinates under them.
The structure is as below: President (CEO) Technic al Liaison Liaison Creative Research PPuubblliicciittyy Accounts Administration Service s Environmental Donors Services AAnndd Agencies NGOs MMaarrkkeettiinngg Harnessin g Outreaches Proposal Editorial Polling Merchandising Accounts Personnel Assembli ng Packing Services Executive Maintenan ce Partnership Quality Audiovisual Information Sales Finance promotion Assumer Media Retrieval Legal 93 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Redesign of Dominick (1993:370).
The additional three departments function as follows: 1.
Technical services: This is involved in harnessing and assembling requisite equipment, maintaining and servicing them in readiness for their time of need.
2.
Liasion: environmental agencies: This department acts as a link, connection and bridge with environmental agencies at all levels: local, regional, national, and international.
As well, it reaches out and partners with similar organisations.
3.
Liasion: Donors and Non-Governmental Organisations.
Its main function is to work in partnership with donor agencies, philanthropists and Non-Governmental Organisations.
In the process, they explore areas of common interest.
The department while doing that packages proposals and ensures the quality of outputs to ensure their high standards as items that goes to external publics and stakeholders.
When the functions are combined with the roles of the other traditional departments, a platform is in place for the effective handling of any environmental public relations.
Confidence is in place for safe guarding the image, reputation and integrity of the agency.
It can with every assurance, at least, near-perfectly handle any environmental problem that may arise, to the joy and happiness of clients and customers.
3.2 All Hands on Deck: The Collective Involvement of Relevant Partners The complexity and complication of environment issues is already clear and known to everyone.
To achieve its ultimate aim of environmental healthiness, a lot is involved, just as care must be taken to ensure that the right resources are employed.
This is not surprising minding the wide spectrum of areas to be covered.
In the words of Nwosu (1996: 145), it involves maintaining “…harmony with its economic, political, social, cultural, community, technological, geographical and other environmental factors”.
As well, the organisational structure of the environmental public relations agency can also give some insights into the magnitude of people to be 94 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS involved.
First, a team of professionals in various departments and units of the agency among them experts and professionals in research , publicity, marketing, sales promotion, accountancy, administration, finance, law, editorial, creative and electronic media.
Others are employees in secretarial, technical, security and maintenance.
External publics are also involved.
They include the media, community, governments, financial institutions, customers, pressure groups and international groups.
Still included are stakeholders, comprising another set of important individuals and group whose roles and views are crucial to the success of any undertaking.
Among them are: environmental protection agencies at local regional, national and international levels (like UNEP, FEPA, FAO, voluntary groups like NACCIMA, MAN), related government agencies like the Police, Army, Navy, Air Force, FRSC, Red Cross, NSCDC, hospitals and associationS, Nwosu and Uffoh 92205:120) such as the Nigeria Conservation Foundation (NCF), Nigeria Environmental Study/Action Team (NEST) and Friend of the Earth, among others.
Mentions must also be made of donors, philanthropists at all levels.
Indeed, it is a web and every relevant public or stakeholder must dutifully play his/her/its roles (a sort of the so called drop of water which eventually makes up the ocean), if we are to talk of a successfully implemented environmental programme.
All needed imputes and resources must be applied according to their right dosage, at the right time and the appropriate place.
If we talk of collective responsibility as a necessary element in attaining a feat, this is one of the places it is most required.
It is not so just because of the sophistication and complexity.
Some other factors account for that.
From conceptualization to completion/evaluation, the processes involved in any single environmental public relations campaign, programme or project are many and so requires many hands as well, for proper handling.
In same vein, enormous resources, including financial and expertise are needed for tackling the so many stages involved, if successful completion of the project must result.
95 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Once the project is on, a lot of high expectations are accompanied.
Consequently numerous specialised, technical and ordinary hands are involved so that the colossal financial investments as well as clients and public expectations do not go down the drain and are not in vain respectively.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What are the similarities and differences between the structure of a public relations agency and an environmental public relations agency?
 Graphically present the organizational structure of an environmental public relations agency  Why does the implementation of an environmental public relations project involve a lot of hands?
3.1.2 CONCLUSION The organisational framework and structure of any organ, to some extent, determines the level of its functionality, flexibility and responsiveness to public aspirations.
This in mind’ an environmental public relations agency has to be organised and structured in such a manner that it would be positioned to carry out its cardinal responsibility of ensuring environmental sustainability.
The redesigned and restrictive organ of the agency clearly has room for all necessary components of needed paraphernalia for the full realisation of the set objectives of the agency.
The current composition, as opposed to that of public relations, takes into cognisance of the unique roles it is expected to plan.
It is then the expectation that with the effective performance of other personnel of the agency, which would employ creativity, innovation, skills, ingenuity and experience the goals of environmental sustainability, would be attained.
5.0.
SUMMARY The restructuring a public relations agency is to enable the achievement of the goals of the new concept and discipline.
The injection of new departments (units) into the system aims at rejuvenating the organ to enable it effectively handle the special responsibilities.
As practitioners and potential practitioners, we need to have good knowledge and understanding of the structure and the roles associated 96 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS with it.
By so doing, we are getting equipped, for not just effective, but also judicious application of available scarce resources.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare are contrast a public relations agency and an environmental public relations agency.
2.
In what ways does the structural organisation of an environmental public relations agency influence its functions and quality of its outputs?
3.
Justify the involvement of so many hands in the implementation of an environmental public relations programme.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dominick Joseph R. (1993).
The Dynamic of Mass Communication.
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc. Nwosu, I. E. (1996).
Public Relations Management: Principles Issues and Applications.
Lagos: Dominican Publishers.
Nwosu, I. E. and V. O. Uffoh (2005), Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu: IDS/UNN.
97 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 2 COMMUNICATION AS TOOL FOR ATTAINING ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (EPR) GOALS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Adhering to communication Principles in Environmental PR 3.2 Road-Map to Effective Handling of Crisis Communication 3.3 Communication as the Nerve Centre of Crisis Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION To say the least, communication is the pivot of either public relations or environmental public relations.
Indeed, on the average, communication conservatively put, constitutes about 85% of all public relations and environmental public relations processes and activities.
Therefore, the effectiveness of environmental public relations undertaking is highly contingent on the communication inputs, their packaging and presentation.
It is to underscore this fact that this theme is given a special treatment as is the case here.
It aims at stressing the high premium that must be placed on communication if the objectives of the environmental public relations must be attained.
The audience of environmental public relations comes from divergent backgrounds and orientations and yet we aim at making them look at the environmental issue from the same perspective.
We can only succeed in doing this if we use such strategic tools of communication like appeal, persuasion, so as to convince and lure the audience and target market to receive and make use of the conveyed messages and ideas.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Understand the principles of communication as needed in environmental public relations.
 Learn the required communication process needed in crisis management.
98 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Appreciate communication as the nerve centre of crisis management.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Adhering to Communication Principles in Environmental Public Relations The umbilical linkage between environmental issues, on one hand and Biblical events/creation, on the other, perhaps, illustrates how serious a matter they are.
The spate of environmental problems facing mankind a sort of stem from man’s unbridled and irresponsible enforcement of the injunction to take charge of the earth, control it and multiple.
In Aliede’s (2012:37) view, the charge “was not without responsibility.” Continuing, he notes that “He (Adam) was enjoined to, as he pleasured, comforted and gratified on the succulent, juicy, vast and abundant natural resources providence bequeathed to him, evolve mechanisms with which to manage, preserve, maintain and sustain them.” Ignorantly or arrogantly, man ignored the other side of the coin of the instructions to him and for this “a costly price is hanging on him and he is paying dearly for it.
Most of man’s actions do not enhance, but rather hinder his sustenance on earth.” And this must be reversed.
Okonkwo (2008) is supportive of this.
His words; “But replenishing the earth is a task that must be done, especially in our time(s) when the consequences of any neglect are instantly felt in the availability of food, shelter, educational facilities, climate change, etc.” From the above, clearly the issue of environmental preservation and conservation bothers on attitudinal and behavioural change.
It has to do with successfully revising the negative dispositions, attitudes, behaviours, viewpoints and opinions exhibited by man and which are inimical to environmental sustainability.
And when the problem is that of attitude and behavior, communication is the right prescription and answer.
Any solution to this kind of problem “substantially must be communication- driven”, Aliede (2012:41) insists.
Accordingly, required are packages with sufficient communication components, which must be, not only be comprehensive, but also professionally conceived, planned, packaged and implemented.
This is in readiness for the massive mobilisation of the people and will provide the 99 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS opportunity for the utilisation of persuasive and motivational strategies as is the case in other social issues like HIV/AIDS, child labour and trafficking, prostitution, kidnapping, among others.
In affecting changes in people’s attitudes and behaviours, these measures are tested and trusted, according to Ozoh (2005/2006:59) and Aliede (2005:107-109).
UNESCO (1980:14) explains communication as an “exchange of news and messages and an individual and collective activity embracing all transmission and sharing of ideas, facts and data”.
Communication is at the centre of man’s progress and perhaps, that is why Aliede (2012:22) describes it “as grease for lubricating the society.
It is, as well, a strategic ingredient for ensuring informed, rational, reasonable and responsible decisions at individual, collective, organisational and governmental levels.” Whatever is chosen as the methods, techniques and tactics for tackling the environmental problem, whether the stage is preventive or curative, care must be taken in planning, producing and packaging the communication components.
It is the key determinant of the eventual success or failure of the entire programme and campaign.
To start with, there should be strict adherence to the principles of communication as already spelt out by experts.
These are dos and don’ts in the process of communication.
Their application ensures that the attention of the audience is attracted, it is retained, and the message is consumed, understood, assimilated and made use of.
In other words, it leads to action.
Impliedly, the campaign programme or project has such compelling influence that leads the target audience to strictly behave in accordance with the intents of the programme, for instance, now disposing domestic and industrial wastes properly and responsibly or stopping dumping of refuse into gutters and drainages.
Examples of these communication principles are those of Lawson (2006:142-143).
He calls them checklist of print and broadcast communication and they are as follows: 1.
The written word is still important and, in some cases, essential.
2.
Strive for accuracy and brevity, but tell the readers/listeners what they need to know.
3.
In all forms of communication, clarity is a principle aim.
100 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 4.
Always plan what you are going to say and stick to it.
5.
Keep to the point and be logical; it aids the reader because he or she avoids reading the material.
6.
“A picture can be worth a thousand words.” 7.
Make good use of modern technology, but use it appropriately.
8.
When using the telephone, try to image the effect you are having on the person.
9.
The telephone can distort your voice; speak clearly and at a reasonable pace.
10.
In all forms of communication, you are trying to inform; don’t leave your readers/listeners more confused than they are.
As guides and sources of direction, these checks should be watchwords while writing environmental public relations campaign communication messages.
That is a sure way to ensure audience-friendly and effective communication that will make the desired impact on the targeted audience.
In their own version they call “The seven C’s of communication”, Cutlip, S. M, A. H. Centre and G.M.
Broom, through Skinner, von Essen and Mersham (2001:77) showcase these as means of attaining result-oriented communication.
They are: 1.
Credibility: communication must embody acceptability, believability, lead to confidence and high regard.
2.
Context: it must reflect the realities of the environment.
Should lead to participation and should reaffirm and support the prevailing social setting.
3.
Content: the message should be meaningful in line with receiver’s value.
It should be relevant, rewarding and gratifying.
4.
Clarity: conveyed message must be in simple, in clear themes, slogans or stereotypes.
There should be one voice and no ambiguity.
5.
Continuity and Consistency: there should be repetition for penetration.
This with variation to “factual and attitudinal learning.” 6.
Channels: use conveyance vehicles familiar to the audience, if this must be massive accessibility and receptability.
7.
Capability of the audience: Audience’s condition should be put into consideration, their affordability, availability, habits, reading ability and level of knowledge and socialisation, all affect the effect and impact of communication, communicator must note this and put it into consideration while packaging their messages.
101 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS These guidelines and principles should be meticulously adhered to in planning, scribing, producing and packaging environmental communication messages.
They are crucial if the envisaged goals must be achieved.
3.1.3 Road-Map to Effective Handling of Crisis Communication Most of the challenges encountered in environmental public relations relate to crisis.
Although some of these may be at their formative stage or merely require preemptive measures to forestall their severe implication, nonetheless, vigorous, committed and concerted effort is always needed in order to achieve positive result.
And this must be the case if the expended resources must not go in vain.
Skinner, von Essen and Mersham (2001:287) describe crisis as a “critical situation, a turning point.
It is that moment of drama when hostile forces are at the height of their opposition.” They classify crisis into three: immediate, emerging and sustained.
The following are yet another classification from them: Acts of God, Mechanical problem, Human error and Management decision, action, or inaction.
Whatever form or shape it takes, crisis most often affect people negatively whether it is earthquake, storm, famine, epidemic, withholding of workers’ salaries or industrial action, people are always at the receiving end.
Faced with such situation, the affected and effected are always desperate in search and anticipation of solution.
When available, such solution can come from anywhere, any source.
However, some specialised organs are always relied on to provide information on such situations.
They are the media, organs of specialise professionals in information and communication management; it is no wonder crisis managers rely on the media for conveying their messages.
Centre (2003:339), however, insist that such communication must result from well developed crisis communication plan.
Effective crisis management, Skinner, von Essen and Mersham (2001:288), say relies on these four key factors:  Well defined corporate policies and procedure of crisis management.
 Giving responsibility to staff to involve in tackling such crisis.
102 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Training and preparing staff to handle communication during such crisis situation at all necessary avenues.
 Establishing communications system and equipping it.
Environmental public relations agency provides a ready-made and stand- by organisation and structure for handling environmental crisis, notwithstanding the level.
Within, it is a team of experts who are trained and versed in the knowledge, skilled and professionalism for managing environmental issues and crises.
To accomplish such herculean tasks, these practitioners are always prepared and ready with all it requires to handle such head on.
This assists to nip the crisis in the bud and/or drastically minimize the adverse implications of the crisis.
Preparing for crisis means planning for it well ahead of time.
Skinner, von Essen and Mersham (2001:289) provide a blueprint for such planning as follows: 1.
In the event of crisis, “assume the worst possible scenarios.” 2.
Prepare crisis management plan.
3.
Be ready to show concern for the incident.
4.
Categorically position the corporate body involved as the right source of information on the incident and available remedial measures.
5.
Make effective use of the media in containing the situation.
6.
On the onset, set up a crisis/emergency control room, well staffed and equipped to manage the crisis.
7.
Maintain telephone hotlines to handle torrents of calls that will accompany the crisis and man them with seasoned personnel.
8.
Involve the affected, effected or opponents involved in the crisis management and control.
9.
Also involve “objective, authoritative bodies” in the crisis management.
This will elicit credibility.
10.
While communicating, be meek, modest, truthful, fair, accurate and concerned.
11.
Understand the audience and their grievances and expectations.
12.
When making the crisis plan, involve outside independent consultancy services.
At the end of the crisis, review, appraise and assess the situation and be able to draw some conclusions from the lessons and experiences.
The above guidelines once more explicitly show one thing, the coveted position of communication in crisis management, no matter 103 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS the place it occurred and indeed the level of such manifestation.
In fact, this cannot be over-stressed.
3.3 Communication as the Nerve Centre of Crisis Management For result-oriented environmental public relations, the communication components equally must be managed effectively.
This in Aliede’s (2012:22) view is “the skillful application of planning, expertise, artistry, experience, creativity and innovation in the organization, control, coordination, directing, monitoring, supervision and evaluation that must take place for the communication set objectives to be attained.” This should include media choice.
Selecting suitable and appropriate media for conveying environmental public relations is cardinal to the success of the campaign.
To Aliede (2001:20) that is the only way to reach the diversified publics the communication messages are targeted.
Ozoh (2001:13) while quoting Moemeka (1990) is too in support of using the right media, especially when the aim is to affect change in people’s attitudes.
As he puts it, the right mass media should change from acting as channels of distribution and transmission to becoming “vehicles for participation, expression and discussion,” so as to “become effective in inducing culture-bond of rural inhabitants to strive to change their attitudes to life by accommodating new and enhancing ideas that would improve the quality of their lives”.
Undoubtedly, the pivotal position of communication to successful environmental public relations is established.
Perhaps left is how best to apply this powerful weapon in attaining the objectives of environmental management restoration.
Here are some guidelines provided by Centre (2003:322) for ensuring effective application of communication in crisis management: 1.
Anticipate the unexpected.
Always be expectant of such crisis as accident, robbery, fire, flood or strike.
2.
Institute and practice a crisis communication plan.
Be ready ahead of any crisis.
3.
Train employees.
Get personnel ready for the task ahead.
4.
Only one spokesman.
Not two or more, just one talking to the media and the public.
5.
Get one more spokesman if the crisis spreads externally, as it should if it is environmental.
He will be handling the publics involved or affected by the crisis.
6.
Don not speculate.
Do not guess the cause, cost or anything else.
Be sure to say what you know.
Other measures recommended by Aliede (2012:43) include: 104 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS a. Utilizing suitable communication designs, layout, frameworks, visuals and plans to attract sufficient attention.
b.
Include drawings, paintings, pictures, illustrations and actualities for attention retention among the less literate groups.
c. Use aesthetics, functional, original, creative, innovative, dynamic and local measures to appeal and motivate comprehension of the messages.
d. Apply proportionally, balancedly, contrastly, clearly, simply, harmoniously and rhythmically packaged communication elements for informative, educative and entertainment goals of the audience.
e. Communication messages’ copy should be also professionally crafted and wordsmithed as to contain the best qualities that would be inviting, luring and conveying the intended messages.
f. Message should lead to awareness, knowledge, desire, and conviction, making the audience to read, views, or listen to the message and eventually act according to the goal of the message.
Environmental problems are partly social issues requiring carefully, professionally and effectively packaged communication.
Besides the need to succeed in solving the problem, some other factors make this necessary.
Among them are: justifying the huge investment of the clients, the high level of competition in the industry, globalisation, and safeguarding the professional reputation and image of the practitioner and agency.
Indeed, well packaged communication messages is the greatest assurance and source of confidence that the project or programme will succeed.
That is why it is the ultimate goal of every practitioner and agency.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Give highlights of some principles of communication required in environmental public relations.
 Show the interface between communication and crisis management.
 Justify communication as the life wire of crisis management.
 Prove that well packaged communication is the root of success in environmental public relations campaign execution.
4.0 CONCLUSION No society would want to persist with attitudes and behaviours adjudged to be negative.
Efforts are usually put in place for the reversal of such ugly tendencies.
In case of acts antithetical to environmental harmony, measures too are put in place for attitudinal and behavioural change.
It is almost unanimous that when social issues and change are involved, communication becomes the dominant component of the 105 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS instrument for the campaign.
This is because of the qualities of communication as a vehicle for conveying feelings, ideas, messages, information, opinions, and values among others.
As a strong and powerful weapon, communication, when effectively and professionally applied, is a potent tool for social influence and effecting change.
Besides, with its persuasive appeal and motivation, communication is capable of reversing behavioural patterns that are inconsistent with societal expectations.
Therefore, with expert proofs of these efficacies, it is now a conviction that if applied in line with the principles and guidelines, communication is the right instrument for restoring the healthiness of our environment.
5.0 SUMMARY Like the treatment of diseases, tackling environmental problems through environmental public relations requires dedication, commitment, strict observation of the rules, among others.
Pertinently, therefore, practitioners must study and understand communication principles and guidelines.
Understanding them is crucial to their effective application and realisation of the intended objectives of such campaigns.
The necessity for understanding them and their effective utilisation is very obvious.
Among them, the invested resources and clients’ expectations have to be justified, competition has to be outwitted, and image and reputation safe guarded.
This in mind, the result is the forceful outing of campaigns with the end ultimately leading to successes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Name and explain at least 10 principles of communication relevant to environmental public relations.
2.
Compare and contrast Lawson’s and Skinner et al’s principles and guidelines of communication, pointing out their merits and demerits.
3.
Present communication inputs as the right tools for crisis management.
4.
What is the suitable ways communication should be packaged in order to be effective tools for environmental transformation?
106 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E. (2001).
“Environmental Public Relations and the Ecological Imparatives of the New Millenium” Journal of Public Relations Management, Vol.1, No.2, June, pp.
18-22.
Aliede, Jonathan E. (2005).” The Challenge of Responsible P Practice of Professional Advertising in Nigeria”, in Nwosu, I. E, J.E.
Aliede and Ifeyinwa Nsude (ed) Mass Communication: One Course, Many Profession, Enugu: Prime Target Limited.
Aliede, Jonathan E. (2005/06).
“An Evaluative Case Study of the Application and Misapplications of Communication Strategies in Managing Environmental Issues and Problems In Ebonyi State, Nigeria”, The Nigerian Journal of Communications” Vol.
4,No.
1 and 2.
Aliede, Jonathan E. (2012).
“Communication Approach to Finding Solution to the Quagmire of Vital Statistics and Civil Data Acquisition/ Management for Nigeria’s Development” in Aliede, J.E (ed.)
Today’s Readings in Mass Communication: Issues, Insights and Perspectives.
Enugu: Prime Targets Ltd. Aliede, Jonathan E. (2012).
“An Assessment of the Application and Role of Communication in the management of the Labour and Federal Government Face-Off Over the Removal of Fuel Subsidy” Journal of Contemporary Communication, Vol.
1, No, 1 pp.20-39.
Centre, Allen H. and Patrick Jackson (2003).
Public Relations Practices: Managerial Case Studies and Problems, Sixth Edition, New Delhi: Prentice- Hall of India Ltd. Cutlip, S.M, A.M. Centre and G.M.
Broom (1994).
Effective Public Relations, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall UNESCO (1980).
Mary Voices, One World: Communication and Society, Today and Tomorrow, Ibadan/ Paris: Ibadan University Press/UNESCO.
Lawson, Ken (2006).
Businessbuddies: Successful Communication.
London: Axis Publishing Limited.
107 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Okonkwo, I. C. (2008).
Address Presented to Participants in the Multi-Sect Aliede, Jonathan E. (2001).oral Workshop on the Vital Statistics and Civil Registration, Organised by the Centre for Population Studies, Imo State University, Owerri and the National Population Commission, at Owerri, February 14.
Ozoh, H. C (2001).
“Knowledge, Attitude, Practice and Behaviour (KAPB) Studies in Public Relations for Community Development,” Journal of Public Relations Management, Vol.
1.
No.2, June.
Skinner, C. L., von L. Essen and G. Mersham (2001).
Handbook of Public Relations, Sixth Edition, Cape Town: Oxford University Press.
Moemeka, Andrew (1990).
“Mass Media, Communication and Rural Development: Towards Effectiveness of Development Messages” in Lai Oso (ed.)
Communication and Rural Development in Nigeria, Abeokuta: Millennium Investments Ltd. 108 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 3 SOME STRATEGIC TOOLS OF ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (EPR) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Some Environmental Public Relations Strategic Tools 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Environmental issues are delicate matters and as such require special tools for their treatment.
The sensitivity of the components is such that only unique and often unusual kind of treatment will solve them.
Accordingly, to effectively tackle them, the deployment of district strategic tools becomes necessary.
These are tested and treated tactical public relations apparatus capable of getting to the roots of the problems in order to solve them once and for all.
Public relations strategies are action inducement driven mechanisms formulated and verified by experts and therefore prescribed for application in handling environmental issues and similar cases.
They are suitable, appropriate and capable of solving the crises.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify public relations strategies applicable in resolving environmental public relations crisis  Understand the functions and efficacies of the strategies.
 Identify specific environmental public relations cases where the strategies can be applied.
3.1.1 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Some Environmental Public Relations Strategic Tools Full appreciation of the enormity of the crisis will enable a better understanding of the problem.
It will also ginger the seriousness that will motive a collective answer and action against the octopus.
109 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS At a time it was still doubtful if environmental problems were real, world senior scientists, among them noble laureates from 70 countries and numbering 1680, on November 18, 1992, according to Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:123), resolutely warned world leaders of the stress the earth was undergoing.
In their words, the level of tampering with world’s, web of life and environmental damages through deforestation, species loss, among others, would result in catastrophic disasters.
To them, the threat is real and only emergency measures can avert such destructive consequences on what they called one life boat (the earth).
And no nation, rich or poor, industrialized or not, can escape the calamity, they insisted.
Another group of concerned scientists, this time, the United States National Academy of Sciences and the Royal Society of London came up with a joint report on the same issue.
To them, population growth and man’s activity on earth over-weight the capacity of science and technology to sustain the planet and mankind.
Poverty and uncontrollable environmental degradation was bound to escalate.
They, therefore, called on man to rethink over his activities and concept of development, Nwosu and Uffoh (2205:124).
These warnings, further researches and of course already clearly manifested destructive global phenomena with the large scale tolls on the environment, perhaps, have convinced doubting Thomases.
This can be seen in this opinion of Grunwald (2013:17).
“The respectable American Centre has recognized that climate change is not only real and man-made, but also a genuine emergency.
The scientific evidence has become too stark to indulge denial or dithering.
The earth is hotter; Arctic ice is melting at a terrifying rate; staid institutions like reinsurers and the CIA are sounding dire warnings about rising seas and extreme droughts”.
Do these authorities need to say more?
The gravity of these realities and revelations, which are overt and overwhelming, calls for emergency, concreted, deliberate, planned, systematic and sustained efforts for preempting the impending doom.
It is with a view to collectively dealing with the crisis that this field and profession, Public Relations, articulated, formulated and presented some schemes and approaches as its own contributions to the urgent and important fight to keep the earth habitable.
110 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Some of these are borrowed from inter-related disciplines like marketing and management, among others.
Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:46) justify this by saying that “Since environmental public relations is a holistic management process, its practice must extend far beyond the normally recognised boundaries of public relations theory and practice, especially in terms of its philosophy, strategies, techniques and mode of applications”.
Below are some of such strategies: 1.
Societal Marketing Strategy To Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:46), this is a marketing philosophy.
It uses corporate social responsibility and/or community relations in steering corporate bodies to assist their communities and the society.
With these, they showcase themselves to the communities and the public as responsible, responsive and reliable corporate citizens, thereby endearing themselves to their public (stakeholders) 2.
Social Marketing Strategy This is different from societal marketing.
It is more of a marketing strategy, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:46), and mainly used in marketing non- profitable “goods, services, ideas and institutions.” Examples are environmental issues and problems.
3.
Demarketing Strategy Demarketing is that another marketing strategy.
It is applied in stopping the consumption of harmful goods and services.
Instances are cigarette, marijuana and unacceptable behaviours: same sex relation, prostitution and polluting the environment through improper disposal of wastes, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:47).
4.
Relationship Marketing It entails the cultivation and maintenance of good relationship “with customer, distributors, supplies, retailers and stakeholder” of an organization, which results in mutual understanding.
It is an off-shut of customer relatives, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005, 47).
5.
Human Resource Management Strategy It is a style of managing an organization in which the result is absence of in-human treatment and exploitation of the employee.
In addition, the personnel are motivated to maximize resources in attaining environmental public relations goals, according to Nwosu and Uffoh (2005, 48).
111 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 6.
Total Quality Management (TQM) Strategy This ensures the satisfaction and full involvement, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:48), of the internal and external publics to organizational eco- friendly performance.
It is also called Total Quality Environmental Management (TQEM) 7.
Management Re-Engineering Strategy It requires the redesigning, restricting and transforming or remolding corporate culture through new use or application of corporate resources.
Nwosu and Uffoh (2005, 48) insist it has to be handled carefully as its failure could turn to be disastrous.
8.
Offensive Strategy As Nwosu and Uffoh (2005; 52) put it, the environmental public relations manager has “to take the initiative with his public relations actions and communications.
It is also called proactive strategy or offensive marketing strategy.
9.
Proactive Strategy Actions launched are done preemptively or with a view to first-hand taking advantage of an emerging situation.
10.
Pre-emptive Strategy Though similar to proactive strategy, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:52), observe that pre-emptive strategy is applied ‘anticipatorily’ to counter attack, criticism, danger or an offensive.
11.
Optimistic Strategy In Nwosu and Uffoh’s (2005:52) view, it is used to take advantage of an opportunity.
For instance, resultS presented by research and environmental scanning can be the basis for launching a campaign in order to promptly deal with a crisis.
Nwosu and Uffoh (2005: 52) sum up their position on the application of these strategies by saying that it is “possible by the fact that public relations is a flexible form of communication’…“and in the area of corporate communication, it is becoming increasingly important as a strategic tool and weapon,” they also quote Paettie (1995: 226), as saying.
112 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Name and explain at least five environmental public relations strategies, as well as crisis they can be applied.
 Show areas of similarities which warrant the application of these strategies in both public relations and environmental public relations.
4.0 CONCLUSION As environmental public relations is versatile, it is also needs multi- pronged instruments to handle them.
It is in this direction that these strategies are applicable measures for effectively tackling these challenges.
Some of these strategies are borrowed from related disciplines, like marketing, management, among others.
This shows the flexibility of the profession and lays bare the fact that it is anchored on communication, like its other multi-disciplines.
5.0 SUMMARY This aspect of the course, one may argue, seems technical and often “diversionary” yet, it is a core of the subject and must be understood by public relations students.
That is how to be formidably prepared for the tasks ahead that of using the course as a platform for reversing the near catastrophic doom awaiting mankind as a result of his intentional and unintentional misapplication of the resources bestowed on him by providence, ironically in his quest to better his lot.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a) With detailed discuss, show areas where five of the environmental public relations strategies can be applied.
b) Explain the relationship between any four of these strategies.
c) Why do these strategies come from different disciplines?
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Nwosu, I. E. and V. O. Uffoh (2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu: IDS/UNN.
Grunwald, M. (2013).
”I am With the Tree Huggers”, TIME, March 11.
Peattie Ken (1995).
Environmental Marketing: Meeting the Green Challenges.
London: Pitman Publishing Limited.
113 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 4 ACHIEVING ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS OBJECTIVES: EXPANDING THE SCOPE OF THE PURSUIT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Key Objectives of Environmental Public Relations 3.2 Achieving Environmental Public Relations Objectives: Widening the Scope of the Pursuit 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The destructive potentials of floods, earthquakes, droughts, wild fire and desertification are no more controversial or debatable.
The days they constituted issues of arguments are gone.
Even those who doubted the dangers they posed on grounds of politics, now have reasons to believe and yearn for early solutions to them.
Incidentally, the capacity and vastness of the destruction these are capable of unleashing is as huge as their sources.
It results from two sources: climate change and global warning, phenomena best described as belligerent, mercurial and avalanche.
Consequently, similarly vast should be the solutions to them, if they will be meaningful and effective.
In line, a wide range of some enduring panacea to the destructive calamities resulting from environmental degradation suffices.
They are encompassing as the problem are overwhelming, hence, the hope that with time, the dangers posed by these forces could abate.
3.0 OBJECTVES At the end of the unit, you should be able:  Identify possible enduring solutions to environmental problems.
 Understand why solutions to them have to be wide and vast.
 Appreciate why such solutions have to come from both local and international sources.
114 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Key Objectives of Environmental Public Relations As a result of its magnitude, numerous and divergent resources are required, if lasting solutions will be found to end or at least check the impending dangers posed by environmental degradation.
Such resources must come in terms of manpower, materials, logistics, infrastructure, technology and finance.
When channeled judiciously and effectively, they aid in attaining the objectives of environmental public relations.
The aims are salient as they are sensitive if mankind’s destined healthy habitation on planet earth will be sustained.
They include: 1.
Conceptualize, plans, produce and package environmental public relations education, enlightens and information programmes.
2.
Widen the scope of knowledge of environmental issues through enhanced mobilisation programmes.
3.
Create sustained awareness, consciousness and participation by the citizenry through widened enlightens and mobilisation 4.
Evolve strategic measures that will be widely acceptable and capable of serving, as warning notice on the dangers of environmental abuses, manhandling and degradation.
5.
Promote activities, actions and programmes that will guarantee healthy environment and harmonious existence of the ecosystem.
6.
Ginger the involvement of all stakeholders in the quest for environmental sustainability, including governments, corporate bodies, multinational corporations, environmental agencies NGOs, the media, donor agencies, among others.
7.
Formulate programmes of action that will motivate more investment in environment issues by NNCs, NGOs, governments and donor/philanthropic agencies.
8.
Provide more pragmatic and strategic programme involving and massive enough to awaken the elite, illiterate, rich, poor, the urban and rural dweller in the crusade, so as to ensure massive involvement in the fight to protect, preserve, conserve and sustain the earth and its inhabitants.
9.
Get the government to make environmental education part of our school curricula, from primary to tertiary institutions.
10.
Assist in the institutionalisation of all necessary measures and platforms, including financing, education, legislation and all other necessities that will make environmental sustainability an enduring legacy.
115 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.2 Widening the Scope of Attaining Environmental Sustenance There is no magical or voo-doo approach to realising the goals of environmental healthiness, friendliness and longevity.
All it takes is planned, deliberate and enduring actions, activities schemes, programmes and policies capable and with the capacity to involve all concerned, necessary resources and effective execution.
The following are some of the critical measures and steps that are relevant and urgent in revising the crippling effects of environmental deterioration: 1.
Environmental issues, problems, challenges and crises should be seen and presented as matters involving every one, indeed every living thing.
It is not an affair that concerns the government, environmentalists, environmental public relations practitioners or the media alone.
2.
Everyone and everybody are not only involved, but all should actively participate in programmes aimed at checking environmental degeneration.
3.
Measures taken in his direction can never be complete unless all relevant stakeholders are partakers.
They include the UN, governments, corporate bodies, environmental agencies, NGOs, donor agencies, industrialists and the media, Aliede (2001: 107) and Nwosu (1996: 141) and Nwosu and Uffoh (2005: 102-107).
4.
Efforts should be intensified towards raising more funds for environmental campaigns locally and internationally.
The United Nations, multinationals, corporate organizations, governments, philanthropists and donors should be involved.
5.
There should be increased bid towards enhanced partnership, association, collaboration and cooperation, with a view to boosting exchange of ideas, technical know-how and cross fertilization of knowledge among the relevant stakeholders and agencies.
6.
Research should be intensified on pertinent areas of the causes and remedies to environmental problems, including global warning, climate change, and green house emission, among others.
7.
Investments in technological resources and other areas crucial to wining the sensitive war is essential, like equipping metrological agencies, FEMA and FEPA.
8.
At national and international levels, laws and legislations pertaining to environmental sustainability should be strengthened and broadened.
116 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 9.
Activities and actions capable of stepping up environmental friendliness and sustainability, for instance: proper disposal of organic and inorganic wastes, as well as tree planting programmes should be enhanced.
10.
Education, information, enlightenment and socialization should be massified.
This should include the inclusion of environmental sanitation, protection and preservation into schools curricula at all levels.
11.
Donating to environmental programmes and campaigns could be traditional donors, but also multinational companies and other organs, especially those contributing to gas and fume emission.
This will assist in a thorough and comprehensive onslaught on a scourge said to be more dreaded and threatening then terrorism and AIDS.
12.
There should be more practicalisation of political will and reframing from unnecessary bickering on environmental matters and issues.
The ego syndrome between the United State of America and China which is marring progress of the campaign should stop.
These two countries, through their industrial activities, are the main causes of global warming and ought to spearhead the fight to end it.
13.
The media could still be more involved in environmental issues and protection through invigorated, robust and effective coverage and reportage.
14.
The application of multi-media approach will, to a large extent, enhance the campaign.
For example, the utilisation of traditional methods of communication besides the mass media, like town criers, talking drums, village squares, drama, songs, among others, means mass education, awareness, consciousness and enlightenment of a greater section of the masses, including those at the grassroots, according to Agbanu (2007:185) and Ugande (2009:185).
15.
People living or doing businesses in flood-prone areas should be vacated and provided alternative areas of residence and business.
It will save more lives and property.
16.
Shallow and other streams, rivers and water ways capable of contributing to flooding e.g.
parts of rivers Niger and Benue, should be dredged to ease and expand water passage through them and lessen the chances of similar experience of 2012.
17.
There should be means of providing early warning systems as is the case in developed countries.
This will assist in creating opportunities for precautionary measures, among others that will save both lives and properties.
18.
All necessary frameworks and policies vital to attaining environmental healthiness and sustainability must be institutionalised and 117 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS formidably entrenched.
This would amount to seriousness, commitment and concerted efforts towards the realisation of environmental harmony and preserving the planet for posterity.
SELF-ASSSESSMENT EXERCISE  Discuss the objectives of environmental public relations.
 Give at least ten ways of attaining these goals.
 What are the challenges facing the attainment of these goals.
4.0 CONCLUSION As planned and deliberate enterprise, environmental public relations is not only a serious business, but also has set objectives.
These goals assist in assessing the level of the achievement of the aims.
Also, to achieve these goals, impediments facing the discipline have to be tackled.
An examination of this area entails detailed analysis of all the critical issues relating to the full realisation of the set goals.
These are holistically examined in order to lay bare issues that must be overcome to achieve environmental harmony.
5.0 SUMMARY Every environmental public relations practitioner is first a manager.
He, therefore, must effectively apply available resources in judicious and prudent manner through thorough and painstaking coordination, control and supervision.
The goals and strategies for their achievement and how to handle their impediments must be fully understood by the practitioner to ensure maximised use of resources.
Realising the vital need for environmental public relations is necessary for sustaining man and other embodiments of the earth; hence it must be taken seriously and with all hands on deck.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Name and explain at least five objectives of environmental public relations.
 Show how the scope and goals of environmental public relations can be widened and achieved.
118 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 7.0 REFERNESS/FUTHER READING Aliede, Jonathan E. (2001).
“Environmental Public Relations and the Ecological Imperative of the New Millennium”, Journal of Public Relations Management, Vol.1, No.2, pp.18-20.
Agbanu, V. N. (2007), “Modern and Traditional Media Interface in Mobilising Rural Communities for Agricultural Development: A Public Relations Perspective”, Public Relations Journal, Vol.3, No.
2, pp.195-205.
Nwosu, I .E.
(19996).
Public Relations Management: Principles, Issues and Applications.
Lagos: Dominican Publishers.
Nwosu, I ,E, and V. O. Uffoh (2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principle, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
IDS/UNN.
Ugande, G. B.
(2005/2009), “Re-engineering the Theatre Audience in Nigeria: The Public Relations Option”, Public Relations Journal, Vol.6, Nos.1 and 2, pp.184-199.
119 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 5 CHALLENGES FACING ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.1 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Challenges Facing Environmental Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Ordinarily, the problems facing public relations pass for obstacles hindering the practice of environment public relations.
But just as the later is a specialised field, so are there some peculiarities in the challenges facing it.
We must fully grasp these challenges, their sources and implications.
That, as the saying goes, makes for half of the solutions to them.
We should understand such impediments to be able to find solution to them.
As it is, there is one special and uniqueness of environmental public relations problems.
Though to be solved locally, some of these problems have their roots internationally.
Impliedly, solving such problems have to be embraced locally and at the same time tackled internationally as well.
For example, problems with their roots in global warning virtually affects the whole world, hence, credible solutions to them must come collectively and internationally, Nwosu (2005:143).
It is on this note do we indepthly look into the obstacles which face this new discipline, with a view to reaching for enduring solutions to them.
Such solutions must take note of the sensitivity of the environment and the need for every panacea to be comprehensive, enduring and credible.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Understand the various challenges from the ones facing public relations.
 Distinguish these challenges from the ones facing public relations.
 Discern the global nature of the sources of some of challenges.
120 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Challenges Facing Environmental Public Relations The following are some of the obstacles facing the practice of environmental public relations: 1.
Newness and low awareness of the concept.
As new as the concept of reputation management, environment public relations as result, has few people aware of it, compared with older arms of public relations like media relations, financial relations or community relations.
Consequently, it will take more efforts and resources to get it to the consciousness of the public and even practitioners to a level it will elicit sufficient support for maximum performance.
2.
Inadequate manpower This problem partly stem from its recency and availability of poor training facilities.
The result is that there is short fall in the number of required personnel, while those available are not well grounded.
At the same time, the available poor training facilities cannot but lead to poor capacity building and manpower.
Capacity building on intensive basis is the answer to this challenge.
3.
High level of illiteracy The high percentage of illiteracy in the country, ranging between 60% and 70% of the population is a major minus for environmental public relations.
The direct implications include ignorance, superstitious and conservatism.
This will take time to be addressed.
4.
High level of poverty due to misrule and corruption Many years of maladministration, authoritarianism and uncontrollable corruption have combined to unleash chronic poverty on majority of Nigerians.
Part of the consequences is diversionary tendencies as the people now face and pursue those developmental goals and facilities government would have ordinarily provided.
Examples are the search for alternative sources of electrify and energy by purchasing generators in absence of achievable public power supply, sinking of bore holes in absence of pipe bone water and private security arrangements in the face of unprecedented insecurity nationwide.
The anxieties and uneasiness associated with these hardly allow the citizens to focus and contribute on other issues no matter their relevant.
5.
Lip service and absence of the need political will Subsequent administrations in the country had merely given platitudunal and verbal service to most crucial matters that require urgent attention like global warning.
Worst still, in cases where budgetary provisions are made to execute certain policies, corruption hardly allow the programmes to see the light of the day.
121 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 6.
Weak regulatory authority The Nigerian Institute of Public Relations (NIPR) currently controls and regulates the practice of public relations in all its ramifications in the country.
It is, however, bedevilled by a lot of hurdles which have impaired its efforts towards robust enforcement of its rules and regulations in order to guarantee high standards and professional excellence of the profession.
Some of the factors include short-sighted Governing Council, inadequate enforcement officers, vastness of the country and out-dated legislative framework.
In Aliede’s words (2005:136), it will be a surprise all those hurdles allow for effective regulatory performance of the noble profession.
7.
Difficulty in reversing strongly-held habits Some of the man-made destructive tendencies which result in environmental degradation are outcomes of unhealthy cultural, religious and traditional practices of indigenous people.
These long held attitudes, as usual, are difficult to be discarded as it is already part of the lives of the people.
It will then take concerted and strategic campaigns and reorientation to dislodge and reverse them in place of more healthy practices and beliefs.
Instances of such negatives practices include in areas of farming methods like crop rotation, deforestation and others which contribute to erosion and soil deregulation.
8.
Huge cost of some environmental campaigns Implementing certain environmental campaigns and programmes could run into millions of naira per one Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:79).
Funding such projects becomes problematic, moreso, with the apparent growing global donors’ fatigue.
There should be some new initiatives and strategies on how to raise funds for such crucial and sensitive projects.
9.
Unquenchable profit interests of multinational companies (MNCs) Primarily, these companies were established to make profits for their owners.
Incidentally, the process of making the money often border on questionable and unethical practices inimical to the people and the environment.
Changing the situation definitely will take practitioners play their advisory and counselling roles to the managements of their corporate organisations and companies, making them to realise the short and long term implications of their actions on the environment.
For effectiveness, such advice is best given the practitioners who are operating from management cadre.
It is at and from that level that they would be more influential and in better position to give advice and be able to prevail on the 122 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS management and insist that his counsel is acceptable, workable, meaningful, implementable and beneficial.
10.
The competitive ego rivalry between nations The controversial position of the issue of global warming is due to the involvement of international politics where competition and ego are in display in the debate.
Although scientists, researchers and experts are unanimous and have made series of attempts to authenticate their claims on the issue of global warming and climate change, rival and acrimonious industrialised nations disagree.
Such absence of consensus, therefore, seriously hurts the quick response and solution with which the problem would have been solved if there was an agreement.
Currently at the centre of the heated impasse and controversy are the United States of America and her allies on one hand, and China and her own supporters on the other.
Although the general notion is that the phenomenon is caused by emission and fumes emanating factories and other industrial establishments, which cause greenhouse gases and depletion of the ozone, the fact that these heavy industrialised countries would be required to lessen their productive capacities which result in the emission, has made them oppose any agreement in order to resolve the crisis.
Ironically, as the major sources of this deadly emission, nothing can practically be achieved without their cooperation, active involvement and participation.
Besides their endemic rivalry and competition, also at work here is ego.
It would amount to display of inferiority for one of them to succumb for the other.
The result is the current deadlock on the sensitive issue.
The implications of the face-off are numerous.
There is no defined agreement on the sources, how to lessen it, solutions to the damage already done and how to forestall future occurrences.
It will, therefore, certainly take humility; concern for others, especially the impoverished nations, which do not contribute to the menace, but share and bear the aftermath; display of genuine global leadership, on the part of the United States; a strong position of the United Nations or global revolutionary opposition, for the long awaited compromise to come.
That will pave the way for finding enduring solution to the problem.
That done, it will be a prelude to instituting a formidable framework for sustainable global environment, one the rich and poor is sure of tomorrow.
That is a sure route to a truly egalitarian and democratic world where the affluent do not lord it over others and what effects one concerns others.
123 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Highlight at least six of the challenges facing the practice of environmental public relations.
 How do those challenges emanate locally and differ from the international ones?
 Show how completion and ego finding solutions to the phenomenon of climate change?
4.0 CONCLUSION The problems facing environmental public relations can come from within as well as internationally.
Still, one thing is certain.
They affect and effect everyone, in both developed and developing countries.
Hence, the primary solution is to find quick answer to the quagmire.
Undoubtedly, solving these problems is no easy task.
Yet, let it begin.
That is the concern.
Enduring solutions should start with massive enlightenment, education and socialisation on individual and collective basis.
It is everyone’s environmental responsibility.
By the time everyone handles the environment and treats its resources with dignity, fairness, justice and rationality, it will form the solid basis on which to extend the campaign to collective heights.
It may not be easy, but let it start.
5.0 SUMMARY The identification of the problems facing environmental public relations is the fundamental step to finding solutions to them.
The challenges should be understood, comprehended and assimilated.
It as well adds to our knowledge, information and insights of the discipline.
Full grasp of these challenges will spurn search for more remedies to them.
And doing this is a must.
It will the pave way for smoothed and accelerated practice of practitioners and the maximum functioning of all the relevant elements and machineries of the profession.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare and contrast the challenges facing public relations and those besieging environmental public relations.
2.
Show some of those problems which comes Nigerians.
3.
Discuss five of the challenges which emanate internationally.
4.
Show how the United States of America hold the key to finding lasting solutions to global environmental challenges.
124 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 7.0REFERENCES/FURYTHER READING Aliede, J. E. (2005).
“Repositioning the Public Relations Personnel for Reputable Practice”, in Nwosu, I. E., J. E. Aliede and I. Nsude (eds.)
Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets Limited.
Nwosu, I. E. (1996).
Public Relations Management: Principles, Issues and Applications.
Lagos: Dominican Publishers.
Nwosu, I. E. and V. O. Uffoh (2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu: IDS/UNN.
125 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS MODULE 5 THE URGENCY AND CURRENT MEASURES FOR SAVING THE EARTH Unit 1.
Planning Environmental Public Relations Programmes Unit 2.
Protecting the Earth Through EPR: Saving Mankind Unit 3.
Ethical Considerations in Environmental Public Relations Unit 4.
Case Studies of environmental Public Relations Unit 5.
Laws and Legislations on Environmental Protection.
UNIT 1 PLANNING ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (EPR) PROGRAMMES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Reasons for Planning Environmental Public Relations 3.2 Gains of Planned Environmental Public Relations 3.3 The Sensitivity of Meticulously Planned Environmental Public Relations Programmes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The level of environmental degradation in some parts of the world is tilting towards alarming proportion.
It is getting to a level only a quick intervention will ameliorate its negative consequences on every part of the globe.
This unprecedented onslaught mainly resulting from global climate change adds to other man-made environmental distortions to cause drought, floods, desertification, among others.
The negative implications of these are of such far-reaching effects that are now of global proportion.
In the same vein, solutions to them must entail measures of the same dimension.
To start with, such measures, if they must be sustainable enough, must be well planned, deliberate and enduring.
It must not be hit-and-run or fire 126 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS brigade arrangement.
Needed now are committed global and lasting programmers capable of getting to the root of the crisis.
It also has to be comprehensive enough as to embody components that could as well address other environmental problems like poor sanitation, industrial wastages, improper mining waste disposals, water crisis, acid rain, air pollution, among others.
The importance of proper planning before engaging in any of those measures is obvious.
There is need to safeguard scare resources and still attain the goal of environmental restoration and reformation.
It is, therefore, a sensitive issue requiring well-though out policy measures, if positive results musty be attained on sustainable basis.
It is a serious and grave global matter requiring wide consultations, concertedness and proper articulation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify the need to properly plan environmental public relocations campaigns and programmers.
 Explain the advantages inherent in a well designed environmental public relations project.
 Discuss the sensitive reasons why such project should be planned 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Reasons for Planning Environmental Public Relations Multiplicity of factors makes it imperative to adequately and effectively plan environmental public relations campaign programmes before embarking on their execution.
Such justifications include: a) Safe Guarding the Seas Resource and Investment Programmers Could Cost Fortune Such investments running into millions of naira must be protected by ensuring the attainment of the set objectives.
The surest means of achieving the goal is through planning as it provides the information which guarantees confidence, focus, direction and surety.
b) Meeting Clients’ Expectation There could be other goals and aspirations of the client other than safeguarding are fund.
It could be profit, image repositioning or corporate reputation enhancement.
It is incumbent on the environment public 127 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS relations agency, consultant or practitioner to ensure that such clientele aims and motives are realized and planning is the answer.
c) Withstanding Competition The field of public relations is one of the most competitive, just like other allied disciplines, including advertising and marketing communications.
Stiff and cut throat competition can easily be overcome through adequate planning.
This ensures that all critical decisions necessary for the attainment of set goals are taken and timely too.
This is a sure way of outwitting rivalries.
d) Protecting Expended Resources Apart from the investors/clients investments, other resources such as manpower, materials, logistics, infrastructure and technology are part of the inputs to any environmental public relations programme budgetary expenditure.
It is only a successful campaign that translates into their protection.
Adequate and effective planning is a means of attaining that.
e) Consolidating Agency’s Corporate Image Should the environmental public relations programme fail, the image of the agency will be dented.
Proper planning is a definitive instrument of avoiding failure and protecting the image, integrity and reputation of the agency and its practitioners.
f) Warding Off the Effects of Globalization In addition to local/national competition facing the agency, it confronts competition orchestrated by globalization.
Knowledge and awareness of this should make the agency to work harder through thorough planning in order to overcome its negative implications.
3.2 Gains of Planned Environmental Public Relations The ultimate objectives of an environmental public relations practitioner is to, through his professional practice, aid the attainment of environmental restoration, resuscitation, preservation and conservation.
To realise this, every available arsenal at his disposal is deployed.
Hence, the practitioner goes beyond profit making to put in place all available measures that will assist in the attainment of the primary goal of achieving the clients’ goal.
Planning makes it easy to achieve these.
128 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Besides, planning of the programme before its implementation also assists the practitioner to aim at the specific goal of the campaign.
The data and statistics with which planning is made provide the added leverage of the focus and essence of the campaign.
With this, the right bearing and direction are known and followed, rather than engaging in guess work or trial and error.
Similarly, planning provides the opportunity of deploying square pays in space holes.
This consequently saves scare resources, avoids wastages and aids the strategic application of resources.
Additionally, it makes possible the full harnessing and utilisation of the diverse inputs necessary to achieving environmental preservation and transformation.
Needed resources have to come from various sources, ranging from international institutions; NGOs; donors and philanthropic bodies; environmental agencies, like FEMA, SEMA, FEPA, SEPA, ministries of environment, other support organisations, and environmental activists.
Put differently, planning enables the practitioner or/and his agency to involve the right kind of people or stakeholders who will assist towards the achievement of his/their set goals.
Belch and Belch(1995:521-529) list the processes of public relations (environmental public relations) to be so enormous that it would be futile, suicidal and unprofessional to engage in it without proper planning.
To them, the processes include: 1.
Determining and evaluating public attitudes.
2.
Establishing a public relations plan.
3.
Developing the programme.
4.
Implementing the programme.
Therefore, planning equips the practitioner with sufficient knowledge of all the involvements and vision of what is required of him.
When this is the case, the executioner is better placed to harness the available resources and attain the set agency objectives.
3.3 The Sensitivity of Meticulously Planned Environmental Public Relations Tackling ordinary public relations problems such as corporate image repositioning or industrial unrest are not as tedious and resources involving like handling environmental public relations crises.
This can be 129 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS buttressed with two current environmental crises, one facing Beijing in China and the other in Ogoniland in Nigeria.
Beijing pollution crisis, The Guardian (2013:48) required China to spend US$16 billion to tackle.
Some of the areas to be handled included improving air quality, sewage treatment, sewage disposal and managing illegal constructions in the city inhabited by about 20 million people.
The other case is Ogoniland environmental remediation.
After many years of environmental degradation dating back to the 1950s and occasioned by insensitive and irresponsible oil exploitation, spillage and mishandling of their management, Ogoniland is at best desolate and barren.
It is beyond contamination and degradation.
Its restoration is beyond herculean task.
According to Uwaegbulam (2013:48), a Federal Government and United Nations Environmental Proramme team of experts has recommended a remedial resuscitation measures expected to last between 25 and 30 years.
The project is to gulp an initial fund of US$1 billion.
With the magnitude of the resources required to take on these two crises, one can imagine the colossal components of the needs for tackling the public relations aspect of the programmes.
No one would invest such wooping sums or preside over the implementation of the programme and want excuses of failure to trail the execution.
And without minding repetition, planning remains the only reliable solution to any fear of failure.
Planning provides the practical and crucial elements on which the programme is pivoted and hence the basis of confidence and success after the campaign execution.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Why and how is planning an aspect of environment public relations?
2.
What are the merits of planning environmental public relations?
3.
Why is planning regarded as very sensitive in environmental public relations?
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit further provides us with an opportunity to underscore the unique place of planning as an indispensable element of environmental public relations process.
It is stage, segment and process no practitioner can afford to ignore.
Planning involves very sensitive decisions that are very pertinent to the effective implementation and success of the entire 130 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS programme or project; and instances include media selection, scripting the communication message, among others.
It is, therefore, an element every intending or incumbent practitioner has to take seriously.
The full knowledge of its dynamics, diversity, implications and application is key to professional performance in the field.
It aids the successful and effective carrying out of environment public relations programme.
5.0 SUMMARY Planning forestalls the wastage of scarce resources and also provides the opportunity for the environmental public practitioner to ponder over his conceptualised framework before the full scale execution.
It is a stage of the environmental public relations process every practitioner should take seriously.
It should not only be seen as very important, but also a relevant component whose omission signals failure in the process of implementing environmental public relations projects/programmes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Underscore the reasons behind planning environmental public relations campaign programmes.
2.
Are there any derivable gains from effectively planning an environmental public relations campaign?
3.
Showcase planning as a sensitive aspect of the environmental public relations process.
7.0 REFERECES/FURTHER READING Belch, G.E.
and M. A. Belch (1995).
Introduction to Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communications Perspective.
Third Edition.
Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill.
The Guardian (2013).
“China to Spend $166 on Beijing Pollution Crisis” Uwaegbulam, C. (2013).
”Government, UNDEP Team Hold Talks Over Ogoniland Environmental Remediation”, The Guardian.
131 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 2 PROTECTING THE EARTH THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (EPR): SAFEGUARDING MAN’S SUSTAINABILITY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 An X-ray of the Enormity of the Calamity 3.2 Crave for a Sustainable Earth: Ways Forward.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION All along we have been engaged in an effort to expose the potentials and efficacies of environmental public relations as an enduring solution to the quagmire of global environmental degradation and catastrophe.
We, too, aimed to underscore that if the war for environmental protection, conservation and preservation must be won, all hands must be on board and deck.
It requires individual, local, corporate, national and international inputs, resources, resolve, will and partnership.
Yet, it is a cause where complacency has no place and role.
It is a fight to finish as on it depends man’s survival and sustainability on earth.
The attainment of the goal will, to a great extent, depend on the level of awareness and consciousness of the carnage, which in turn would arouse mass participation in the crusade and campaign.
The mobilisation must begin with students of environment public relations who relay their knowledge, experience and insights to others and that way the gospel will spread.
Everyone must be a partaker; after all, when it comes to environmental issues everyone is either effected or affected.
This unit is a mop-up.
It sums up the theme of the material and after presenting some cases of environmental degradation, emphasises the urgent need for concerted action in order to chart a formidable path capable of saving the earth.
It is followed by some appendixes of relevant documents (laws, regulations, policies and ethics/codes) relevant to the theme of the discourse.
132 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Appreciate the enormity of environmental degradation and its implication.
 Understand why only collective effects will solve the problem.
 Justify why environmental public relations is a lasting solution to the endemic problem.
 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 AN X-RAY OF THE ENORMITY OF THE CALAMITY Undoubtedly, an invigorated and massive approach to finding solution to the prostrated and endemic problem will stem from wide and full knowledge of the underlaying issues and factors.
Hence, the scope should continue to be expanded through highlighting the crisis, results and implications.
Some more illustrative cases, therefore, suffice: 1.
Deforestation in Madagascar According to Harrison (1993:74-77), the country initially had a forest cover of 11.2million hectres.
By 1950, it had only 7.6million hectres.
Today, it is only 3.8 milliion hectres that remain.
Yearly, 111,000 hectres are cleared.
Madagascar’s entire rainforests have varnished in 35years.
Ronomafana forest in the country wad 60 kilometres wide.
This was reduced to, according to him, to mere strip of 7 to 15 kilometres across.
2.
Deforestation the Global Outlook Between 1975 and 1990, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:143) claim, about 2 million square kilometers,…17% of global forested area was degraded.
Of this, 12.2 million square kilometres was badly degraded.
Europe had the greatest share of 23%; Africa followed with 22%; Asia, 20%, and South America, 14%.
The above two scenarios concern an assault on a major and sensitive aspect of the environment.
The destruction of forests portends enormous negative implications for mankind.
The ecosystem is immediately and drastically altered with its dangerous impact on food, medicine, raw materials, drinks, among others.
Such consequence has global reach and implications, and not just to people within the place of the forest location.
3.
Aftermath of Hurricane Sandy In the last quarter of 2012, Hurricane Sandy hit the United States with devastating effects.
With influence even on the November 6, 2012 133 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Presidential and Congressional elections, its effects were across the Caribbean, Mid-Atlantic and North-Eastern parts of USA.
At the last count, Hurricane Sandy left a trail of woes and tribulation.
Some of its destruction includes:  Estimated cost of at least $20 billion.
 Flooding of subway lines and tunnels.
 Numerous buildings devastated some through fire outbreaks.
 Submerging of bridges.
 Damaging vehicles.
 Causing power outages, and  Breaking hearts, according to TELL (2012:8-9).
4.
The BP Guilt of Mexico Oil Leak This devastation now rated in the words of the President of the United States, Barak Obama, “The worst environmental disaster in American history”, also remains the costliest environmental crisis in the world, as the data provided by Newsweek (2013:28) would show.
The oil leakage lasted for 87 days, ending on July, 15 2010.
Apart from the colossal financial repercussions, the leakage resulted in a number of other damages.
As Hertsgaard (2013:29) puts it, attempts to contain its effects by cleaning the oil resulted in health a serious crisis of untold proportion as the chemical used led to numerous health hazards.
“The combination of Corexit and crude oil also caused terrible damage to gulf wide life and ecosystems, including an unprecedented number of seafood mutations; declines of up to 80% in seafood catch; and massive die-offs of the microscopic life-forms at the base of the marine food chain.” The quantity of the leakage and the whooping cost of litigations resulting from it would assist in giving a clear picture of the disaster whose health ramifications on the coastal residents and its clean-up workers is still unfolding.
Among them are:  The explosion which caused the leak killed 11 workers and injured 17.
 Spilled at least 210 million gallons of crude oil into the Gulf of Mexico.
 BP to spend $7.8 billion on settling cases and plaintiff of the leak.
 BP to pay the largest court fine in U.S history: 4.
$4.5 billion.
 BP to pay Louisiana, Alabama, Mississippi and Florida $34 billion.
134 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Another payment of $4,300 per barrel, totaling $17.5 billion, yet the cases involved are still ongoing.
5.
The Giant Killer: Climatic Change Just recently, lending his voice to concern over global warning the president of the World Bank, Jin Yong Kim, described it as a “…fundamental threat…to global economic development”.
To him, it threatens the planet and the poorest people.
He goes on to add that “If we do not act to curb climate change immediately, we will leave our children and grand-children an unrecognisable planet”.
Incidentally and unfortunately “It is the poor, those least responsible for climate change and least able to afford adaption, who would suffer most”, he laments.
Climate change is the ugly consequence of man’s unbridled and uncontrolled mismanagement of the earth and its resources.
Investigations has shown steady rise in atmospheric temperature over the years, and more pronounced now than in the past.
According to Mader (1998:474), atmospheric carbon dioxide jumped from 280 in 1850 to 350 in 1998, due to industrialisation and other related activities.
Man’s quest for socio-economic improvement directly and indirectly results in this.
The activities involved and general mismanagement of the earth’s resources cannot but lead to the untold results.
Burning of fossil fuel in various ways, especially through industrialisation and deforestation are the major sources of this calamity.
Those actions and their negative effects are graphically presented below, adapted from Mader’s (1998:474) insightful work on the area: Kind of Gas Causes Carbon dioxide Fossil fuel and wood burning Nitrous oxide Fertilizer and animal wastes Methane Biogas and rice paddies Chlorofluorocarbon Freon, a refrigerant Halos Fire extinguishers Ozone Photochemical smog in troposphere The results of the emission of these gasses into the atmosphere are acid rain and ultra violet radiation, which are harmful to human beings, the ecosystem, and as well leads to the depletion of the ozone layer, the so called green house gases and their negative effects.
Indeed, to say the least, man is not fair and just to the earth and of course to himself.
The level of the mismanagement and negative activities and 135 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS their dangerours implications attest to this assertion.
Empiricisms from Mader (1998:474) show unabated increase in the level of concentration of green house gases.
This is the aftermath of man’s poor sewage treatment, acidic water from mines, industrial wastes, nuclear reactors, oil pollution/spillage, fertilizer runoffs, and poor disposal of used tires, plastic bottles, cans, sachets, among others.
According to Mader (1998:474), these add to industrial gas emission and deforestation and culminate in climate change, in addition to the following:  Warming oceans.
 Temperature rising.
 Glaciers melting.
 Water expansion.
 Seal level rising.
 Water evaporation increasing.
 More rain along the coasts.
 Dryer conditions inland.
 Droughts resulting.
 Reduced agricultural yields.
 Trees dying.
 More floods.
 Coastal town disappearing.
 Soil erosion increasing.
3.2 Crave for a Sustainable Earth: Ways Forward With the dangers facing the environment succinctly elucidated, it is clearer them ever the escalating tendency for man to personally truncate his own existence on the globe, unless something is done urgently.
Certainly, any development effort which negates the future of posterity is out of it.
Therefore, quest for development must embody measures and blueprints which take care of resultant defective outcomes that is sustainable development.
Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:50) quote the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) as describing sustainable development as “…the development strategy that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”.
Any activity that would jeopardize the environment and the ecosystem should not be carried out in man’s and posterity’s interests.
This is the position of Solomon, Linda and Diana (2003:47), as they remind us that we depend on the environment for “…pure (clean) water, 136 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS clean air, food, fibre, medicines and many other necessities of life”.
The biosphere (part of the planet where living things inhabit – the lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere), must be protected.
In their words, we must “...prevent or at least minimize the possible degradative effects to all living things (as the) extinction of nonhuman species (from the earth) is on the increase”.
In fact it has reached a level it is called biodiversity crises.
Finding solution to them is, therefore, a matter of imperative and urgentcy.
Accordingly, the following 15-point prescriptions are recommended: 1.
Invigorated mobilization of the public Stepped-up enlightenment, education and mobilisation of the masses for total and holistic onslaught on the causes of environmental degradation.
For effective results, all measures must be in place and all hands on deck.
There should be multi-media approach: utilizing both traditional and modern media for comprehensive education of the public on causes of environmental degradation, proper disposal of wastes and how to preserve the environment.
2.
Involvement of experts and professionals Experts and professionals in the fields of public relations and environmental public relations should be used.
As professional practitioners, they will apply the right and suitable principles, practices, methodologies, strategies, tactics and techniques to rouse the awakening, awareness and consciousness of everyone to better understand the environment, in addition to their massive participation in environmental protection programmes and projects.
3.
Strengthening all necessary legislations Putting in place all essential and required legislations and strengthening existing ones, as well as ensuring their effective enforcement.
4.
Institutionalisation of all needed frameworks Necessary frameworks and policies should be institutionalised for proper and smooth operational engagements in environmental protection, conservation and preservation.
5.
Effective application of environmental and other related agencies.
Environmental protection emergency and other related agencies should be properly funded, equipped and mobilised for their active service in view of 137 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS the challenges before them, at all levels, for instance FEPA, FEMA, among others.
6.
Improved capacity for the Nigerian Meteorological Agency (NIMET) This organ charged with the responsibility of providing meteorological services for the country should be improved, capacity-wise and technologically in line with the demands of its tasks in an expanse country like Nigeria 7.
Collaborative engagements with others.
Environmental protection agencies can be more robust and effective if they enhance their cooperation with similar and related organisations through partnership; association and collaboration, Example of such bodies include Manufacturers Association of Nigeria (MAN), National Association of Chambers of Commerce, Industries, Mines and Agriculture (NACCIMA), among many others.
8.
Drastic measures on flood areas Serious measures should be taken to dredge our water ways, especially flood-prone areas, to enhance smooth and increased water passage just as residents of flood-prone areas should be evacuated and relocated.
9.
Entrenchment of Environmental Impact Assessments(EIA) Henceforth, the execution of every major project, whether by government or private organisations, should be preceded by environmental review through Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).
This would aim at protecting the immediate and outer communities from resultant environmental degradation in the short and long runs.
10.
Multi-national corporations should leave up to their social responsibilities More involvement and commitment of multinational corporations should be sought and insisted on.
These should be obtained through well planned, deliberate and sustained policies, programmes and legislations, since their industrial activities are the major causes of gas emission.
They must, therefore, be part of the solutions, through their contributions.
11.
Evolvement of more effective population policies At national and international levels, more effective and pragmatic population policies should be evolved for more judicious and positive 138 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS management of global population.
This is a necessity in order to avert the looming catastrophe and cataclysm inevitably awaiting mankind unless the current rate of global population growth is checked.
Now at over 7 billion, it is projected to hit 9.1 billion by 2050, according to The Guardian (2013:48-49).
The negative consequences are numerous: food scarcity, water crisis, unemployment, to mention just a few of them.
12.
Closer affinity with UN agencies More attention should be paid to UN and UNEP pronouncements, policies and programmes on the environment, to ensure that Nigeria takes advantage of their existing services in view of the country’s low capacity in managing major environmental crises, for example the 2012 flood disasters.
13.
Global environmental issues should not be politicized The hitherto prevalent East/West divide, which tended to polarize the international community over issues of critical importance, including global environmental matters should be jettisoned.
For instance, there existed stalemate between the United States of America and China over responsibility and actions on the green house gas emission controversy.
This should be resolved and discarded, and followed by strong political will to synergistically tackle the problem once and for all.
14.
Major industrialized nations should accept responsibility Industrialized countries are the major sources of the gases which cause ultra violet radiation, acid rain, green house effects and subsequently climate change.
There is no doubt about this, accordingly they should accept responsibility for this and equally spearhead the attempts aimed at finding lasting solutions to them.
The United Nations should intervene, hold them accountable and ensure that henceforth, environmental matters are not made issues of international politics.
15.
The plight of developing countries should be assuaged Measures must be taken to specially address the peculiar environmental needs of less developed nations.
Though they contribute very marginally to the global environmental crisis, they heavily bear the brunt.
Yet, if left on their own, they have little or no capacity, whatsoever, to tackle the endemic crisis.
Assisting them in this direction must be seen as a necessity, right and urgent.
139 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Showcase deforestation and oil spillage as source of environmental crises.
 Discuss two (one local and the other foreign) water-induced environmental crisss and their effects.
 Suggest solutions to global environmental problems.
4.0 CONCLUSION Environmental crises are already past of man.
Therefore, tenable is finding solutions to them and containing them through effective management.
This is realisable by putting permanent structures and relevant institutions on ground to ensure they are nipped in the bud, should they arise.
A number of past and recent environment disasters have been examined.
The exploration is with a view to exposing their implications.
It is further intended to act as means of education to student who must be in the vanguard of finding enduring solutions to environmental problems and crises.
Equally, it is instructive to reiterate the importance of public education, enlightenment, sensitisation and mobilisation for the purpose of public understanding, appreciation and participation in environmental issues and activities.
5.0 SUMMARY Need we say more?
Of course it cannot be said enough that finding effective solutions to environmental crises in emerging nations like Nigeria much depends of massive public involvement.
In turn, such massive participation is contingent on public mobilisation.
This is necessary in view of the low level of public knowledge and appreciation of environmental matters and problems or even their causes in emerging societies like ours.
This spells out the magnitude of responsibility and obligation on the shoulders of practitioners and professionals in the new field of environmental public relations.
It is onus on them to widen the scope of knowledge of the discipline, its meaning, roles, functions and indispensability in saving the drowning earth.
To practitioners and students, this is both moral and ethical responsibilities.
We cannot afford to shirk it.
The earth must be saved and we have major roles to play in 140 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS attaining it.
And this unit, module and indeed the entire course material, have done a lot in making it a point.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
X-ray three major causes/sources of environmental degradation, including explanations of their instance and results.
2.
Climate change is every time presented as a key source of endemic environmental crisis.
Show how and why.
3.
Give and explain five ways out of global environmental crises.
4.
Detailedly show why global environmental crises require collective solution if it must be enduring.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Harrison, P. (1993).
The Revolution: Population, Environment and Sustainable World.
London: Penguin Books.
Hertsgaard, M. (2013), “Drowning in Oil”, Newsweek, April 29.
Mader, S. S. (1998).
Biology, Sixth Edition.
Boston: WCB McGraw-Hill.
Newsweek (2013), April 29.
Nwosu, I E. and V. O. Uffoh (2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu: UNN/IDS.
Solomon, E. P., L. R. Berg and D. W. Martin (2003), Biology, Sixth Edition, Vol.
1.
California: Brooks/Cole.
TELL (2012), November 12.
The Guardian (2013), April 8.
The Guardian (2013), Monday, March 25, pp, 48-49.
141 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 3 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS Introduction 1.0 Objectives 2.0 Main content 2.1 Understanding Ethical Conducts 2.2 Functions and Benefits of Corporate Ethical Responsibility 3.0 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 6.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Every field, discipline and profession requires regulation and control.
These are imperative in order to ensure that the operators and practitioners perform their duties in conformity with the laws of the land, rules guiding the field; has respect for the truth, rule of law, decency, orderliness and decorum, and moreso have regard for the rights of others.
To guarantee these, often the government makes laws to ensure everyone conforms.
On the other hand, sometimes members of a profession or a professional body voluntarily makes rules and regulations, dos and don’ts, code of conduct or ethics for every member or practitioner in the field.
Note that members are expected to voluntarily adhere to these codes of conduct, without being forced.
Virtually every profession has it.
It is a necessity for the prevalence of sanity and civilized practice in such a field or profession, Okpara (2011: 285) The field of public relations and environmental public relations is not left out in this respect.
Such a measure exists for its practitioners and members to respect laws of the land, provide impeccable services to members of the public, respect the rights of others and above all ensure that while questing for profit, practitioners do not compromise standards, excellence and quality service to customers, consumers and clients.
It is a voluntary regulation.
142 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define and give illustrative examples of ethics.
 Understand the necessity for ethical regulation in professional organisations.
 Explain the contents of some existing codes of conducts in the field of public relations and environmental public relations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Understanding Ethical Conduct Ethics are principles or standards set by oneself or professional organisation as benchmark governing attitudes, behaviours and actions while practicing in a specific field.
It is a matter of conscience; hence, it also depends on the personal disposition of an individual.
As well, ethics has to do with customs, culture and traditional, as Center and Jackson (2003:363) rightly note, citing the issue of gifts, favors and gratifications.
These are norms in some places, but abhorred in some others.
In the later case it is regarded as bribes and payoffs and capable of jeopardising efficient and high quality service delivery, hence unethical Although one may not be prosecuted on account of ethical issues, yet one is left to be judge by his/her conscience.
This could be more disturbing to some people; hence it compels them to do what is right, not just for personal and individual interest, but also for public and organisational or corporate interest.
It is a set of core values, which interestingly if adhered to, turns to be in the interest of the corporate body.
When ethics is combined with or results in high quality products, excellent service delivery, probity, among others, the result is credibility, positive image and respect for the corporate organisation.
These in turn translate to public patronage of corporate goods and services.
Other consequences include profitability and high productivity.
With these accruing gains and positivities, the organisation is better placed to do more for, not just for its clients, customers, consumers and shareholders, but also its various publics (internal and external ) and stakeholders, as well as the community of its location.
Organisational gains and profits would be so much that they would, undoubtedly spill 143 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS over to the public, by ways of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), donations, philanthropy, and more quality products that would enhance public welfare and wellbeing, as shown in the illustration below: Ethnical standard High quality products Credibility Massive patronage Public interest Excellent services Reputation High productivity Public welfare Discipline Goodwill Profitability Public wellbeing Transparency Trust Business growth Job opportunities Accountability Respect More investments Corporate social Responsibility Fig.
X: Impact Process Model of Corporate Ethical Conduct Therefore, it is even in the interest of corporate entities to be ethically responsible.
Adhering to ethical values variously pay off, including positioning the organisation to serve the public better, in addition to sensitivity to public needs through Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), conversely reciprocated through more patronage, awards, commendations and high regard from the public, organisations and governments.
3.2 Functions and Benefits of Corporate Ethical (Responsibility) Numerous gains and benefits accrue from organisational adherence to ethical codes of conduct.
As the management and staff exhibit ethics in their attitude, behaviors, utterances and actions, the direct positive consequence go the management, staff/employees and the other publics, stakeholders and general public.
These gains and how they benefit organisation are highlighted below.
Such corporate bodies could be profit- oriented, charitable or both.
Ethical conduct is, therefore, a critical element of running any establishment, field, discipline and profession, including environmental public relations, as partly adduced by Skimmer, von Essen and Mersham (2001:13).
1.
Leads to strict adherence to laws governing the discipline.
2.
Inspires good conduct, behaviour and attitude in the performance of a business.
3.
It is a route to professionalism.
4.
Assists quick attainment of organisational objectives.
5.
Elicits trust, goodwill and commendation to organisation.
6.
Portrays a corporate body as responsible, reasonable, rational and sensitive.
144 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 7.
Serves public interest by enabling organisations to respond to the needs and aspirations of the public and their publics.
8.
Provides voice and viewpoints for public enlightenment, education and opinion.
9.
Encourages professional training, development, research and education.
10.
Creates room for fulfilling corporate obligations to various public and stakeholders.
11.
Enables practicing members to acquire knowledge, expertise, skill and experience.
12.
Helps the organisation to easily meet any legislative, legal and other requirements of its area operations.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain ethics as necessary ingredient of corporate governance.
 Why must any organisations adhere to ethical standards?
 Show how ethics is beneficial to employees, customers and stakeholders.
4.0 CONCLUSION Ethics is speedily gaining global popularity and wide acceptance.
This stems from its multiplicity of its gains.
Perhaps, too, the corporate world has realised how disadvantageous any members could be if it rejects these principles and values.
A number of factors make it imperative for every corporate entity to join the queue.
Among them are competition and globalisation.
Those who flaunt ethical conducts do not only face isolation, but also loss productivity, profitability and public trust.
It is, therefore, a moving train no one can afford to miss or else one is out of contention in the business world.
5.0 SUMMARY Having come to this stay, there is still need to nurture, consolidate and protect ethics in corporate governance.
To achieve this, apart from organisational managements, practitioners have vital roles to play, in view of the novelty of the practice.
This the practitioners can do through various ways, including, putting it into practice in their daily engagements; spreading the “gospel” to other staff and members of the public, since it is everyone’s business.
In the same vein, practitioners should embark on training and retraining by 145 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS participating in conferences, seminars, workshops, symposia and the like, in order to improve on their operational capacities and competence.
This enables organisations to widen the gains of practicing the tenets, including averting the undue interference, control and regulation of government and other agencies.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define and explain code of ethics in relations to the practice of environmental public relations.
2.
Of what importance is ethical practice in averting environmental designation while exploring and exploiting oil by an oil company?
3.
What are the benefits of an organisation practising code of ethics to its workers, shareholders, community and customers?
4.
To what level do Nigerian corporate organisations put into practice the tenets of codes of conduct?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okpara, G. (2011).
“Social Responsibility and Ethics”, in Kankrarofi, G. B. and J. Onuoeah (ed.)
Study Manual for the Advertising Professional Examinations, Past One.
Lagos: APCON.
Skinner, C., L. von Essen and G. Mershan (2001).
Handbook of Public Relations, Sixth Edition.
Cape Town: Oxford University Press.
Center, A. H. and J. Patrick (2003).
Public Relations Practices: Managerial Case Studies and Problems, Sixth Edition.
New Delhi: Prentice-hall of India .
146 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 4 CASE STUDIES ON ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (EPR) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Exxon Oil Spillage in Alaska, USA 3.2 Union Carbide Chemical Leak in Bhopal, India.
3.3 Deaths from Johnson & Johnson’s Poisoned Tylend.
3.4 Nigeria’s 2012 Flood Disaster.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The destructive and devastating effects of environmental degradation agents such as floods, pollution, oil spillage, erosion, desertification and deforestation are real, not imagination.
Therefore, to drive this home, some cases are here used as illustrations to reiterate their nature, effects and implications.
Besides, inclusive are some other public relations studies which as well underscore the reality of such crises and their damaging influences.
These are pertinent as they provide to students the diversities, dynamics and ramifications of such incidents to individuals and corporate organizations.
This aids the practicalisation of the learning process, as well as the easy assimilation of the lesson.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Understand some various kinds and cases of environmental crises.
 Explain how to face and tackle environmental and other cases and crises.
 Appreciate their diversity and dynamics as well as the factors influencing them.
147 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Exxon Oil Spillage in Alaska, USA Prince William Sound is in Alaska in the United States of America.
On March 24, 1989, Exxon had its oil spilled in Port of Valdez in the area.
Exxon’s oil ship hit Bligh Reef in Prime William Sound, spilling 11 million gallons of crude oil into the sea.
The oil giant was than faced with clearing the 1,300 miles of shoreline, representing 15% of the areas 9,000 miles shoreline.
The clearing process lasted till 1992, Center and Jackson (2003:339).
Although the United States Coast Guard and the Alaska State Government confirmed job well done after the clean up exercise in 1992, it was then that the Exxon’s problem began, observe Centre and Jackson (2003:339).
First, it was the 34th largest oil spillage and the most remembered incident, the authors observe.
Environmentalists saw its damage as colossal.
It led to the death of many aquatic animals including birds, otters, among others.
Affected most were the oil company’s corporate image and reputation as the crisis was seen as badly managed.
Other areas like tourism and Exxon’s profits have bounced back after the cleanup as Center and Jackson (2002 339) note, except these two crucial assets: image and reputation.
Somewhat vigorously tackle the public perception of not doing enough in the course of the crisis; Exxon unfortunately, concerned itself with the cleanup efforts.
To its various publics, the organisation was unnecessarily rigid.
The established information centre and the headquarters were not forthcoming with information, kinds of scenario, you see in Nigeria Nwosu and Uffor (2005: 266).
In addition, the public never believed that Alaska would recover from the environmental disaster.
All these were besides visual images of animals in distress, therefore, adding to the emotion of the people and hence, highlighted “negative perception of the company”, Center and Jackson (2003:341).
These brought Exxon’s credibility and reputation to the lowest ebb.
Its later full page apology could not do much in minimising the image damage.
Exxon’ media damage control could not stop it’s portrayal as “money- minded and inhuman”.
It waited for the media to show that its information was accurate, consistent and complete; when it should do so by itself.
Its sympathy regret and sincerity did not come on time, hence its loss of reputation; note Centre and Jackson (2003: 343).
148 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Another cause of the image damage was Exxon’s inability to consult all relevant stakeholders: governments, environmentalists, media, community and employees.
Their support was crucial, they say.
The cleanup plan, information, coordination and strategies lacked transparency and effective handling.
These gave the media the chance to focus on the damage on aquatic animals and not on the recovery efforts, thereby inflicting more incalculable damages to Exxon, observe Centre and Jackson (2003:343).
A lesson is there for Exxon and other corporate bodies to learn: do not give anything to chance.
Make adequate planning.
Always anticipate even the worst.
Do not ignore any situation.
Be forward thinking.
Be proactive, open and transparent, as Centre and Jackson advice (2003:343).
3.2 Union Carbide Chemical Leak in Bhopal, India Union carbide India Ltd, is a subsidiary of Union Carbide Corporation based in Connecticut, USA, where it was the 37th biggest industrial organization, according to Centre and Jackson (2003:332).
It began operation in India in 1997.
On December 2, 1984, a poisonous gas leaked that at the end turned to become “the worst industrial disaster ever”.
At the last count, it claimed between 1,700 and 4,000 lives, mainly children and the elderly, whose lungs could not withstand the poisonous gas.
Indeed, it was a nightmare of immense proportion, to quote Center and Jackson (2003:332).
Although the accident was finally blamed on sabotage, other organisational and managerial factors were at play.
These included: a cooling unit was shut down; a flare tower was not functional; a scrubber was out of service, and there was an insufficient warning system.
These could be summed up in two words: criminal negligence.
These culminated in the worst and unprecedented environment public relations crisis ever.
UCC had problem handling the crisis, in the words of Center and Jackson (2003:325).
This was caused by the following: geographical and cultural differences; presence of only two telephone lines in a city of 750,000 people; difficulty in getting reliable information; non-education of the community; slow flow of information of the crisis to the parent company, and lack of knowledge of communication and crisis management by the UCCIL plant manager, the authors maintain.
149 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS As a rational, legitimate and responsive organisation, UCC accepted responsibility for the tragedy.
It promised more meticulous maintenance, getting to the root of the crisis and pacifying the injured and families of the diseased.
At the end, $6 million were spent on assisting the victims and another $470 million paid in 1989 as legal charges.
In his self-assessment of the crisis, the communication director of UCC, Bob Berzok, blamed it on absence of openness and candidness in messages packaging; not falling back on existing communication programmes in absence of an elaborate one; non-recognition of relevant stakeholders, and expecting to handle any crisis like the one before, Centre and Jackson (2003:337).
This crisis can be blamed on managerial ineptitude, negligence and absence of planned and strategic measures for crisis management, especially at such level.
The environmental public relations implications were enormous.
Yet, it was compounded by absence of, at that local level, any formidable mechanism for tackling them.
This hampered rescue operations.
3.3 Deaths from Johnson & Johnson’s Poisoned Tylenol Tylenol capsules are manufactured by Johnson & Johnson, an industrial giant in the United States of America.
Tainting the drug with cyanide caused the death of some consumers in 1982.
Johnson & Johnson quickly recalled the product from consumers and marketers, at a whooping cost of $50 million.
Reappearing, the product had tamper-resistant containers.
This was followed by a well planned and formidable public communication and public relations strategies.
The drug bounced.
The company regained its credibility, public trust and esteem.
This case is regarded as a classical instance of effective corporate crisis management.
Johnson & Johnson literarily “turned adversity into gain”, as Center and Jackson (2003:185) put it.
A number of factors according to Center and Jackson (2003:186-187), were responsible for this feat:  It was a gain from its long history of qualitative products.
 It had pride in public visibility, reputation and integrity.
 It was a result of many years of practicing social responsibility, high ethical standards and customer care to a level of legacy.
 The organisation has a creed which spelled out its standards.
150 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  It took cognisance of all relevant stakeholders and it paid off.
 It recognised public interest and ensured harmonious media relations and free flow of information to the public.
 The corporate affairs manager was a member of the managements, and took part in decision making and execution.
 Opportunity was available for feedback as the organisation had high regard for public contributions to its policies and programmes.
During the crisis, it was assisted in this particular area by the Food and Drug Administration.
Here we clearly see the relevance of corporate responsibility.
The enormity of the crisis notwithstanding, Johnson and Johnson still retained its credibility, good image and reputation, Center and Jackson (2003:190) note.
It had high regard for the public by ensuring positive public relationship.
This resulted in goodwill and profitability.
About same time, Johnson & Johnson received many and various awards from reputable organisations, indicating tacit acknowledgment of its positive impactful and social responsibility oriented corporate governance.
3.4 Nigeria’s 2012 Flood Disaster Between July and November 2012, Nigeria witnessed a record destructive flood it had never experienced in its history.
The chilling effects of the flood whose disastrous influence and scares are still with the people, know no bounds and cut across over two-thirds of the states of the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory.
The tale of woes which trial the flood is the same across Kaduna, Taraba, Jigawa, Benue, Edo, Imo, Kogi, Adamawa, Plateau, Kwara, Anambra, Delta, Ebonyi, Lagos, Akwa Ibom, Cross River, Rivers and Bayelsa states, as TELL (2012:60) and TELL (2012:42).
The calamity came simultaneously from two sources: weeks of torrential rainfall and the bursting of a dam on the Benue River located in Cameroon.
These factors unleashed its devastating effects on Nigeria, claiming hundreds of lives and property worth billions of naira.
Buildings were submerged, bridges, culverts and roads were washed away across these regions, TELL (2012:42).
The floods’ other havocs included loss of farm products, especially rice, millet, maize and sorghum.
That was in addition to disease and epidemics, 151 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS which hit refuges across the country in various squalors and poor sanitary camps they were helplessly sheltered.
For one, the crisis ignominiously exposed Nigeria’s unpreparedness for emergencies.
Clearly, all the emergency agencies were caught napping, including FEMA, FEPA, in addition to state levels.
Though all these bodies existed, besides the Red Cross, the suffering of the victims was not adequately and promptly addressed.
Rather, these agencies, among other groups and individuals were to ingloriously benefit corruptly from the billions of naira the Federal Government, philanthropists and donors dished out for the care of the victims.
Complaints of non-receipt of the donations rage across the states.
Therefore, as they groan on their devastating experiences, no contingency plans were on to forestall future occurrences.
Still, metrological agencies predict more destructive floods, unless attitudes and behaviors which orchestrate disastrous floods abate.
Among them are non-channeling of water through drainages, indiscriminate dumping of refuse and poor handling of oil exploration and exploitation, which experts say could later result in earthquakes.
With the absence of meaningful emergency arrangements and the aftermaths of global warming and climate change ravaging the globe, Nigeria should only wait and expect one thing: the worst.
Before the crisis, the Nigerian Metrological Agency did warn of the impending doom.
Yet, no serious measures were taken in preparation for it.
Even during and after the calamity, apart from usual media reports of events, nothing showed there was any concerted communication, public relations or any other strategies for counseling, assuaging and pacifying the victims.
There were only few cases of the Federal and states authorities’ media or show stunt/biz of touring affected areas, talking to victims and promising reliefs.
That is on crisis management Nigerian sytle.
No formal planning, no organised media briefing during and after the disaster of what happened, how to prevent it in future, relief arrangements, medication or those hit by epidemics, how the Federal and donor reliefs would be disbursed, Federal/States relationship in tackling the crisis, among others, In fact, it was best at a study on how not to handle a crisis, as it ignored all known principles and guidelines on crisis management, Kankarofi and Onuorah (2011: 241).
152 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Most glaring was the absence of organised communication and public relations measures for addressing the crisis.
Ironically too, no groups or individuals openly demanded for it.
Such demands and insistence for it would have at least indicated we appreciated and understood the uses and efficacies.
It is a stack indictment of our current operational level as far as using communication or public relations and their effective management in crisis situations is concerned.
Yet, we have public relations “experts” at Federal and state levels, who should know the critical roles of communication and public relations under such circumstances.
On the other hand, since no body demanded of it, why should they care for it?
Their focus was at how to appropriate the billions of naira donated to the victims, which in most cases hardly reach the right people, but end in committee members’ pockets.
4.0 CONCLUSION Of these four cases, three are specifically environmental, while the other one is pure public relations/health/social crisis.
To solve the Exxon Oil Spillage, Union Carbide Chemical leak and the Johnson & Johnson Tylenol poisoning crises, extensive dosages of communication and public relations was utilised.
The right of the public to know and be informed was respected and complied with.
They were the means of ascertaining the people’s anxieties, fears, problems and aspirations so as to effectively address them.
Such measures provided the opportunity for eliciting feedbacks, reactions and responses.
Of these cases, one had the reputation of attaining effectiveness, optimum results and professionalism.
That was the case of Johnson & Johnson case.
Ahead of the crisis, there were sufficient mechanisms and measures.
For this, at the end, the company came out of the crisis stronger and stouter.
Its profit increased and its credibility and corporate image got boosted, just because proper planning was done, cognisance of the public was taken and programmes of action, including communication and public relations, was effectively and professionally implemented.
That was in sharp contrast with the handling of the Nigerian food crisis.
There was no prior arrangement, the public or the victims were not focused on, and no efforts made to assure them of preventive measures against future occurrence.
And strangely, the public did not protest or agitate against the shoddy and shabby affairs.
At the end, even the donations meant to cushion the harsh effects of the crisis do not get to the right people.
Communities of cronies and relations of top government 153 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS officials misappropriated the funds to the detriment of the victims, some of who lost all their life acquisitions.
Indeed, there were no formal or informal panned, deliberate and sustainable public relations measures for tackling the crisis.
The implication is clearly seen in the aftermath of whatever was done in the direction of handling the crisis.
Perhaps, it is because over here case is not given to corporate image, reputation and credibility.
5.0 SUMMARY A lot of lessons can be learned from these real life cases.
There must be pre-planned, deliberate and enduring measures properly put in place and effectively executed for the solution to be sustained.
People must be the focus of environmental public relations: their views, opinions and feedbacks.
Besides, the corporate image and credibility of those concerned must be cared for.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  X-ray the place of properly planned communication in handling crisis situations.
 Compare the handling and situations on ground in the Union Carbide Chemical leak and the Johnson & Johnson crisis.
 Discuss the environmental public relations measures in the Nigerian flood crisis and show if they were effective.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Critical examine the communication and public relations inputs into managing the Exxon oil spill, showing their effectives and contributions to the resolution of the crisis.
.2.
Assess the inadequacies which led to the loss of many lives in the Union Carbide Chemical leak, especially the importance of communication as an element.
3.
Show in details those professional and public relations strategies which reversed the negative effects of Tylenol crisis to the advantage for Johnson & Johnson and how.
4.
Indicate and discuss those things that should been done but left on done in handling Nigeria’s flood disaster.
154 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 5.
Compare the tackling of the Tylenol and the Nigerian flood crises.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Center, Allen H and Patrick Jackson (2003).
Public Relations Practices.
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall of India.
TELL (2012).
“The high cost of ravaging floods”, October 8, p.60.
TELL (2012).
“The Disaster yet to come”, October 22, p.42.
Kankarofi, G. B. and J. Onuorah (2011).
Study Manual for the Advertising Professional Examinations, Part One.
Lagos: APCON.
Nwosu, I. E. and V. O. Uffoh (2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu: UNN/IDS.
155 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 5 LAWS AND LEGISLATIONS ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND SUSTAINABILITY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 National Policy Environment 3.2 Establishment of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA) 3.3 National Environmental Protection Management of Solid and Hazardous Wastes Regs, 1991 3.4 Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act (CAP, 131 LFN) on act Pollution Industries 3.5 FEPA Act (CAP, 131, LFN) on Effluent Limitation 3.6 An Excerpt From Decree No.
86 of 192.
3.7 Other Existing Relevant Laws 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Environmental protection is a global concern.
It is an issue that directly and indirectly affects even the unborn child.
It is a serious matter as it unchecked, poses severs danger to man’s survival on earth.
Indeed, even earlier doubting Thomases today have conceded that the earth is in a danger; it is caused by man’s activity, which has led to global warming.
Ironically, these cynicists are the major industrialized countries known to be generating most of the substances that cause global warning and depletion of the ozone layers.
To frontly face this threat, the United Nations in 1972 established the United Nations Environmental Programmes.
It is charged with the responsibility coordinating, controlling and regulating environmental progammes and projects in the world.
It has its headquarters in Nairobi, Kenya.
In cooperation and collaboration with regional and national bodies and agencies, it oversees activities relating to environment conservational and preservation.
In addition to regulatory measures and mechanisms, regions, countries enact laws and legislations which ensure environmental 156 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS protection.
This goes down the line, for instance, in Nigeria, state and local government, respectively, have roles to play in ensuring the protection of the environment.
It is a tacit unanimity that the issue of the environment is everyone’s concern.
We have provided some highlights of some of these polices and legislations.
Their details are in the accompanying appendixes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Understand the justification for enacting laws for protecting the environment.
 Note the extent of involvement of various levels of governments, agencies and organisations in environmental matters.
 Explain the embodiments and contents of some of these laws.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 National Policy on Environment The policy states Nigeria’s commitment to sustainable development anchored on proper management of the environment.
To attain the goal, it promises planning in order to balance “needs against the carrying capacity of the environment”, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005: 272).
Strategies and management measures must be place to ensure the following:  Major economic decisions cover environmental issues.
 Development projects cover costs of environmental remediation.
 Natural resources are economically management.
 Development projects fellow compulsory environmental impact assessment.
 Environmental monitoring and auditing is a continuous exercise.
The policy is tied to sustainable development principle and is main full the interrelationships among sector and subsectors which all must function optimal for the goals to be released.
The goals’ include: 1.
Quality environment goal enough for good health and well being.
2.
Environment should be managed to benefit today and future’s generations.
3.
Ensure quality ecosystem, ecology, biosphere and biological diversity.
4.
Enlighten and promote public awareness for participating on environmental issues 5.
Forge relationship with other countries, bodies and agencies on environmental issues.
157 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS The document contains five major policy initiatives, in addition to strategies for their implementation, FEPA (1999).
It is a blue print for pursuing and escapism environmental, protection and preservation for the countries, in line with LINEP stipulations.
3.2 Establishment of Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA) Decree No.
58 of 1988.
The Federal Environmental Protection Agency came into effect on December 30, 1988.
Its members include a chairman, four scientists a member each from nine key ministries and a director.
Among others, the functions of FEPA are: a.
Advise the government on national environmental policies and priorities and other areas effecting the environment.
b.
Prepare plans for enchanting science and technology in the area, in addition to the financial requirement.
c. Ensure cooperation with other bodies and agencies in other countries.
d. Engage in other activities pertinent to the realizing of the intents of the agency as contained in the decree.
Among others The agency is under the ministry of environment.
It is to ensure environmental standards in the following areas:  Water quality  Fish and wildlife  Air quality  Ozone protection  Noise control  Influent limitation  Disposal of hazardous materials.
3.3 National Environmental Protection Management of Solid and Hazardous Waste Regulation, 1991 The commencement date of this law was December 30, 1991.
Its goals, among others, were to:  Identity solid, toxic and hazardous waste inimical to people and the environment.
 Provide surveillance and monitoring.
 Give guidelines for the institution of the requirements for documenting hazardous waste and their disposal.
 Provide suitable means of disposing such wastes.
158 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS  Find ways of recycling and reuse of the waste.
The decree spells out the relationship between the agency and industries on waste management, and as well classify dangerous wastes (hazardous and radioactive), how to identify them; handle/dispose them, among others, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:300).
3.4 Federal Environmental Relations Agency Act (Cap.
131 LFN) This addendum to the operational instruments of the agency is called National Environmental Protection (Pollution Attement in Industries and Facilities Generating Wastes) Regulation 1991, with effect from August, 1991.
It pertains the dos and donts on the part of industries/factories and the subsequent statutory roles of FEPA to dutifully ensure the proper disposal of such wastes, FEPA (1991): 1.
Industries should not release hazardous or toxic wastes into the air, water and lands, but in the approved by the agency.
2.
Every industry should have means of monitoring and controlling pollution.
3.
Discharged wastes: solid, gas or liquid should be reported to FEPA.
4.
Such discharge should be reported with 24 hours.
5.
Industries should submit to FEPA used, stored and sources of chemical.
6.
State and zonal offices of FEPA are designated pollution response centres.
7.
These should exist in every industry contingency plans for accidental discharge of chemicals.
8.
Measures and equipment must be on ground in the event of emergencies.
9.
Nearest office of FEPA is to monitor and manage such emergencies.
10.
Unless permitted, no one can store or transport harmful toxic wastes in Nigeria.
3.5 Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act (CAP.
131 LFN) Called National Environmental Protection (Effluent Limitation) Regulations, this came into effect on August 15, 1991.
Its outlined mandates include: 1.
All industries should install anti-pollution equipment for detoxification of effluent and chemical discharges in such industries.
2.
There must compliance with stipulated waste water parameters in every industry.
3.
Discharged effluent should be treated and FEPA informed, among others, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:315).
159 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.6 An Excerpt from Decree No.
86 of 1992 This portion deals with the general principles of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).
According to it, Nwosu and Uffoh (2005:317), the objectives of EIA are as follows: a.
Before engaging in any programme that will likely affect the environment, anyone, organisation of government must first undertake EIA.
b.
B.
Any executed programme by anyone, body or government must be in conformity with the tenets of this exercise and realisation of its goals.
c. These should exchange of information, notification and consultation among people and organisation an embarked project or programme is to have environmental effects on boundaries of states, towns, communities and villages.
3.7Other Existing Relevant laws Some other prevailing laws and regulations an environmental protection and management include the following: a.
The Mineral Act of 1946 b.
The Mineral Oil (Safety Regulation of 1967).
c. The Oil in Navigable Waters Acts, No 34 of 1968 d. Petroleum Regulations Decree of 1967. e. Petroleum Decree (Act) of 1969. f. Petroleum (Drilling and Production) Regulations of 1969. g. Petroleum (Drilling and Production) Amendment Regulation of 1973. h. Petroleum Refining Regulations of 1974.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Of what necessity is the knowledge of these laws and regulations to an environmental public relations practitioner/manager?
 What are the basic functions of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA).
 How is FEPA empowered to handle its responsibilities?
160 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 4.0 CONCLUSION To practice very effectively and professionally in any field, every practitioner must have good knowledge of the dos and donts, rules and regulations, laws and legislations in his chosen field.
It is to underscore this that we undertook to play on the highlights of these major statutes concerning environmental protection and preservation in Nigeria.
Clear knowledge of these will assist the environmental public relations manager and his associates to function in such a way that his corporate goals will be achieved, the interest of the public served and the earth preserved for posterity.
These do not encompass all the laws relating to environmental sustainability.
Notwithstanding, all the fundamental components are contained and are enough to equip the practitioner with all he needs to serve the public and his profession better.
Overview knowledge of them, at least is sine qua non to the attainment of professional excellence and high standards in this field.
5.0 SUMMARY Having chosen to practice communication, public relations and environmental public relations one needs to be well prepared and fortified all the challenges.
Past of this is having good knowledge of these laws and legislations.
It gives one confidence and sense of pragmatic resolution to handle any aspect of the practice: reputational, managerial or policy making.
In additional, in a field one needs to enlighten the public to be at least of the essence, implications and the gains of environmental protection and sustainability, the mobiliser should, first, understand the background and prerequisites, Good knowledge of these laws is an aspect of that.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Highlight the main trust of the national policy on environment and how it intends to achieve its goods.
2.
Mention and explain the function of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA).
3.
Discuss how FEPA is equipped to take care of the management of solid and hazardous wastes in Nigeria.
4.
Show how FEPA CAP.131 LFN takes care of pollution in industries and other facilities regulation in Nigeria.
161 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 5.
How can environmental public relations facilitate the observance of these laws and legislations by all concerned?
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READING Nwosu, I. E and V. O Uffoh (2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles, Strategies, Issues and Cases.
Enugu: UNN/FEPA (1999),Revised National Policy on the Environment, Abuja Establishment of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA), Decree No.58, (December 30)198,Abuja.
FEPA (1991), Environmental National Protection Management of Solid and Hazardous Wastes Regulation Protection, December 30, Abuja.
FEPA (1991).
National Environmental Protection (Pollution Abatement In Industries And Facilities Generating Wastes), August 5, Abuja.
FEPA (1991).
National Environment Protection (Affluent Limitation) Regulation, August 15,Abuja FEPA (1992).
Decree No.86, On Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) December 10, Abuja.
162 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS APPENDIX I EXCERPT FROM NIGERIA’S NEW NATIONAL POLICY ON THE ENVIRONMENT, 1999.
Introduction Nigeria is committed to a national environmental policy that will ensure sustainable development based on proper management of the environment.
This demands positive and realistic planning that balances human needs against the carrying capacity of the environment.
This requires that a number of complementary policies, strategies and management approaches are put in place which should ensure, among others, that: Environmental concerns are integrated into major economic decision- making process; Environmental remediation costs are built into major development projects; Economic instruments are employed in the management of natural resources; Environmentally friendly technologies are applied; Environmental Impact Assessment is mandatorily carried out before any major development project is embarked on.
This policy, in order to succeed must be built on the following sustainable development principles: The precautionary principle which holds that where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, the lack of full scientific knowledge shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective means to prevent environmental degradation; Pollution Prevention Pays Principle (3p+) which encourages Industry to invest positively to prevent pollution; The polluter pays principle (PPP) which suggests that the polluter should bear the cost of preventing and controlling pollution; The user pays principle (UPP), in which the cost of a resource to a user must include all the environmental costs associated with its extraction, transformation and use (including the costs of alternative or future uses forgone); The principle of inter-generational equity which requires that the needs of the present generation are met without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs; The principle of intra-generational equity which requires that different groups of people within the country and within the present generation have the right to benefit equally from the exploitation of resources and that they have an equal right to a clean and healthy environment; The principle of participation which requires that decisions should as much as possible, be made by communities affected or on their behalf by the authorities closest to them.
This new policy thrust is based on fundamental re-thinking and a clearer appreciation of the interdependent linkages among development processes, environmental factors as well as human and natural resources.
Since development remains a national priority, it is recognized that the actions designed to increase the productivity of the society and meet the essential needs of the populace must be reconciled with environmental issues that had hitherto been neglected or not given sufficient attention.
In enunciating a national policy on the environment, cognisance must be taken of the various institutional settings and professional groupings, as well as the complex historical, social, cultural and legal considerations which have been and continue to be involved, in the identification and implementation of measures designed to solve national environmental problems.
The provisions of the Policy have thus been informed by recent national policy initiatives in Science and Technology, Agriculture, Health, Industry, Oil and Gas, Population, Culture, etc., as well as major international efforts in the field of environment.
The Policy aims to provide a rational, practicable, coherent and comprehensive approach to the pursuit of economic and social development in a way that minimizes contradictions and duplications, while enhancing inter and intra-sectoral co-operation and effectiveness at all levels.
163 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Since the health and welfare of all Nigerians depend on making the transition to sustainable development as rapid as possible, this National Policy on the Environment provides the concepts and strategies which will lead to the procedures and other concrete actions required for launching Nigeria into an era of social justice, self-reliance and sustainable development as we enter the 21st Century.
Policy Goal The goal of the National Policy on the Environment is to achieve sustainable development in Nigeria, and, in particular to: a. secure a quality of environment adequate for good health and well-being; b. conserve and use the environment and natural resources for the benefit of present and future generations; c. restore, maintain and enhance the ecosystems and ecological processes essential for the functioning of the biosphere to preserve biological diversity and the principle of optimum sustainable yield in the use of living natural resources and ecosystems; d. raise public awareness and promote understanding of the essential linkages between the environment, resources and development, and encourage individual and community participation in environmental improvement efforts; and e. co-operate in good faith with other countries, international organisations and agencies to achieve optimal use of trans-boundary natural resources and effective prevention or abatement of trans- boundary environmental degradation.
Conceptual Framework The National Policy on the Environment is basically a programme of actions rooted in a conceptual frame within which the linkages between environmental problems on the one hand and their causes, effects and solutions on the other hand can be discerned.
This is achieved in the Policy document through five major policy initiatives, viz: a. preventive activities directed at the social, economic and political origins of the environmental problems; b. abatement, remedial and restorative activities directed at the specific problems identified, and in particular: Problems arising from industrial production processes; Problems caused by excessive pressure of the population on the land and other resources; and Problems due to rapid growth of urban centres.
c. design and application of broad strategies for sustainable environmental protection and management at systemic or sub-systemic levels; d. enactment of necessary legal instruments designed to strengthen the activities and strategies recommended by the POLICY; e. Establishment/emplacement of management organs, institutions and structures designed to achieve the policy objectives.
Strategies For Implementation The implementation of the National Policy on the environment depends on specific actions directed towards all sectors of the economy and problem areas of the environment.
Consequently, the approach to problem-solving adopted in this Policy is predicated on an integrated, holistic and systemic view of environmental issues.
The actions envisaged will establish and/or strengthen legal, institutional, regulatory, research, monitoring, evaluation, public information, and other relevant mechanisms for ensuring the attainment of the specific goals and targets of the policy.
It is also expected that these strategies will lead to: a. improvement in the quality of life of the people; b. the establishment of adequate environmental standards as well as the monitoring and evaluation of changes in the environment; 164 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS c. the publication of up-to-date environmental data and the dissemination of relevant environmental information; d. prior environmental assessment of proposed activities which may negatively affect the environment or the use of a natural resource.
The proposed implementation strategies for the various sectors are as detailed below.
Source: FEPA (1999) Revised National Policy on the Environment, pp.
1-5 (of 45 pages) (Abuja, Nigeria).
165 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS APPENDIX II Decree No.
58 (30th December 1988) commencement THE FEDERAL MILITARY GOVERNMENT Hereby decrees as follows: PART I - ESTABLISHMENT, MEMBERSHIP, FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 1.
Establishment of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (1) There is hereby established a body to be known as the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (in this Act referred to as "the Agency") which under that name shall be a common seal, and may sue and be sued in its corporate name.
2.
Membership of the Agency (1) The Agency shall consist of the following members, that is to say – a.
Chairman who shall be a person with wide knowledge in environmental matters to be appointed by the President, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces; b.
Four Distinguished scientists to be appointed by the President, Commander-in- Chief of the Armed Forces and one representative each from the following Federal Ministries – (i) Health; (ii) Science and Technology; (iii) Works and Housing; (iv) Agriculture, Water Resources and Rural Development; Industries; (v) Mines, Power and Steel; (vi) Employment, Labour and Productivity; (vii) Petroleum Resources (Petroleum Resources Department); (viii) Transport; (ix) Aviation; and c. The Director of the Agency (2) Subject to section 3 of this Decree, a member who is not a public officer – a. shall hold office for a period of four years from the date of his appointment and shall be eligible for reappointment for one further term of four years only; b. shall be paid such remuneration and allowances as the President, Commander-in- Chief of the Armed Forces may, from time to time determine.
(3) The supplementary provisions contained in the Schedule to this Decree shall have effect with respect to the proceedings of the Agency and the other matters therein mentioned.
3.
Removal from office of member of the Agency The office of a member who is not a public officer shall become vacant if he resigns his office by a letter addressed by him to the President, or if the President is satisfied that it is not in the interest of the Agency for the person appointed to continue in office as a member, in which case the President shall notify the member in writing to that effect.
4.
Functions of the Agency The Agency shall, subject to this Act, have responsibility for the protection and development of the environment and biodiversity conservation and sustainable development of Nigeria's natural resources in general and environmental technology, including initiation of policy in relation to 166 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS environmental research and technology; and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, it shall be the duty of the Agency to- (a) advise the Federal Military Government on national environmental policies and priorities and on scientific and technological activities affecting the environment; (b) prepare periodic master plans for the development of environmental science and technology and advice the Federal Military Government on the financial requirements for the implementation of such plans; (c) promote co-operation in environmental science and conservation technology with similar bodies in other countries and with international bodies connected with the protection of the environment; (d) co-operate with Federal and State Ministries, Local Government Agencys, statutory bodies and research agencies on matters and facilities relating to environmental protection; and (e) to carry out such other activities as are necessary or expedient for the full discharge of the functions of the Agency under this Decree.
5.
Power of the Agency to give grants, etc.
(a) make grants to suitable authorities and bodies with similar functions for demonstration and for such other purposes as may be determined appropriate to further the purposes and provision of this Decree; (b) collect and make available, through publications and other appropriate means and in co- operation with public or private organisations, basic scientific data and other information pertaining to pollution and environmental protection matters and the degradation of natural resources; (c) enter into contracts with public or private organisations and individuals for the purpose of executing and fulfilling its functions and responsibilities pursuant to this Decree; (d) establish, encourage and promote training programmes for its staff and other appropriate individuals from public or private organisations; (e) enter into agreements with public or private organisations and individuals to develop, utilise, co-ordinate and share environmental monitoring programmes, research effects, basic data or chemical, physical and biological effects of various activities on the environment and other environmentally related activities as appropriate; (f) establish advisory committees composed of administrative, technical or other experts in such environmental areas as the Agency may consider useful and appropriate to assist it in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Decree; (g) establish such environmental criteria, guidelines, specifications or standards for the protection of the nation's air and inter State waters as may be necessary to protect the health and welfare or the population from environmental degradation; (h) establish such procedures for industrial or agricultural activities in order to minimise damage to the environment and natural resources from such activities; (i) maintain a programme of technical assistance to bodies (public or private) concerning implementation of natural resources conservation, environmental criteria, guidelines, regulations and standards and monitoring enforcement of the regulations and standards thereof; and (j) develop and promote such processes, methods, devices and materials as may be useful or incidental in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Decree.
6.
Power of the Minister to give directions Subject to this Decree, the Minister may give to the Agency directions of a general nature or relating generally to particular matters, but not to any particular individual or case with regard to 167 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS the performance by the Agency of its functions under this Decree and it shall be the duty of the Agency to comply with the directions.
7.
Director and other staff of the Agency (1) There shall be appointed by the President, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces a Director of the Agency.
(2) The Director who shall be the chief executive of the Agency and shall hold office on such terms and conditions as may be specified in his letter of appointment and, subject thereto, on such other terms and conditions as may be determined by the Agency in respect of the other employees thereof.
(3) The Agency may appoint such other persons to be employees of the Agency as it may deem fit.
(i) The remuneration and tenure of office of employees (other than the Director) shall be determined by the Agency with the approval of the Minister.
8.
Pensions 1979 No.
102 (1) It is hereby declared that service in the Agency shall be public service for the purposes of the Pensions Act 1979 and accordingly officers and other such staff of the Agency shall in respect of their services be entitled to such pensions, gratuities and other retirement benefits as are prescribed hereunder.
(2) For the purposes of the application of the provisions of the Pensions Act 1979, any powers exercisable thereunder by a Minister or other authority of the Government of the Federation (not being the power to make regulations under section 23 thereof) are hereby vested in and shall be exercisable by the Agency and not by any other person or authority.
9.
Power of the Director The Director shall, subject to the policies laid down by the Agency, develop programmes to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Act and, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, shall, in particular and in consultation with appropriate agencies (a) establish programmes for the prevention, reduction and elimination of pollution of the nation's air, land and inter-State waters, as well as national programmes for restoration and enhancement of the nation's environment; (b) encourage and promote the co ordination of the conservation of natural resources and environmentally related activities at all levels; (c) utilise and promote the expansion of research, experiments, surveys and studies by public or private agencies, institutions and organisations concerning causes, effects, extent, prevention, reduction and elimination of pollution and such other matters related to environmental protection and natural resources conservation as the Agency may, from time to time, determine necessary and useful; and (d) conduct public investigations on pollution.
10.
Power to accept gift (1) Subject to subsection (2) of this section, the Agency may accept gifts of land, money, books or other property upon such terms and conditions, if any, as may be specified by the person making the gift.
(2) The Agency shall not accept any gift if the conditions attached thereto by the person making the gift are inconsistent with the functions of the Agency under this Decree.
168 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 11.
Residence, offices and premises (1) For the purposes of providing residential accommodation for its staff, offices and premises as may be considered necessary for the performance of its functions under this Act, the Agency may (a) purchase or take on lease any interest in land; and (b) build, furnish, equip and maintain residential quarters, offices and premises.
(2) Subject to the Land Use Act 1978, the Agency may, with the approval of the President, sell or lease any residential quarters, land, offices or premises held by it and no longer required for the performance of its functions.
12.
Financial Provisions (1) The Agency shall establish and maintain a fund from which there shall be defrayed all expenses incurred by the Agency.
(2) The Agency shall cause to be kept proper accounts established under subsection (1) of this section - (a) such sums as may, from time to time, be granted to the Agency by the Government of the Federation; (c) all moneys raised for the purposes of the Agency by way of gifts, grants in aid, testamentary dispositions and sale of publications; (d) all subscriptions, fees and charges for services rendered by the Agency and all other sums that may accrue to the Agency from any other source.
13.
Borrowing power (1) The Agency may, with the consent of the President or in accordance with the general authority given by the Federal Military Government, borrow by way of loan or overdraft from any source any moneys required by the Agency to meet its obligations and its functions under this Act, so however that no such consent or authority shall be required where the sum or aggregate of the sums involved at any time does not exceed such amount as is for the time being specified in relation to the Agency by the Federal Military Government.
(2) The Agency may, subject to the provisions of this Decree and the conditions of any trust in respect of any property, invest all or any of its funds with the like consent or general authority.
(3) The Agency may invest any of its surplus funds in such securities as may be permitted by law.
14.
Annual estimates, accounts, and audit (1) The Agency shall cause to be prepared not later than six months before the end of each year an estimate of the expenditure and income of the Agency during the next succeeding financial year and, when prepared, they shall be submitted to the Minister.
(2) The Agency shall cause to be kept proper accounts and proper records in relation thereto and, when certified by the Agency, such accounts shall be audited as provided in subsection (3) of this section.
(3) The accounts of the Agency shall be audited as soon as may be practicable after the end of each year by auditors appointed from the list and in accordance with the guidelines supplied by the Auditor-General of the Federation.
PART II – (I) NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS Water quality 15.
Federal water quality standards 169 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (1) The Agency shall make recommendations to the President for the purpose of establishing water quality standards for the inter State waters of Nigeria to protect the public health or welfare and enhance the quality of water to serve the purposes of this Decree.
(2) In establishing such standards, the Agency shall take into consideration the use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, agricultural, industrial and other legitimate uses.
(3) The Agency shall establish different water quality standards for different uses.
16.
Effluent limitations (1) The Agency shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of this Decree, establish effluent limitations for new point sources which shall require application of the best control technology currently available and implementation of the best management practices.
(2) The Agency shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of this Act, establish effluent limitations for existing point sources which shall require the application of the best management practices under circumstances as determined by the Agency, and shall include schedules of compliance for installation and operation of the best practicable control technology as determined by the Agency.
Air quality and atmospheric protection 17.
Air quality, etc.
(1) The Agency shall establish more criteria, guidelines, specifications and standards to protect and enhance the quality of Nigeria's air resources so as to promote the public health or welfare and the normal development and productive capacity of the nation's human, animal or plant life, and include in particular - (a) minimum essential air quality standards for human, animal or plant health; (b) the control of concentration of substances in the air which separately or in combination are likely to result in damage or deterioration of property or of human, animal or plant health; (c) the most appropriate means to prevent and combat various forms of atmospheric pollution; (d) controls for atmospheric pollution originating from energy sources, including that produced by aircraft and other self propelled vehicles and in factories and power generation stations; (e) standards applicable to emission from any new mobile source which in the Agency's judgement causes or contributes to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare; and (f) the use of appropriate means to reduce emission to permissible levels.
(2) The Agency may establish monitoring stations or networks to locate sources of atmospheric pollution and determine their actual or potential danger.
18.
Ozone Protection (1) The Agency shall undertake to study data and recognise developments in international force and other countries regarding the cumulative effect of all substances, practices, processes and activities which may affect the stratosphere, especially ozone in the stratosphere.
(2) The Agency may make recommendations and programmes for the control of any substance, practice, process or activity which may reasonably be anticipated to affect the stratosphere, especially ozone in the stratosphere, when such effect may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare.
170 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (3) For the purposes of this section, "stratosphere" means that part of the atmosphere above the troposphere.
19.
Noise Control (1) The Agency shall, as soon as practicable after the commencement of this Act, in consultation with appropriate authorities (a) identify major noise sources, noise criteria and noise control technology; and (b) establish such noise abatement programmes and noise emission standards as it may determine necessary to preserve and maintain public health or welfare.
(2) Any noise criteria identified under this section shall reflect the scientific knowledge most useful in indicating the kind and extent of all identifiable effects on the public health or welfare which may be expected from differing qualities and quantities of noise.
(3) The Agency shall make recommendations to control noise originating form industrial, commercial, domestic, sports, recreational, transportation or other similar activities.
Hazardous substances, etc 20.
Discharge of hazardous substances and related offences (1) The discharge in such harmful quantities of any hazardous substance into the air or upon the land and the waters of Nigeria or at the adjoining shorelines is prohibited, except where such discharge is permitted or authorised under any law in force in Nigeria.
(2) Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (1) of this section commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding N100,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or to both such fine and imprisonment.
(3) Where an offence under subsection (1) of this section is committed by a body corporate it shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding N500,000 and an additional fine of N 1,000 for every day the offence subsists.
(4) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a body corporate, the body corporate and every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible to the body corporate for the conduct of the business of the body corporate, shall be deemed to be guilty of such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall render any person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(5) The Agency shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of this Decree, determine for the purposes of this section what substances are hazardous substances and such hazardous substances, the discharge of which shall be harmful under the circumstances to public health or welfare and, for this purpose, the Agency shall take into account such special circumstances including locations, quantity and climatic conditions relating to discharge as it may determine appropriate.
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or of any other sections of this Act the provisions of the Harmful Waste (Special Criminal Provisions, etc.)
Decree 1988 shall apply in respect of any hazardous substance constituting harmful waste as defined in section 15 thereof.
21.
Spiller's liability (1) Except where an owner or operator can prove that a discharge was caused solely by a natural disaster or an act of war or by sabotage, such owner or operator of any vessel or onshore or offshore facility from which the hazardous substance is discharged in violation of section 21 of this Decree, shall in addition to the penalty specified in that section be liable for 171 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (a) the cost of removal thereof, including any costs which may be incurred by any Government body or agency in the restoration or replacement of natural resources damaged or destroyed as a result of the discharge; and (b) costs of third parties in the form of reparation, restoration, restitution or compensation as may be determined by the Agency from time to time.
(2) The owner or operator or a vessel or onshore or offshore facility from which there is a discharge in violation of section 21 of this Act shall, to the fullest extent possible, act to mitigate the damage by (a) giving immediate notice of the discharge to the Agency and any other relevant agencies; (b) beginning immediate clean up operations following the best available clean up practice and removal methods as may be prescribed by regulations made under section 23 of this Decree; and (c) promptly complying with such other directions as the Agency may, from time to time, prescribe.
22.
Removal methods, etc.
The President for purposes of this Part of this Decree may, by regulations, prescribe any specific removal methods, national contingency plans, financial responsibility levels for owners or operators of vessels, or onshore or offshore facilities, notice and reporting requirements, penalties and compensation as he may determine necessary to minimise pollution by any hazardous substance.
23.
Co-operation with the Ministry of Petroleum Resources The Agency shall co-operate with the Ministry of Petroleum Resources (Department of Petroleum Resources) for the removal of oil related pollutants discharged into the Nigerian environment and play such supportive role as the Ministry of Petroleum Resources (Department of Petroleum Resources) may, from time to time, request from the Agency.
PART III - ESTABLISHMENT OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION BODIES 24.
Establishment of State and local government bodies The Minister shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of this Decree, encourage States and local government Agencys to set up their own environmental protection bodies for the purpose of maintaining good environmental quality in the areas of related pollutants under their control, subject to the provisions of this Decree.
PART IV - SUPPLEMENTARY AND MISCELLANEOUS Enforcement Powers 25.
Powers to inspect, etc.
For the purposes of enforcing this Act, any authorised officer may, without a warrant (a) require to be produced, examine and take copies of, any licence, permit, certificate or other document required under this Act or any regulations made thereunder; (b) require to be produced and examine any appliance, device or other item used in relation to environmental protection.
26.
Powers to search, seize and arrest (1) Any authorised officer, where he has reasonable grounds for believing that an offence has been committed against this Decree or any regulations made thereunder, may without a warrant 172 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (a) enter and search any land, building, vehicle, tent, vessel, floating craft or any inland water or other structure whatsoever, in which he has reason to believe that an offence against this Decree or any regulations made thereunder has been committed; (b) perform tests and take samples of any substances relating to the offence which are found on the land, building, vehicle, tent, vessel, floating craft or any inland water or other structure whatsoever, searched pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subsection; (c) cause to be arrested any person who he has reason to believe has committed such offence; and (d) seize any item or substance which he has reason to believe has been used in the commission of such offence or in respect of which the offence has been committed.
(2) A written receipt shall be given for any article or thing seized under subsection (1) of this section and the grounds for such seizure shall be stated on such receipt.
27.
Obstruction of authorised officers Any person who (a) wilfully obstructs any authorised officer in the exercise of any of the powers conferred on him by this Decree; or (b) fails to comply with any lawful enquiry or requirements made by any authorised officer in accordance with the provisions of section 26 of this Decree, commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding N500,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or to both such fine and imprisonment.
28.
Authorised officers to disclose identity (1) Any authorised officer, not in uniform when acting under the provisions of this Act, shall, on demand, declare his office and produce to any person against whom he is taking action such identification or written authority as may reasonably be sufficient to show that he is an authorised officer for the purposes of this Act.
(2) It shall not be an offence for any person to refuse to comply with any request, demand or order made by any authorised officer not in uniform, if such authorised officer refuses, on demand being made by such person, to declare his office or produce such identification or written authority.
29.
Procedure in suits (1) No suit against the Agency, a member of the Agency or any employee of the Agency for any act done in pursuance or execution of any law, or of any public duties, or in respect of any alleged neglect or default in the execution of such law, duties or authority, shall lie or be instituted in any court unless it is commenced within twelve months next after the act, neglect or default complained of or, in the case of a continuance of damage or injury, within twelve months next after the ceasing thereof.
(2) No suit shall be commenced against the Agency before the expiration of a period of one month after written notice of intention to commence the suit shall have been served upon the Agency by the intending plaintiff or his agent; and the notice shall clearly and explicitly state - (a) the cause of action; (b) the particulars of the claim; (c) the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff; and (d) the relief which he claims.
173 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 30.
Service of documents The notice referred to in section 30 (2) of this Decree and any summons, notice or other document required or authorised to be served upon the Agency under the provisions of this Decree or any other law, may be served by delivering the same to the chairman or the Director General, or by sending it by registered post addressed to the Director General, at the Secretariat of the Agency.
31.
Restriction on execution against the property of the Agency In any action or suit against the Agency, no execution or attachment or process in the nature thereof shall be issued against the Agency, but any sums of money which by judgment of the court are awarded against the Agency shall, subject to any directions given by the Agency, be paid from the general reserve fund of the Agency.
32.
Indemnity of members of the Agency Every member of the Agency, or agent, auditor or employee for the time being of the Agency, shall be indemnified out of the assets of the Agency against any liability incurred by him in defending any proceeding, whether civil or criminal, if any such proceeding is brought against him in capacity as such member, agent, auditor or employee as aforesaid.
33.
Annual report The Agency shall, not later than 30 September in each year, submit to the Minister a report on the activities of the Agency and its administration during the immediately preceding year and shall include in such report the audited accounts of the Agency.
34.
Material misrepresentation and impersonation (1) If a person knowingly or recklessly makes any statement in purported compliance with a requirement to furnish information, which is false in a material particular, he commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding N200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to both such fine and imprisonment.
(2) Any person who falsely represents himself to be an authorised officer of the Agency and assumes to do any act or to attend in any place for the purpose of doing any act on behalf of the Agency, shall be guilty of an offences under this Act and on conviction shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
35.
General penalties Any person who contravenes any provisions of this Decree or any regulation made thereunder commits an offence and shall on conviction, where no specific penalty is prescribed therefore, be liable to a fine not exceeding N20,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or to both such fine and imprisonment.
36.
Companies and firms liable Where any offence against this Decree or any regulations made thereunder has been committed by a body corporate or by a member or a partnership or other firm or business, every director or officer of that body corporate or any member of the partnership or other person concerned with the management of such firm or business shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding N500,000 for such offence and, in addition, the body corporate, firm or partnership shall be directed to pay compensation for any damage resulting from such breach thereof or to repair and restore the polluted environmental area to an acceptable level as approved by the Agency unless he proves to the satisfaction of the court that – (a) he used due diligence to secure compliance with this Decree; and (b) such offence was committed without his knowledge, consent or connivance.
174 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (c) Miscellaneous 37.
Power to make regulations The Minister, on the advice of the Agency, may make regulations generally for the purposes of this Decree but, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Minister may, in particular, prescribe standards for - (a) water quality; (b) effluent limitations; (c) air quality; (d) atmospheric protection; (e) ozone protection; (f) noise control; and (g) control of hazardous substances and removal control methods.
38.
Interpretation In this Decree, unless the context otherwise requires - "appropriate agencies" means any government agencies which have jurisdiction over the land or water affected by the pollution or any government agencies which ordinarily have jurisdiction over the operation which led to the pollution; "authorised officer" means any employee of the Agency, any police officer not below the rank of an Inspector of Police, or any customs officer; "court" means the Federal High Court; "Director" means the Director of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency; "disposal" includes both land based disposal and dumping in waters and airspace of Nigeria; "effluent limitation" means any restriction established by the Agency of quantities, rates and concentration of chemical, physical, biological or other constituents which are discharged from point sources into the waters of Nigeria; "environment" includes water, air, land and all plants and human beings or animals living therein and the inter relationships which exist among these or any of them; "hazardous substance" includes any substance designated as such by the President by order published in the Federal Gazette; "new source" means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of any regulations prescribing a standard of performance under this Act, which are applicable to such source; "offshore facility" means any facility of any kind located over, in, or under any of the waters of Nigeria; "onshore facility" means any facility (including, but not limited to motor vehicles and rolling stock) of any kind located over, in, or under any land within Nigeria other than submerged land; "owner" or "operator" means (a) in the case of a vessel, any person owning, operating or chartering by demise such vessel; (b) in the case of an onshore facility or an offshore facility, any person owning or operating such onshore facility or offshore facility; and (c) in the case of any abandoned offshore facility, the person who owned or operated such facility immediately prior to such abandonment; from which pollutants are or may be discharged; "point source" means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe; ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged; 175 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS "pollution" means man made or man aided alteration of chemical, physical or biological quality of the environment to the extent that is detrimental to that environment or beyond acceptable limits and "pollutant" shall be construed accordingly; "removal" means removal of hazardous substances from waters of Nigeria, including shorelines or the taking of such other action as may be necessary to minimise or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare, ecology and natural resources of Nigeria; "waters of Nigeria" means all water resources in any form, including atmospheric, surface and subsurface, and underground water resources where the water resources are inter State, or in the Federal Capital Territory, territorial waters, Exclusive Economic Zone or in any other area under the jurisdiction of the Federal Government.
39.
Citation This Decree may be cited as the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Decree 1988.
SCHEDULE SECTION 1(3) SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE AGENCY Proceedings 1.
Subject to this Decree and section 26 of the Interpretation Act 1964 (which provides for decisions of a statutory body to be taken by a majority of its members and for the person presiding to have a second or casting vote), the Agency may make standing orders regulating the proceedings of the Agency or any committee thereof.
2.
Every meeting of the Agency shall be presided over by the chairman or in his absence the members present at the meeting shall elect one of their number to preside at the meeting.
3.
The quorum at a meeting of the Agency shall consist of the chairman (or in an appropriate case the person presiding at the meeting pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Schedule) and six other members.
4.
Where upon any special occasion the Agency desires to obtain the advice of any person on any particular matter, the Agency may co opt that person to be a member for as many meetings as may be necessary; and that person while so co opted shall have all the rights and privileges of a member except that he shall not be entitled to vote.
Committees 5.
(1) Subject to its standing orders, the Agency may appoint such number of standing and ad hoc committees as it thinks fit to consider and report on any matter with which the Agency is concerned.
(2) Every committee appointed under the foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall be presided over by a member of the Agency and shall be made up of such number of other persons, not necessarily members of the Agency, as the Agency may determine in each case.
(3) The quorum of any committee set up by the Agency shall be as may be determined by the Agency.
6.
Where standing orders made pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Schedule provide for a committee of the Agency to consist of co opted persons who are not members of the Agency, the committee may advise the Agency on any matter referred to it by the Agency and the members thereof may attend any meeting of the Agency for that purpose.
Miscellaneous 7.
The fixing of the seal of the Agency shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director General of the Agency.
176 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 8.
Any contract or instrument which, if made by a person not being a body corporate, would not be required to be under seal, may be made or executed on behalf of the Agency by the Director or by any other person generally or specially authorised to act for that purpose by the Agency.
9.
Any document purporting to be a contract, instrument or other document duly signed or sealed on behalf of the Agency shall be received in evidence and shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed without further proof to have been so signed or sealed.
10.
The validity of any proceedings of the Agency or of a committee thereof shall not be adversely affected (a) by any vacancy in the membership of the Agency or any committee thereof; or (b) by any defect in the appointment of a member of the Agency or any committee thereof.
11.
Any member of the Agency or a committee thereof who has a personal interest in any contract or arrangement entered into or proposed to be considered by the Agency or committee thereof shall forthwith disclose his interest to the Agency or the committee and shall not vote on any question relating to the contract or arrangement.
12.
No member of the Agency shall be personally liable for any act done or omission made in good faith while engaged on the business of the Agency.
MADE at Lagos this 30th day of December 1988.
GENERAL I.B.
BABANGIDA, President, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces Federal Republic of Nigeria EXPLANATION (This note does not form part of the above Decree but is intended to explain its purport) The Decree establishes the Federal Environmental Protection Agency with the following functions- (a) responsibility for monitoring and helping to enforce environmental protection measures; (b) co-operation with Federal and State Ministries, Local Government Councils, statutory bodies, and research agencies on matters and facilities relating to environmental protection.
For the effective implementation of its functions, the Decree confers additional powers on the Agency including the power to establish standards in certain environmental areas.
In order to make the work of the Agency effective, the Decree confers upon its employees certain specific powers, for instance, power to inspect, search and seize and the power to arrest offenders.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE FEDERAL MILITARY GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA AND PRINTED BY THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND CULTURE PRINTING DIVISION, LAGOS.
FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY ACT, CAP 131, LFN, 1990 (as amended) by DECREE NO.
59 OF 1992.
Decree No.
59 ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS PART I – ESTABLISHMENT, GOVERNING COUNCIL, FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY SECTION 1.
Establishment of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
177 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 2.
Governing Council of the Agency.
2A.
Establishment and functions of the Technical Committee.
3.
Removal from office of member of the Agency.
4.
Functions of the Agency.
5.
Powers of the Agency to give grants, etc.
6.
Power of the President to give directions.
7.
Director General and other staff of the Agency.
8.
Pensions.
9.
Powers of the Director General.
10.
Power to accept gifts, etc.
11.
Residences, offices and premises.
12.
Fund of the Agency.
13.
Borrowing power.
14.
Annual estimates, accounts and audit.
PART II - NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS Water quality 15.
Federal water quality standards.
16.
Effluent limitations.
Air quality and atmospheric protection 17.
Air quality, etc.
18.
Ozone protection.
Noise 19.
Noise control.
Hazardous substances 20.
Discharge of hazardous substances.
21.
Spiller's liability.
22.
Removal methods, etc.
23.
Co-operation with the Ministry of Petroleum Resources.
178 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS APPENDIX III NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION MANAGEMENT OF SOLID AND HAZARDOUS WASTES REGULATIONS, 1991 Commencement: 30th December, 1991 In the exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 37 of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act and all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I, Major General Mamman Tsofo Kontagora (Rtd) on the advice of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, hereby make the following regulations: PART 1 - OBJECTIVES AND DESIGNATION OF DANGEROUS WASTE 1.
The objectives of solid and hazardous waste management shall be to – (a) identify solid, toxic and extremely hazardous wastes dangerous to public health and environment; (b) provide for surveillance and monitoring of dangerous and extremely hazardous wastes and substances until they are detoxified and safely disposed of; (c) provide guidelines necessary to establish a system of proper record keeping, sampling and labelling of dangerous and extremely hazardous wastes; (d) establish suitable and provide necessary requirements to facilitate the disposal of hazardous wastes; (e) research into possible re use and recycling of hazardous waste.
2.
Functions of appropriate Governmental agencies (1) All industries shall inform the Agency of all toxic, hazardous and radioactive substances which they keep in their premises and/or which they discharge during their production process.
(2) The Agency shall maintain an up to date register of all industries which keep toxic, hazardous and radioactive substances or discharge toxic, hazardous and radioactive wastes.
(3) The Agency shall prescribe to the relevant industries, factories or other institutions methods of controlling the generation of toxic, hazardous and radioactive wastes.
(4) The Agency shall maintain a register of banned toxic, hazardous and radioactive substances and inform relevant industries, factories or institutions of the substances.
(5) For the purpose of the disposal of toxic solid and hazardous wastes, the Agency shall (a) monitor and ensure that industries, factories or other institutions which discharge toxic, hazardous and radioactive waste as listed in column of the First Schedule to these regulations, shall treat such hazardous wastes in the manner prescribed in the Second Schedule to these regulations; (b) request from any industry on its register, information relating to the generation, handling, disposal of toxic, hazardous and radioactive wastes; it shall be unlawful for any industry to withhold any such information; (c) employ scientific and human resources to monitor and control all phases of life cycle of all substances likely to have an adverse effect on human health and environment; (d) determine and use the most advanced technology available for the disposal of toxic, hazardous and radioactive wastes; (e) set up regional bodies or committees to serve as "DUMP WATCH" for transboundary movement of toxic, hazardous and radioactive waste.
The Agency shall prescribe necessary guidelines to the committees set up pursuant to paragraph (e) of these regulations.
179 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.
A solid waste shall be determined to be a dangerous waste or extremely hazardous waste if it conforms with the provisions of regulation 6 of these Regulations and it is out of waste specified as dangerous in the list of dangerous wastes specified in Schedule 6 to these Regulations.
PART II – DANGEROUS WASTE LIST 5.
A waste shall be designated as discharged chemical product, if it is handled in any of the manners described in Schedule 4 to these Regulations.
6.
Dangerous waste source (1) waste shall be deemed to be dangerous waste if the waste appears in the list of dangerous waste contained in FAC-000-000-9903 as listed in Schedule 12 to these Regulations.
(2) A waste shall be regarded as dangerous if it is – (a) waste which appears in the dangerous waste source list as listed in Schedule 12 to these Regulations; (b) waste which is a residue from the management of a waste listed in the dangerous waste source list in Schedule 12 to these Regulations and identified as "D.W"; and (c) described in the footnotes of FAC 000 000 9904 as an extremely hazardous waste in the hazardous and dangerous waste sources list in Schedule 13 to these Regulations.
(3) Any waste appearing in the dangerous waste list shall be designated as exclusively hazardous waste (EHW).
7.
Dangerous waste mixtures Infectious dangerous wastes shall include but not be limited to infectious waste specified in Schedule 5 to these Regulations.
8.
(1) Any waste whose constituents and concentration are known and which has not been designated as (a) a discarded chemical product; (b) an infectious dangerous waste; (c) a dangerous waste source, shall be deemed as a dangerous waste mixture to which the provisions of these Regulations shall apply.
(2) A dangerous waste mixture shall also be determined as dangerous if (a) the category or degree of toxicity for each known constituent in the waste is known; or (b) each known constituent in the waste is a halogenated hydrocarbon or a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon with greater than three rings and less than seven rings; or (c) each known constituent of the waste is regarded by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) as human or animal positive or a suspected carcinogen.
(3) Any person who has a dangerous waste material shall use data available to him to determine the extent of toxicity in the waste.
(4) Where the data available to the person who has the dangerous waste is inadequate to determine the extent of toxicity, the person concerned shall apply to the Agency or its employees to determine whether the waste is contained in the Exclusive List of Registered Dangerous Substances in the Register with the Agency.
9.
Determination of toxicity in waste (1) The toxicity category for each toxic constituent in a waste shall be determined by referring to the FEPA Register and by checking this data against Schedule 6 to these Regulations.
(2) Where the toxic constituent classified under more than one of the four toxicity categories (Aquatic, Oral, Inhalation or Dermal), the toxic constituent shall be assigned to the most acutely toxic category represented.
(3) The category of toxicity in a waste shall be determined in accordance with the toxicity category table in Schedule 6 to these Regulations.
180 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 10.
Categorisation of toxic waste (1) The degree of toxicity shall be categorised according to the formula prescribed in the Schedule 6 to these Regulations.
(2) If a person has established the toxicity of his waste by means of the Bioassay test methods and has determined his waste toxicity's range, then he shall designate his waste according to the Toxic Dangerous Waste Designation in Schedule 7 to these Regulations.
11.
Persistent hazardous dangerous wastes (1) Wastes which contain halogenated hydrocarbons (HH) and/or polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons with more than three rings and less than seven rings (PAH) shall be determined by the procedure specified in these Regulations.
(2) A person shall determine the concentration of (HH) and/or (PAH) in his waste by either testing his waste as specified in (a) of this sub paragraph or by the calculation procedures described in (b) of this sub paragraph, that is (a) concentration tests: A person shall test his waste to determine its concentration level as stated in sampling and testing method below; (b) concentration calculations: if a person can demonstrate to FEPA beyond a reasonable doubt that any remaining persistent constituents for which he does not know the concentrations of would not contribute significantly to the total persistent concentration of his waste then he may calculate this concentration as follows: (3) A person whose waste contains one or more halogenated hydrocarbons for which the concentrations are known shall determine his total halogenated hydrocarbon concentration by summing the concentration percentages for all of his waste's significant halogenated hydrocarbons.
12.
Carcinogenic Dangerous Wastes (1) A substance listed as an IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer) human or animal positive or suspected carcinogen and is an inorganic, respiratory, carcinogen shall be a carcinogenic substance provided it occurs in a triable format (that is, if it is a waste which easily crumbles and forms dust which can be inhaled).
(2) Any person whose waste contains one or more IARC carcinogen(s) and if (a) the monthly or batch waste quantity exceeds 100kg; or (b) the concentration of anyone positive (human or animal) carcinogen exceeds 1.0 per cent of the waste quantity (i) shall designate such waste as EHW (and such designation shall be determined by (i), (ii), (iii)); (ii) the concentration of anyone IARC positive (human or animal) carcinogen exceeds 0.01 per cent of the waste quantity, such waste shall be designated DW; or (iii) the total concentration summed for all IARC positive and suspected (human or animal) carcinogens exceeds (1.0 per cent of the waste quantity) such waste shall be designated DW; (c) a substance shall not be carcinogenic if it is rated as IARC human or animal positive or suspected carcinogen merely because of studies involving implantation of the substance into the animals as site cause for the IARC rating.
13.
Characteristic to determine Solid waste as a dangerous waste A solid waste shall be regarded as dangerous waste by determining any of the following parameters (a) ignitability; (b) corrosivity; (c) reactivity; 181 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (d) extraction procedure toxicity (EPTOX); (e) halogenated hydrocarbons concentration; (f) polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon concentration (PAH); (g) static acute fish toxicity test; (h) acute oral rate toxicity test; (i) polychlorinated Dibenzo p dioxins and dibenzofurans concentrations; (j) polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCB's).
14.
Methods and Tests to determine representative samples (1) The method used for obtaining representative samples of a waste shall vary with the type and form of the waste.
(2) The Agency shall consider such representative samples using any of the sampling methods.
(3) If the waste samples have properties similar to the characteristics mentioned in regulation 13 of these Regulations and the materials indicated therein can cause any of the reactions indicated in regulation 13 of these Regulations then the waste shall be considered as a dangerous waste as described in paragraph (2) of this regulation.
(4) The following methods shall be used by the Agency to determine representative samples as waste, that is (a) crushed or powdered material ASTM standard method (D346 75); (b) extremely viscous liquid ASTM standard method (D 140 70); (c) flash like material ASTM standard method (D22234 7 6); (d) solid like material ASTM standard method (D 1452 65); (e) solid or rock like materials ASTM standard method (D420 69); (f) containerised liquid waste (COLIW ASA) described in "TestMethods for the evaluation of solid waste, Physical/Chemical Methods" SW 846 USEPA (1985); (g) liquid waste in pits, ponds, lagoons and similar reservoirs "Pond sampler" described in "Test methods for the evaluation of solid waste, Physical/Chemical Methods" SW 846, USEP A (1985).
15.
Ignitability Test (1) A solid waste is ignitable if its representative sample has any of the following properties, that is (a) it is liquid, other than an aqueous solution containing less than 24 per cent alcohol by volume and has a flash point of less than 60°C as defined by Pensky Mertens Close cup Tester using the test method specified in ASTM standard D 93 79 or D 93 80, or a seta flash closed cup tester usingmethod specified in ASTMStandard D 3278; (b) it is not a liquid and is capable, under standard temperature and pressure, of causing fire through friction, absorption of moisture or spontaneous chemical changes and, when ignited, s so vigorously and persistently that it creates a hazard; (c) it is an ignitable compressed gas; (d) it is an oxidiser.
(2) An ignitable solid waste not designated as dangerous waste under any of the Agency's Dangerous Waste Lists or the Agency's Dangerous Waste Criteria shall be assigned the dangerous waste number FD 001.
16.
Corrosive Testing (1) A solid waste is corrosive if its representative sample has any or more of the following properties, that is (a) it is aqueous and has a (pH) less than or equal to 2 or greater than or equal to 12.5 as determined by a (pH) meter using method 5.2 in Test Method for the evaluation of solid waste, (Physical/Chemical methods); 182 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (b) it is a liquid and corrodes steel (5AE 1020) at a rate greater than 6.35mm per year at a test temperature of 55°C as determined by standard Test Method 01 69 as standardised in "Test Methods for the evaluation of solid waste, (Physical/Chemical methods)"; (c) it is a solid or semi solid, and when mixed with an equal weight of water results in a solution, the liquid portion of which has the property specified in such paragraph (a) of this regulation.
(2) A corrosive solid waste not designated as a dangerous waste under any of the Agency Exclusive List of Dangerous Substances listed in Schedule 12 to these Regulations or has any of the characteristics of Dangerous Waste Criteria listed in regulation 13 of these Regulations shall be designated DW and shall be assigned the dangerous waste number FD 002.
17.
Reactivity Test (1) A solid waste exhibits the characteristic of reactivity if a representative sample of the waste has any of the following properties, that is (a) it is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent changes, without detonating; (b) it reacts violently with water; (c) it forms potentially explosive mixtures with water; (d) when mixed with water, it generates toxic gases, vapours or fumes in a quantity sufficient to pose danger to human or animal health or the environment; (e) it is a cyanide or sulfide bearing waste which when exposed to (pH) conditions between 2 and 12.5 can generate toxic gases, vapours or fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human or animal health or the environment.
18.
Solid waste exhibiting characteristic of toxicity Where a solid waste exhibiting the characteristic of EP toxicity is not designated a dangerous waste under any of the Agency's Dangerous Waste List or Dangerous Criteria, it shall be assigned to the Agency's dangerous waste number specified in Schedule 9 to these Regulations which corresponds to the toxic constituent causing it to be dangerous.
19.
Generic dangerous waste numbers A waste which exhibits any of the dangerous waste characteristics lists in Schedule 8 to these Regulations shall be assigned the dangerous waste number corresponding to the characteristic exhibited by the waste as shown in Schedule 9 to these Regulations.
183 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS APPENDIX IV FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY ACT (CAP.
131 LFN) National Environmental Protection (Pollution Abatement in Industries and Facilities Generating Wastes) Regulations 1991 Commencement: 5th August 1991 In the exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 37 of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act and all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I, Major General Mamman Tsofo Kontagora (Rtd) on the advice of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, hereby make the following regulations: 1.
Restriction on the release of toxic substances No industry or facility shall release hazardous or toxic substances into the air, water or land of Nigeria's ecosystems beyond limits approved by the Agency.
2.
Monitoring pollution units An industry or a facility shall‐ (a) have a pollution monitoring unit within its premises; (b) have on site a pollution control; or (c) assign the responsibility for pollution control to a person or body corporate accredited by the Agency.
3.
Discharge monitoring report A discharge, including solid, gaseous and liquid waste from any industry or facility shall be analysed and reported to the nearest office of the Agency every month, through a Discharge Monitoring Report.
4.
Unusual or accidental discharges An unusual discharge or accidental discharge of waste from any industry facility shall be reported to the nearest office of the Agency not later than 24 hours of the discharge.
5.
List of chemicals An industry or facility shall submit to the nearest office of the Agency‐ (a) a list of the chemicals used in the manufacture of its products; (b) details of stored chemicals and storage conditions; (c) where chemicals are bought, sold or obtained, the name of any secondary buyer.
6.
Pollution Response Centre The State and zonal offices of the Agency shall serve as Pollution Response Centres for co‐ordinating pollution response activities.
7.
Contingency plan An industry or a facility shall have a contingency plan approved by the Agency against accidental release of pollutants.
8.
Machinery for combating pollution, etc.
(1) An industry or a facility shall set up a machinery for combating pollution hazard and maintain equipment in the event of an emergency.
184 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (2) An industry or a facility shall, for the purposes of paragraph (1) of this regulation, have a stock of pollution response equipment which shall be readily accessible and available to combat pollution hazards in the event of accidental discharges.
9.
Pollution emergency If there is a case of pollution emergency, the nearest office of the Agency shall serve as an "On‐the‐Scene Co‐ordinator" to co‐ordinate all response activities.
10.
Storage treatment and transport of harmful toxic waste (1) No person or body corporate shall engage in the storage treatment and transportation of harmful toxic waste within Nigeria without a permit issued by the Agency.
(2) The permit shall be in such form as may be determined by the Agency.
11.
Generator's liability The collection, treatment, transportation and final disposal of waste shall be the responsibility of the industry or facility generating the waste.
12.
Industrial layouts in each State (1) Each State of the Federation shall‐ (a) designate industrial layouts which shall be separate from residential areas; and (b) provide buffer zones between industrial layouts and residential areas.
(2) A buffer zone shall‐ (a) be rigidly kept away from developers; (b) be monitored to prevent developing encroachment by developers.
13.
Strategies for waste reduction An industry or a facility, including those to be established after the commencement of these Regulations, shall adopt in‐plant waste reduction and pollution prevention strategies.
14.
Restriction on new source of pollution (1) No new industry or facility shall commence production without compliance with the provisions of these Regulations.
(2) The Agency shall prevent an industry or facility from commencing operation where the Agency believes that such industry or facility may constitute a new point source of pollution.
15.
Permissible limits of discharge into public drains, etc.
(1) No effluent with constituents beyond permissible limits shall be discharged into public drains, rivers, lakes, sea or underground injection without a permit issued by the Agency or any organisation designated by the Agency.
(2) No oil, in any form, shall be discharged into public drains, rivers, lakes, sea, or underground injection without a permit issued by the Agency or any organisation designated by the Agency.
(3) Application for a permit and the permit shall be in the Forms set out in the schedule to these Regulations or as specified by the Agency.
(4) The Agency may revoke a permit issued under paragraph (1) of this regulation if the Agency is satisfied, after the due enquiry, that the industry or facility has not complied with any of the conditions specified in the permit.
(5) Revocation of a permit shall be in the Forms C and D set out in the Schedule to these Regulations or as specified by the Agency.
185 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (6) An industry or a facility with a new point source of pollution or a new process line with a new point source shall apply to the Agency for discharge permit not later than 180 days before commencing the discharge of any effluent arising from any operation.
16.
Solid wastes to be disposed of in environmentally safe manner (1) Solid wastes generated by any industry or facility, including sludge and all by‐products, resulting from the operation of pollution abatement equipment, shall be disposed of in an environmentally safe manner.
(2) No industrial solid waste shall be disposed of in any municipal landfill.
17.
Release of gaseous matters An industry or a facility which is likely to release gaseous, particulate, liquid or solid untreated discharges shall install, into its system, appropriate abatement equipment in such manner as may be determined by the Agency.
18.
Surroundings of factories The surroundings of a factory or facility shall be maintained to preserve their aesthetic and sanitary conditions.
19.
Safety of workers No industry shall expose an employee to any hazardous condition in his place of work.
20.
Forms The Forms set out in the Schedule to these Regulations shall be used for the purposes specified therein with or without modification by the Agency.
21.
Environmental impact assessment, etc.
The Agency shall demand environmental audit from existing industries and environmental impact assessment from new industries and major developmental projects and the industries shall comply within 90 days of the receipt of the demand.
22.
Penalty A person or body, whether corporate or unincorporate, who contravenes any provision of these Regulations shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to the penalty specified in section 35 or 36 of the Act.
23.
Citation These Regulations may be cited as the National Environmental Protection (Pollution Abatement in Industries and Facilities Generating Wastes) Regulations 1991.
186 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS APPENDIX V FEDERAL ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AGENCY ACT (CAP.
131 LFN) National Environmental Protection (Effluent Limitation) Regulations 1991 Commencement: 15th August, 1991 In the exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 37 of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act and all other powers enabling me in that behalf, I, Major General Mamman Tsofo Kontagora (Rtd) on the advice of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, hereby make the following regulations: 1.
Installation of anti‐pollution equipment (1) Every industry shall install anti‐pollution equipment for the detoxification of effluent and chemical discharges emanating from the industry.
(2) An installation made pursuant to paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be based on the Best Available Technology (BAT), the Best Practical Technology (BPT) or the Uniform Effluent Standards (UES).
2.
Waste water parameters (1) The selected waste water parameters for the industries specified in column 1 of the First Schedule to these Regulations are set out in columns 2 and 3 respectively of the Schedule.
(2) The parameters shall be continuously monitored to ensure compliance with these Regulations.
3.
Treatment of effluent (1) An industry which discharges effluent shall treat the effluent to a uniform level as specified in the Second Schedule to these Regulations to ensure assimilation by the receiving water into which the effluent is discharged.
(2) The nearest office of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency shall be furnished from time to time with the composition of any effluent treated as specified in paragraph (1) of this regulation.
4.
Additional sectoral effluent limitation treatment  An industry specified in column 1 of the Third Schedule to these Regulations shall be subject to the additional sectoral effluent limitations set out in columns 2 and 3 respectively of the Schedule.
5.
Penalty A person who contravenes a provision of these Regulations is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to the penalty specified in section 36 or 37 of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act.
6.
Citation These Regulations may be cited as the National Environmental (Effluent Limitation) Regulations.
187 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS APPENDIX VI EXCERPT FROM DECREE NO.
86 Commencement: 10th December 1992 THE FEDERAL MILITARY GOVERNMENT hereby decree as follows: - PART I - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT 1.
The objectives of any environmental Impact assessment (hereafter in this Decree referred to as "the Assessment") shall be - (a) to establish before a decision taken by any person, authority corporate body or unincorporated body including the Government of the Federation, State or Local Government intending to undertake or authorise the undertaking of any activity that may likely or to a significant extent affect the environment or have environmental effects on those activities shall first be taken into account; (b) to promote the implementation of appropriate policy in all Federal Lands (however acquired) States and Local Government Areas consistent with all laws and decision making processes through which the goal and objective in paragraph (a) of this section may be realised; (c) to encourage the development of procedures for information exchange, notification and consultation between organs and persons when proposed activities are likely to have significant environmental effects on boundary or trans-state or on the environment of bordering towns and villages.
188 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS MEMBER CODE OF ETHICS FOR THE PRACTICE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS PUBLIC RELATIONS SOCIETY OF AMERICA This code was adopted by the PRSA assembly in 2000.
It replaces a code of ethics in force since 1950 and revised in 1954, 1959, 1963, 1977, 1983 and 1988.
STATEMENT OF PROFESSIONAL VALUES These core values of PRSA members and, more broadly, of the public relations profession, provide the foundation for the member code of ethics and set the industry standard for the professional practice of public relations.
These values are the fundamental beliefs that guide our behaviors and decision-making process.
We belief our professional values are vital to the integrity of the profession as a whole.
ADVOCACY:  We serve the public interest by acting as responsibly advocates for these we represent.
 We provide a voice in the marketplace of ideas, fact and viewpoint to aid informed public debate.
HONEST  We adhere to the highest standards of accuracy and truth in advancing the interests of those we represent and in communicating with the public.
EXPERTISE  We acquire and responsibly use specialized knowledge and experience.
 We advance the profession through continued professional development.
Research and education.
 We build mutual understanding, credibility and relationships among a wide array of institutions and audiences.
INDEPENCE  We provide objective counsel to those we represent.
 We are accountable for our actions.
LOYALITY  We are faithful to those we represent, honoring our obligation to serve the public interest.
FAIRNESS  We deal fairly with clients, employers, competitors, vendors the media and general public.
 We respect all opinion and support the right of free expression.
CODE PROVISIONS Free Flow of Information Core principle: protecting and advancing the free flow of accurate and truthful information is essential to serving the public interest and contributing to informed decision making in a democratic society.
Competition Core principle: promoting healthy and fair competition among professionals preserves an ethical climate while fostering a robust business environment.
189 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Disclosure of information.
Core principle: open communication fosters informed decision making in a democratic society.
Safeguarding confidences Core principle: client trust requires appropriate protection of confidential and private information.
Conflicts of interest Core principle: avoiding real, potential or perceived conflicts of interest builds the trust of clients, employers and publics.
Enhancing the profession Core principle: public relations professionals work constantly to strengthen the public‘s trust in profession.
190 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS PUBLIC RELATIONS INTITUTION OF SOUTHERN AFRICA Code of professional standards for the practice of public relations for members of the Public Relations Institute of Southern Africa and its chapters.
DECLERATION OF PRINCIPLES We base our professional principles on the fundamental value and dignity of the individual.
we believe in and support the free exercise of human right, especially freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, and freedom of the media, which are essential to the practice of good public relations, in serving the interest of clients and employers, we dedicate ourselves to the goals of better communication, understanding and co-operation among diverse individuals, groups, and institution of society.
We also subscribe to and support equal opportunity of employment in the public relations profession we pledge  To conduct ourselves professionally, with truth, accuracy, fairness, and responsibility to the public and towards our colleagues;  To improve our individual competence and advance the knowledge and proficiency of the profession through continuing education and research;  To adhere to the articles of the code of professional standards for the practice of public relations.
CODE OF PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS 1.
Definition Public relations are the management, through communication, of perceptions and strategic relationships between an organization and its internal and external stakeholders.
2.
Professional Conduct 2.1 In the conduct of our professional activities, we shall respect the public interest and dignity of the individual.
it is our responsibility at all times to deal fairly and honestly with our clients or employers, past or present, with our colleagues, media communication, and with the public.
2.2 We shall conduct our professional lives in accordance with the public interest .we shall not conduct ourselves in any manner detrimental to the profession of public relations.
2.3 We have a positive duty to maintain integrity and accuracy, as well as generally accepted standards of good taste.
2.4 We shall not knowingly, internationally, or recklessly communicate false or misleading information.
It is our obligation to use proper care to avoid doing so inadvertently.
2.5 We shall not guarantee the achievement of specified results beyond our direct control.
We shall not negotiate nor agree terms with a prospective employer or client on the basis of payment only contingent upon specific future public relations achievements.
2.6 We shall, when acting for a client or employer who belongs to a profession, respect the code of ethics of that other profession and shall not knowingly be part to any breach of such a code.
191 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3 Conduct towards clients/employers 3.1 We shall safeguard the confidences of both present and former clients and employers.
We shall not disclose or make use of information given or obtained in confidence from en employer or client, past or present, for personal gain or otherwise, or to the disadvantage or prejudice of such client or employer.
3.2 We shall not represent conflicting or competing interests without the express consent of those involves, given after full disclosure of the facts.
We shall not place ourselves in a position where our interests are or may be in conflict with a duty to a client, without full disclosure of interests to all involved.
3.3 We shall not be party to any activity which seeks to dissemble or misleading by promoting one disguised undisclosed interest while appearing to further another.
It is our duty to ensure that the actual interest of any organization with which we may be professionally concerned is adequately declared.
3.4 In the course of our professional services to the employer or client we shall not accept payment either in cash or in kind in connection with these services from another source without the express consent of our employer or client.
4 Conduct towards colleagues 4.1 We shall not maliciously injure the professional reputation or practice of another individual engaged in the public relations profession.
4.2 We shall at all times uphold this cod, shall co-operate with colleagues in doing so and in enforcing decisions on any matter arising from this application.
4.3 Registered individual, who knowingly cause or permit another person or organization to act in a manner inconsistent with this code or are part to such an action, shall be deemed to be in breach of it.
4.4 If have reason to believe that another colleague has engage in practices which may be in breach of this code, or practices which may be unethical, unfair, or illegal, it is our duty to advise the institute promptly.
4.5 We shall not invite any employee of a client to consider alternative employment.
5 Conduct towards the business environment 5.1 We shall not recommend the use of any organization in which we have a financial interest, nor make use of its services on behalf of our client or employer, without declaring our interest.
5.2 In performing professional services for a client or employer we shall not accept fees, commissions, or any consideration from anyone other than the client or employer in connection with those services, without the express consent of the client/employer, given after full disclosure of the facts.
5.3 We shall sever relation, as soon as possible, with any organization or individual if such a relationship requires conduct contrary to this code.
192 MAC 232 ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 6.
Conduct towards channels of communication 6.1 We shall not engage in any practice which tends to corrupt the integrity of channels or media of communication.
6.2 We shall identify publicly the name of the client or employer on whose behalf any public communication is made.
7.
Conduct towards the state 7.1 We respect the principles contained in the constitution of the country in which we are resident.
7.2 We shall not offer or given any reward to any person holding public office, with intent to further our interests or those of our employer.
8.
Conduct towards PRISA 8.1 We shall at all times respect the dignity and decisions of PRISA.
8.2 We are bound to uphold the annual registration fee levied by PRISA, which fee is payable as determined by registered practitioners at the annual general meeting of PRISA.
9.
Disciplinary Rules A registered member, who, in the opinion of the Disciplinary Committee of PRISA, infringes the code of professional standards, shall be informed in writing.
The member deemed responsible for such an infringement shall be given reasonable opportunity to state their defence, either in writing or by personal attendance at a meeting of a Disciplinary Committee appointed by the PRISA Board and specially convened for this purpose.
Sanction will take the form of a warning or the practitioner’s name will be removed from the register of members.
This action will be made public.
193
