NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE:MAC 212 COURSE TITLE:MEDIA AND SOCIETYMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY COURSE GUIDE MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Course Developer/Writer Andrew Asan Ate Igbinedion University, Okada Benin City Course Editor Mr Oloruntola Sunday Dept.
of Mass Communication University of Lagos Akoka, Lagos Programme Leader Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Chidinma H. Onwubere National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN:978-058-894-9 All Rights Reserved iiiMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………………….…… 1 What You Will Learn in this Course ………………………..…….
1 Course Aims ………………………………………………..….….. 1 Course Objectives …………………………………………..……… 2 Working through this Course ………………………………...…….
2 Course Material …………………………………………………….
2 Study Units ………………………………………………..……….. 2 Textbooks and References ……………………………………….….
3 Assignment File ……………………………………………….……..4 Assessment …………………………………………………………..4 Tutor-Marked Assignment ………………………………………….. 5 Final Examination and Grading ……………………………………...5 Presentation Schedule …………………………………………......... 5 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………………….… 6 Course Overview …………………………………………………… 6 How to Get the Most from this Course ……………………….…… 7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials …………………………………… 9 Summary ……………………………………………………….…… 9 Introduction MAC 212 is a one-semester 3-credit unit course.
It is designed to drill Journalism or Mass Communication students on the relationships between the mass media and the society.
The course will also highlight the theories of the mass media from the global perspective and point out those theories that are relevant to the Nigerian environment.
The course takes into account the professional and academic needs of students offering B.Sc degree in Journalism and Mass Communication.
The course has a Guide which serves as a compass towards effective use of the course materials as contained in the course units.
There is also provision for tutor-marked assignments which should not be handled with levity by students.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of MAC 212: Media and Society is to examine the mass media as elements of cultural and social processes.
It pays particular attention to sociological concepts, themes and problems.
It provides the strategies for understanding mass communication and its ivMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY relationship with major social institutions.
Focus is on the issues of sociology and professionalism of mass communicators, mass media contents, cultural imperialism and media dependency, internal dynamics and control of the mass media organizations and mass communication politics.
The role of communication in development is examined critically.
The meaning of communication and its process will be examined in this course.
The students will also study the mass media, functions of the mass media and theories of the press.
Concepts like press freedom, press censorship, society and culture would also be examined in the course.
The course will equip students to be better informed on topics like social change, Nigerian social structure, globalization and the media, among other issues.
Course Aims The major aim of this course is to explore the relationship between the media and the society.
The roles of the mass media as an agent of socialization would be discussed.
Also, the role of the mass communicator as a social engineer in his society would be examined.
Course Objectives At the end of the course, you should be able to: 4.0 Explain the dynamics of society vis-à-vis the role of the mass media.
1.0 Discuss the types, theories, power and limitations of the mass media in society.
Working through this Course To effectively harness and retain the rich information in this course, the student is expected to read the recommended texts and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
The self assessment exercise spelt out in each unit must be taken seriously.
Students are, expected from time to time to submit assignments for on-ward and periodic assessment.
There will be an examination at the end of this course.
Stated below are the components of the course and what you ought to do.
Course Materials vMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation.
In addition, you must obtain the materials.
Obtain your copy.
They are provided by NOUN.
In some cases, you may be required to obtain your copy from the bookshop.
In case you have any problem in obtaining your materials, you may contact your tutor.
Study Units Module 1 Unit 1 The Communication Process Unit 2 Traditional and Modern Means of Communication Unit 3 The Mass Media – Classifications and Characteristics Unit 4 Functions of the Mass Media Unit 5 Theories of the Mass Media Module 2 Unit 1 Overview of the Mass Media in Nigerian Society Unit 2 Media Ownership and Control Unit 3 Press Freedom in Nigeria Unit 4 The Nigerian Press Council Unit 5 The Nigerian Social Structure Module 3 Unit 1 Culture and the Mass Media Unit 2 Social Change and the Mass Media Unit 3 Cultural Imperialism and Media Dependency Unit 4 Globalization and the Media Unit 5 Social Institutions and the Mass Media Unit 6 Mass Media and Economy Module 4 Unit 1 Technology and the Media Unit 2 Social Effects of the Mass Media Unit 3 Media and Governance viMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Unit 4 Media Ethics in Nigeria Unit 5 Mass Media and Development Each unit is accompanied by a number of self-tests which are drawn from the materials the student has already gone through.
The tests are designed to keep the student abreast of what he/she has studied from the course materials.
If properly utilized, the excellent combination of self- tests with tutor-marked assignments will in no small measure lead to the achievement of the holistic objectives of the course.
Textbooks and References Daramola, I.
(2005).
Mass Media and Society.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
Okoro, N. and Agbo, B.
(2003).
Writing for the Media Society.
Nsukka: Prize Publishers.
Onwuejeogwu, M.A.
(1992).
The Social Anthropology of Africa: An Introduction.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books.
Giddens, A.
(1989).
Sociology.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Egbon, M. (2005).
Democratic Journalism in Two Worlds: A Comparative Study of Press Freedom in the American and the Nigerian Mass Media.
Zaria: Tamaza Publishing Company.
Okolocha, C.F., Nwanunobi, C.O.
and Igbo, E.U.M.
(1999).
Introduction to Sociology.
Lagos: Acquitas Consortium.
Daramola, I.
(2003).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
2nd edition.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
Haralambos, M. and Holborn, M. (1995).
Sociology Themes and Perspectives.
4th edition.
London: Harper Collins Publishers.
Folarin, B.
(1998).
Elements of Journalistic Style.
Ibadan: Stirling- Horden.
Sambe, J.A.
(2008).
Introduction to Mass Communication Practice in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books.
Assignment File In the Assignment File, you will get the details of the work you are expected to submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final marks you obtain in this course.
viiMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Further information on the assignment will be found in the Assignment File itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the tutor- marked assignments; second, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30 per cent of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will count for 70 per cent of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are fifteen tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The best four (i.e.
the highest four of the fifteen marks) will be counted.
The total marks for the best four (4) assignments will be 30 per cent of your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given to the Assignment File.
If, however, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is done to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of MAC 212 will be three hours’ duration with a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of viiiMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked assignment you have come across.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You are advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
You will find it useful to review your tutor-marked assignments and the comments of your tutor on them before the final examination.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due dates.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1-15 15 assignments, best four marks of fifteen count @7.5% (on the averages) = 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course marking Scheme Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of Work Week’s Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Module 1 1 The Communication Process 1 Assessment 1 2 Traditional and Modern Means of 2 Assessment 2 Communication 3 Mass Media–Classification and 3 Assessment 3 ixMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Characteristics 4 Functions of the Mass Media 4 Assessment 4 5 Theories of the Mass Media 5 Assessment 5 Module 2 1 Nigerian Society: Overview of the 6 Assessment 6 Mass Media 2 Media Ownership and Control 7 Assessment 7 3 Press Freedom in Nigeria 8 Assessment 8 4 The Nigerian Press Council 9 Assessment 9 5 The Nigerian Social Structure 10 Assessment 10 Module 3 1 Culture and the Mass Media 11 Assessment 11 2 Social Change and the Mass 12 Assessment12 Media 3 Cultural Imperialism and Media 13 Assessment 13 Dependency 4 Globalization and the Media 14 Assessment 14 5 Social Institutions and the Mass 15 Assessment 15 Media 6 Mass Media and Economy 16 Assessment 16 Module 4 1 Technology and the Media 17 Assessment 17 2 Social Effects of the Mass Media 18 Assessment 18 3 Media and Governance 19 Assessment 19 4 Media Ethics in Nigeria 20 Assessment 20 5 Mass Media and Development 21 Assessment 21 Revision 22 Examination 23 Table 2: Course Overview How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set books or other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in- class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is xMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units you must go back and check whether or not you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from other materials.
Reading Section Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
• Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
• Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course Overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should fashion out your own convenient schedule for working on each unit.
• Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
• Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
• Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
• Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
• Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
xiMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY • When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
• When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
• After completing the unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Facilitators/Tutor and Tutorials There are 12 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: i.
You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, ii.
You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, iii.
You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
xiiMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary MAC 212 is packaged to introduce you to the basic concepts of the mass media and society.
Upon completion of the course, you will be able to answer the following questions among others: 3 What is communication?
4 What are the mass media?
5 What are the functions of the mass media in a society?
6 What is society?
7 What is culture?
8 What is the connection between technology and the media?
xiiiMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Course Code MAC 212 Course Title Media and Society Course Developer/Writer Andrew Asan Ate Igbinedion University, Okada Benin City Course Editor Mr Oloruntola Sunday Dept.
of Mass Communication University of Lagos Akoka, Lagos Programme Leader Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator Chidinma H. Onwubere National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xivMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN:978-058-894-9 All Rights Reserved xvMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ……………………………………………….…..…… 1 Unit 1 The Communication Process ………………………... 1 Unit 2 Traditional and Modern Means of Communication….
10 Unit 3 The Mass Media – Classifications and Characteristics ………………………………..……… 15 Unit 4 Functions of the Mass Media…………………….….. 22 Unit 5 Theories of the Mass Media …………………….…... 26 Module 2 ……………………………………………………..… 31 Unit 1 Overview of the Mass Media in Nigerian Society ….
31 Unit 2 Media Ownership and Control ……………………….
36 Unit 3 Press Freedom in Nigeria …………………………….
41 Unit 4 The Nigerian Press Council ………………….……….
46 Unit 5 The Nigerian Social Structure ……………………….. 54 Module 3 ………………………………………………..……… 60 Unit 1 Culture and the Mass Media …………………….…… 60 Unit 2 Social Change and the Mass Media ………..….………65 Unit 3 Cultural Imperialism and Media Dependency …….…..72 Unit 4 Globalization and the Media ………………………..... 77 Unit 5 Social Institutions and the Mass Media ………….…... 80 Unit 6 Mass Media and Economy …………………….…….
86 Module 4 ………………………………………………….….… 91 Unit 1 Technology and the Media ………….…………....… 91 Unit 2 Social Effects of the Mass Media ……………….….. 96 Unit 3 Media and Governance …………………………....... 101 Unit 4 Media Ethics in Nigeria ……………………………... 106 Unit 5 Mass Media and Development ……………………… 113 xviMAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY MODULE 1 Unit 1 The Communication Process Unit 2 Traditional and Modern Means of Communication Unit 3 The Mass Media – Classifications And Characteristics Unit 4 Functions of the Mass Media Unit 5 Theories of the Mass Media UNIT 1 THE PROCESS OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions of Communication 3.2 Types of Communication 3.3 The Process of Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Communication which is the process of transferring thoughts, ideas, facts, feelings, etc from one person to another is very important in human existence.
Without communication, life will be meaningless and human interaction would be impossible.
This unit takes a look at the concept of communication with particular emphasis on its meaning, types and process.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, should be able to: • define communication • discuss types of communication • outline the process of communication.
1MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definitions of Communication Communication as a concept parades a lot of definitions.
But before we take a look at various definitions of communication, it is important for us to trace the origin of the term.
The term communication is derived from the latin word, communicare meaning to share and from the French communis meaning common.
(Akalugo, 2003).
Thus, communication simply, means the sharing of meaning.
The importance of communication cannot be overemphasized.
Sybil etal (1989:2) observed that communication “serves as an instrument of social interaction.
It helps us to understand ourselves, to keep in touch with other people, to understand situations.
It is a means by which power is acquired, exercised and sustained.
It is the medium through which relationships are established, extended and maintained…” Let us consider the following definitions of communication by some experts: 1.
Communication is any means by which a thought is transferred from one person to another (Chappel & Read 1984:1).
2.
Communication is the process by which one person (or a group) shares and imparts information to another person (or group) so that both people (and group) clearly understand one another.
(Udall, R & Udall, S 1979:5).
3.
Communication is not just the giving of information, it is the giving of understandable information and receiving and understanding the message.
Communication is the transferring of a message to another party so that it can be understood and acted upon.
(Eyre, E.C 1983:7).
4.
The communication process involves all acts of transmitting messages to channels which link people to the languages and symbolic codes which are used to transmit messages, the means by which messages are received and stored, and the rules, customs, and conventions which define and regulate human relationships and events.
(Ugboajah, F 1985:2).
From the above definitions, one can see a common thread running through them.
From the definitions, communication is viewed as: 2MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY (a) A process of transmitting thought (b) The sharing and imparting of information (c) The giving of understandable information and receiving and understanding of the message (d) The transmitting of messages and the linking of people (e) The conveying of ideas, feelings and attitudes (f) The creating and exchanging of messages within a network of interdependent relationships.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define communication.
3.2 Types of Communication Human communication falls into two broad categories – verbal and non- verbal.
Verbal communication is a kind of communication which is done through the use of words.
It can take place in an oral form or written form.
Non-verbal communication on the other hand is a form of communication which is carried out without speech.
It comprises the following: (i) Tactile communication e.g touching, kissing etc (ii) Sign e.g Road traffic signs; boy scout signs, etc (iii) Object e.g uniform, crown, artworks, etc.
(iv) Action e.g boxing, football, etc.
(v) Genetic factor communication e.g skin colour, shape of head, body proportion, etc.
Communication can also be: 1.
Intrapersonal communication 2.
Interpersonal communication 3.
Group communication 4.
Mass communication • Intrapersonal communication is the process of transfer of information which takes place within an individual e.g soliloquy.
(Soola, 1998).
• Inter-personal communication is also known as face-to-face communication.
Under this communication, the exchange of ideas, 3MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY opinions, information, is between two people.
Here, the sender shares his ideas or information with the receiver unlike intrapersonal communication where the communicator keeps his ideas to himself.
E.g GSM discussion or telephone conversation.
(Akalugo, 2003).
• Group communication; when three or more people come together with a view to achieving a specific goal, a group is formed.
Their coming together may be by design or by accident but so long as there is exchange of ideas and information among the group, you have group communication.
Group communication takes place in churches, offices, schools, clubs, etc where a group share ideas with one another for the attainment of group goals.
(Sybil, e tal, 1990).
• Mass communication is the process of transmitting information, ideas, attitudes, values, beliefs through a communication device to a relatively large, heterogeneous and anonymous audience simultaneously.
In mass communication, modern communication gadgets are used in putting across a message through channels like radio, television, newspapers, magazines, etc.
(Sambe, 2004).
Mass communication is unique because its message is often general and targeted at a very large audience, who are anonymous in nature and heterogeneous in composition and posture.
Under mass communication, there is low degree of feedback and low level of interaction.
The message is rapid and transient in nature as it is meant to be consumed immediately SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Briefly discuss four types of communication you know.
3.3 Process of Communication A process according to Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English is “a series of actions that someone takes in order to achieve a particular result”.
The communication process involves the following: (1) Transmitter (2) Design the message (3) Select the medium (4) Receiver (5) Design the response (6) Select the medium (7) Feedback When we understand the concept of process, we view relationships and events as dynamic, on-going, ever-changing, and continuous.
The 4MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY components within a process interact.
Each ingredient affects all others all the time.
The process of communication Transmitter Feedback Design the message Select the medium select the medium Receiver Design the response • Transmitter – This is also known as the source, the encoder, the communicator or the sender.
The transmitter is the initiator of the communication encounter.
According to Soola, O (1998:14), the “source or sender of the message, ideas or information may be an individual, a group or an organization.
We can thus talk about intrapersonal, interpersonal, intra-organizational and inter- organizational communication”.
It is important at this juncture for us to consider some factors that influence effective communication by a source.
Sambe (2008:4-6) identifies four of these factors.
The factors are: communication skills, knowledge level, social cultural context and attitude.
• Communication Skill: A source must have a good command of the language he chooses to communicate in, that is, he must be able to pronounce or write words or segments correctly.
If he is communicating orally, he must use the appropriate stress pattern.
His intonation must be in conformity with the standard one.
His reasoning must be very sound and logical, devoid of unnecessary sentiments or emotions.
This means that the speech organ of the speaker must function effectively.
All voiced sounds must be accompanied by the adequate vibration of the vocal cords, while all the voiceless sounds must be produced with free flow of air.
• Knowledge Level: The source of communication must have a good knowledge of the message he is putting across to the recipient.
Success of communication is often influenced by the source’s 5MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY perception and knowledge of the message.
This enables the source to state his message unequivocally and understandably.
• Socio-cultural Context: Interactions in society is shrouded in the background of set socio-cultural milieu.
For this reason, communication can hardly take place in a vacuum.
The social- cultural context in which communication takes place determines to a large extent the disposition of the source towards the message and then towards the receiver or audience.
We have such social context as son/father context, daughter/mother context, student/teacher context, friend/friend context, etc.
Whatever the context, a good communicator should realized that situation changes in different environments and that regard must be given to age, status, seniority, class distinctions, etc.
He must thus strive to conform to the socio- cultural context in which he is communicating.
• Attitude: This is another important factor in the source that bears on the success or otherwise of his communication endeavour.
The attitude of the source is often measured by his communication behaviour, which may be positive or negative.
Also, the source consciously or unconsciously brings his personality to bear on his communication endeavours.
His attitude serves as a reflection of his personality.
There are three levels of attitude of the source: Attitude towards self: This is referred to as self-concept and its very crucial to communication.
The source must have positive self-concept.
This means approaching the communication endeavour with confidence and not inferiority complex.
Attitude to the message: Though feelings are difficult to hide, the source should try as much as possible to be neutral or at least positive to the message.
Attitude towards the receiver: The source must have a positive attitude towards the receiver.
For any meaningful communication to take place, the source would need to create an atmosphere conducive to communicate with the receiver.
He must know that he can hardly communicate effectively with someone he hates or mistrusts.
• Design the Message After the sender decides to share his ideas, feelings and information with someone else, he will choose which symbols to use to put across his message to the receiver.
Writing, speaking, gesturing, etc are some of the means the communicator can reach out to the intended receiver.
Designing of the message is the stimulus for transmission.
6MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY • Select the Medium The communicator chooses appropriate channel to carefully and timely convey his information to the receiver.
Soola, O (Op cit) explains the rationale for choice of medium.
According to him, “your choice of a medium must be based on your understanding of the audience.
Of particular relevance in this regard is whether the receiver is educated or not; whether or not he can read and write, as well as his level of understanding of the language of communication.
Other factors to consider include the physical distance separating the source from the receiver, as well as the nature of the message…” • Receiver The receiver is the decoder of the message.
The receiver needs to pay much attention in other to receive the message with clear understanding.
There must be perceptive listening on the side of the receiver.
• Design the Response At this stage, the receiver organizes and responds to the stimulus having got the message interpreted by his central nervous system.
• Select the medium At this stage, the receiver has to select a method of sending his reply to the source.
The decoder who receives the message must participate in the communication exchange.
He will have to respond through an appropriate medium.
• Feedback Feedback is the receiver’s response to the source’s message.
(Sambe, 2008:8).
This is the reaction or reply to the message.
Feedback is the last but important part of the communication process.
Sybil et al (1990:10) stated that feedback helps to show whether or not: (i) communication has taken place (ii) the decoder of the message has understood (iii) the decoder is prepared and willing to partake in the communication process, and (iv) the encoder has adequately formulated and sent his message SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 7MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Outline the process of communication.
4.0 CONCLUSION I have discussed in this unit that communication is a powerful force for human interactions and that there are different types of communication.
Irrespective of whatever form or type of communication, there must be a process in the exchange of ideas from the encoder to the decoder.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has explained the meaning of communication, discussed types of communication, as well as the process of communication.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and explain the key elements in the communication process.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akalugo, G.N.
(2003).
“Fundamentals of Mass Communication.” Lecture Monograph.
Chappell, R.T, Read, W.L (1984).
Business Communications.
London: Macdonald and Evans.
Eyre, E.C.
(1983).
Effective Communication Made Simple.
London: W.H Allen.
Sambe, J.A.
(2004).
“Introduction to Mass Communication.” Unpublished Material.
Sambe, J.A.
(2008).
Introduction to Mass Communication Practice in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. Sybil, J.; Ode, I. and Soola, O.
(1990).
Introduction to Communication for Business and Organisations.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books.
Soola, O (1998).
Modern Business Communications.
Ibadan: Kraft Books.
Udall, R. and Udall, S (1979).
People and Communication.
Amersham, Bucks: Hulton Education Publications.
Ugboajah, F.O (1985).
“Communication: An Overview” International Keynotes, Vol.
1, 1:2.
8MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English.
(2000).
Third edition.
London: Longman.
9MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 2 TRADITIONAL AND MODERN MEANS OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Forms of African Communication Systems 3.2 Modern Communication 3.3 Relationship between Traditional and Modern Systems of Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Before the introduction of modern means of communication in Africa, Africans had a solid communication super-structure in place known as traditional or trado-communication.
Through traditional communication, Africans in different rural settings were mobilized to participate in the affairs of their locality.
However, as the society became large and complex, traditional communication systems could not adequately take care of the communication needs of the people and therefore, the mass media was put in place to reach out to the relatively large, heterogeneous and anonymous audience simultaneously.
That marked the era of the mass media or modern man communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • outline forms of African communication system • discuss the advantages of modern means of communication • establish the relationship between traditional and modern means of communication in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and forms of African Communication Systems Traditional communication is a system of communication whereby information is disseminated through local channels of communication to 10MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY members of the society.
It is also known as folk media or trado- communication.
Below are modes or forms of African communication system.
6.
The town crier or gong man: Is a messenger who goes about with his iron gong to call people in order to announce to them whatever message they have for the society.
7.
The Hornman: Uses the elephant tusk (horn) to call the people's attention whenever the need arises e.g.
when the king or chief of a town has any message to pass across to the entire community.
8.
The minstrel: Is a singer who communicates with the people indirectly through songs.
9.
The story teller: tells stories about the society and in this way passes valuable information across especially to the young ones.
10.
Traditional leaders: These are used as modes to get information across to their communities from a larger forum 11.
Social groups: These are the different groups in the society who represent different interests.
Through them, information could equally be passed across to their group members.
Sounding a little bit advance, Wilson (1990:281-282) captures six modes of traditional communicating system.
These are: i.
Instrumental Mode of Communication ii.
Demonstrative Mode of Communication iii.
Iconographic Mode of Communication iv.
Extra-Mundane Mode of Communication v. Visual Mode of Communication vi.
Institutional Mode of Communication • Instrumental Mode of Communication consists of modes which use idiophones, aerophones, membranophones and symbolography.
It is important to dilute the above high sounding words as explained by Wilson (1990:281-2).
Idiophones are self-sounding instruments which produce sound when they are beaten, pricked, struck or plucked by hand or by the use of a stick.
They produce sound without the use of an intermediary medium.
They include instruments such as the mental gong, woodblock, wooden drum, bell and rattle.
Aerophones are instruments which produce sound as a result of the vibration of a column of air in them.
The sound produced may also be a message or may serve as signal.
They include whistles, flutes and horns 11MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY from plants and animals.
Some of the best known ones are cows, ivory and deer horns.
Membranophones are communication instruments which are made from the skins of animals.
When the membranes are struck or beaten they produce sound which may act as signal or may serve as the message itself.
The best known is the ‘talking’ drum commonly used among the Yoruba-speaking people both for music and communication.
Symbolography is the use of cryptic representation in the form of writing (pseudo-writing) made on surfaces (hard or soft) like the rind of the bamboo, walls, cloth, or the ground.
This is a symbolic writing mode or representation which may be employed in communicating among members of an exclusive club.
The best known example is the Nsibidi writing is found among the people of the Cross River, Akwa Ibom, Imo and Anambra States and even beyond to the Camerouns.
• Demonstrative Mode of Communication consists of the use of music and signal in communicating with the people.
• Iconographic Mode of Communication consists of the use of objects (objectified communication) and floral media.… the presentation of a bowl of kolanut has significance with the context of the presentation and also has symbolic meanings…floral communication involves the use of selected floral of the local vegetation for the purpose of communicating specific meanings or ideas to members of the community.
• Extra-Mundane Mode of Communication is a mode which is believed to take place between the living and the dead, or between the living and the supernatural or Supreme Being.
On the surface, it usually seems unidirectional but participants at religious crusades, prayer sessions, rituals and other religious and pseudo-spiritual activities know there is often a form of feedback which may come through intrapersonal processes, physical revelations or magical, other-worldly verbalizations.
• Visual Mode of Communication consists of the use of colours and dressing, appearance and general comportment to communicate certain feelings and attitudes.
• Institutional Mode of Communication consists of the use of certain traditional institutions symbolically.
The most important of such traditional institutions are marriage, chieftaincy, secret societies, shrines, masks and masquerades.
12MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY African communication system by way of strengths reinforces and promotes a sense of nationality and nationhood in Africa; forms the basis for diffusion network; avoids empty waste in information dissemination and is simple and less costly.
Critics of trado-communication see its communication process as been tiresome and tedious in nature.
It is also been criticized on the ground that the communication system is limited to a group of people who speak the same language or dialect.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Outline the modes of African traditional communication system.
3.2 Modern Communication This has to do with communication through the mass media.
The mass media refers to communicating with large number of people without direct contact.
They include TV, Radio, newspapers, magazines, comics, books, films and advertising bill boards.
(Haralambos, M. et al 1986:28).
Conventionally, the mass media inform, entertain and educate the people.
They are the major source of information and ideas in modern society.
They shape people’s attitude and direct their behaviour to a greater extent.
They are the instrument of social control.
Apart from the mass media, other tools of informatics and computopia like telephones, walkie-talkie, the internet, satellite to mention only a few are useful channels of communication in modern society.
By extension, these tools of informatics facilitate the process of mass communication.
Modern means of communication is faster and attends to a large number of people irrespective of distance almost simultaneously.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the modern means of communication 3.3 Relationship Between Traditional and Modern Systems of Communication Both traditional and modern man communication are systems of communication.
The former is simple while the latter is complex and sophisticated.
13MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY The mass media can address the communication needs of diverse audience within a short period.
They preserve and refine the trado modes of communication with a view to addressing the entertainment and education needs of the people.
The mass media can initiate social change in the society using any of the forms of traditional communication in a globalised manner.
The mass media overcome the challenges of trado-communication by opening 24-hour vistas of communication to anonymous, heterogeneous and large audience across national frontiers.
Both the trado-communication and the mass media can re-engineer the society depending on how they are used.
The mass media are wider in concept, sophisticated in the process and dynamic in operations.
The reverse is almost the case in traditional communication.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Discuss the relationship between trado-media and the mass media.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have looked at some basic definitions of communication, identified some traditional and modern modes of communication.
Finally we tried to establish the link between both of them.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, I discussed the meaning and modes of African traditional communication.
I also examined the concept of modern communication and established its relationship with the folk media.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Distinguish traditional communication systems from the mass media.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ate, A.A (2006).
“African Communication Systems.” Lecture Monograph.
Haralambos, M, Holborn, M and Heald, R (1986).
Sociology: A New Approach.
Lancashire: Canseway Press.
Wilson, D (1990).
“Traditional Communication Media Systems” in Akpan (ed.)
Communication Arts: Principles, Applications and Practices.
Uyo: Modern Business Press.
14MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 3 THE MASS MEDIA – CLASSIFICATION AND CHARACTERISTICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of the Mass Media 3.2 Classification of the Mass Media 3.3 Differences between Print and Electronic Media 3.4 Characteristics of the Mass Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall take a look at the mass media, its various classifications and characteristics.
This will enable the student to appreciate the nitty-gritty surrounding the general operations of the mass media.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • define the mass media • discuss the various classes of the mass media • explain the characteristics of the various classes of the mass media.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is the Mass Media?
McQuail (2000) describe mass media as a means of communication that operates on a large scale, reaching and involving virtually everyone in a society to a greater or lesser degree.
Media is a plural of medium, which means a channel or vehicle through which something is carried or transmitted.
In other words, mass media are channels of communication in a modern society, primarily the print and the electronic media.
McQuail further describes the mass media as the organized means for communicating openly and at a distance to many receivers within a 15MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY short space of time.
The mass media are impersonal communication sources that reach large audiences.
The primary function of the mass media system is to provide information to several millions of people.
The mass media are extremely influential.
Each of the media is presumed to affect perceptions and behaviour in a distinctive way.
They can affect the society and vice versa.
The mass media are the uniquely modern means of public communication and much of their importance lies in the fact that they are a major cause of whatever modes of perception, thought, public discourse, and political action.
Because of their size and the large number of people they reach, the mass media have tremendous impact on society.
Murphy (1977) sums up societal impacts of the media in different ways as oil, glue and dynamite.
As oil, Murphy asserts that media of communication keep the world running smoothly by helping individuals adjust to the reality of lives.
They keep society on and healthy by suggesting solutions that are socially acceptable.
As glue, social cohesion is maintained by communication.
Murphy contends that the media gives all of us including strangers something to talk about by setting agenda of discussion.
And that over the years, communication builds up and reinforces the fabrics that hold a society together.
Murphy also describes the mass media as dynamites that can rip the society apart.
A good example of this is the propaganda campaigns that preceded the Russian Revolution in 1917 and Hitler’s rise to the German Chancellorship in 1933.
Similarly, the mass media particularly the newspapers and magazines played a tremendous role in the struggle for Nigeria’s independence in 1960.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the term mass media.
3.2 Classification of the Mass Media The mass media can be broadly classified into two –the print media and the electronic media.
The classification is carried out according to the mechanism involved in the process of conveying messages.
16MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.2.1 The Print Media The print media have a mechanism that depends on printing items of information.
These include newspapers, magazines, books, pamphlets and comics that carry messages to the populace by appealing to their sense of sight.
One common thing about the print media is that they involve the pressing of ink on paper using plates and blocks, and special machines.
The print media includes books, newspapers and magazines.
Books are the oldest medium of mass communication whereas the newspapers are the first popular mass medium.
For the purpose of discourse, more emphasis would be placed on newspapers and magazines.
a.
Newspaper A newspaper in terms of format can be categorized into two: i. Tabloid ii.
Standard size Tabloid is the common newspaper that is found in Nigeria.
The Sun, Nigerian Tribune, The Hope and most state owned newspapers are tabloids.
The standard size is large and takes two size of a tabloid.
It is usually found in the U.S, Britain and other advance countries of the world.
In Nigeria, This Day, is a good example of the standard size newspapers.
b.
Magazines There are many types of magazines, namely: i.
General Interest Magazine This is also known as mass magazine.
It focuses on the activities of the masses.
General interest magazines contain more credible stories than fiction.
The nature of such magazine is large circulation particularly in diversified or heterogeneous society.
ii.
Specialized Magazine This is designed for specialized people, written in specialized language and directed at specialized group of people.
Examples of specialized magazine include, Nigerian Medical Journal, Pharmaceutical Journal, etc.
17MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY iii.
Literary or Class Magazine This type of magazine is usually written in a very literary style for highly educated or sophisticated members of the society.
The content is usually on literature, arts, agriculture etc.
Examples are Readers Digest, The Economist, Awake, African Today, etc.
iv.
Junk (Soft Sell) Magazine These magazines are designed for general public but are usually designed in low quality.
They are very unreliable in terms of concrete and accurate information.
They thrive on rumour and have more pictures than stories.
Here, you have magazines like Ecomium, Hints, Ovation, etc whose stock in trade is sensational or yellow journalism.
3.2.2 The Electronic Media The electronic media use devices that can transform or change sound or light waves into electrical signals, which are reconverted to things that can be heard or seen on radio or television.
The electronic media technique can be divided into production, transmission and reception.
The electronic media according to Daramola (2003) include: i.
Radio and audio recordings that appeal to the sense of sound ii.
Television, motion pictures and video recordings that appeal to both sense of sound and that of sight.
There is a marked difference in the technologies of radio and television particularly with reference to receiver-transmitter relationships or both.
While the radio receiver is built to detect and amplify signals, television receiver goes beyond that.
It must also carry out the precisely timed scanning sequence in exact synchronism with the camera.
The transmitter and receiver of the television must operate on the same line and field frequencies.
(Daramola 2003).
The broadcast media are the most powerful in the world today for affecting the minds, emotions and even the actions of mankind.
No wonder, a one time American critic, William Rivers once describe the broadcast media as great “mentioners.” (Akpede, 1994).
This means they have the power to build and destroy an individual or an institution as the case may be.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the various classifications of the mass media.
18MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.3 Differences between Print and Electronic Media According to Daramola (2003:99), broadcast media differ from print media in the following ways: i.
Print media appeal to the eye while broadcast appeal to both the eye and ear.
ii.
Print is always in written form, while broadcast is always in oral form.
iii.
Broadcast news are forgotten easily and cannot be kept as reference work while the print media serve that purpose.
iv.
Print media is more detailed than broadcast media.
v. Print media is more permanent than broadcast media which is very ephemeral SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Differentiate between print and electronic media.
3.4 Characteristics of the Mass Media Weaver cited in Daramola (2000) identified five major characteristics of the mass media.
These are: 1.
The first characteristic derives from the name, mass media which implies that media is designed for, distributed to and consumed by mass audiences.
The mass audiences are very large, either in terms of number or proportion of total population and the audience exist in large, heterogeneous societies either industrial or transitional societies.
2.
The second characteristic of the mass media is that they are big businesses, employing millions of people and making billions of naira as the case may be as profit.
3.
One other characteristic of the mass media is that they are sole disseminators of news (defined as factual, current and verifiable information about recent events).
The mass media also disseminate other sorts of information –fictional stories, political advocacy, and strictly utilitarian information like recipes.
4.
The mass media are also characterized by speed with which they gather information and frequency with which they distribute it.
Media producing organizations are continuously gathering information and are in instantaneous communication with their sources of information.
The speed and rhythm of this ongoing 19MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY process of gathering and distributing information, especially news, sharply differentiate mass media from other media and exert enormous influence on the character of their messages.
5.
The fifth characteristic of the mass media is that they are all twentieth-century phenomena.
In other words, they all developed and attained maturity during roughly the same period, in response to the same circumstances and in pursuit of the same purposes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Outline the various characteristics of the mass media.
4.0 CONCLUSION The mass media are vehicles or the means by which information or messages are conveyed from source to receivers –the heterogeneous, large and anonymous audience.
The mass media are ‘organisations’ that distribute cultural products or messages that affect and reflect the culture of society.
They provide information simultaneously to large, heterogeneous audiences.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit so far, you have learnt that: • Mass media are the various means or channels by which information or messages are disseminated to heterogeneous public.
• Mass media are classified into print and electronic media.
• The mass media form the political, cultural and economic part of any society.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the importance of the mass media in modern-day society.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 20MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Akpede, D (1994).
“Radio and TV Production” Lecture Monograph.
Daramola, I (2003).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
McQuail, D (2000).
Mass Communication Theory.
4th Edition.
London: Sage Publication.
Murphy, D.R (1977).
Mass Communication and Human Interactions.
Boston: Houghton Miftlin Company.
UNIT 4 FUNCTIONS OF THE MASS MEDIA 21MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Traditional or Conventional Functions of the Mass Media 3.2 Other Functions of the Mass Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall take a look at the traditional or conventional functions of the mass media as well as other functions of the mass media.
This will enable the student to understand and appreciate in deeper perspective the functions of the mass media in the society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the traditional or conventional functions of the mass media • discuss other functions of the mass media.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Traditional/Conventional Functions of the Mass Media The mass media perform some traditional or conventional functions which include: 1.
Information This is the first and primary function of the mass media.
Information dissemination is creating awareness on the part of the people.
Communication experts believe that people could be informed of what is happening or what has happened.
The role of information as the pivot in the growth and development of societies cannot be over emphasized.
No wonder there has been systematically studied by sociologists, anthropologists and political scientists.
Their study proves that information can indeed lead to social change in the society.
The mass media provide information to the entire society on daily basis.
Such information comes through news on radio, television, newspaper 22MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY and magazines.
The news raises the awareness of listeners as in the case of radio, viewers (television) and readers (newspapers and magazines).
2.
Education The education function of the mass media is meant to teach the people by imparting knowledge with a view to broaden the horizon of members of the society.
Through different programmes like “Who wants to be a millionaire?”, “Super story”, etc, members of the public can develop themselves mentally and morally.
Through the education via the mass media, people can discover themselves and the potentials in their environment and harness such potentials for the holistic development of the society.
It can be said therefore, that the mass media is a school of its own.
Through it, a lot of people have been delivered from the bondage of ignorance and illiteracy and it has the power to introduce light in the life of the audience.
3.
Entertainment Another important function of the mass media is entertainment.
The media can make the people laugh and forget their sorrows.
Entertainment through the media can come in different forms - sports, drama, motion pictures, short stories, crosswords, puzzles and cartoons.
All these forms of entertainment are by-product of the mass media.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the traditional functions of the mass media.
3.2 Other Functions of the Mass Media Apart from the traditional or conventional functions of the mass media, i.e to inform, educate and entertain, the mass media also perform other numerous functions.
Harrold Lasswell in Sambe (2004) identifies the following functions of the mass media: 1.
Surveillance This means keeping close watch over someone or something.
In the context of mass communication, surveillance means that the mass media is to inform and provide information to the society by keeping watch on the activities of government and correcting uncomplimentary occurrences.
Lasswell describe the surveillance role of the media as the “watchman function”.
The surveillance function often corresponds to what is generally called news handling.
This includes the collection and 23MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY distribution of information about events in the environment, both outside and within any particular society.
2.
Transmission of Cultural Heritage This function of the mass media focuses on the transmission of knowledge, values and social norms from one generation to another or from members of a group to newcomers.
The existence of a community depends on the ability of its members to share common values and to agree on what constitute acceptable behaviours.
Also, the continued existence of the society depends on the ability of its members to transmit the values and norms of the society from one generation to another.
This can be done through songs and preservation of certain artifacts.
People’s way of life in terms of dressing can also be preserved by the mass media.
The same thing is applicable to certain cultural festivals which can be preserved for the sake of posterity by the mass media.
3.
Status Conferral Another function of the mass media is the bestowal of prestige on people who attempt to remain well informed about events in their community.
In Nigeria, for instance, being well informed about what is going on in government and society generally is a source of prestige.
People who are well connected are looked upon as opinion leaders.
The function of status conferral comes from being the subject of news reports.
The mass media have the power to make instant celebrities of hitherto unknown persons either for good or bad.
The electronic media, most especially, have conferral effect on the audience.
People or organizations that are featured in the media tend to acquire some level of importance above the ordinary.
(Sambe, 2004).
4.
Interpretation and Prescription of News The chief function of interpretation and prescription is to prevent such undesirable consequences of the mass communication of news.
The selection, evaluation and interpretation of news – focusing on what is most important in the environment, according to Sambe (2004) tend to prevent over stimulation and over mobilization of the population.
Like surveillance, he observed that the activities of news interpretation and presentation for behaviour, when performed as mass communication can also be dysfunctional both at the societal and individual level.
On 24MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY the societal level, experts believe that some activities can impede social change and enhance social disorder in a society.
At the individual level, the dysfunctional role of the mass media is believed to create panic among individual members of the society.
Another important function of the mass media in modern society is the agenda setting function.
The agenda setting function of the mass media presupposes the fact that the media can lead members of the public in taking very sensitive decisions on issues of public significance be it politics, economic and social standings.
The agenda setting function of the media is predicated on the fact that the mass media can influence a thinking of members of the public through its court of public opinion.
In addition to the aforementioned functions of the mass media, Folarin (1998:5) added national integration; social-economic modernization; and cultural creativity as functions of journalism.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Outline other functions of the mass media.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is an established fact that the role of the media cannot be underestimated in any society.
The media keeps the fabrics that hold the society together and links all the agents of socialization through its diverse functions.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the conventional functions of the mass media as well as other functions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the role of the mass media in the society.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Daramola, I (2003).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
2nd Edition.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
Folarin, B (1998).
Elements of Journalistic Style.
Ibadan: Stirling- Horden Publishers.
Sambe, J.A (2004).
“Introduction to Mass Communication.” Lecture Monograph.
UNIT 5 THEORIES OF THE MASS MEDIA 25MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of a Theory 3.2 Characteristics of a Theory 3.3 Why Do We Study Theories?
3.4 Normative Theories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION For a forensic analysis of the mass media in the social environment, it is important to understand the theories of the mass media that operate in the social environment.
To a large extent, the theories of the mass media define the operation of the media in the society.
Sambe (2008:261), reaffirms this postulation that “press theories suggest the way in which mass media in a particular society is owned, organized and run.
They also determine the restrictions placed in the operations of the mass media in a particular country.” This unit therefore, examines closely the concept of theory, its characteristics and relevance as well as the various types of theories.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define a theory • explain the characteristics and relevance of theory to the society • explain the different types of theories of the mass media • define the kind of theories of the mass media that we operate in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Theory A theory is a way of explaining the ordering and occurrence of different events in the society.
Wilbur Schramm (cited in Folarin 1998) defines theory as a “crop-detector” which enables us to separate scientific 26MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY statements from unscientific ones.
To Mclean (1972), theory is our understanding of the ways in which things work.
All the above definitions stress the intellectual rigour involved in the formulation of a theory.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define a theory.
3.2 Characteristics of a Theory i.
Intellectual rigour: To ensure that theories are testable, verifiable and systematic, they usually involve much intellectual rigour.
ii.
Datedness: Theories are always a step behind reality; because new facts continue to emerge as theory is being evolved.
iii.
Dynamism: Theories are subject to change in the light of new facts, so they are dynamic, not static.
iv.
Economy: A good theory accounts for many pertinent cases with a few statements and with few exceptions if any.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Outline the basic features of a theory.
3.3 Why Do We Study Theories?
i.
Because they help us in managing reality “there is nothing so practical as a good theory” says Kurt Lewin (1958).
Good theories, according to him enable us to put facts in perspective and to predict what will happen, even before the events we are theorizing about happen.
ii.
A good theoretical background may make all the difference between a competently executed research project and a pedestrian one or a sound scientific statement and an unsound one.
From the inception of mass media, people theorized about the process of mass media, about the use which individuals, groups, corporate bodies make of mass media, about the effects which the mass media have on the individuals and society at large.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Account for the importance of the study of a theory.
3.3Normative Theories 27MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY The basic assumption of Normative theories is that the media tend to assume the form and coloration of the society in which it operates.
The well known four theories are, Authoritarian, Libertarian (or free press), Soviet Communist and Social Responsibility theories.
McQuail (2000) also draws attention to two other emergent normative theories, namely, Democratic-Participant Media Theory and Development Media Theory, thus bringing the number of Normative theories recognized in the literature to six.
These will be scanned as follows: • Authoritarian Media Theory Dates from the 16th century, the theory describes a situation in which the mass media are subordinated to state power.
Whether the media ownership is private or public, they are expected to service the government or its functionaries and are forbidden to criticize government or its functionaries.
The instruments of authoritarian control of the media are many and varied.
They include heavy taxation, repressive legislation and direct or subtle state control of staffing.
Others are suspension of publication, and rough treatment of journalists which were the hallmark of Babangida and Abacha regimes in Nigeria.
• Libertarian Theory (Free Press) The Libertarian theory or free press theory believes that an individual should be free to publish what he or she likes to hold and express opinions freely.
It is based on the concept of “free market place of ideas” which held that good ideas would inevitably drive out bad ones if both were guaranteed free expression.
The theory does not however obliterate the laws of defamation, sedition, obscenity and invasion of privacy.
It believes that human beings including journalists are rational and have the ability to differentiate between right and wrong.
The theory exists mainly to check on governments or its functionaries and therefore must ideally be free from government control.
The clearest expression of the libertarian principle can be found in the first amendment to the American Constitution, which infringes on freedom of speech or of the press is a good example of the theory at work.
• Democratic Participant Theory 28MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY The main thrust of this theory as enunciated by McQuail lies on the insistence that the existing bureaucracy and professional hegemony in media system should be done away with so as to ensure easy access to the media by allowing potential users and consumers.
Conclusively, it insists that previous media theories have failed to deliver the expected results and therefore calls for grassroot participation in the control of the mass media.
• Social Responsibility Theory The social responsibility theory can be aptly described as a child of the industrial revolution.
The industrial revolution and the emerging multimedia society provided the conducive environment for the development of a theory that is based on the assumption that while the press should be free, it must nonetheless be responsible.
This theory places emphasis on the moral and social responsibilities of people, who, and institutions which operate the mass media.
The main theme of the message therefore is “In Public Interest”.
It holds the position that one has the right to print, but he does not have the right to libel.
It admits no censorship, but depends solely on the maturity of proprietors, editors and reporters.
The main difference to the libertarian theory of the mass media lies in the demand for social responsibility which, if need be, can be enforced on the media by other institutions when it acts contrary to the laid down principles of social responsibility.
• Development Media Theory Development media theory was put forward as a means of paying for the imbalance in development and information flow of the Third World Countries and a solution to the technological problems facing them.
The Third World Countries are bedeviled by problems that make the development of mass media system difficult.
Some of these problems are the absence of communication infrastructure, the professional skill, the production and cultural resources and the available audience.
The major tenets of Development Media Theory as enunciated by McQuail are: • Media must accept and carry out positive development tasks in line with naturally established policy 29MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY • Freedom of the media should be open to economic priorities and development needs of the society • Media should give priority in the content to the national culture and language • Journalists and other media workers have responsibilities as well as freedom in their information gathering and dissemination tasks.
• In the interest of development, the state has a right to intervene or restrict media operation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 List five normative theory you know.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is necessary to state here that in practical term, it is difficult to see a country operating one theory to the exclusion of others.
For example, you have elements of social responsibility theory which can be seen in countries where libertarian theory operates.
In Nigeria for instance, we have elements of social responsibility and authoritarian media theories in our mass media atmosphere.
This is what Folarin (1998) described as a little bit to the left and a little bit to the right.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have x-rayed the meaning of a theory, its importance and types of normative theories of the media.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Authoritarian and libertarian theories of the mass media are poles apart.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Daramola, I (2003).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
Lagos: Rothans Press.
Folarin, B (1998).
Theories of Mass Communication: An Introductory Text.
Ibadan: Sterlin-Horden Publishers.
McQuail, D (2000).
Mass Communication Theory.
4th Edition.
Englewood Cliff, N.J: Prentice Hall.
Sambe, J.A (2008).
Introduction to Mass Communication Practice in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books.
MODULE 2 30MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Unit 1 Overview of the Mass Media in Nigerian Society Unit 2 Media Ownership and Control Unit 3 Press Freedom in Nigeria Unit 4 The Nigerian Press Council Unit 5 The Nigerian Social Structure UNIT 1 OVERVIEW OF THE NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Nigerian Society 3.2 Overview of the Mass Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The mass media is a by-product of the society.
The nature of the society determines to a large extent the kind of media systems the society will have.
In this unit, we shall trace the stages of the development of the mass media in the Nigerian society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, should be able to: • explain the structure of the Nigerian society • give an overview of the mass media in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Nigerian Society The term society can be defined as the network of social interaction.
Daramola (2005:1) sees society as the “web of social relationship.” It is the “whole complex scheme” or “whole tissue” of social relationships.
A sociologist, George Simmel in Daramola (2005:2) defines society as 31MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY “a number of individuals connected by interactions.” Equally, an anthropologist, Ralph Linton in Daramola (op Cit) sees society as any group of people who have lived and worked together long enough to think of themselves as a social unit with well defined limits.
Society could be organized or unorganized.
It could be complex or simple, depending on its structure.
The Nigerian society is complex and heterogeneous in nature.
Nigeria has up to 250 tribes and there is diversity in terms of culture in the country.
The economic, social, political and religious activities in the country among different tribes or sub-groups reflect the diversity of the Nigerian society.
Nigeria has a rich cultural heritage which is been expressed in different traditional festivals and fiestas among different ethnic nationalities in the country.
Because of the diversity of Nigeria in terms of tribes and other variables, the country, sometime, finds itself in ethnic controversy.
Commenting on the effects of ethnic chauvinism on the Nigerian press, Umechukwu (2001:139) wondered: … why did the press sink into a low ethnic ebb?
Ethnicity is so entrenched in the Nigerian psyche that the political stratification cannot be anything but ethnic; economic and cultural activities in the country cannot be anything but based on ethnic principles.
It is important to stress that within the context of our cultural diversities, the mass media and other stakeholders have been trying to define national unity and national interest.
It is also important to state that despite our heterogeneity as Nigerians, we share so many things in common.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define society?
3.2 Overview of Nigerian Mass Media An overview of the Nigerian press can be appreciated through the following eras: • Colonial era (1800-1949) • Pre-independence era (1950s-early 1960s) • Post-independence era (1960-2000) • The present era (2000 to date) • The Colonial era 32MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY This era marked the introduction of the press in Africa by the missionaries.
Newspapers were precisely established in Africa by the missionaries for the purpose of spreading gospel among the people.
That is why some people believe that the Nigerian press was borne and nurtured in the waters of colonialism.
The Nigerian press according to Daramola (2006:78) had “its debut in Rev.
Henry Townsend’s newspaper, Iwe Irohin fun awon are Egba ati Yoruba, which began publication in 1859.” This missionary-turned journalist established his paper chiefly to propagate the gospel and to improve the literacy level of the target audience.
• The Pre-Independence Era This period featured the growth of political awareness by Africans as they demand for independence and self governance.
Indigenous newspapers sprang up at this era and waged a dogged war against socio- political and economic injustices of the colonialists.
During this period, newspapers such as, the Nigerian Pioneer established in 1914 by Kitoyi Ajasa and Ernest Ikoli’s African Messenger established in 1921 came on board.
This era marked a kind of antagonistic journalism as social and economic ills of the colonial masters were attacked with all vehemence.
• The Post-Independence Era During this period, communication and media research received a tremendous improvement.
The leaders advocate for development journalism while lots of legal barriers were mounted against the press.
There was a sudden shift from national aspirations to regional politics.
Daramola (2006:89) captures this scenario thus: From 1959 to 1966, the press took regional and ethnic posture.
This was as earlier stated due to struggle for power by the nationalists who now formed the bulk of local politicians… Since no press operates independence of the society on which it operates, the regional politics of the post independent Nigeria ultimately gave rise to regional government established regional newspapers: radio and television were meant to champion their parochial interests on national issues.
It is important to stress that during this era, the fire of the media seem to have been quenched.
This is because independence, which was the 33MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY activating circumstance for the guerrilla journalism was gotten and the Nigerian journalists have no challenging issues to attack.
• The Present Era The press at this era performs well in terms of improvements in the training of professionals and communication research.
There is a remarkable improvement in both broadcasting and the print media.
That notwithstanding, the press is still inhibited by endogenous and exogenous problems like economic challenges, technological impotency, censorship and social mishaps.
A renowned communication scholar, Ralph Akinfeleye (2007) captured the progress of this era thus: The number of Nigerian Journalism/Mass Communication institutions continues to increase at a very high rate in the same way that the number of Nigerian journalists continues to increase.
For example, in 1999, there were only fifteen (15) accredited Journalism institutions in Nigeria at both the University and Polytechnic levels.
But today, 2007, my latest research findings on this reveal that there are fifty-eight (58) Journalism institutions in Nigeria.
And that Nigeria is being serviced by three hundred and fifty (350) radio and television stations; a number considered by media researchers too low for a population of over 140 million people.
It is heart warming to observe that Nigeria parades an excellent crops of media professionals both in print and broadcast media who are recognized in Africa and beyond.
In academics, this era is rewarding because the country has been producing professors and Ph.D holders in journalism and mass communication who are making waves in national and international frontiers on communication related issues.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Give an overview of the mass media in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit establishes the fact that the Nigerian mass media over the years have been influenced by socio-political, economic and others factors in the course of their operations.
In spite of the challenges, a lot of progress has been made in different areas of the Nigerian mass media.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have explained the stages which the Nigerian media have gone through in its match to professionalism.
34MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Taking the Nigerian society into consideration, discuss some structural changes in the mass media.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinfeleye, R. (2007).
“UNESCO Model Curricula for Journalism Education for Developing Countries: The Challenge for Nigerian Journalism Education and Training.” A seminar paper presented at the Nigerian Press Council’s workshop held in Lagos on October 3, 2007.
Daramola, I (2006).
History and Development of Mass Media in Nigeria.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
Umechukwu, P (2001).Mass Media and Nigerian Society.
Enugu: Thompson Printing and Publication Company.
35MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 2 MEDIA OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Patterns of Media Ownership 3.2 Methods of Exercising Control over the Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Herbert Altschull cited in Lamidi et al (2008) insisted that an independent press cannot exist and that the news organs are agents of the people who exercise political and economic control.
No matter the benevolence of the government, no matter the democratic principles of the society and no matter the advancement of any society, the mass media are usually subjected to some form of control from those who hold and operate the apparatus of power.
In Nigeria, the base of authoritarianism was however pronounced by direct government control and monopoly of the radio and television stations until 1992 when private broadcasting stations were licensed for the first time under the administration of General Ibrahim Badamosi Babangida.
This development marked a new era in the broadcast media ownership.
This concept and other issues relating to patterns of control over the media will be the focal point of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: • explain the different types of media ownership • explain the indirect control of the media • explain the reasons behind media control.
36MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Patterns of Media Ownership i.
Government Ownership This refers to public ownership of the mass media (both print and electronic).
Government for political reasons owns the media especially radio and television.
This kind of ownership could be operational in both civilian and military regimes.
Media are set up, staffed and controlled by government because of the fear that such media houses could be used to cause trouble if left in the hands of private businessmen.
This is a common scenario in Africa with the exception of Nigeria which liberalized the broadcast industry in 1992 by allowing private individuals to own radio and television stations.
Prior to 1992, only state and federal governments own broadcasting stations.
This type of ownership is common in Nigeria and in some African countries.
ii.
Private Ownership This refers to the private ownership of the media (both print and electronic).
This type of ownership is common in the Europe, America and Nigeria.
iii.
Joint Government and Private Ownership This is a rather joint venture between the government and private businessmen.
This is very common in Canada.
iv.
Public Ownership This refers to media operated on behalf of the public by charter and is supposedly “autonomous” or independent to a great extent.
The British Broadcasting Corporation, NHK, are two typical examples of public media.
Many media organisations in various countries bear the title public corporation; but they are so only in name and not in fact, considering their obvious subservience to government.
v. User Ownership This is the initiative of the audience e.g fan clubs coming with their radio and television stations.
This type of ownership is not common in this part of the world but it can be found in America.
37MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List and briefly discuss the patterns of media ownership.
3.2 Methods of Exercising Control over the Media There are several ways by which those who wield political power can control mass media in any society.
This can be through the arsenals of authoritarian control such as repressive legislation, heavy taxation, direct or indirect control of essential production inputs, rough treatment of media workers, issuing of death threat and in some extreme cases assassination of media workers (e.g Dele Giwa), censorship and closure of media houses (e.g Daily Concord, OGBC, Abeokuta, during the Babangida regime).
Another method of exercising control over the broadcast media is through the indirect control of the media structures.
These structures include: i.
Management Structure: It is the ownership structure that determines management of any media organisation.
In a situation of government ownership, the management is usually structured to reflect government’s thinking and interest.
In terms of the private sector, the media is structured in such a way as to protect the interest of the proprietor.
For instance, the Independent Television (ITV) Benin City owned by Chief Gabriel Osawaru Igbinedion cannot go against the interest of the Igbinedion dynasty in the course of reporting.
The same thing is applicable to Raymond Dokpesi’s Africa Independent Television (AIT).
The station can never injure the political and economic interest of the proprietor.
ii.
Finance: The financing of the media is dependent on the ownership.
In developing countries like Nigeria, government sends subvention to its media houses, even when such media establishment still source funds from other sources.
Therefore, in a situation of government ownership, government can exercise the power at its disposal to put financial pressure on such media organisations with a view to forcing them to conform to the policies and philosophy of the proprietor.
Other sources of finance especially in public financed broadcast organisations according to Akpan (2006:198-199) are: iii.
Syndication – is a process by which broadcast stations are supplied programmes by programme production companies.
Each 38MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY copy of the programme would be used by three or more stations before being returned to the syndicate for inspection and re-issue in rotation pattern.
iv.
Barter Programmes – in addition to buying programmes from syndicates, stations can receive programme for little or no money under an arrangement known as “barter”.
In a “barter deal,” syndication companies would make programmes available to a broadcast station at normal or no charge in return for the right to run advertisements on the station accepting the programme.
v. Production: The production structure refers to the technological equipment used for production.
They are very expensive AND African countries do not have the capacity to produce their own technology.
They can only acquire the media equipment from developed countries.
The exercise of political power can affect a country’s media structure if such a country breach international laws and is subsequently ostracized.
Such ostracism could lead to refusal of the developed countries to trade with the offending country.
During the regime of General Sanni Abacha, Nigeria was given a pariah status with an indefinite suspension by the Commonwealth of Nations after the execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other Ogonis.
vi.
Distribution: This is more prevalent in the broadcast media industry.
The distribution of broadcast signals is determined by the cost of materials for distribution and geographical factors.
However, unlike developed countries where channels and frequencies are allocated on the basis of needs, distribution of channels in a country like Nigeria is carried out at times on the basis of political exigency.
This has left the private and state government owned media at a disadvantaged position in terms of area of coverage.
The stronger channels VHF for television and SW (short wave) bands are reserved for federal government owned stations.
The weak ones in terms of coverage such as UHF channels on television and mostly FM (frequency modulation) band on radio are allocated to state government and privately owned stations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Outline measures of media control.
39MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 5.0 CONCLUSION Just as I have stated in the introduction, no matter the benevolence of the government and no matter the democratic principles, there is no country in the world where the media enjoy absolute freedom without any form of control.
What is different, however, is that the degree of freedom enjoyed by the media varies from one country to the other.
Besides, the type of government in place also determines the degree of freedom enjoyed by the media.
For instance, in Nigeria, there is less control of the civilian government on the media in comparison to military regime.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined patterns of media ownership and methods of exercising control on the media.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and discuss four types of media ownership known to you.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akpan, C.S (2006).
The Pillars of Broadcasting.
Nsukka: Communication Studies Forum.
Babatunde, F (1999).
Foundation of Broadcasting.
Abeokuta: Link Publications.
Lamidi, I.K.
and Adedowole, F.I (2008).
Radio and Television Production: A Basic Text.
Akure: Alabi-Eyo.
40MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 3 PRESS FREEDOM IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Press Freedom 3.2 Constitutional Guarantees of Press Freedom 3.3 Limits to Press Freedom 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is a general notion that press freedom is hard to define.
While others look at it as “the right to communicate ideas, opinions and information through the printed word without governmental restraint,” the difficulty actually lies in defining the word “press” itself.
Is the word, press make up of newspapers, magazines, journals or does it include broadcasting and other forms of communication yet dreamt of?
Another dilemma in demystifying the concept of press freedom is in the degree of freedom sought or implied in the concept.
That notwithstanding, we shall attempt to deal with the concept of press freedom in this unit with particular emphasis on Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define press freedom • outline constitutional guarantees for press freedom • discuss limits to press freedom in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Press Freedom Press freedom is practically the same thing with freedom of expression which many people believe is the mother of all freedoms.
Press freedom connotes a free flow of information and the rights to disseminate information without hindrances whatsoever.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 41MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Define Press freedom.
3.2 Constitutional Guarantees for Press Freedom The 1960 constitution provided under Section 24 for freedom of expression, including freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart ideas and information without interference.
(Momoh, 2004:62).
Momoh also observed: Section 24 of the 1960 constitution became Section 25 of the Republican Constitution of 1963 and formed the major part of Section 38 of the 1989 Constitution, Section 40 of the 1995 draft constitution, and Section 39 of the 1999 Constitution.
Let us examine Section 39 of the 1999 constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria in full in order to appreciate constitutional guarantees for press freedom in Nigeria.
It states as follows: (1) Every person shall be entitled to freedom of expression, including freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart ideas and information without interference.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) of this section, every person shall be entitled to own, establish and operate any medium for the dissemination of information and opinions: Provided that no person, other than the Government of the Federation or of a state or any other person or body authorized by the President on the fulfillment of conditions laid down by an Act of the National Assembly, shall own, establish or operate a television or wireless broadcasting station for any purpose whatsoever.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Highlight the constitutional guarantees for press freedom in Nigeria.
3.3 Limits to Press Freedom in Nigeria There is no absolute press freedom anywhere in the world.
Nigeria which professes to have one of the freest press in Africa has a lot of limitations to press freedom.
Sunday (2006:115) argued that press freedom is limited in the overall interest of the society by: • The constitution 42MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY • The legislature • The courts • The government It is contradictory to discover that the same constitution which guarantees press freedom takes away the same freedom it gives to media men.
The 1999 constitution for instance, has given conditions for expression of freedom.
According to this statute book, expression of freedom is subject to any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Section 39(3) of the 1999 constitution states as follows: (3) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society- (a) For the purpose of preventing the disclosure, of information received in confidence, maintaining the authority and independence of courts or regulating telephony, wireless broadcasting, television or the exhibition of cinematograph film; or (b) Imposing restrictions upon persons holding office under the Government of the Federation or of a State, members of the armed forces of the Federation or members of the Nigeria Police Force or other Government security services or agencies established by law.
Let us examine other limitations on the laws empowering the media- press freedom as chronicled by Momoh (2007:13-14): Section 45(1) of the constitution provides as follows: “Nothing in sections 37,38,39,40 and 41 of the constitution shall invalidate any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society: (a) in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; or (b) for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedom of other persons.” 2.
The section that affects the media is section 39 which we already know guarantees freedom of expression and freedom to own, establish and operate a medium for imparting information, ideas and opinions to those who are willing to receive them.
It is when we look at details of the limitations on the exercise of the freedom under section 39 we discover that media practitioners 43MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY need to be more serious in investigating the mines that litter the road taken.
3.
The media must therefore look at the various laws that have been promulgated in the interest of defence, public order, public morality or public health, and for the protection of the reputation of others.
We will here look at the Criminal Code to point to the extent which the polity has gone in protecting itself against interests that may be opposed to public good.
4.
Part 2 of chapters 2-10, for example, deals with offences against public order.
They include: (a) Treason and certain other offences (secs 37-49) (b) Sedition and the importation of seditious or undesirable publications (secs 50-60).
These include power to prohibit importation of publication (sec 58); publication of false news with intent to cause fear and alarm to public (59); and defamation of persons exercising sovereign authority over a state (sec 60).
(c) Offences against the Executive or Legislative power (sec 61) (d) Unlawful societies (sec 62-68) (e) Unlawful assemblies (sec 69-88A) especially section 88A which deals with provoking breach of the peace by offensive publication.
(f) Offences against the administration of law and justice, and against public authority (sec 89-97) especially section 97 dealing with disclosure of official secrets.
(g) Corruption and abuse of office (sec 98-111).
These provisions have been reinforced with the setting up of the Economic and Financial Crime Commission and the ICPC.
(h) Offences relating to the administration of justice (secs 113-133) 5.
There are also provisions for punishing offences against public morality (secs 214-233A); and public health (secs 243-251).
6.
The greatest danger the media faces today is coping with the protection which the laws give to those whose reputation has been called to question.
Many media house do not fully appreciate the cost which neglect of this protection can cause the organisation in terms of payment of damages.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Outline the limitation of press freedom in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION 44MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY In this unit, you have discovered that though there are constitutional guarantees for press freedom in Nigeria.
The statute book also showcased limitations against press freedom.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have appraised the concept of press freedom, from the perspective of definition, constitutional guarantees and limitations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define press freedom and examine its limitations in the Nigerian constitution.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Egbon, M. (2001).
Democratic Journalism in Two Worlds: A Comparative Study of Press Freedom in the American and the Nigerian Mass Media.
Zaria: Tamaza Press.
Momoh, T. (2002).
Nigerian Media Laws.
Lagos: Efua Media Associates Ltd. Momoh, T. (2007).
“Journalism Training of Relevance” Unpublished Seminar Paper Presented at the Nigerian Press Council’s Workshop on October 6, 2007 in Lagos.
Sunday, O.
(2006).
JLS 605: News Reporting.
Lagos: National Open University of Nigeria.
The 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
UNIT 4 THE NIGERIAN PRESS COUNCIL 45MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Press Council 3.2 Reasons for Setting up Press Councils 3.3 The Nigerian Press Council and its Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the ways of ensuring that journalists perform their social responsibility function effectively is through strict adherence to ethical standards of their profession.
The press council ensures that journalists operate within the professional dictates as it monitors and regulates the practice of the journalism profession.
In this unit, we shall take a look at the Nigerian Press Council.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define press council • outline reasons for establishment of press councils • discuss the structure and functions of the Nigerian press council.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Press Council Press councils by way of definition are self regulatory bodies which enforce moral sanctions in the practice of journalism profession.
According to Daramola (2005:239), “a press council is mainly to investigate and rule on public complaint and against the press to make it more responsible, and also to fend-off restrictive government regulations and interference.
Duyile (2005:80) describes press councils as journalists’ court of honour.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 46MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY What are press councils?
3.2 Reasons for Establishment of Press Councils Press councils are desirable and inevitable in the practice of journalism anywhere in the world.
The major reason for putting in place press councils is to maintain the character of the press in accordance with the highest professional and commercial standards.
Another cardinal reason for setting up press councils is to ensure the freedom of press in the belief that such preservation is crucial to the existence and independence of the press and vital to the society that the press serves.
(Daramola 2005: 239).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Outline two major reasons for the establishment of press councils.
3.3 Structure and Functions of the Nigerian Press Council The Nigerian Press Council was established as an autonomous body in 1992 by Decree No.
85.
The Decree was amended by Act No.60 of 1999 by the Federal Government.
The major objective of its establishment was to defend and protect people against unfair treatment by the press and the press against unfair attacks and harassment by the government and other power structures.
The Nigerian Press Council, as observed by Daramola (2005:241), was” inaugurated on December 29, 1992 with 17 members comprising the chairman, four representatives of Nigeria Union of Journalists (NUJ), two representatives each of Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria (NPAN), Nigerian Guilds of Editors (NGE), Broadcasting Organisation of Nigeria (BON) and the public.” The law made it mandatory for one member representing the country to be a woman.
Other members are a representative of the Federal Ministry of Information; News Agency of Nigeria (NAN); Journalism training institutions and the executive secretary of the Press Council.
It is important for us at this juncture to take a look at the functions of Nigerian Press Council as chronicled by Daramola (Op cit).
Functions 47MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY The Council is to among other things, perform the following functions: i. Enquire into complaints about the press and the conduct of any person or organisation towards the press; ii.
Research into contemporary press development and engage in updating press documentations; iii.
Review developments likely to restrict the flow of information and advice on measures aimed at remedying such developments; iv.
Ensure the protection of the rights and privileges of journalists in the lawful performance and maintenance of high professional standards by the Nigerian Press; v. Foster the achievement and maintenance of high professional standard by the Nigerian Press Council.
The Council works through four Committees.
These are: i.
The Complaint Committee ii.
Research and Documentation Committee iii.
Registration and Disciplinary Committee iv.
Rights and Privileges Committee The Complaint Committee The Complaint Committee vets, investigates and deals with complaints brought before the Council.
In the treatment of complaints, the Committee observes strictly the Council’s procedure, which sets out to complain.
The Complaints Committee in the consideration of complaints before the Council lays emphasis on what it regards to be the public interest.
Through its recommendations on adjudication it provides normative interpretation of the Code of Conduct of the NUJ to give the press board guidelines in its operation.
These include stressing that the public is entitled to news and comment presented fairly and honestly with respect to privacy and sensibilities of the individual.
The committee also emphasizes the obligation of the press to take all reasonable steps to ensure the truth of its statements.
Rights of Complaints Any member of the public is entitled to lodge complaints against any medium of the mass media, provided the complaint is one of unethical conduct.
One can complain if: i.
Anything unethical is published in respect of him in any medium of information in Nigeria.
The media is defined under Press, and include radio, television, wire services, newspapers, magazines 48MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY and such other channel of communication involved in the collection and dissemination of information.
ii.
Anything considered objectionable is done in respect of him by any journalist in his capacity as a journalist.
A journalist is one who is engage in the collection, processing and dissemination of information for use in the Press and has been accredited by the Nigeria Union of Journalist.
iii.
Anything done against the journalist that is capable of limiting the preservation of the freedom of the press guaranteed by the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
iv.
What is done and complained about is not in accordance with the Code of Conduct of the Nigeria Union of Journalists.
Focus of Complainants A person can complain only when he is satisfied that he has drawn the attention of the medium concerned to what he deems objectionable and he is not satisfied with the way the matter was handled by the medium.
The medium may have failed to react to his complaint or informed him that it was not liable.
If the grouse has to do with a broadcast, it is advised that the complaint be directed to the station’s director of news and/or programmes.
One should be in no doubt about the publication he is complaining about, when the publication was made, what harm it did and what he wants done.
The complaints must be written.
The Committee entertains no verbal complaints.
One has to state clearly what one’s own grouse is; the steps he had taken to effect redress; and that the Press Council should look into the matter.
Processing Reports of Complaints Within 48 hours of the receipt of the complaint, the office of the Executive Secretary will make a preliminary report to the Complaints Committee to keep it fully informed, as well as set in motion the following administrative steps for the resolution of the complaint.
iv.
Acknowledge receipt of the complaint v. Refer the complaint to the Legal Department of the Nigerian Press Council for interpretation and confirmation that the complaint falls within the Council’s jurisdiction.
If the advice is negative, the Secretary will write to the complainant to say the complaint is not within the Council’s jurisdiction.
If yes, the Secretary will write to the complainant to supply documented details if not already submitted.
vi.
The Secretary will then write to inform the defendant about the complaint and invite him to comment in writing.
49MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY vii.
With necessary preliminary investigations now completed, the Secretary will lay all available facts of the case with documents if any, before the Complaints Committee for adjudication.
Handling of Complaints by the Committee The Complaints Committee will meet as often as the need arises while the Press Council itself will meet every quarter.
i.
The Complaint Committee handles the matter by inviting both sides and witness as provided for in the Nigerian Press Council Decree.
In this regard, attention is drawn to section 9 (1) and (10) of the Decree, with particular reference to the powers of the Council to summon any person in Nigeria to attend any meeting of the Council to give evidence and to examine him as a witness and in the case of journalist, without prejudice to the provisions of the Code of Conduct; as well as the power of the Chairman to issue summons etc.
ii.
The Complaints Committee will lay its findings and conclusions before the Council for consideration.
The Press Council will take a decision and announce its findings.
iii.
The Complaints Committee will handle matters that have to do with publication in newspapers or magazines and broadcast on radio or television.
Rights and Privileges Committee The Council through its Rights and Privileges Committee from time to time holds discussion with and advises government on developments, which might limit the press in its performance.
The Committee also prepares position papers on laws and developments adjudged as capable or impeding the performance of the press and issue press releases that advise and give general guidelines to the press.
The Council, since its inception, has written three position papers on the Newspapers Registration Decree No.
43 of 1993, Newspapers, etc (Proscription and Prohibition from Circulation) Decree No.
48 of 1993 and on the provision for the information of a National Mass Media Communication in the Draft Constitution which was abrogated by the General Abdulsalam Abubakar military administration in favour of the suspended 1979 Constitution in April, 1999.
Registration and Disciplinary Committee The Nigerian Press Council is required by Section of its enabling law to maintain a register of accredited journalists submitted to it by the Nigeria Union of Journalists.
The Union registers any person as a 50MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY journalist if such a person has acquired the stipulated training qualifications and experience spelt out in Section 17 of the Decree.
Section 18 of the Decree makes it an offence for any person not duly registered to hold himself out as a registered journalist.
It is the duty of the Registration and Disciplinary Committee to vet the register submitted to the Council to ensure that it conforms to the provisions in Section 17.
Research and Documentation Committee The Research and Documentation Committee undertakes on behalf of the Council an important aspect of its function in relation to training of journalists.
Sections 20-21 empower the Council to accredit as well as carry out visitations to journalism training institutions to keep itself informed of the course content and qualifications in such institutions.
The visit is expected to ascertain the following: i.
The adequacy of instructions given to persons attending approved course of training.
ii.
The adequacy or otherwise of examination offered in that institution.
iii.
Any other matter relating to the institution or examination on which the Council may, if it thinks fit, withdraw any approval given in respect of the course content, qualification or institution.
The Committee also organizes workshops and seminars for practicing journalists on important developments in the Press.
The Committee also oversees the production of the council’s journal and other publications.
The emphasis has been to foster the development of enabling conditions for the press to flourish and carry out its responsibilities to society; respect the diversity of opinions and ideas as well as respect for due process.
Registration The Nigerian Press Council is required to maintain a register of accredited journalists submitted to it by the Nigeria Union of Journalists.
Offences Any person who is not a registered journalist but holds himself out to practise, as one is guilty of an offence under the Nigerian Press Council Decree.
51MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Findings of the Council The Council may find the medium complained against liable or not liable and where appropriate it will direct the medium or cause the person concerned to publish, in such manner as the Council may direct, a suitable apology or correction and may in addition reprimand the journalist or person concerned in the matter.
If the journalist has to be further disciplined, like the removal of name from the register, a recommendation will be sent to the Nigeria Union of Journalists, which is responsible for accreditation of journalists.
The Council may in addition cause to be published in the Press, and in such other manner as the Council may deem fit, the name of any journalist or person reprimanded by the council.
The Council shall produce its own journal to publish its activities and the result of its findings on adjudications and such other matters relating to development of the mass media in Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Outline the functions of Nigerian Press Council.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been established that the Nigerian Press Council protects and defends the press against undue attacks or persecution from outside forces.
The council also ensures that journalist perform their constitutional duties without overstepping their boundaries.
With this intermediary role, the Nigerian Press Council is indeed a court of honour for journalists.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have considered the definitions of Press Councils and reasons for their establishment.
We also discussed the structure and functions of the Nigerian Press Council.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the structure and functions of the Nigerian Press Council.
52MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Daramola, I.
(2005).
Mass Media and Society.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
Duyile, D. (2005).
Writing for the Media: A Manual for African Journalists.
2nd Edition.
Lagos: Gong Communication.
Nigerian Press Council (2008).
“Nigerian Press Council Guidelines for Accreditation of Professional Programmes in Journalism and Mass Communication in Nigerian Tertiary Institutions.” Lagos: Nigerian Press Council.
53MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 5 THE NIGERIAN SOCIAL STRUCTURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Social Structure 3.2 Importance of Social Structure 3.3 Class Classification and Patterns of Interaction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is a general saying in Africa that all fingers are not equal.
This saying is applicable to social interactions among members of the society.
The rate at which people in the society have access to the means of production differs and hence the need to discuss different classes or stratification in our society.
This unit takes a look at the meaning of social structure, its importance, as well as class classification in contemporary Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, should be able to: • define social structure • explain the importance of social structure • outline the class structure of contemporary Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Social Structure Social structure or social stratification is the name under which sociologists study inequality in society, that is, the unequal distribution of goods and services, rights and obligations, power and prestige.
(Littlejohn, 1972:9).
The concept of inequality has to do with unequal distribution of goods and services, power and prestige, rights and obligations among members of the society.
The concept of social structure has to do with the 54MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY rankings of people either from high to low depending on their access to the means of production (Littlejohn, 1972; Okolocha, C.F et al 1999).
As a social engineer of the society, the mass communicator is expected to be conversant with the social structure of his/her country and that of other countries.
This development would place the communicator in a better position to understand the conflicts and patterns of interaction between the upper and the lower class in the society.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define social structure.
3.2 Importance of Social Structure The importance of social structure can be appreciated from different perspectives.
To a journalist, the study of social structure would enable him/her to effectively perform the status conferral role to the society.
To policy makers, such understanding would enable them to plan and initiate policies for different categories in the society.
Every society, according to Okolocha, et al (1999:201), has “a system of ranking people either as ‘high’ or ‘low’ or as ‘superior’ or ‘inferior.’ They observed that those who are ranked high or superior enjoy special privileges which elude those who are ranked as either low or inferior.
On a general note, social structure enables sociologists appreciate a person’s position in respect of mode of production.
It helps us to identify people at the upper class, middle class and lower class.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Outline the importance of social structure in the study of society.
3.3 Class Structure in Contemporary Nigeria Basically, the contemporary class structure of Nigeria has the bourgeoisie on top of the ladder followed by petty bourgeoisie, the proletariat, the peasantry and the lumpens at the lower ebb.
Unom cited in Ate (2000) gives a graphic analysis of class characterization and patterns of interaction among members of the Nigerian society.
55MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Social/Class Structure of Contemporary Nigeria Class Characterization Pattern of interaction (class relations) Bourge Compradors of foreign Focus their attention on the oisie capital, indigenous state as the main source of professionals, capital accumulation since bureaucrats, generals and the neo-colonial economy career politicians who leaves little room have, mostly via the state, elsewhere for easy resources.
accumulated capital and This relationship to the state carved out enough is all important, hence the monopolistic advantage fierce competition among to become a bourgeoisie.
themselves to control power.
Major source of income include state contracts as Relate with the poorer classes well as profits, interest as patrons to supplicants.
and rents from estates, The bourgeoisie (ethnic- companies and other based factions criss-cross investments.
Live mostly with military versus civilian in the urban centers of as well as Christians political and economic versus Muslims factions) to activity but maintain a manipulate particularistic rural presence for interests and sentiments (e.g strategic purposes.
they often use ethnicity and religion) among the poor classes to maintain political and social pre-eminence.
Have intensified the exploitation and oppression of the poor classes mainly through the instrumentation of the state Petty- Craftsmen or artisans and They are resentful of the bourgeoisie petty traders found monopolization of the state mainly in the urban but patronage, credit and other also significantly in the business opportunities by the rural areas who are small organized private sector (i.e operators with little the bourgeoisie) and the capital, restricted skills formal economy which is and limited schooling.
only for those with education and formal skills.
56MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Unemployment However, wage increase in (including graduate the formal economy has also unemployment) has benefited some of them, expanded their ranks in especially in urban areas like tailoring, commercial centers- but not hairdressing, catering, most of them.
They have trading etc.
Lack of followed ‘tricksters’ popular capital restrict them to leaders in hope of a share of using their labour of the resources appropriated by hiring relatives, bourgeoisies.
apprentices and lumpen-proletarians Alternatively, they have sought individual advancement through relations of clientage.
Since they are unorganized and lack resources to articulate and enforce their own demands of their own accord, they have to rely on workers to do it for them.
Proletar Industrial and clerical Class consciousness and iat employees in the formal action is expressed mostly sectors of the economy.
through collective Found mainly in the bargaining and militancy urban centers; their chief over wages and working source of income being conditions.
Public sector wages workers set the pace, in wage agitation, but workers in industrial and organized private sector, where wages are in a smaller proportion of costs, generally earn higher incomes than the public and Levantine business workers.
Individual workers seek clientage and patronage from top bureaucrats to secure promotion, advantageous postings e.t.c.
All are keen on maintaining and improving their earning to meet the current needs and for later entry into the private sector.
57MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Peasan Small-holding farmers Peasant, like the other poor try who normally work in the classes, simultaneously envy farm themselves assisted and resent the bourgeoisie, by relatives and, where who are seen as models of possible a few hands success as well as selfish and hired for specific tasks on ruthless gluttons.
The farmers a temporary basis.
They proudly identify with live in backward villages ‘successful’ relatives in or even isolated and the urban centers and look up remote homesteads.
Main to them for assistance with source of income is farm inputs, sponsorships, seasonal earnings from credits and even social sales of farm produce.
amenities.
The lack of these things is at the same time They are mostly illiterates blamed on the universal and unorganized avarice and nepotism of powerful and rich people collaborating to short-change the poor.
The peasant also simultaneously identify with and envy urban workers who are seen as ‘aspiring’ or ‘struggling’ kinsmen when they relate well with relatives or as greedy aspirants to bourgeoisie status when they keep aloof or compete with the peasants as “absentee farmers” The Unemployed, barely Depend on the aid from lumpens skilled employees of the working kinsmen and friends petty-bourgeoisies, who are usually only slightly beggars, peddlers, tramps, better off.
Eventually domestic employees, hostility develops between petty criminals, them and their hosts as they prostitutes, without stable fail to find stable work.
or assured income.
Found Desperation and or greed mainly in the poor slums leads them to offer of the commercial centers themselves into the hands of the bourgeoisie as thugs, guards, objects of fun, servants etc for some income for the hope of a breakthrough.
Sometimes 58MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY frustration turns them against the more successful classes.
They are regarded as enemies of the society SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Examine the relationship between the petty bourgeoisie and the proletariat.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been established in this unit that the study of social structure is very crucial to all stakeholders in the development of the society – journalists, sociologists, policy makers, etc.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined the meaning and importance of social structure.
I also took a microscopic scrutiny of the social structure of contemporary Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the classes in the contemporary Nigerian social structure and the nature of interactions.
7.0REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ate, A.A (2000).
“Economics of Mass Media Reporting.” Lecture Monograph.
Joseph, M (1990).
Sociology for Everyone.
2nd Edition.
Oxford: Polity Press.
Littlejohn, J (1972).
Social Stratification.
London: Allen & Unwin.
Okolocha, C.F, Nwanunobi, C.O and Igbo, E.U.M (1999).
Introductory Sociology.
Lagos: Acquitas Consortium.
59MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY MODULE 3 Unit 1 Culture and the Mass Media Unit 2 Social Change and the Mass Media Unit 3 Cultural Imperialism and Media Dependency Unit 4 Globalization and the Media Unit 5 Social Institutions and the Mass Media Unit 6 Mass Media and Economy UNIT 1 CULTURE AND THE MASS MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of a Culture 3.2 Components of Culture 3.3 Culture and the Mass Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Culture, which is the totality of a person’s way of life, plays an important role in the society.
In fact, people’s world views are greatly influenced by cultural variables.
In this unit, we shall examine the concept of culture and its relationship with the mass media.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define culture • outline the components of culture • state the relationship between culture and the mass media.
60MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Culture Culture is simply the totality of people’s way of life.
Sanderson (1988) defines culture as the total life ways characteristic of members of society including tools, knowledge and patterned ways of thinking and acting that are learned and shared and are not the direct product of biological inheritance.
Basically, culture has five characteristic – it is a system; it is diverse; it is shared; it is learned; and it is based on symbols.
Culture according to Daramola (2005:64) is “an entity that is made of many parts.” Rodney (1976:41) argues that culture embraces what people ate, and what they wore, the way they talked, the manner in which they treated their dead and greeted the new born.
Culture is the way and manner people socialize and go about their businesses.
One of the popular definitions of culture endorsed by E.B Taylor and many Anthropologists and Sociologists is that culture is the complex whole of man’s acquisitions of knowledge, morals, beliefs, art, custom, technology, etc which are shared and transmitted from generation (Otite and Ogionwo, 1979:26).
With regards to Nigerian culture, Ate (2007:8) observed that the way Nigerians cook, speak, dance, sing and dress speak volumes of their culture.
He maintains that culture encompasses values, mores, attitudes and people’s belief system.
By way of features, culture is symbolic.
It is learned, shared and integrated.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define culture in your own way.
3.2 Components of Culture Basically, culture has two components.
These are material and non- material culture.
Material culture has within its fold all the artifacts of the society e.g tools fashioned by man, shelter, clothing, weapons, etc.
Non-material culture according to sociologists consists of ideas behind the making and transformation of material objects for the use of man.
These include norms, values, belief system to mention only a few.
Because non-material aspects of culture are mental creations, they are also referred to as psychological aspects of culture.
(Okolocha et al, 1999:136).
61MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 X-ray the components of culture.
3.4 Culture and the Mass Media Culture includes the language, the philosophy, the religion, the values and the ideologies to be found among the people.
It also includes its science, its political beliefs, its moral codes, its forms of arts and recreation.
Culture provides the basic form of the many ceremonies and rituals of social life such as wedding, funerals, greetings, etc (Daramola, 2005:54).
One of the functions of the mass media as identified by Harold Laswell in Sambe (1994) is preservation of cultural heritage from one generation to another.
Based on that role, the mass media can be described as a preservative institution for all aspects of culture, whether material or non-material.
Sambe (2008:61) contends that the media have dominant and critical roles in shaping and re-shaping Nigerian cultures and norms.
According to him, through their coverage of cultural festivals, traditional dances, exhibitions of local arts and crafts, folklore and vernacular discussion programmes on radio and television as well as publications in magazines, the mass media play a role in enforcement and transmission of culture.
This role, he argued is heightened by the ability of the media to define, analyse and interpret issues in form of news, features, editorials and documentaries.
Culture, as earlier noted in this unit from the perspective of characteristics is learned, shared, integrated and symbolic.
It is crucial to state that the mass media – Radio, TV, newspapers and magazines make the learning, sharing and integration of culture possible among people of diverse backgrounds irrespective of distance, race, sex and other variables.
The mass media also convey meanings in form of symbols to the relatively large, heterogeneous and anonymous audience simultaneously.
In today’s complex and large society, the mass media remains one of the fundamental tools to facilitate cultural and social change.
Through the mass media, Africans are conversant with western customs, traditions and values and vice versa.
With the use of satellite broadcasting, the entire universe has become a global village and learning of people’s way of life is been carried out on a daily basis.
In the course of transmitting culture to other parts of the 62MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY globe, the westerners who had the technology and buoyant economy often super-impose their cultures on developing nations or third world countries.
This takes us to a very crucial issue of cultural imperialism by the media which shall be discussed later in the course of our study.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Discuss the relationship between culture and the mass media.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been established in this unit that the mass media outlets are transmitters of culture from one place to another.
It has also been discovered that the media as an institution preserves cultural heritage for the sake of posterity.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit delves into the meaning and components of culture.
It also explains the relationship between culture and the mass media.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT The mass media play a crucial role in the transmission of cultural heritage in the society.
Discuss with appropriate examples in the Nigerian environment.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ate, A.A (2007).
“Satellite Broadcasting and Effects on Nigerian Culture” A Seminar Paper presented in Akure at the Nigerian Union of Journalists (NUJ), Owena Press Chapel’s Workshop held on March 19, 2007.
Daramola, I (2005).
Media and Society.
Lagos: Rothan Press Laswell, H in Sambe, J.A (1994).
“Introduction to Mass Communication.” Lecture Monograph.
Okolocha, C.F Nwanunobi, C.O and Igbo, E.U.M (1999).
Introductory Sociology.
Lagos: Acquitas.
Otite, O and Ogionwo, W (1979).
Introduction to Sociological Studies.
Ibadan: Heinemann.
63MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Rodney, W (1976).
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa.
Dares Salaam: Tanzania Pub.
House.
Sambe, J.A (2008).
Introduction to Mass Communication Practice in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books.
Sanderson, S.K (1988).
Macrosociology: An Introduction to Human Societies.
New York: Harper and Row.
64MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 2 SOCIAL CHANGE AND THE MASS MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Social Change 3.2 Approaches to Social Change 3.3 Obstacles to Social Change 3.4 What is Mass Media?
3.5 The Mass Media and Social Change 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nothing is permanent except change.
Change is inevitable.
It is ubiquitous.
Change can be gradual or sudden.
It can be passionate or dispassionate.
With change, traditional societies can metamorphose into modern ones.
Change according to Ate, (2007) is: Very costly.
There can be no change within a system without a cost.
We live in a world that is subject to dramatic transformation in different spheres of life.
There will be no transfiguration or change of any kind in any society where people are reluctant to get out of their age-long beliefs or world views.
Most people followed more or less the same way of life as their parents due to their inability to change.
Change can alter the course of history; societies have moved from simple to complex courtesy of change.
Due to the forces of change, humanity has recorded the collapsed monsters like colonialism, slavery to mention only a few.
Change can take place within a social organisation or a cultural setting.
This unit addresses the concept of change from the social perspective using the media as a potent tool.
65MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, should be able to: • define social change • outline the approaches to social change • discuss obstacles to social change • define the mass media • establish the relationship between social change and the mass media.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Social Change Before we define social change, it is very important for us to take a look at the concept of cultural change.
Culture has to do with a people’s way of life.
It is the totality of people’s way of life –the way they dress, eat, weep, laugh, bury the dead, etc.
Culture includes the material things like tools, artifacts, etc and the non-material elements like mores, customs, values, attitudes etc.
Cultural change is the modifications of the body of knowledge of people and their tools.
Swanson cited in Okolocha et al (1999:217) defines cultural change as a difference occurring over time and being initiated by factors outside the structure.
Okolocha (Op cit) looked at social change as the modifications in the mode of interactions of members of a society.
Social change, they argued, may be planned or may evolve naturally.
Some sociologists believe that cultural changes often lead to social change.
Okolocha et al (1999:218) confirm this assertion: The penetration of capitalist system of production into Africa, and Nigeria in particular, transformed social relationships within the traditional extended family.
Before the advent of capitalist system of production in Nigeria, the extended family provided social, economic, security against harsh realities of living for its less fortunate members.
This commonly quoted practice of being our brother’s keepers’ best illustrates this point.
With the capitalist system of production, this practice appears to have lost its meaning as people struggle to fend for themselves, upholding the capitalist principle of individualism rather than the erstwhile communism.
This is a good example of how cultural change can lead to social change or a modification of people’s behaviour patterns.
Social change in the words of Moore cited in Osawe (2007:5) is the “significant alteration of social structure (i.e of patterns of social action 66MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY and interaction including consequences and manifestation of structure embodied in the norms (rules of conducts, values and cultural products and symbols).” The definition above has taken into cognizance social and cultural changes.
Talking about social change in modern world, Giddens (1997:519) observed that we live in a world subject to dramatic and continuous transformation.
He identified the increasing involvement of different societies within the global system as a dimension or direction of change.
Looking at globalization as an instrument of social change, Giddens (1997:519) asserted that the “globalization of social life both influences and is influenced by changing patterns of urbanization”.
He analysed from a deeper perspective the social, political and economic change from eighteen century to the present day.
Lending his voice on the concept of social change, Osawe (2007) observes: In whatever way we may define social change, what is important is that the restructuring or mutation is seen to have occurred in social relationship between members of the community, group or the society at large and that culture has been influenced by such restructuring or mutation.
This could be at the macro or micro institutional… personal levels.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define the term social change.
3.2 Approaches to Social Change Basically, there are two major approaches to social change.
These are Evolutionary approach and revolutionary approach.
Evolutionary Approach This is a process by which organism develops naturally from a simple to complex organism overtime (Okolocha, et al 1999:219).
A good example of the above approach is Charles Darwin’s theory of human evolution.
Revolutionary Approach 67MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY These are intensive and drastic changes or alterations of the patterns of social organisations.
These changes may be political, economic or even cultural depending on the nature of the revolution.
Revolutions which is defined by the Longman’s Dictionary of Contemporary English as “a complete change in ways of thinking, methods of working” could be violent or non violent.
Okolocha et al (1999:220) outline examples of violent and non violent revolutions.
Violent Revolution: French Revolution (1789), the Russian Revolution (1917) and the Chinese Revolution (1949).
Non-Violent Revolution: Industrial Revolution in Western Europe.
It is important to point out at this juncture that social change can be triggered by an innovation.
Ryan cited in (Okolocha et al 1999: 221) defines innovation as something novel if it differs markedly from its earlier version.
Innovation may come in form of an invention which has been captured by Okolocha (Op cit) as the “production of something new out of existing stock of knowledge in form of a discovery which is mere unveiling of something already in existence whose presence has not been recognized by the people or members of the society.” SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Outline approaches to social change.
3.4 Obstacles to Social Change Communication scholars and sociologists have identified different reasons as to why people resist change.
Ate (2007:56-60) outlines the following reasons: 1.
Inferiority complex 2.
Inability to tamper with your comfort zone 3.
Inability to embrace new concepts 4.
Procrastination 5.
Fear of breaking one’s tradition and societal norms, and 6.
Inability to set priorities In harmony with the above, Okolocha et al (1999: 224-227) identifies the following factors as to why people resist innovations: 1.
Fear of the unknown 2.
Tradition 68MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.
Vested interest 4.
Aesthetic values 5.
Moral sentiments, ignorance and superstition SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List obstacles to social change.
3.4 What is Mass Media?
Mass communication is a process of transmission of information, cultures, opinions, attitudes, etc, to a relatively large, heterogeneous and anonymous audience simultaneously (Sambe, 2004).
Bitner, (1977:9) observes that “for mass communication to exist, we need an intermediate transmitter of information, a mass medium…” In other words, the above assertions by Bitner implies that without the machines that serve as paths or ways of transmission of messages to a large people, communication would otherwise be limited to two people, or a group of people in a face-to-face setting.
Invariably, what this mean is that, mass communication can not take place without a mass medium.
Sambe (2008:28) reasoned that mass communication is “a process by which information originates from source to receiver, having been thoroughly filtered and transmitted through a channel.
Noise may interfere with the reception to cause communication breakdown.” He added that the feedback system in mass communication “is not instant.
It is delayed.
The feedback is mostly through letters to the editor or telephone calls or personal calls on the media.” However, drawing from Defleur et al (1981:239) mass media could be defined as “devices for moving messages across distances or time to accomplish mass communication”.
The term mass media is often applied to the technical devices through which information, ideas and attitudes are transmitted to many people in their different locations.
A simple way to classify the mass media is to group them under print and electronic media.
The print media are such media as books, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, etc that carries a message to the masses by appealing to their sense of sight through printed word.
The electronic media on the other hand comprises all the mass media which rely on electric power to get their messages to their audiences.
These include radio and audio recordings that appeal to the sense of sound as well as television and cinema that appeal to both the sense of sound and that of sight.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 69MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Define the mass media.
3.5 Relationship between Social Change and Mass Media Change is ubiquitous.
According to Okolocha et al (1999:217), “it is often used synonymously with development, progress, evolution or process”.
Viewed from the above perspective, it is an established fact to state that the mass media are powerful and potent tools of social change.
Through their factual news, features and editorials, the mass media can set agenda for the society that could lead to evolution of any kind.
Also through documentaries, the mass media can feature issues that bring transformation in the society.
The mass media have the power to build and destroy a person or an institution.
They can also be used to prosecute developmental projects of different kinds.
The mass media direct members of the public on which direction to follow on public issues.
As purveyors of peoples conscience, through their educative, informative and entertaining programmes, the mass media can bring unprecedented changes in the society.
Commenting on the effect of community newspapers in respect of social change, Ate (2008) argued that through vernacular newspaper, the village dwellers were wooed and mobilized to participate in development programmes of their communities, thus engendering social change.
He argued that the mass media are potent tools for social change and that community journalism if well harnessed and husbanded by the appropriate stakeholders would bring change at the grassroot level.
Social change can be appreciated in the sociology of the mass media.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Discuss the relationship between social change and the mass media.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have stressed in this unit that the mass media can be used in facilitating social change because of their remarkable functions or roles they perform in the society.
5.0 SUMMARY 70MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY In this unit, we have examined the concept of social change from the angle of meaning, approaches and obstacles to the subject matter.
We also defined the mass media and established its relationship with social change.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is social change?
Using appropriate examples in Nigeria, explain how the mass media will bring about social change in the country.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ate, A.
A.
(2007).
Unlocking the Wisdom in Small Things…Roadmap to Greatness.
Akure: Pamma Press.
Ate, A.
A.
(2008).
“Facilitating Social Change in Nigeria via Community Journalism”.
Unpublished Paper.
Bitner, J.R. (1977).
Mass Communication: An Introduction.
Englewood.
Cliff, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Defleur, M.L and Dennis E.E (1981).
Understanding Mass Communication.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Okolocha, C. F.; Nwanunobi, C.O and Igbo, E.U.M (1999).
Introductory Sociology.
Lagos: Acquitas.
Osawe, C (2007).
“Social Change”.
Unpublished Work.
Sambe, J.A.
(2004).
“Introduction to Mass Communication”.
Lecture Monograph.
Sambe, J.A.
(2008).
Introduction to Mass Communication Practice in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books.
UNIT 3 CULTURAL IMPERIALISM AND MEDIA DEPENDENCY 71MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Cultural Imperialism 3.2 Media Dependency 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The term imperialism according to Longman’s Dictionary of Contemporary English is: (i) a political system in which one country rules a lot of other countries and tries to find more that it can defeat and govern; (ii) methods by which a rich or powerful country can get political or trade advantages over poorer countries.
Hobson cited in Giddens (1997: 550) describes imperialism as the drive to conquer and subjugate other peoples.
This unit takes a look at the concept of imperialism and media dependency.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define cultural imperialism • explain media dependency.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cultural Imperialism One of the functions of the mass media is the transmission of cultural heritage from one generation to another.
It is important to point out that in today’s globalised world, the powerful and economically buoyant nations had an edge over poor countries and therefore the former super- impose their cultures or ways of life on the latter.
Imperialism can be seen from political or economic dimensions.
Udeze (2005: 27) argues that imperialism at the economic front is now being 72MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY helped by media and cultural imperialism.
According to him, to buy those goods and services, peoples minds are first of all prepared via the mass media to accept these goods or services, or to accept this behaviour or life style as the superior one.
Cultural imperialism has a broad scope.
According to White (2003), a review of cultural imperialism literature reveals that the concept has been used as a framework by scholars of other academic backgrounds and various disciplines to explain phenomena in the areas of international relations, anthropology, education, sciences, history, literature and sports.
White (op cit) argues that an examination of the international communication literature will reveal different terms such as “media imperialism” (Boyd-Barret, 1977); “structural imperialism” (Galtung, 1979); “cultural dependency and domination” (Link, 1984; Mohammadi, 1995) “cultural synchronization” (Hamelink, 1983); “electronic colonialism” (Mc Phail, 1987); “communication imperialism” (Matteart, 1994) – relating to the same basic notion of cultural imperialism.
Ate, (2007) observes that there is Babel of noises which suggests that some cultural values of many third world countries have been eclipsed in no small measure by western values.
This seed of imperialism, he argued, is “fertilized” by aggressive bombardment of media instruments like satellite, internet, video etc by western nations to developing nations.
Morrissey and War cited in Ate (2007:13) confirm this line of argument thus: The USA has rich, well developed media industries- firms, advertising, TV, music, etc and it is perhaps ‘home grown’ media industries.
Many cultures look to the USA and see affluence, freedom, desirable consumer goods and so on.
The USA is therefore invited to export films etc to other parts of the world.
It is very much a one-way system, introducing the values and commodities of (American) capitalism.
The above statement is a clear portrait of cultural imperialism.
Imperialism is different from capitalism.
Lenin cited in Udeze (2005:26) described imperialism as moribund capitalism or capitalism at its dying stage.
Giving a clear distinction between capitalism and imperialism, Udeze contended that “imperialism is subtle control from outside by multinational corporations; while colonialism involves physical occupation and governance of the colonized country.” SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 73MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Define cultural imperialism.
8.2 Media Dependency The production and diffusion of the media by powerful countries to the detriment of third world countries has led to the concept of media imperialism.
By this trend, third world countries in the views of Giddens (1997:545) are “held to be especially vulnerable because they lack resources with which to maintain their own cultural independence.” The concept of media dependency presupposes the fact that less powerful nations often depend on powerful nations in terms of consumption of mass media messages.
Talking about the effect of satellite communication, Ate (2007:9) observed; “The profound and major effect of satellite communication is the argument that it is an instrument of cultural imperialism.
This point of view accuses western nations of the world of super-imposing their cultures on third world countries, thereby polluting their ways of life.” There is no gainsaying the fact that rich and powerful nations define news and control the minds of diverse people with their global media coverage.
By doing this, they set agenda for the people, dictate the pace of civilization and initiate new ways of life.
Media dependency has an economic and technological dimension.
The richer the country and the powerful it is, the greater influence it exerts on less privileged countries.
The mass media experience between western nations and African nations vividly illustrates this point.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the term, media dependency.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have established that imperialism as a concept takes into account economic and political variables.
These variables by extent determine the nature of the mass media a society could produce.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed media imperialism and examined media dependency from the context of rich and poor countries.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 74MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Discuss media imperialism and media dependency.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ate, A.A (2007).“Satellite Broadcasting and Effects on Nigerian Culture.” A Seminar Paper Presented in Akure at the Nigerian Union of Journalists (NUJ), Owena Press Chapel’s Workshop held on March 19, 2007.
Boyd-Barret, J.O (1977).
“Media Imperialism: Towards an International Framework for an Analysis of Media System.” In J. Curran, M, Gurevitch and J, Woollacott (eds.
), Mass Communication and Society.
London: Edward Arnold.
Galtung, J.
(1979).
“A Structure Theory of Imperialism” In G. Modelski (ed.
), Transnational Corporation and World Order: Readings in International Political Economy.
San Francisco: W.H Freeman and Company.
Giddens, A.
(1997).
Sociology.
Oxford: Polity Press in Association with Blackwell.
Hamelink, C. J.
(1993).
Cultural Autonomy in Global Communication.
New York: Link, J. H. (1984).
“Test of the Cultural Dependency Hypothesis” In R. Stevenson and D. Shaw (eds.
), Foreign News and the New World Information Order.
Ames: IOWA State University Press.
Mattleart, A.
(1994).
Mapping World Communication.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press McPhail, T.L (1987).
Electronic Colonialism: The Future of International Broadcasting and Communication.
Newbury Park: CA: Sage Mohammadi, A.
(1995).
“Cultural Imperialism and Cultural Identity.” In J.
Downing, A. Mohammedi and A. Srebemy-Mohammandi (eds.
).Questioning the Media: A Critical Introduction.
London: Sage Morrissey, P. and War, S. (1997).
Advanced Media Communication and Production.
Oxford: Heinemann.
Cited in Ate (2007).
).“Satellite Broadcasting and Effects on Nigerian Culture” A Seminar Paper 75MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY presented in Akure at the Nigerian Union of Journalists (NUJ), Owena Press Chapel’s Workshop held on March 19, 2007.
Udeze, E.S.
(2005).
After the Whirlwind: A Discourse on International Communication.
Enugu: Rhyce Kerex Publishers.
White, L.A. (2003).
“Reconsidering Cultural Imperialism.” http://www.tbsjournal.com Longman’s Dictionary of Contemporary English.
(2000).
Third Edition.
London: Longman.
76MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 4 GLOBALISATION AND THE MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Globalisation 3.2 Effects of Globalisation 3.3 Globalization and the Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The world has become a global family as a result of growing ties of interdependence of countries.
This increasing wave of interdependence virtually affects everyone living on earth either positively or negatively.
Humanity is governed by the dynamics of globalisation in virtually all fields of human endeavour, be it medicine, commerce, economics, politics, sports, etc.
In this unit, we shall take a closer look at globalisation, the term which describes this increasing and alarming interdependence of the world.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define globalization • discuss the effects of globalization • explain the roles of the mass media in a globalized community.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Globalization Globalization is a term or concept that describes that growing worldwide interdependence of people and countries.
The concept of globalisation has been captured by Khor (2000:1) as the “defining process of the present age.” Through globalisation, the social, political and economic connections which cross-cut borders between countries decisively condition the fate of those living within each of them (Giddens, 1997:62).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 77MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Define the term globalization.
3.2 Effects of Globalization Globalization as a concept is like a fruit that has a sweet and bitter taste.
It has been proved to be both useful and harmful.
In a global community both luxury and poverty co-exist.
On a positive side, proponents of globalisation believe that the concept has the potential of eradicating poverty in the 21st century.
Globalisation can also help in propagating local and international cultures.
Capturing the strength of globalisation, Awake!
(2002:7) argues that “the ideas, news, money and technology have created a new global neigbourhood that can bring benefits.” Globalisation has also enriched some people and nations and has brought about unprecedented breakthroughs in the era of global communication.
On the negative perspective, globalisation has its own headaches.
Even though, the concept can bring ultimate prosperity, it is argued that globalisation has an economic consequence of widening the gap between the rich and the poor.
While global wealth has undoubtedly increased under globalisation, it has become concentrated in fewer hands and few countries.
Statistics from Awake!
(2007:7) show that the net worth of the 200 richest people on earth now exceeds the combined income of 40 percent of the people who live on the planet.
The magazine argued that “while wages continue to rise in wealthy countries, 80 impoverished countries have actually seen decline in average income over the past ten years”.
The economic globalisation, it is believed has been influenced by market forces, whose major interest is in nothing but profit.
Summarizing the negative effects of globalisation, Khor (2000:1) states: …the lack of tangible benefits to most developing countries from opening their economies, despite the well- publicized claims of export and income gains; the economic losses and social dislocation that are being caused to many developing countries by rapid financial inequalities arising from globalisation and the perception that environmental, social and cultural problems have been made worse by the workings of the global free- market economy.
78MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Globalisation as an evil wind also promotes crime and terrorism.
It also promotes diseases, viruses in no small measure among other things.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the positive and negative effects of globalization.
3.3 Globalization and the Media The mass media is a powerful tool of globalisation.
Through newspapers, magazines, internet, TV, radio and other channels of communication, people across cultures, races can be connected for a common course.
No wonder, with the miracle of technology in the present age, the entire world has become a global village.
It is important to stress at this point, that the media as the mirror of the society promotes both the negative and positive aspects of globalisation depending on the prevailing circumstances.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the exchange of ideas is an important characteristic of globalisation.
Awake!
(2007:7) reasoned that the internet symbolizes the inter-exchange of ideas in a global era.
However, the magazine bemoaned the fact that the internet is not used to spread beneficial information, culture and commerce, some web sites “promotes pornography, racism or gambling”.
On the TV and films, Awake!
(2007:7) states: Television and films have enormous influence on how people think.
The messages on the world’s screens often come out of Hollywood, the world’s principal factory on make-belief.
The values that this vast entertainment industry reflects often promote materialism, violence or immorality.
They may be totally alien to the local culture of many countries of the world.
Nevertheless, government, educators and parents invariably find it impossible to hold back the tide.
Through the mass media, radio, TV, newspapers, magazines etc, the impoverished people in developing nations for example, know how their rich counterpart in developed countries live.
Such gross unfairness in the global neighbourhood, Awake!
Observes, clearly “sows many seeds of unrest and frustration”.
79MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Another dimension to look at the issue of globalisation is within the media context itself.
This is the viewpoint some people describe as globalisation of the media.
Here, the rich and the powerful nations of the world with robust economic and technological advantage dominate the media at the expense of poor countries.
This domination gives rise to imbalance in the flow of information between the rich and the poor countries.
To stem the imbalance, the new world information order- an international system of the production, distribution and consumption of information has been recommended by global community as a way forward.
The big four international news agencies- Reuters, American Associated Press (AP), United Press International and Agence France Press currently define news to the global community courtesy of globalisation technology.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Discuss the relationship between the mass media and globalization.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have established the fact that there is an overwhelming increase of interdependence among countries of the world and that this scenario is made possible with the use of the mass media.
However, in a globalised society, the country that has a strong economy and a vibrant technological base will certainly rule the one that is disadvantaged in the aforementioned.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we explained the term globalisation and discussed its effects on humanity.
I also looked at the mass media in the context of globalisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define the term globalisation and establish its relationship with the mass media.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Awake!
(2002).
“Globalisation: Curse or Cure?” May 22, 2002.
Giddens, A.
(1997).
Sociology.
3rd Edition.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Khor, M (2000).
Globalisation and the South: Some Critical Issues.
Ibadan: Spectrum.
80MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 5 SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND THE MASS MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Social Institutions 3.2 Types of Social Institutions 3.3 Social Institutions and the Mass Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Social institutions exist to satisfy diverse needs of members of the society.
Such needs may be simple or complex depending on the circumstances.
In this unit, we shall examine the concept of social institutions in the society and establish its relationship with the mass media.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the study, you should be able to: • define social institutions • discuss types of social institutions • explain the relationship between social institutions and the mass media.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Social Institutions Social institutions are establishments that tackle some basic problems or needs in the society.
Such establishment of social organisations is put in place to guarantee an ordered social life.
Social institutions according to Obeta (2003:77) are: The basic social organisations that regulate and organize most of the activities of individuals in society into definite organisational pattern in order to achieve the fundamental 81MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY goals of societal life.
Without social institutions, none of the perennial, basic problems of any society will be solved.
Social institutions ensure that patterns of behaviour of individual members are regulated according to some definite, continuous and organized patterns.
This regulation is upheld by norms and by sanctions which are legitimized by society.
3.2 Types of Social Institutions Obeta (2003:77-78) identifies the following types of social institutions: • The Family and Kinship Institutions This institution regulates behaviour patterns in the area of procreations, biological relations between individuals in society and the initial socialization of the new members of society.
Daramola (2005:100) argues that the family pattern varies from society to society and that it is the basic institution that keeps the society going.
He described the family as the primary social invention that shapes us into human beings.
The family according to him, is characterize by common residents, economic cooperation, security, affection and care.
• Educational Institutions Educational institutions deal with the socialization of the young into adults as well as the differential transmission of knowledge, values, attitudes, skills and other aspects of cultural heritage of society from one generation to another.
It is an indisputable fact that education involves learning and socialization.
Daramola (2005:112) sees education as a principal mechanism for developing human skills and knowledge.
Education according to him ranks as one of the most important institutions in modern society today.
Apart from the family, where the infant begins the learning process, he contends that education also offer another opportunity from three years of age to 20 or 30.
The educational institution, be it primary, secondary or tertiary according to him is concerned with the transmission and creation of culture.
Cooper cited in Daramola (2005:115) identifies three categories of education.
These are formal, informal and non-formal education.
82MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY • Economic Institution The economic institution is central to the survival of society.
It deals primarily with the production, distribution and consumption of goods and services.
• Political Institution The political institution ensures that man is organized into political units.
It deals with the control and the use of force within the society, and the maintenance of internal and external peace, as well as the mobilization of resources for the implementation of various goals etc.
• Legal Institution This institution articulates and sets-up just laws that will guarantee justice, fairness and equity in order to ensure that there is order and peace in society.
Laws may not change the ‘heart’, but they restrain the ‘heartless’.
• Religious Institution Religious institutions deal with man’s relationship with his Creator.
• Health Institution Health institutions performed a variety of health related functions that are aimed at satisfying the health needs of the members of the society.
• Others There exist other institutions which deal with the differential distribution of positions, rewards, and resources and the access to them by the various individuals and groups within the society, etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define social institutions 3.3 Social Institutions and the Mass Media There are different agents of socialization in any given society.
According to Daramola (2005:81), “man is not genetically programmed to live in the society.
Rather, he has to learn the rules and codes necessary to make him function in a society.” He defines socialization as 83MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY a process whereby the culture of a society in general or a social institutions in particular is transmitted to individuals.
The agents of socialization are the family, school, peer group, church/mosque and the mass media.
An individual learns much from the family and other social forces that make acquisition of social knowledge and skills necessary for interactions of members of the society.
In this unit, our major concern is on the mass media which makes social engineering possible for members of the society.
The mass media are connecting tissues to other agents of socialization or social institutions.
The media as an institution serve as a social interface between the society and other agents of socialization.
While the family, peer group, the school, church/mosque cook norms, values, attitudes etc for the consumption of the society, the mass media as an institution assist in serving the tantalizing dishes to the tables of members of the society in a powerful manner.
In Nigeria, for instance, the Nigerian Television Authority, NTA, has been linking or connecting families or friends to one another through its News Line programme.
The newspapers, through their letters to the editor column, have also been connecting members of different agents of socialization together.
Daramola (2005:95-96) analyses the role of the mass media as a potent social force in the socialization business.
He observes that the mass media are very powerful socializing agents as they reach large, heterogeneous and widely dispersed audiences.
He contended that the mass media do not only teach the individual or public the norms and values of society, but also reinforce such norms and values.
As political instruments of socialization, Daramola (Op cit) noted that the mass media can influence political beliefs and education of individuals.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the role of the mass media as an agent of socialization.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is no gainsaying the fact that the mass media have powerful influence in the social engineering process of any society.
This unit showcases the mass media as a very crucial agent of socialization.
84MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the meaning and types of social institutions.
We also established the relationship between the mass media and other agents of socialization.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Dsiuss the relationship between the mass media and other agents of socialization.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Obeta, M.C.
(2003).
Man, Environment and Society.
Nsukka: Chuka Educational Publishers.
Daramola, I.
(2005).
Mass Media and Society.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
85MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 6 MASS MEDIA AND ECONOMY CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0Objectives 3.0Main Content 3.1 Economic News and Journalistic Responsibility 3.2 Problems Affecting the Economic Journalist in Nigeria 3.3 Relationship between the Media and Economy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the greatest problems confronting humanity is that of survival.
The basic needs of man – food, clothing, shelter, etc have economic dimensions.
Therefore, it will amount to an exercise in futility for us to discuss the mass media and society without highlighting the economic angle.
The economy is the focal point of human existence and therefore the media practitioners should understand the economic variables of their society.
What makes economic news?
Who is controlling the means of production and at whose expense?
What are the challenges to economic reporting?
What is the relationship between the media and the economy?
All these questions are begging for answers in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain constitutes economic news • discuss confronting economic journalism • explain relationship between the media and the economy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Economic News and Journalistic Responsibility The major economic and business stories which journalists should consider include taxes, inflations, trades, dwindling resources, capital market, money market, corporate transactions, etc.
People are not only curious and apprehensive to know what is happening to prices of commodities, where to get jobs and other economic variables, they want 86MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY to know the “how” and “why” of these issues.
They want to know why inflation and unemployment persists and how to cope with them in their various lives.
The public is concerned about the role of government and the private sector in the economy.
They want to know how the programmes of Non- Governmental Organisations, national and international would free them from the pangs of poverty.
To be candid, people seek to know not only what is happening in the economic realms but to also appreciate the how, why, when and where of the happenings.
In their quest to probe the above, they look at the print and electronic media for answers.
Here lies the responsibility of media practitioners.
The journalist has the noble responsibility of serving the audience with a balanced and elaborate diet of economic and business news and analysis.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Outline sources of economic news available for a journalist.
3.2 Problems Affecting the Economic Journalist Economic news or reporting is a very challenging beat.
It is a specialized and technical aspect of journalism.
A typical Nigerian journalist contends with a lot of problems in the course of doing his/her job.
Iyorkyaa cited in Ate (2000:2) identifies these problems: • Most reporters and editors are not trained and motivated for the task.
• Many business men are not willing to discuss their business transactions with the press.
There is often a mutual suspicion between business moguls and members of the pen profession in Nigeria.
• Economists themselves are not helping matters.
They are fond of presenting conflicting and almost confusing view points on economic issues which sometimes doesn’t work at all.
No wonder, General Ibrahim Babangida, at the twilight of his administration said: “Our economic problems defy solution proffered by economic theorists.” • The science of economics is too complex, cumbersome, and difficult to understand.
It is riddled with multidimensional complexities.
For instance, is employment or inflation our biggest problem?
Is small 87MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY business better than the big one?
Are wages rising too rapidly or too slowly?
• Another problem is the translating of business and economic vocabulary to a meaningful and understandable language to the audience.
The business and economic beat seems to pose a great challenge for the interpretation of terms like fiscal policy, monetary policy, income policy, micro economics and macro economics.
Another similar burden is to translate less formal and colourful terms like: - Stag inflation which describes the economic condition in which real output declines when inflation is rising i.e having recession and inflation at the same time.
- Jaw – burning which is translated as the situation where government uses persuasions to convince business and labour to moderate price and wage increase.
• Our economic life is intertwined with other dimensions of our existence such as physical environment, social attitude, lifestyles, politics etc.
To report well on the economy, the reporters need to understand the economics involved in a phenomenon as well as the non-economic element.
For instance, what is the relationship between economic and National Health Insurance Scheme, family planning, free education, and free health?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the problems affecting the Economic Journalist.
3.3 Relationship between Media and Economy There is an inter-mutual relationship between media and economy.
Daramola (2003:32) confirms that the media, both in structure and content, have an intricate relationship with the economy in its geographical location.
He argued that without the media, society’s economic life is bound to suffer.
The media in his views, contribute, albeit indirectly, to the Gross National Product (GNP) through their impact on productivity and employment.
The direct impact of the media as noted by Daramola (Op cit) can be seen from the thousands of people that are employed by the media as virtually, all groups of professionals are employed in the media, thus helping to reduce the level of unemployment.
He argued that the media 88MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY have their most obvious impact on the economy from the volume of advertising, which they handle.
Giving distinctive features of media economics, McQuail (2005:233) summaries: • Media are hybrid in respect of markets, products and technology • Media have high fixed costs • Media business involves creativity and uncertainty • Products can be multiply, used/recycled • Media tend naturally to concentration • Media business is difficult to enter • Media are not just any other business, because of the public interest aspect.
The role of the mass media in servicing the economy system cannot be underestimated.
According to Daramola (2005:183), advertising revenue are the major source of income for most private radio and television stations, same thing for newspapers and magazines.
The private radio, televisions stations, newspapers and magazine publishing companies are commercial enterprise which in his view are owned and operated by profit making corporations.
He contends that majority of the advertising in the media are of four categories.
These are: • Those aimed at inducing the purchase of one type of product • Those aimed at inducing the purchase of a brand • Those aimed at emotions rather than the intellect • Those directed at the intellect SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Briefly discuss the relationship between media and the economy.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have established in this unit that the media and economy needs each other for the overall survival of the society.
An economic society without the media will be incomplete and vice versa.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit took a look at the sources of economic news in the society and the problems economic journalists do face in the course of discharging their constitutional responsibilities.
It also x-rayed the relationship between the media and economy.
89MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Despite the problems confronting the economic journalist, the society cannot do without his services.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ate, A.A. (2000).
“Economics of Mass Media Reporting.” Lecture Monograph.
Daramola, I.
(2003).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
2nd Edition.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
Daramola, I.
(2005).
Media and Society.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
McQuail, D. (2005).
McQuail’s Mass Communication Theory.
5th Edition.
London: Sage Publications.
90MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY MODULE 4 Unit 1 Technology and the Media Unit 2 Social Effects of the Mass Media Unit 3 Media and Governance Unit 4 Media Ethics in Nigeria Unit 5 Mass Media and Development UNIT 1 TECHNOLOGY AND THE MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Technology?
3.2 Types of Media Technology 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The mass media is technologically driven.
As the society becomes more complex by the day, media practitioners need to technologically position themselves in a vantage position to effectively discharge their social responsibility function to the members of the public.
In those days, somebody could accept the definition of news as an account of what has happened.
But today, with the technology of satellite, the process of news gathering and dissemination has been reshaped.
People can watch events anywhere in the world as they are happening.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define technology • outline types of media technology.
91MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Technology?
The Longman’s Dictionary of Contemporary English defines technology as “knowledge about scientific or industrial methods or the use of these methods.” Technology is an aspect of culture.
The nature of the society depends on the type of technology it will have.
Artifacts, which are man-made products of ideas and activities, can reflect the technological advancement or backwardness of a society.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define technology.
3.2 Types of Media Technology Generally, Information Technology (IT) which is the study or use of processes especially computers for storing, retrieving and sending out information of all sorts has turned the world into a global village today.
Technology, like the mass media is an instrument of social change in a society.
We live in a world of automated computer dominance of communication in both private and public sectors.
The mass media as an institution has been making use of informatics, a fundamental tool of the age of computopia.
That is, the process of making use of computers and other electronic devices in information gathering, storage and processing in all aspect of life.
Technology has revolutionized communication during the past decade.
Access to people and information – practically anywhere in the world has become quicker, cheaper and easier – (Awake!
May 22, 2002).
Let us examine some few types of media technology.
i.
Satellite – A satellite is a chain-link of equipment used for sending out or receiving electronic microwaves or signals.
Nigeria’s first communication satellite was launched on May 13, 2007 by China.
With the launch of NIGCOMSAT, Nigeria has become a member of the space community.
The critical issue here according to Ate (2007) is that of technology.
According to him, during the launch of Nigeria Sat – I in 2003, the country relied on Russia for the project.
Also, during the 2007 launch of NIGCOMSAT, the giant of Africa depended solely on China for the unprecedented project.
This, indisputably, is worrisome.
92MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY ii.
Internet – Microsoft Encarta cited in Umechukwu (2001:69), defines internet as “a global matrix of interconnected computer network using the internet protocol to communicate with each other.
It is an open connection of networks that enables connected computers to communicate directly.” Awake!
(Op cit), puts the number of new users that get connected to the internet every week at 300,000. iii.
Television – Most people in the world now have access to a television, even if they don’t own one.
By 1995, there were 235 TV sets for every 1000 people worldwide, almost double the number in 1980.
Just a small satellite dish can enable people who live in remote areas to receive broadcasts from around the world.
“Today, no country can ever truly cut itself off from the global media,” points out Francis Fukuyama, a professor of political economy.
(Awake!
May 22, 2002).
iv.
Telephone – A good number of people are using mobile phones all over the world.
Many of these users are having access to the internet through their phones.
What an information revolution!
v. Microchip – Through this device, much information could be stored in the little space.
Media practitioners who have access to this technology are using it to effectively gather and disseminate timely information to members of the public.
It is important to stress that the development of information technology was a gradual process that evolved over a period of time.
For instance, in the pre 3500 BC, science and speech were developed.
The earliest known writing – cuneiform was developed in Mesopotamian.
By 63 BC, Tiro, Rome invented a shorthand which was taught and used to record speeches while China invented paper in 100 AD.
Let us examine the development of information technology time chart as compiled by Ate (2005:10): 1450: Paper mills in England.
Invention of moveable type in Europe.
1476: W. Caxton, book printed in English 1590: Invention of lead pencil 1714: Henry Mill, patent for a typewriter 1837: Samuel Morse (USA) produces his first telegraph 1839: First British commercial use of electricity: Cooke and Wheatstone’s telegraph lines open in London.
1843: Principles of facsimile transmission patented by A. Bain 1852: B.
Dancer, invention of microfilm 1867: James Maxwell proves the existence of radio waves 1868: Scholes develops his typewriter, fore-runner of modern typewriter 93MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 1874: Remington Corporation (USA) markets the developed Scholes Typewriter 1876: First words transmitted on a telephone by Alexander Bell 1878: Bell predicts the current telephone network 1882: Vertical filling systems introduced 1897: First Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) invented by K.F Braun 1901: Guglielmo Marconi sends radio signals from Cornwall to Newfoundland 1913: Vacuum tube amplifier (the valve) produced by H.D Arnold.
First long-distance telephone cable laid 1920: First electric typewriter in commercial use 1925: John Logic Baird produces first real television 1928: Baird demonstrates first colour television pictures 1931: Page printing teleprinter introduced by Creed 1936: British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) starts the first public television service in the world.
1946: ENIAC – Electronic Numerical Indicator And Calculator – the first modern electrically powered computer demonstrated, Pennsylvania, USA 1947: The transistor is invented by Brattain and Barden 1949: First computer (EDSAC) with stored memory is demonstrated in Cambridge, England 1950s: Start of long-distance direct dialing of telephone calls.
Photocopying devices on general sale 1956: IBM Corporation develops computer disc drive 1958: First satellite radio message 1960: Laser light beam developed by T.H Maiman (initials standing for: Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation) 1964: IBM Corporation markets its Selectric Typewriter with memory function – forerunner of word processing equipment 1966: ITT Corporation (USA) develops fibre-optics technology 1967: British Post Office introduces its Data Processing Service 1971: Intel Corporation (USA) produces first commercially applicable micro-processor.
Floppy disc drive introduced for computer programming 1970s: Rapid development of microcomputer – based equipment and systems - microcomputer, stand-alone word processor, optical scanner, etc 1974: Xerox Corporation introduces the ‘daisy’ print wheel 1979: British Post Office transmits its Prestel viewdata service 1980: British Post Office begins to introduce its ‘System X’ computerized telephone network 1981: British Telecommunications Act: establishes British Telecom as public corporation separated from the Post Office.
Also, permits the introduction of private enterprise into telecommunications.
94MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 1980s: Developments in information technology produced apace – more powerful microprocessors, area networking for electronic mail, etc, experimental work on voice input into computers, ‘wristwatches TV’, improved ‘bubble’ memory for microcomputers, fibreoptic transmission of messages, work with electronics of ‘faster than light speeds’, widening of information technology education in Great Britain from primary schools upwards.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Outline some media technology that you know.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been established beyond all reasonable doubt that technology is the answer to effective dissemination of information to members of the public in this jet age.
Technology rules the world, the mass media inclusive.
5.0 SUMMARY We have defined technology in this unit.
Wealso looked at some types of media technology available in modern society.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is technology?
List some types of media technology.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ate, A.A. (2005).
“Media and Technological Development: An Appraisal”.
Lecture Monograph.
Ate, A.A. (2007).“Satellite Broadcasting and Effects on Nigerian Culture.” A Seminar Paper presented in Akure at the Nigerian Union of Journalists (NUJ), Owena Press Chapel’s Workshop held on March 19, 2007.
Awake!
(2002).
“The Technology Behind Globalisation.” May 22, 2002.
Umechukwu, P. (2001).
Media and Nigerian Society (Developmental Issues and Problems).
Enugu: Thompson Printing and Publishing Company.
Longman’s Dictionary of Contemporary English (2000).Third Edition.
London: Longman.
95MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 2 SOCIAL EFFECTS OF THE MASS MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Social Effects 3.2 Social Effects of the Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is a general postulation that the mass media are supremely effective mind-controlling agents.
To this end, it is assumed that members of the society or human beings respond inescapably to the powerful stimuli from the media.
This point of view underscores the social effects of the mass media, which is the focus of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define social effects • explain the social effects of the mass media.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What Are Social Effects?
Social effects can be defined as direct or indirect influence of a social force on a person or a thing.
Looking at the concept from the media perspective, McQuail (2005:456) asserts: We dress for the weather as forecast, buy something because of an advertisement, go to a film mentioned in a newspaper, react in countless ways to media news, to films, to music on radio and so on.
Good or bad economic news clearly affects business and consumer confidence.
The subtle influence on the lives of the audience by the mass media can therefore be described as social effects of the media.
96MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are social effects?
3.2 Social Effects of the Media One of the basic assumptions about the media is that the mass media have an important influence on peoples’ lives and sometimes change their beliefs and opinions.
This subtle influence or impact of the mass media on the habits of the audience is what is referred to as social effect of the media.
To justify the fact that the mass media exert serious influence on the lives of the audience, there are some theories of media affects namely, Hypodermic Needle Effect theory; Two-Step Flow theory; Minimally Powerful Media theory; Uses and Gratification theory; Agenda-Setting theory, Knowledge Gaps theory and “Spiral of Silence” theory which capture the social effects of the media.
Acknowledging the social effects of the media, McQuail (2005:456) states: Our minds are full of media-derived information and impressions.
We live in a world saturated by media sounds and images, where politics, government and business operate on the assumption that we know what is going on in the wider world.
Few of us cannot think of some personal instance of gaining significant information or forming an opinion because of the media.
Much money and effort are also spent on directing the media to achieve such effects, especially by way of advertising and public relations, and it is hard to believe that this would happen without a conviction that it works, more or less according to plan.
Certainly, the media themselves seem confident on their capacity to achieve intended effects.
Discussing the social effects of the media with home grown examples, Daramola (2003:33-34) did the following comprehensive appraisal.
i. Arousing Mass Revulsion A whole nation could become revulsed and react adversely to some national issues.
An example will suffice here.
In the year 2000, there was demonstration in Kaduna (Nigeria) over the introduction of Sharia legal system by the state government.
This led to riot in which several 97MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY people died.
Media coverage of the riot aroused fear in the minds of people across the country.
ii.
Re-Assurance During Panic During situations of panic created by other sources, the media have been known to play a very key role in reassuring, calming and in specific instances, directing people to areas of safety.
For example, in situations of crisis like the Kaduna Sharia riot, which led to exodus of non- indigenes from the North to their states of origin in February and March 2000, the media were subsequently used to assure fleeing residents that all is well.
iii.
Panic Inducement The media can induce panic especially in periods of insecurity.
On the heel of the annulment of the June 12, 1993 presidential election, the media induced a lot of panic in the populace with their largely unverified reports that one section of the country was preparing for a secessionist war.
Out of panic, a lot of people started moving their families and property back to their home states.
This led to motor accidents with so many people losing their lives.
iv.
Induce Mass Social Action The mass media induce their admirers to social action.
Before the cancellation of the national monthly environmental sanitation, the Nigerian media were known for mobilizing the people for the sanitation exercise.
Nigerians have been known to respond in large number to appeal for generosity from the media for fellow Nigerians who have serious medical problem.
One good example is the case of Yinka Ayefele, a broadcaster with the Radio Nigeria, Ibadan who got his spinal cord broken in automobile accident in the late 90s.
Both the print and electronic media appealed for philanthropic assistance for the victim.
Good Nigerians assisted him.
The same thing repeated itself when Fadeyi Oloro, an artist got burnt in April 2001.
The media of communication solicited financial assistance for him to carry out necessary surgical operation.
v. Language Standardization The media simplify the language they use.
As a result of this, the audience tends to follow this pattern as the acceptable standard.
This is more so because of the demand of modern living that requires a lot of running around for people before they can make ends meet.
This means 98MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY people are no longer patient to read lengthy articles thereby encouraging economy of language which appears to be the hallmark of the media.
vi.
Define Social Values Through direct advertising, editorials and articles and implicit suggestions, the media tend to define for the society what constitutes standard social values.
In other words, the media shape societal values and write off many as unacceptable, archaic or obscene.
Sambe, (2008: 206) contends that an effective message delivery “creates an effect when it creates an impression on the receiver and causes the receiver to act according to the impression.” The mass media, he argues they carry messages and operate as informal education agents.
Sambe, (2008: 221) identifies some issues in media effects on Nigerian society.
These issues which he considered under broad groupings are: i.
Information and Education: The mass media performs several functions and in the process, affect Nigerians variously.
ii.
Entertainment, Socialisation and Economic Growth: Closely tied to the function of entertainment and socialization is the economic aspect of the media.
We read various stories and advertisements in newspapers, magazines and books.
We listen to and watch radio and television programmes.
We watch films in cinema houses and in our homes on VCRs.
All these serve to entertain us but at the same time, serve as an agent of socialization for the society.
iii.
Role Modelling and Habit Cultivation: Through the mass media, we acquire new habits, (whether positive or negative), by copying the things we read and watch.
iv.
Politics and Nationalism: For a multicultural society like Nigeria, where there are between 250 and 400 ethnic nationalities…It is through the mass media that ideas of unity, peace and stability are politically achieved.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the social effects of the mass media.
99MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit discussed divergent viewpoints on the social effect of the mass media and established the fact that the audience are living at the awesome mercy and influence of the mass media.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit took a look at the meaning of social effects and identified the social effects of the mass media.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss social effects of the mass media with particular emphasis on the Nigerian society.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Daramola, I.
(2003).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
2nd Edition.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
McQuail, D. (2005).
McQuail’s Mass Communication Theory.
5th Edition.
London: Sage Publications.
Folarin, B.
(1998).
Theories of Mass Communication: An Introductory Text.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers.
Sambe, J.A.
(2008).
Introduction to Mass Communication Practice in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books.
100MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 3 MEDIA AND GOVERNANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Governance 3.2 Purpose of Governance 3.3 Media and Governance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The importance of the mass media in art of governance cannot be under estimated.
Some people see the fourth estate of the realm as a powerful instrument in governance.
In fact, a one time American President, Thomas Jefferson cited in Abati (2007) summed up the indispensability of the mass media in the art and science of governance.
Jefferson places the media on a higher pedestal than governance when he observes: The basis of government being the opinion of the people, the very first object should be to keep that right; and were it left to me to decide whether we should have a government without newspapers or newspapers without a government, I should not hesitate a moment to prefer the latter.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define governance • outline the purpose of governance • discuss the relationship between the media and governance.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Governance The term govern means to officially and legally control a country and make all the decisions about taxes, laws, public services, etc.
(Longman’s Dictionary of Contemporary English).
According to 101MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY McQuail (2005:234), the term governance describe the overall set of laws, regulations, rules, conventions which serve in the general interest including that of media industries.
Governance in his view refers not “only to formal and binding rules, but also to numerous informal mechanisms, internal and external to the media by which they are “steered” towards multiple (and often inconsistent) objectives.” Government from the above deductions, therefore, concerns itself with leadership in totality for the sake of the people.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define governance.
3.2 Purpose of Governance Basically, it is the responsibility of government to provide basic amenities to members of the society.
Government also has the mandate of maintaining law and order as well as providing security to members of the society among other functions.
The variety of forms of governance that apply to the media, McQuail (2005:234) argues, reflects the diversity of purposes served.
He outlines the purposes of media governance: • the protection of the essential interest of the state and of public order, including the prevention of public harm; • the safeguarding of individual rights and interests; • meeting the needs of media industry for a stable and supportive operating environment; • promotion of freedom and other communication and cultural variables; • encouraging of technological innovation and economic enterprise; • setting technical and infrastructural standards; • meeting international obligations, including observance of human rights; • encouraging media accountability.
It is unfortunate to state that governance which is supposed to exist for the collective benefits of the people have become something else in developing nations.
In most of these nations, leadership exists to satisfy personal interest.
In Nigeria, for instance, most leaders are notorious for corrupt tendencies as they corner the state resources for personal use.
This unhealthy development is evident in the near collapse of infrastructural facilities or social amenities in the country.
The tension in 102MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY the land in terms of insecurity is another manifestation of bad governance in the country.
Politics in Africa is a lucrative business.
This explains the sit-tight syndrome of most leaders who are saddled with the responsibility of leading the people.
Any time their tenures are over, they find it difficult to leave the seat.
If they are leaving, they try to manipulate the political machinery in order to put their biological children or political “anointed” sons and daughters in those positions.
Most of the time, the quest for power compels some leaders to use the state mass media outfits as instruments to achieve their selfish desires.
The media, most of the time, find itself in a tight corner on whether to service the people or the leaders for their selfish gains.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the purpose of media governance.
3.3 Media and Governance The central theme of politics is power – who controls it at the expense of who?
Talking about the relationship of the media and governance, Daramola (2003:48) contends that the political philosophy of the society determines the type of press such a society will have.
Ate (2007:2) argues that “the media connects the government to the governed, electorate to the candidates in a democratic setting.” The central message about media and governance is that the latter dictates the former in the society and both play complimentary roles in servicing the populace.
Atte (2007) argued that mass media organisations are educators and key information sources that can be used for promotion of transparent governance… It is an indisputable fact that governance cannot succeed without a vibrant media in any society.
The media sets agenda for good governance.
The fourth estate of the realm also the excesses of the executive, judiciary and the legislature and ensure that leadership is people’s oriented.
The fear of mass communicators in some societies is the beginning of wisdom as the media have the power to uproot, leadership through investigative journalism by exposing some skeletons in the leader’s cupboard.
A society with a sound media is bound to progress.
The reverse is the case for a society which has a kwashiorkored media as such society is bound to be confined in the dustbin of history.
103MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY The media and governance are interwoven.
A media guru, Joseph Pulitzer cited in Uwakwe (2005:15) confirmed this position some decades ago.
He asserts: Our Republic and its press will rise or fall together.
An able disinterested, public-spirited press, with trained intelligence to know the right and courage to do it, can preserve that public virtue without which popular government is sham and a mockery.
A cynical, mercenary demagogic press will produce in time a base as itself.
The power to mould the future of the Republic will be in the hands of the journalists of future generations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Briefly discuss the relationship between media and governance.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit amplified the fact that the media and governance play complementary roles for the survival of the society.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the definition of governance, forms of media governance and the interdependent relationship between media and governance.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline the purpose of media governance and discuss the relationship between media and governance.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abati, R. (2007).
“Journalist and Obasanjo’s Contempt.” The Guardian, August 27, 2007.
Ate, A.A. (2007).
“Media Coverage of April 2007 Elections: A Post- Mortem.
Unpublished Work.
Atte, J.F.
(2007).
“Effective Messages for Voters Education on TV.” Unpublished Work.
Daramola, I.
(2003).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
2nd Edition.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
104MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY McQuail, D. (2005).
McQuail’s Mass Communication Theory.
5th Edition.
Lagos: Sage Publications.
Uwakwe, O.
(2005).
Media Writing and Reporting.
Enugu: Afrika- Links.
105MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 4 MEDIA ETHICS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Ethics 3.2 Importance of Ethics 3.3 Ethical Issues in Nigeria Mass Media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The major thing that controls the body and soul of every establishment is ethics.
Ethics serve as a compass or guiding instrument of various professions across the world.
It defines what is good and what is not.
Ethics can therefore be described as the general science of right and wrong.
Ethics as a concept can be traced to Aristotle’s book titled NICHOMACHEAN ETHICS which according to Duyile (2005: 79) “has brought world wide recognition and focus on this subject which influences the conscience of the journalist in the performance of his duty.” In that book, Aristotle argued that happiness can be achieved from a contemplative use of the mind; the cultivation of the virtues of prudence, temperance, courage and justice.
Duyile (2005:79) observes that ethics belongs to the mind and that ones conscience is the judge.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define ethics • outline the importance of ethics • identify and explain ethical issues in the Nigerian mass media.
106MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Ethics Every profession is governed by certain norms of conduct as ethics or code of conduct.
Ethics according to Daramola (1999:198) is “the study of human action in respect of being right or wrong or the study of human conduct in the light of moral principles.” Ethics are codified rules or codes of conduct.
In the case of the mass media, these ethics are also known as cannons of journalism which have been defined by Duyile (2005:79) as “prescription guiding all journalists in behaving right while carrying out their functions to inform, to educate, to entertain and to lead the public.” SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What do you understand by ethics?
3.2 Importance of Ethics Ethics as earlier observed is every crucial for the smooth running of every profession.
It describes areas where professional integrity could be achieved and what is considered unacceptable in the professional circle.
I shall examine the desirability of ethics with particular emphasis in journalism.
The major advantages of ethics are captured by Daramola (1999:198) thus: These professional ethics have the advantage of infusing dose of morality into the crude performance of a particular profession to which they refer.
They enhance competence in the exercise of the profession.
They constitute a means of control and discipline among members of the profession.
Invariably, professional ethic regulates the relationship between professionals and their particular publics.
The above views buttress the fact that ethics are instruments of professional sanity and moral uprightness.
Ethics are placed on a higher pedestal than law because what is considered lawful in a society may be unethical.
For instance, no law forbids a male lecturer from sleeping and impregnating his female students.
However, such an act may be considered unethical.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How useful is ethics in the practice of journalism?
107MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.3 Ethical Issues in the Nigeria Mass Media All journalists would like total freedom and autonomy to publish what they like.
But considering the great powers they wield in the shaping of the society, the freedom and the autonomy they want must be tempered by a commensurate sense of responsibility considering the fact that modern media’s all pervasive reach touches virtually all aspect of life, it is time someone undertook the task to fill the ethical vacuum which is at present occupying the hearts of most media establishments.
(Egbon, 2001:28).
Taking a look at the above views expressed by Egbon, it is apt to state that ethical issues have become very sensitive issues in modern society.
In Nigeria for instance, corruption is one of the nagging issues in the media.
A journalist is not supposed to take or accept bribe to suppress a story.
Journalists are also not supposed to disclose their sources of information to anybody.
Plagiarism and many other ethical issues are addressed by professional bodies in Nigeria.
Let us peep into the code of ethics for Nigerian journalist approved by the Nigerian Press Organisation and published by Nigerian Press Council to appreciate critical ethical issues in the Nigerian mass media.
CODE OF ETHICS FOR NIGERIAN JOURNALISTS PREAMBLE Journalism entails a high degree of public trust.
To earn and maintain this trust, it is morally imperative for every journalist and every news medium to observe the highest professional and ethical standards.
In the exercise of these duties, a journalist should always have a healthy regard for the public interest.
Truth is the cornerstone of journalism and every journalist should strive diligently to ascertain the truth of every event.
Conscious of the responsibilities and duties of journalists as purveyors of information, we Nigerian journalists, give to ourselves this Code of Ethics.
It is the duty of every journalist to observe its provisions.
1.
EDITORIAL INDEPENDENCE Decisions concerning the content of news should be the responsibility of a professional journalist.
108MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 2.
ACCURACY AND FAIRNESS i.
The public has a right to know.
Factual, accurate, balanced and fair reporting is the ultimate objective of good journalism and the basis of earning public trust and confidence.
ii.
A journalist should refrain from publishing inaccurate and misleading information.
Where such information has been inadvertently published, prompt correction should be made.
A journalist must hold the right of reply as a cardinal rule of practice.
iii.
In the course of his duties, a journalist should strive to separate facts from conjecture and comment.
3.
PRIVACY As a general rule, a journalist should respect the privacy of individuals and their families unless it affects public interest.
A.
Information on private life of an individual or his family should only be published if it impinges on public interest.
B.
Publishing of such information about an individual as mentioned above should be deemed justifiable only if it is directed at: i. Exposing crime or serious misdemeanour; ii.
Exposing anti-social conduct; iii.
Protecting public health, morality and safety; iv.
Preventing the public from being misled by some statement or action of the individual concerned.
4.
PRIVILEGE/NON-DISCLOSURE i.
A journalist should observe the universally accepted principle of confidentiality and should not disclose the source of information obtained in confidence.
ii.
A journalist should not breach an agreement with a source of information obtained as “off-the-record” or as “background information.” 5.
DECENCY i.
A journalist should dress and comport himself in a manner that conforms with public taste.
ii.
A journalist should refrain from using offensive, abusive or vulgar language.
iii.
A journalist should not present lurid details, either in words or picture, of violence, sexual acts, abhorrent or horrid scenes.
109MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY iv.
In cases involving personal grief or shock, enquiries should be carried out and approaches made with sympathy and discretion.
v. Unless it is in the furtherance of the public’s right to know, a journalist should generally avoid identifying relatives or friends of persons convicted or accused of crime.
6.
DISCRIMINATION A journalist should refrain from making pejorative reference to a person’s ethnic group, religion, sex or to any physical or mental illness or handicap.
7.
REWARD AND GRATIFICATION i.
A journalist should neither solicit nor accept bribe, gratification or patronage to suppress or publish information.
ii.
To demand payment for the publication of news is inimical to the notion of news as a fair, accurate, unbiased and factual report of an event.
8.
VIOLENCE A journalist should not present or report acts of violence, armed robberies, terrorist activities or vulgar display of wealth in a manner that glorifies such acts in the eyes of the public.
9.
CHILDREN AND MINORS A journalist should not identify, either by name or picture, or interview children under the age of 16 who are involved in cases concerning sexual offences, crimes and rituals or witchcraft either as victims, witnesses or defendants.
10.
ACCESS TO INFORMATION A journalist should strive to employ open and honest means in the gathering of information.
Exceptional methods may be employed only when the public interest is at stake.
11.
PUBLIC INTEREST A journalist should strive to enhance national unity and public good.
110MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 12.
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY A journalist should promote universal principle of human rights, democracy, justice, equity, peace and international understanding.
13.
PLAGIARISM A journalist should not copy, wholesale or in part, other people’s work without attribution and/or consent.
14.
COPYRIGHT i.
Where a journalist reproduces a work, be it in print, broadcast, art work or design, proper acknowledgement should be accorded the author.
ii.
A journalist should abide by all rules of copyright, established by national and international laws and conventions.
15.
PRESS FREEDOM AND RESPONSIBILITY A journalist should strive at all times to enhance press freedom and responsibility.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List some critical ethical issues in Nigerian mass media.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit argued that, every profession is guided by a moral compass by way of ethics.
It also established the fact that the journalist in modern society needs to be guided by codes of conduct to effectively and efficiently discharge his duties to the society.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we explained the concept of ethics, highlighted its advantages and identified ethical issues in the Nigerian mass media.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define ethics and outline some major ethical issues in the Nigerian mass media.
111MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Daramola, I.
(1999).
Law and Ethics of Media Practice.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
Duyile, D. (2005).
Writing for the Media – A Manual for African Journalists.
2nd Edition.
Lagos: Gong Communication.
Egbon, M. (2001).
Democratic Journalism in Two Worlds: A Comparative Study of Press Freedom in the American and the Nigerian Mass Media.
Zaria: Tamaza Publishers.
Nigerian Press Council (1998).
“Code of Ethic for Nigerian Journalists.” Lagos: Nigerian Press Council.
112MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY UNIT 5 MASS MEDIA AND DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0Objectives 3.0Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Development 3.2 Relationship between Communication and Development 3.3 Mass Media and Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 2.0 INTRODUCTION Development has become a very important issue in the media circle.
In fact, it is believed in some quarters that development cannot be fully achieved without the active participation of the media as an institution.
The debate for media and development has become popular that communication scholars have propounded the developmental media theory whose major tenets according to McQuail cited in Okoro and Agbo (2003:28) provides: • Media should accept and carry out positive development tasks in line with nationally established policy.
• Freedom of the media should be open to restriction according to economic priorities and development needs of society.
• The media in developing countries should align their interests with news and information in other developing countries that are close geographically, culturally and politically.
• In the interest of development in the state, media operations can be restricted.
Development communication is justified for a number of reasons.
First, its importance can be appreciated from the standpoint of the role communication plays in developing the society.
Second, development communication reflects the aspirations of third world countries (Uwakwe 2003:58).
113MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY 3.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define development communication • explain the relationship between communication and development • discuss media selection for development programmes 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Development Development connotes progress or advancement.
According to Longman’s Dictionary of Contemporary English, development means: the gradual growth of something so that it becomes bigger or more advanced; a new event or piece of news that is likely to have an effect on the present situation; the act or result of making a product or design better and more advanced; the process of planning or building new houses, offices, etc and a group of new buildings that have all been planned and built together on the same piece of land.
Also looking at the subject matter from a multi-dimensional perspective, Walter Rodney cited in Uwakwe (2003:14) x-rays development: Development in human society is a many sided process.
At the level of the individual, it implies increased skill and capacity, greater freedom, creativity, self-discipline, responsibility and material well being… A society develops economically as its members increase jointly their capacity for dealing with the environment.
This capacity for dealing with the environment is dependent on the extent to which they understand the laws of nature (science), on the extent of which they put that understanding into practice by devising tools (technology), and on the manner in which work is organized.
Development is a planned and deliberate attempt to ensure growth and effect social change in the society.
In consonance with this, Ogai cited in Uwakwe (2003) captured the concept of development: Development also refers to a widely participatory process of directed social change in a society intended to bring about social and material advancement including greater equality, freedom and other valued qualities for the majority of people through their gaining greater control over environment.
He argued that some scholars view development as a changeover from a traditional to an industrial society.
Development, in generic sense to him 114MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY may be “conceived as planned mobilization and direction of scarce resources to achieve constantly rising national goals and objectives formulated by national machinery.” Development can take place at the local, national or international levels.
The absence of development in a society is known as underdevelopment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define development.
3.2 Relationship between Communication and Development Communication is an important tool in achieving socio-political and economic developments.
Okunna (2002:293) argues that communication is so closely interconnected with development that there can be no development without communication.
The above postulations cannot be faulted because of the roles communication play in the development enterprise, Nwodu (2002) outlines some of the roles: • Creating a climate of development by adequately informing the people and encouraging them to embrace positive changes that can enhance their well-being.
• Encouraging people to aim high as well as developing new taste to the point of desiring good things in life.
• Focusing people’s attention to developmental process thereby sensitizing their maximum participation in development effort.
• Helping the people to understand and appreciate government policies meant to enhance their living conditions.
The link between communication and development is so powerful that the concept of Development Communication (DEVCOM) is fast attracting the attention of scholars.
Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003:27) define this concept as the “overall deliberate efforts to acquaint targets development with the desired message of development.” DEVCOM whose primary aim is to create adequate awareness about the development projects designed to enhance the well-being of members of the society according to Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (Op cit) “involves deliberate, well desired and articulated communication codes aimed at bringing development to the knowledge of development targets.” Development entails the use of multi-media approach to prosecute the gospel of development for the good of the society.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 115MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY Outline the roles of communication in the area of national development.
3.3 Media Selection for Development For communication to have any impact in the developmental initiatives of any society, appropriate media must be selected to reach out to the development targets at the right time.
Amplifying this point of view, Nwosu cited in Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003:75-76) observes: Such a multi-media approach will, for sure, respect the research-and- experience-supported fact that because of the high illiteracy factor among rural dwellers, and the problems of overcoming geographical and language barriers, the electronic media, especially radio, seem to be the most effective media for promoting rural development.
But it will also recognize that the print media (especially rural newspapers) and the traditional media or folk media like drums, market places, town criers systems and others, also have vital contributions to make in building the communication grid needed for balanced development.
It is only with this kind of recognition that each medium will be given its rightful place and attention in the developmental communication equation.
In selecting the media for development, a thorough understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of each medium of communication will be required.
One needs to understand above-the-line (use of communication channels like television, radio, newspapers and magazines) and below-the-line (use of communication channels like posters, town criers, minstrels, social groups, etc) aspects of communication before deploring them for developmental purposes.
The fact remains that both the traditional and mass media are crucial to the promotion of developmental programmes.
This is so because, regardless of their appeal, they complement each other in the business of development.
This is why communication researchers, scholars and practitioners recommend a multi-media approach for effective publication and promotion of development programmes.
(Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor 2003:75).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Outline the media selection approach you will use for developmental reasons and justify your position.
4.0 CONCLUSION 116MAC 212 MEDIA AND SOCIETY This unit established the fact that the society needs communication and indeed the mass media to achieve any developmental agenda or initiative.
Communication is indisputably an imperative for development.
5.0SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed x-rayed the concept of communication from the perspective of meaning, discussed its relationship with development and highlighted the media selection approach for development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define communication and establish its relationship with development 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Nwodu, L.C.
and Fab-Okozor, N. (2003).
Communication Imperatives for Development.
Enugu: John Jacobs Publishers.
Okunna, S. (2002).
Teaching Mass Communication: A Multi- Dimensional Approach.
Enugu: Magnet Publishing Company.
Uwakwe, O.
(2003).
Communication and National Development.
Owerri: Africa Link Books.
Longman’s Dictionary of Contemporary English.
(2000).
Third Edition.
London: Longman.
117
