 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 223 COURSE TITLE: FEATURE AND MAGAZINE ART WRITING 1  COURSE GUIDE MAC 223 FEATURE AND MAGAZINE ART WRITING Course Team Course Writer: Aderibigbe Adebola A. Bowen University, Iwo, Osun State 08034161539 omonlalabi@yahoo.com Content Editor: Dr. Olubunmi Ajibade University of Lagos 08033304512 aajibade@unilag.edu.ng Course Coordinator: Ndukwe Grace National Open University of Nigeria 08030306566 geendukwe@yahoo.com Programme Leader: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com 2 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………………………….
1 What You Will Learn in this Course……………………………......
Course Aims………………………………………………………………….
Course Objectives………………………………………………………….
Working through this Course…………………………………………..
Course Materials…………………………………………………………….
Study Units…………………………………………………………………… Text Books and References…………………………………………….. Assessment…………………………………………………………………… Tutor Marked Assignment……………………………………………….
Final Examination and Grading………………………………………..
Course Marking Scheme………………………………………………….. How to Get the Most from this Course……………………………… Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….
Summary……………………………………………………………………….
3 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to MAC 223: FEATURE AND MAGAZINE ART WRITING.
It is available for students in the Undergraduate Mass Communication programme, particularly in their second year.
The course provides an opportunity for students to acquire the basic skills needed to write feature articles for magazines and mass circulated publications.
They will be exposed to the roles of magazines as a mass communication medium and the importance of research in magazine article writing.
Students who have gone through this course would be able to approach Feature Writing with little or no difficulty.
It is however advised that students tackle dutifully every assigned task in this course for their own good as this would be inevitable for the development of the needed skills for writing the feature.
This course guide provides you with the necessary information about the contents of the course and the materials you will need to be familiar with for a proper understanding of the subject matter.
It is designed to help you get the best of the course by exposing you to some exceptional materials and write-ups by outstanding journalists in the mass communication profession.
It also provides necessary guides on the way to approach your tutor marked assignment (TMAs).
Overall, this course will leave you as a great Feature Writer.
And importantly, you will acquire the skills that will help you in a great way become an encompassing and better writer.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall objective of MAC 223 FEATURE AND MAGAZINE ART WRITING is to expose the students to the skills involved in crafting outstanding feature articles.
To achieve this, attempts have been made to carefully select great write-ups and lecture materials that would facilitate this objective.
In this course, feature has been thoroughly discussed in a friendly manner.
Characteristics of features, types of feature, qualities of a good feature writer and the basic difference between a feature in a newspaper and a feature in a magazine have 4 been spelt out.
For all the types of features discussed, a practical example has been drawn from newspapers and magazines to further aid the learning of the students.
This course will further expose the students to basic elements of good writing.
These elements are usually missing these days in many feature articles in our newspapers and magazines, thereby making the quality of writing these days in our national publications quite poor.
Lastly, this course will expose the students to the importance of research to a feature writer.
Course Aims The aims of this course are to i.
Outline the skills involved/necessary for feature writing ii.
Expose the students to the role of magazine as a mass communication medium iii.
Expose the students to the principles of magazine article writing.
iv.
Discuss the importance of research in magazine.
Course Objectives Several objectives can be delineated from this course.
In addition, each unit has specific objectives.
The unit objectives can be found at the beginning of a unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the particular unit to check on the progress you are making.
You should always look at the unit objectives before and after completing a unit.
In this way, you could easily check whether or not you have covered what is required of you in that unit.
At the end of this course, the students should be able to; i.
Write a good feature article; ii.
Identify distinctly the types of feature articles there are and write good features on them; iii.
State briefly differences between a newspaper feature and a magazine feature; 5 iv.
Enlist the characteristics of feature writing; v. Differentiate between a News Feature and Straight news; vi.
State the aims of News Feature; vii.
Write a good News Feature; viii.
Define Profile Feature; ix.
Write a good Profile Feature; x.
Give the types of Profile Features there are; xi.
Enlist four tips on writing a powerful Profile Feature; xii.
Recognize a Travelogue article when you see one; xiii.
Recognize a How-to-do-it- yourself article when you see one; xiv.
Apply the element of Economy effectively; xv.
Apply the element of Correctness effectively; xvi.
Identify what makes an elegant writing; xvii.
Identify and use figurative languages effectively; xviii.
Construct words with freshness of expression; xix.
Effectively identify poor mechanics in a written or printed material; xx.
Identify useful materials in the Library; xxi.
Identify the Functions and roles of a dictionary as a research material; xxii.
Give reasons why the Library is still an important avenue for research; xxiii.
Give reasons why the internet is an indispensable research medium; xxiv.
List other sources of information available to a feature writer; xxv.
Identify and explain the tools of a writer; xxvi.
Identify the benefits of these equipments; xxvii.
State five reasons why note taking is essential for a writer; 6 xxviii.
Explain and use two Note taking Methods of their choice.
Working through this Course To complete this course you are required to read the study units.
Most of the units contain self assessment exercises, and at some points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course is a final examination.
I would like to state categorically that this course is practically drawn and it is expected that students approach it with every sense of practicality.
Students must make it a habit however to read newspaper and magazine articles and be curious to identify both good and weak Feature articles.
In addition, you need a good dictionary, Thesaurus and writing Pad.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a “Course Overview” to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available online on the NOUN website.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is late to get help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
6.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7 7.
You will learn a lot by dutifully doing the assignments.
Keep abreast with the deadlines given to the submission of your assignments online.
The assignments have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course, and therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for assessment, do not wait for feedback before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.
See that you have fulfilled the objectives listed in the course guide and in the main course materials.
After completing the last unit, prepare yourself for the final examination.
Stated below are the components of the course.
Course Materials.
i.
Course Materials ii.
Study Units iii.
Recommended Textbooks and other Reference Materials iv.
Assignment File v. Writing Notes 8 Study Units There are twenty study units in this course, as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Introduction to Feature Writing Unit 2 News Feature Unit 3 Profile Feature Unit 4 Travelogue and How-to-do-it-Yourself Feature Module 2 Unit 1 What is a Magazine?
Unit 2 A Brief History of Magazine Unit 3 Functions of Magazines Unit 4 Contents of a Magazine Module 3 Unit 1 Basic Elements of Good Writing I Unit 2 Basic Elements of Good Writing II Unit 3 Mechanics of Writing Unit 4 Appropriate Word Usage Module 4 Unit 1 The Editor’s Note Unit 2 Fiction Writing Unit 3 Review Writing 9 Unit 4 Photography Module 5 Unit 1 Study Skills Unit 2 Information Sourcing Unit 3 Tools of a Feature and Magazine Writer Unit 4 Note Taking Skills Text Books and References Alexander,L.
(2003) Beyond the Facts: A Guide to the Art of Feature Writing (2nd ed) Shelley Printers Delhi.
Anaeto, S.G, Anaeto M.S & Tejumaiye, J.A.
(2009).
Newspaper and Magazine- Management, Production, Marketing.
Ibadan.
Stirling-Horden Publishers.
Ayodele, S.O (1989) Faster Reading for Better Comprehension, Ibadan: Y Books.
Daramola, I.
(2003).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
Lagos.
Rothan Press.
Ebele, E. (1987) Effective Writing.
Ibadan.
Heinemann.
Esimokha, G. (2011).
Newspapers and Magazines: Editing, Production, Marketing.
Osun.
Waltodany Visual Consepts.
Friedlander I, Edward J & Lee J (1988) Feature Writing for Newspapers and Magazines.
Harper and Row, Newyork.
Gbenedio, U & Anene-Boyle, F.A.
An Introduction to Language Art (Unpublished Memograph).
Hannessy, B.
(2004).
Writing Feature Articles: A Practical Guide to Methods and Markets.
3rd ed.
Focal press Burlington.
10 Okoye, I.
(2006) Feature Writing; Theory and Practice (2nd ed) Lagos.
Malthouse Press Limited.
Omojuyigbe, D. (2005) Writing for Specific Purposes: A Professional Approach.
Lagos.
New Deo Communications.
Okoye, I.
(2004).
Magazinology: The Systematic and Indepth Study of Magazine Types, Principles and Techniques.
Lagos.
Mbeyi and Associates.
Ohaja, E.U.
(2004).
Magazine Article Writing.
Lagos: John Letterman.
Osho, S.A. (2007) Graphic Arts and Design in Mass Communication (2nd ed).
Ogun.
Ess-Oh Consult Publications.
Pasqua, T etal (1990) Mass Media in the Information Age.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Sayce, K (2006).
What not to Write; A Guide TO Dos and Don’t of Good English.
London.
Words at Work.
Awonyinfa, M., and Igwe, D. (1997): The Art of Feature Writing for Newspapers and Magazines.
Lagos: McDee Communications Limited.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessments of this course.
First, are the tutor-marked assignments; second, is a written examination.
In tackling these assignments, you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and experience acquired during the course.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will account for 30 per cent of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final examination of three hours duration.
This examination will account for the other 70 per cent of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 11 There are a number of Tutor-Marked assignments in this course.
I want to implore you to try hard to submit as many as you can.
The best four (i.e.
the highest four of what you submit) will be counted.
Each assignment counts for 20 marks but on the average when the four assignments are put together, the score will count at 30 per cent towards your total course mark.
When each assignment is completed, send it together with a TMA (Tutor-marked assignment) form to your tutor.
Ensure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the stipulated deadline given.
Final Examination and Grading Please be informed that the final examination for MAC 223 FEATURE AND MAGAZINE ART WRITING will be of three hours duration and with a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions that will reflect the practice exercises and tutor marked assignments you have previously submitted.
You are therefore advised to pay stringent attention to all the practical exercises you have encountered in the course of your studying this course.
Course Marking Scheme ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignments Four submitted, best three counts for 30% of course marks.
Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks.
12 How to Get the Most from this Course Because of the practical nature of this course, the first thing you will need is to brush-up your reading and writing skills.
Secondly, you may need to purchase some of the recommended textbooks text-books for additional guides.
You will unavoidably need a quiet study friendly environment to write and read.
If you are not computer literate (I will advise you to make a conscious effort to be one) because you will also need to visit some websites.
Lastly, you should cultivate the habit of visiting reputable institutional or public libraries accessible to you.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are specified hours of tutorials allotted in support of the course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of these tutorials together with the name and phone number of your tutor as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your article submissions and keep a close watch on your progress.
Be sure that your tutor-marked assignments will be promptly sent in, and feel free to contact your tutor in case of any difficulty with your self-assessment exercise, tutor-marked assignment or the grading of an assignment.
I strongly advise you to attend the tutorials regularly and punctually too.
And please, active class participation will be noted.
Summary This is a practically driven course.
Much of the effort to excel in this course lies in the hands of the students.
Great success will be achieved if the student takes the assigned assignments seriously and turn in exercises promptly.
But there is no doubting the fact that the students will enjoy the course.
13  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 223 COURSE TITLE: FEATURE AND MAGAZINE ART WRITING 14  MAIN COURSE MAC 223 FEATURE AND MAGAZINE ART WRITING Course Team Course Writer: Aderibigbe Adebola A. Bowen University, Iwo, Osun State 08034161539 omonlalabi@yahoo.com Content Editor: Dr. Olubunmi Ajibade University of Lagos 08033304512 aajibade@unilag.edu.ng Course Coordinator: Ndukwe Grace National Open University of Nigeria 08030306566 geendukwe@yahoo.com Programme Leader: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com 15  MAIN COURSE MAC 223 FEATURE AND MAGAZINE ART WRITING Table of Content Module 1 Unit 1 Introduction to Feature Writing Unit 2 News Feature Unit 3 Profile Feature Unit 4 Travelogue and How-to-do-it-Yourself Feature Module 2 Unit 1 What is a Magazine?
Unit 2 A Brief History of Magazine Unit 3 Functions of Magazines Unit 4 Contents of a Magazine Module 3 Unit 1 Basic Elements of Good Writing I Unit 2 Basic Elements of Good Writing II Unit 3 Mechanics of Writing Unit 4 Appropriate Word Usage Module 4 Unit 1 The Editor’s Note Unit 2 Fiction Writing Unit 3 Review Writing Unit 4 Photography Module 5 Unit 1 Study Skills Unit 2 Information Sourcing Unit 3 Tools of a Feature and Magazine Writer Unit 4 Note Taking Skills 16 MODULE 1: FEATURE WRITING The general aim of this module is to expose the students to the basics of feature writing.
Topics like what is feature writing?, Characteristics of Feature writing, Differences between Newspaper Feature and Magazine Feature, Types of Feature, Functions of Feature, Qualities of a good Feature writer, Aims of the News Feature, Tips on writing Profile Feature amongst others have been given detailed discussion.
Also, within this module, practical sessions have been added for enhanced learning of the students.
In this module, the best of Feature Articles by outstanding journalists in the field of mass communication have been selected for the students reading.
The content of this module are as follows; Unit 1: Introduction to Feature Writing Unit 2: News Feature Unit 3: Profile Feature Unit 4: Travelogue and How-to-do-it-Yourself Feature 17  UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION TO FEATURE WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 What is Feature Writing?
3.2 Characteristics of Feature 3.3 Differences between Newspaper Feature and Magazine Feature 3.4 Types of Feature 3.5 Functions of Feature 3.6 Qualities of a good Feature Writer 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You must have read features times without number without an understanding of what exactly you read.
How do I know this?
If you answer yes to majority of these questions, the chances are high that you have read features before.
Have you gone through a magazine before?
Have you read stories beyond the centre page of a newspaper before?
Have you read about a prominent Nigerian in a magazine or the newspaper and you enjoyed it?
Have you read about places and you felt like being there to witness what the writer described?
If you answered yes on two or three occasions, then you have come across a feature story before.
The question now is what is a feature?
What are the characteristics of a feature story?
Is there any difference between a feature in a newspaper and a feature in a magazine?
What are the types of features we have?
What are the qualities a good feature writer must possess?
These questions have been dutifully answered in this module.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to; - Define feature writing - Enlist four characteristics of feature writing without opening your note 18 - State briefly the difference between a newspaper feature and a magazine feature - Enlist with examples, four qualities of a good feature writer.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT What is Feature Writing?
According to Alexander (2000:2), feature Writing is Writing and reporting, which answers the questions: What was it like?
and/or “what does it mean?” A feature story provides a reader with the flavor of an event or the nature of a person, not just the facts of what happened or to whom it happened.
It carries its reader beyond the events and leads him to an understanding of them.
Gidean (2009:14) defines feature writing as vivid, sensational writing which appeals to the emotions of the reader.
Alexander (2003:1), further gives his definition more understanding by stating that feature writing is writing an arresting story about a bank robbery and a sympathetic story about a campaign to raise money for welfare agencies.
It is giving a reader an insight into how a young girl feels when, suddenly, she realizes she has been selected as Miss Nigeria or Miss America or Miss Ohio.
It is telling a reader more about a hurricane than just the fact that 6.3 inches of rain fell within 24 hours and 5000 phones were knocked out of order by the rain and by winds that rose to 125 miles an hour.
According to Okoye (2006:10), feature is an in-depth and factual write up on a topical issue which seeks to give comprehensive information in a more captivating and relaxed style than the straight news.
Feature writing is an attempt to report, inform, enlighten, educate or persuade in a relaxed way.
Whether it is a serious news or just an article, what feature articles or writings seek to achieve is to pass the message across to the divergent or specific readers in a more expansive, illustrative, sensational, descriptive or dramatic way.
This is achieved through feature writing devices like quotes, specific details, personality, interesting writing etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Look closely at the definitions of feature writing I have given above.
Think deeply for 10 minutes on them.
Now provide two definitions of your own.
CHARACTERISTICS OF FEATURE Wheeler (2009:3) gives the following characteristics of features; 19 1.
Varied Approach: There is no one correct way to structure a feature.
There are many ways to it.
This greatly depends on the skill of the writer and how he can drive his point across to the readers.
2.
Individual voice from the writer- A good feature writer will develop his own distinctive writing style.
It may be amusing, serious or sarcastic for example.
3.
Can involve Personal thoughts, colours, description- The journalist may become part of the feature if they try out a new sport or want to draw attention to an interviewee’s strange behavior.
They can describe a big event, and comment on what they see.
4.
Longer then news- Features have room enough to breath.
Some of the features in magazines or weekend newspaper supplements may run to several thousand words.
5.
Involve narrative background- there is far more space in a feature for the journalist to ink in background information; in a news story this may be restricted to one or two brief paragraphs.
6.
Wide use of quotes and dialogue- News stories will, of course, include quotes, but there are usually fewer of them.
A feature writer has the luxury of more space for quotes, and even including snatches of dialogue where two or more people may be talking.
7.
May have a more distant deadline- News stories are generally written with a tight deadline.
Features however may be prepared a day or more in advance, magazine deadlines may be three months.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 I want you to go through the characteristics of feature writing again.
Now, do that quickly.
Ok, close this book, take a sheet of paper and enlist four characteristics of a feature.
A feature can appear either in a newspaper or in a magazine.
It is important to let you know that there is no difference between the feature you will find in a newspaper and the one you will find in a magazine.
In fact, most magazine features are essentially like newspaper features.
Yet, there are some silent and sensitive differences between magazine writing and newspaper writing.
The differences are as follows; 1.
Specialization: A magazine appeals to a special community of readers; oil men, students, fashion designers, sport enthusiasts, Christians, muslims e.t.c, while a newspaper appeals to a cross section, whose only common interest is their geographic location in 20 the same city.
Alexander (2003:240).
A feature writer should however know this to avoid lack of focus.
Because if you are writing for a magazine that has children as the readers and your language could not meet their needs, then you have not achieved much.
2.
Thoroughness: Another major difference is the thorough nature of the magazine article.
Many newspaper articles are thorough; but a writer cannot wait for events to climax or to terminate, he reports whatever happens up to the newspaper deadline.
A magazine comes out monthly; there is time to get thorough coverage.
Magazines encourage good writing.
Not that newspaper don’t but two things militate against good writing in newspapers, and they are the speed with which a writer must put together his story and the limited amount of space the newspaper can devote to each topic.
In spite of that, many newspaper stories are extremely well written.
Magazines have deadline that encourage good writing.
There’s a month between issues.
Magazine stories run longer, in general, than those in newspapers.
They are long enough to include everything that belongs in the story and there is enough time to decide what to omit.
TYPES OF FEATURE Okoye (1998:37) in Omojuyigbe (2005:107) identifies six major kinds of feature as; 1.
The News Feature 2.
The Profile 3.
The Expose or Alarmer 4.
The Travelogue 5.
How-to-do-it yourself 6. Review of work of Art.
According to Omojuyigbe (2005:107), out of the six features outlined above, an editor can allow a contributor to handle only profile, travelogue, how-to-do-it yourself and review of a work of art.
He may not allow him to dabble in the area of news feature and alarmer if the editor must hold his peace.
This is because news feature is an expanded version of news report and an alarmer is a story exposing the ills of society.
An editor would prefer any of his regular hands to do either story than to allow a contributor do it.
FUNCTIONS OF FEATURE 21 According to Okoye (2006:14), while straight news breaks the news of the day, feature helps the reader to understand better what has happened.
Feature is able to do this through indepth analysis, interpretation, explanantion and focusing on the aspects usually ignored by straight news.
Secondly, feature summarizes the big news of the week.
Because feature is more comprehensive than straight news, it has the tendency to gather the bits of news that broke during the week and summarize them in one piece.
Thirdly, feature has the advantage of dealing with areas not usually covered or under covered by straight news.
According to Okoye (2006:14), trivialities and mundane things of life which make interesting reading are the subjects of good features.
Most times, the concern of the feature writer may be the human interest and their involvement in trivialities or just to make a news out of these trivialities.
Some examples of these trivialities could be; - Meet the poorest Nigerian - Meet the first Professor of Kong fu.
Again, feature articles provide enough materials for those who read for pleasure.
Because feature writing is usually written in a colourful and stylish manner than straight news, its content usually appeal more to the pleasure reading public who are usually bored by the formal nature of straight news.
QUALITIES OF A GOOD FEATURE WRITER Okoye (2004:15), captures four essential qualities of a good feature writer but he cautions that first a good feature writer must be a good news writer.
He must posses the traditional qualifications for basic journalistic practice, plus an analytical and creative mind slightly higher than that required for writing straight news.
The qualities are; 1.
A nose for news- A good journalist must have nose for news.
Having nose for news have many dimensions to it.
This range from the ability to recognize that a particular information can be made of interest to readers, viewers or listeners.
It is also the ability to recognize clues in the environment or a beat which may be very casual but which may lead to the discovery of important news.
Also, it is ability to recognize the possibility of several other news related to the particular information at hand.
22 2.
Resourcefulness: A good feature writer is resourceful.
By resourcefulness, I mean he is good at finding ways of improving himself and improving the quality of his writing.
A resourceful feature writer consistently solves problems arising or that may arise from the beat.
3.
Sound Educational and Professional background: A good feature writer must have gone to the University or Polytechnic to acquire a degree in Journalism or mass communication.
Though, over the years, graduates of English, Philosophy, Education, Theatre Arts e.t.c have shown incredible penchant for the journalism practice, it is not important to stress that those who are schooled in journalism often times stand out and need not be re-schooled vigorously for the basics in the profession.
In Nigeria, there are different kinds of education for a journalist.
They are the University/Polytechnic training and In-house training.
4.
Love for Writing: A good feature writer must unavoidably love the art of writing.
A feature writer must be such a person that enjoys the pains that go with the process of writing from planning to the final draft.
Also, he must be someone who is not satisfied with even the final draft until it is taking to the press.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Do you think a feature in a magazine is the same as a feature in a newspaper?
Justify your claims in two paragraphs.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the above, the following conclusions can then be reached.
- Feature Writing is an extension of the hard news - Feature writing is an in-depth and factual write up on a topical issue - Feature writing is an attempt to report, enlighten, educate or persuade in a relaxed way.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to identify various definitions of feature writing.
You have been exposed to the characteristics of feature writing, the major difference between 23 newspaper writing and magazine writing, types of feature writing, functions of feature writing and the qualities of a good feature writer.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Submit a two-page essay (A4, double spacing) where you spell with detailed explanations the qualities of a good feature writer.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoye, I.
(2006) Feature Writing; Theory and Practice (2nd ed) Lagos.
Malthouse Press Limited.
24 UNIT 2.
NEWS FEATURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Writing the News Feature 3.2 Aims of the News Feature 3.3 Tips on Writing Profiles 3.4 Practical reading session 3.5 Differences between a News feature and a Straight News 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit and some other units that will come after it has been designed to expose you to some Feature Articles written by good hands in the profession.
You are to take the readings seriously.
This unit is on News Feature.
Among the existing types of Features, the news Feature is taken seriously.
According to Omojuyigbe (2005:107), a magazine or newspaper editor can allow a contributor to handle other kinds of feature except the news feature and alarmer if the editor must hold his peace.
This is because the news feature is an expanded version of news report and an alarmer is a story exposing the ills of society.
An editor would prefer any of his regular hands to do either story than allowing a contributor do it.
This is to show you that the news feature is a sensitive aspect of feature writing.
I shall explain further in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to; 1.
Differentiate between a News Feature and Straight news.
2.
State the aims of News Feature 3.
Write a good News Feature Definition of News Feature According to Alexander (2003:112), a news feature is news that is written again with the addition of human interest and feature touches.
Further, according to him, as a feature writer, 25 sometimes you are dealing with a complex collection of information and ideas.
It is going to be hard to get them across to a reader.
You then decide to interweave the story with some human interest and some touches of good writing that will help make the story more clear and more interesting; thus sustaining the reader’s interest through the hard-to-understand parts of it.
This, according to him, is news feature.
Okoye (2006:19) has a similar opinion.
He defines news feature as an extended news report which seeks to add more flesh to the account already offered by straight news.
It is less timely than straight news since it usually comes as a follow up.
He, however, warns that this does not mean that the news feature should be left until the interest in the event subsides.
Purpose or Aims of the News Feature According to Okoye (2006:19), the news feature may have one or a combination of the following; i.
To analyze or interpret the already reported event.
ii.
To highlight side attraction or aspect of that important event which was not adequately portrayed by straight news.
iii.
To summarize or put together bits and pieces of news related to the event which are obtained at different locations and times.
According to Akinyemi (2009:35), news features are not always hot or fresh news that just broke out in the country, they are rather already written straight news which have now been re-written in a simpler, softer, more appealing way to demystify the seriousness of the original news and make it look like an easy and very refreshing story.
GENEREAL TIPS ON WRITING THE NEWS FEATURE I want you to take the following tips seriously.
They are tips by experts in the field of mass communication on how to write great news feature.
News feature do not come as easy as it sounds, only the writer who has mastered the tricks would turn out great stories.
4.0 CONCLUSION The news feature is news that already existed.
To put it better, they are news that are written again, but now with the addition of human interest and feature touches.
The aims of the news feature are to analyze or interpret the already reported event, to highlight side attraction or 26 aspect of that important event which were not adequately portrayed by straight news and to summarize or put together bits and pieces of news related to the event which are obtained at different locations and times.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to define news feature holistically.
The purpose of the news feature has been well spelt out and some guiding tips on how to write the news feature have been given.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Pick one of the following Newspapers (Guardian, Punch or The Nation) preferably the one published yesterday.
Write a four-page news feature on the news that made headline.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alexander,L.
(2003) Beyond the Facts: A Guide to the Art of Feature Writing (2nd ed) Shelley Printers Delhi.
Okoye, I.
(2006) Feature Writing; Theory and Practice (2nd ed) Lagos.
Malthouse Press Limited.
Omojuyigbe, D. (2005) Writing for Specific Purposes: A Professional Approach.
Lagos.
New Deo Communications.
27 A NEWS FEATURE WRITTEN BY: MIKE ODIEGWU FROM: THE PUNCH OF SUNDAY, MARCH 18 2012.
MANY PROMISES, LESS ACTIONS FOR CHEVERON HOST COMMUNITIES The January 16, 2012 explosion of a wellhead belonging to Chevron Nigeria Limited seems to be a blessing in disguise for the impacted communities in Southern Ijaw Local Government Area of Bayelsa State.
This is because at no period in the chequered history of the people had their island, located close to the Atlantic Ocean, attracted top government functionaries the way it has done in recent times.
While some persons had visited the islands with selfish motives of scoring cheap political points, others went there with genuine intentions of finding solutions to the plight of the ravaged and impoverished oil communities.
Even the former acting governor of the state, Mr. Nestor Binabo, despite his brief stay in office, visited the area and read the Riot Act to oil multinationals, including Chevron, the culprit.
He threatened to take legal action against the company- a pledge that was applauded by chiefs and youths in the communities.
But at the end, he left office without taking practical steps to cushion the effects of the explosion.
After Binabo’s visit, the communities continued with their outcries.
The Minister of Petroleum Resources, Mrs. Diezani Allison Madueke, in company with her entourage, also visited the communities.
She arrived at the beleaguered communities on a chopper and hovered around the burning rig before meeting with the people.
She was, however, silent on the impact of the incident on the environment and health of the communities.
Again, after her departure, the traumatized communities did not fare better.
The people say the gas emission has killed the fish in their rivers and affected their means of livelihood.
So, they depend on iced fish bought by those who could afford to pay over N5,000 fare to get to Yenagoa, the State capital.
The complain that the pollution had affected their source of drinking water, while lamenting cases of skin irritation, difficulty in breathing and other forms of diseases recorded in the communities after the blowout.
28 Following the development, the deputy Governor of Bayelsa State, Rear Admiral John Jonah (retd) who represented his boss, Mr. Seriake Dickson, toured the affected areas on a speed boat to assess the damage.
Decrying the level of environmental pollution suffered by the communities, Jonah said, “it is nostalgic, especially when one sees the fishing settlement.
They remain the same as they used to be in those days, as nothing seems to have changed.
However, one thing that has changed is that the environment has suffered and is still suffering much pollution.
“In those days, the environment was not polluted and we had things as natural as they were created.
And this is where we are concerned, because the environment is dying slowly at our expense.
And we need to do something about it.” He insisted that oil companies should apply the same standards obtainable in their home countries to Nigeria.
He observed that the position was capable of leading to slow death among the residents, promising that government would respond to all the issues after proper investigations.
“One thing is clear, and that is the fact that same laws that govern the oil industry in the home countries of oil companies apply here; it cannot be different.
So, if what we are experiencing now is wrong in America where Chevron comes from, it is wrong here to.
This should be the standard and we should not expect anything less, Jonah said”.
Irked by the development, the Bayelsa State House of Assembly passed a two-point resolution calling on the Federal government and Chevron to immediately send relief materials and medical team to all the communities affected by the incident.
The lawmakers also called on the company to, as a matter of urgency, put out the fire and clamp all spills from its facility.
They further asked Chevron to pay adequate compensation to all the affected communities, regretting that nothing significant has been done to alleviate the suffering of the people.
The lawmakers observed that due to hunger, the people were forced to eat contaminated fish.
They were unanimous in condemning the activities of oil multinationals operating in the state, regretting that the law had debarred state assemblies from legislating on such matters.
Finally, the most important visitor, President Goodluck Jonathan, arrived at the communities on February 27 about two months after the incident.
Though the people were angry that it took the President who hails from the State a long time to visit, they were satisfied that their lamentation had brought Jonathan to the island, believing that his presence would end their 29 plight.
The President assured the impacted people of Koluanma of the government readiness to address the environmental problems.
He directed the National Emerrgency Management Agency to distribute relief materials to all the communities affected by the explosion, while commending them for their peaceful conduct despite their problems.
A NEWS FEATURE WRITTEN BY: MAUREN AZUH FROM: THE PUNCH OF FRIDAY JANUARY 6, 2012.
TRENDING: TWEET FOR TAT ON SUBSIDY REMOVAL The Federal Government has insisted that it will not back down on subsidy removal.
But Nigerians from all walks of life too are saying NO.
Part of the routes of agitation that remain burning with fierce words are President Goodluck Jonathan’s Facebook page and those of his agitated subjects.
One of them tells the President, “you could easily have accomplished your subsidy… This shows that we all make mistakes.
I believe the subsidy approach is a mistake.
Please, effect necessary corrections!”.
There goes other: Life goes in periods, phases, come, go e.t.c.
Any non-observance of that law causes chaos.
You could easily have accomplished your subsidy removal if you have done so in phases; not the outright crudity you are pushing down our throats.
And the withdrawal should be accompanied by improvement in our refining ability, functionality and increased quantity.
Think about it.
President Barack Obama appointed just Richard Cordray as the top watch dog at the consumer Financial Protection Bureau- to help him protect the interest of the people financially.
For all Obama’s creative strategies, he makes $400,000 annually.
President Goodluck Jonathan recently appointed Mr. Christopher Kolade to head a committee that will help him take out money from the already suffering Nigerians.
For Jonathan and his Vice-President they spend $6,500,000 (SIX MILLION, FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS) on food alone.
Tell the President that his Facebook account has been inundated by messages and 98 per cent of them are against him.
How will you want to destroy yourself and the country in such fashion?
30 Oknojo-Iweala can go back to the World Bank.
Trust me, we will grow without her.
Read the writing on the wall.
You lied to us with the Town Hall Meetings.
Tell me: what kind of men/women are you?
31 UNIT 3: PROFILE FEATURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Writing the Profile Feature 3.2 Types of Profile Feature 3.3 Categories of Profile Feature 3.4 Tips on Writing Profiles 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Oxford dictionary defines the word Profile as a description or something that gives useful information.
In other words, a profile affords more to be known about a person, a place, e.t.c whether the person has been known before or not.
People want to know more about the personal lives of prominent Nigerians for example, the same way they will like to know about a place or historical site.
I want to welcome you to this unit.
This unit has been made fully practicable.
I will expose you to brilliant profile features, and guide you on how to write you own.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to; 1.
Define Profile Feature 2.
Write a good Profile Feature 3.
Give the types of Profile Features there are 4.
Enlist four tips on writing a powerful Profile Feature.
DEFINITION OF PROFILE FEATURE Okoye (2006:20) was apt to define Profile Feature as a close-up on a significant personality, organization, place or thing.
He went further to say that after reading a good Profile, one feels that one now has an intimate knowledge of the subject.
32 Let me define Profile Feature as a colourful examination of the life, effort, strength, weaknesses or all of a person, place, organization or thing and the translation of same into a detailed but interesting/colourful account for the consumption of a target reader or heterogeneous readers as the case may be.
TYPES OF PROFILE FEATURES Okoye (2006:20) identified the following types of profile features; 1.
Profile on Personalities 2.
Profile on Organizations 3.
Profile on Places Let me take them one after the other.
A.
Profile on Personalities: According to Alexander (2003), readers whether newspaper or magazine readers enjoy reading about people especially prominent people whether at home or abroad whose achievements have been quite admirable and spectacular.
Okoye (2006:21) confirms this by saying people enjoy reading about other humans whose contributions shape the world and those whose stories make them stop and think “this is a human being like me”.
On the international scene, there are quite a number of eminent men whose lives remain a point of reference to millions of people around the world.
Some of these men are dead while some of them are still alive.
They are people from all works of life; Dr. Martin Luther King (Jnr), Bill Clinton, Jomo Kenyatta, Mohammed Ali, the Late princess of Wales- Lady Diana, former Prime Minister of Great Britain Lady Margaret Thatcher, Nelson Mandela, Barack Obama, Emperor Haile Salaissie, and the list goes on and on.
At home in Nigeria, a newspaper or magazine reader will want to read about the following distinguished Nigerians, the Late Chief MKO Abiola, Austin Jay Jay okocha, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, Prof. Wole Soyinka, Prof Akinwunmi Ishola, Pastor E.A Adeboye, Pastor William Kumuyi, Falilat Ogunkoya, Ngozi Okonjo Iweala, the Late Chief Bola Ige.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 33 Identify ten (10) other distinguished Personalities from varied works of Life that could Pass for a Profile Feature whose names are not listed above.
FACTORS RESPONSIBLE FOR PERSONALITY PROFILE Some factors are responsible for writing a good feature.
A feature writer must know this.
These factors are what Okoye (2006:21) identified as attractions.
They include office or position, age, occupation, proximity, physical challenges, unusual accomplishments or significant contributions in a given field of human endeavour.
I will discuss some of these briefly.
- Office or Position as a Factor or Attraction for profile: The following offices amongst others are good attractions for a profile feature; the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, the Senate President, Governor of a State, Central Bank Governor, Chief Justice of the Fedration, Vice Chancellor of a Univeristy, Inspector General of Police, Minister or Special Advisers to the President e.t.c.
These individuals are usually frequent subjects/ choice for a profile feature and this is because any story about their activities, and personal lives attract a great appeal from the general public.
- Age as attraction for profile feature- You may want to ask how age is significant in this respect.
I will explain.
A 25 year old man who marries a 55 year old woman becomes an instant celebrity.
A 22 year old woman who becomes a Professor becomes an instant choice for a feature story.
The same way a boy who wins a 50 million lottery also will make an outstanding profile feature.
Still on age, readers like to read about elderly people who have paid their dues in their chosen professions.
Example could be the oldest practicing Accountant in Nigeria, the oldest elder statesman, the oldest Medical Doctor e.t.c.
- Occupation as an attraction for Profile Feature- Some people have distinguished themselves in some profession which are termed rare.
People will want to read about this people.
The Professor of Aeronautic Engineering, the Professor of Kong Fu will any day make news.
Also, the first female in any field or will also make news.
Like the first female Rear-Admiral, or the first female Professor of Mathematics e.t.c, the list goes on.
- Proximity as an attraction for profile feature- Proximity simply means closeness in space and time.
Proximity in this respect however means the unsual feat accomplished by the ordinary but close people.
Especially an ordinary Nigerian.
According to Okoye (2006:22), profiles could be written on the following; 34 (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) The Local boy who successfully served as the Secretary-General of the Commonwealth (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) The Nigerian who may become Pope.
- Unusual Accomplishment as an attraction for Profile: Those behind ground breaking accomplishments, discoveries, e.t.c are essentially potentials for profile features.
The following achievements will easily pass for a profile feature.
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) The man who discovered FACEBOOK (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) The first man to discover the cure to HIV/AIDS B.
Profile on Organizations Successful public and private organizations can make an outstanding profile feature.
According to Okoye (2006:23), this kind of features are advertorials written as supplements and published during anniversaries and other special occasions.
The problem with this kind of profiles according to him is they give rosy, one sided accounts of these organizations, which serve as mere publicity material, rather than news in the strict journalistic sense.
According to him, for profiles of organization to be balanced they should include both the positive and negative impressions given by officials of the organizations as well as members of the general public or even competitors who have dissenting views to express.
C. PROFILE ON PLACES According to Okoye (2006:24), three main categories of places attract the focus of feature writer when it comes to Profiles on places and they are (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Historical Places, (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Contemporary Familiar Places (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Obscure Places Historical Places Historical sites and locations are surely point of reckoning for a profile feature story.
Such places could be; a.
The First storey building in Nigeria 35 b. Mungo Park grave (in Jebba) e.t.c.
Contemporary Familiar Places According to Okoye (2006:24) examples of these are the airports, sea ports, important stadia, Universities and Institutes, Prominent Churches and Mosques, Holiday and Recreation facilities (like Obudu Cattle Ranch), Presidential Villa e.t.c.
Obscure Places According to Okoye (2006:24), obscure places exist in every city which are unknown to most people living in the city.
But interesting things legal and illegal things happen there routinely.
It then behoves the enterprising feature writer to discover such places and bring them to the view of the readers.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Give an outstanding definition of profile feature and enlist with brief notes the 4 types of profile features that we have.
GENERAL TIPS ON WRITING PROFILE FEATURE Whether it is a profile on a person or a profile on a place or organization, the following tips will go a long way to assist you and guide you in turning out a brilliant profile feature.
1.
Select a theme for your Profile- If for instance, the theme for your profile is on “Marital Success”, tie your writing strictly around your chosen theme, even if it is necessary for you to deviate always remember your theme.
Also, identify the life of the personality that revolves around your theme and dwell on that.
2.
Avoid using facts that have been over-used- Do a thorough research to uncover new facts about the personality you have chosen.
3.
Do not deviate from the Feature Writing style.
It is easy to quickly forget that you are writing a feature and not an essay or a fiction work, do not forget this.
4.
Do not exaggerate, Do a thorough research.
5.
Now, if your personality is not like Prof. Chinua Achebe or Wole Soyinka, if he is unknown or not well known then decide why you need to use him.
According to Okoye (2006:23), the obscure man who designed the Nigerian flag may only be 36 appropriate during the nations independence anniversary celebrations, but out of place during the Christmas season.
6.
Take the story from a fresh, interesting angle.
Do not repeat facts already known to everyone.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Attempt a profile feature of about 800 words on any of the types discussed in this unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION Profile feature is a colourful examination of the life, effort, strength, weaknesses or all of a person, place, organization or thing and the translation of same into a detailed but interesting account for a reader.
Profile could be written on personalities, organization and places.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to explain the types of features we have.
They are profiles on personalities, organizations and on places.
Some factors responsible for writing on personality feature was also highlighted.
And lastly, some general but useful tips for writing profile feature were also outlined.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify a prominent Nigerian of your choice.
Whether male or female.
Turn in a four-page feature on this Nigerian.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoye, I.
(2006) Feature Writing; Theory and Practice (2nd ed) Lagos.
Malthouse Press Limited.
Alexander,L.
(2003) Beyond the Facts: A Guide to the Art of Feature Writing (2nd ed) Shelley Printers Delhi.
37 A PROFILE FEATURE FROM: THE SUN OF SUNDAY MARCH 21, 2004.
Mothering Nigeria’s Conscience Motherhood nurtures, moulds and builds.
That aptly describes the world of Dora Akunyili, the NAFDAC boss.
She is one woman that has been nurturing and building the conscience of Nigerians all over the country with her good deeds.
And for erring citizens it has the cane approach, all in the process to bring about a change in our psyche.
The achievements of this woman is not complete until you go down memory lane taking her childhood, the kind of parenting she got and how it made her a good mother to her siblings and Nigerians.
About fifty years ago, a little girl was born in Makurdi, Benue State.
It was far away from home, her roots in Anambra State, South East Nigeria.
Her parents especially her sweet mother showed her love and today that girl is indeed one of the greatest women of our time moving like a colossus in an industry where some men are afraid to tread.
Right from childhood, the trait to get to the top had always been with her.
Akunyili passed her first school leaving certificate with distinction in 1966 and the West African School Certificate with Grade I distinction in 1973.
That automatically earned her the Eastern Government Post Primary Scholarship and the Federal Government undergraduate scholarship respectively.
Akunyili bagged her first degree in Pharmacy in 1978 and got her Ph.D, seven years after from the University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Just before she came into public life she was a Senior Lecturer and Consultant Pharmacologist in the College of Medicine University of Nigeria, Nsukka (UNN), Enugu campus.
In the Ivory Tower she made a steady progress from Lecturer I in 1986 until she was made a Senior Lecturer in 1990.
In addition she was a post doctorate Fellow of the University of London and a fellow of the West African Post Graduate College of Pharmacists.
Dr. Nkem Akunyili assumed office on 12th April 2001 as the director general of the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC).
She is an internationally renowned Pharmacist, and a visionary leader.
Her duty was to wipe out counterfeit drugs, which had flooded the Nigerian market.
There was also an urgent need to sanitize the food and drug sector.
A sad experience that affected her sister who was diabetic was another source of inspiration.
The poor woman died as a result of injecting fake insulin in 1988.
But her detractor did not allow her to prove herself initially.
“I was told I was inexperienced, old and without capapcity”, she 38 recalls.
From that point she strode confidently into battle and since then her story has been forward ever backward never.
NAFDAC was in such a bad state that I was under intense pressure to perform.
I transformed this into a sense of urgency in addressing counterfeit drugs and I brought this to my right from the first day I assumed office.
“Together they developed effective strategies to track down bad eggs.
The organization has destroyed counterfeit drugs worth over US $16 million.
Many have been forced to confessions while warehouses in Lagos and Onitsha have been raided.
In addition, Akunyili mounted several campaigns on the hazards of substandard drugs.
Some administrative changes were carried out and surveillance was beefed up at all the ports of entry.
Things changed miraculously and within such a short time, the impacts of her multi prong strategy was felt all over the country.
Congratulations, a new breed of Nigerian had indeed arrived at our shores and encomiums poured in but for some others it were a different song, they started to crucify her.
Assasins tracked her down, while other detractors gave people mouth-watering gratification to hound her down, but this woman who knows her onions refused to budge.
On Boxing Day, 2003, she narrowly escaped the assasins bullet when her convoy was attacked in her husbands village in Aniocha Local government area in Anambra State.
One of the bullets fired shattered the windscreen of the car while another pierced through her headgear by sheer providence.
For her consistency and triumph it has been kudos all the way.
Nigerians from all walks of life have also voiced their outrage at this attempt on the life of a woman of substance.
Investigations are on and some tried to say it was an accidental discharge but that story has already been debunked.
As if that was not enough, they touched her Lagos office located at Ikoyi Secretariat.
NAFDAC’s biggest laboratory in Oshodi, Lagos was also vandalized last year.
Her office and home were also burgled several times with threats and all kinds of harassments.
In spite of the odds, it is kudos to a great woman.
A woman who has more than 90 awards and recognitions from government and international organizations in her kitty.
A woman who has waged a relentless war against fake, adulterated and expired drugs and food dealers.
As we mark this year’s International Women’s Day, you just cannot imagine the widespread accolades and good will that put Akunyili many miles ahead of others.
39 UNIT 4.
TRAVELOGUE AND HOW-TO-DO-IT-YOURSELF FEATURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Writing a Travelogue 3.2 Guide on Writing a Travelogue 3.3 Writing How-to-do-it-yourself articles 3.4 Some tips on How-to-do-it-yourself articles 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings Introduction If you are a generous reader like me, you must have come across a story that takes you to somewhere you have never been before in such a way that makes you feel like you were there in person.
Or, you could have come across a material or article that leaves you wanting to practice a skill it taught or carry out a service it suggested.
This is what this unit is about.
In this unit, you will be presented succinctly with two other kinds of feature articles; the Travelogue and the Ho-to-do-it yourself articles.
Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to; - Recognize a Travelogue article when you see one - Recognize a How-to-do-it- yourself article when you see one - Write both articles when faced with the challenge to do so 40  Writing a Travelogue According to Okoye (2006), a travelogue is the account of a trip to a place of interest.
It informs the reader about life in other places and draws lessons by comparing life in those places with the situation at home.
Travelogue usually includes brief profiles of the places visited, blended with descriptions of episodes that involved the visitor.
Travelogues are filed by newsmen who visit distant places in the course of official duties or on holiday.
Such articles are also of particular interest to specialized magazines of automobile firms, airlines and tourists organizations, whose aim may be to induce people to travel.
In the regular newspaper or magazines, travelogues add the needed variety to the contents and enlighten the readers about other lands from the point of view of a local boy.
For example, when a Nigerian newspaper editor visited china, sometimes ago, he wrote a beautiful travelogue on his experience.
He drew a number of useful lessons for the Nigerian reading public from his Chinese experience.
He noted particularly the following interesting facts about life in china.
a.
Bicycle is not a symbol of poverty in China, unlike what obtains in Nigeria.
In China, everyone owns and proudly rides a bicycle, regardless of age and status.
b.
The Chinese are particularly orderly and simple despite their large population.
c. Even though the Chinese are not religious like Nigerians, they are relatively honest.
For example, no one needs to lock his bicycle and you could keep your handbag full of money on top of your bicycle, spend hours in the shopping centre, come back and meet it intact.
No one touches it.
Compare this with what obtains anywhere in Nigeria.
The mass media are known to extend one’s world view, by bringing information about life in distant places.
Travelogue is one method the media employ in getting this done.
There are many other reasons why people like to know about life in other places.
If you are a Christian or Muslim, you would certainly like to know what Jerusalem or Mecca or Medina looks like.
Those who go on pilgrimage to Israel narrate stories of the historical holy places such as Bethlehem, the birth place of the Lord Jesus, the River Jordan, Mount Sinai, the Wailing Walls of Jerusalem, among many other places of interest.
41 In similar stance, those who visited Saudi Arabia are interested in Mount Arafat and the Ka’aba.
Every country has its own national, international or globally recognized tourist site where travelers or tourist want to unavoidably want to get to, when they pay tourism visit.
Examples are Paris (Eiffel Tower and the Presidential Palace), London (Buckingham Palace and Trafalgar Square), Egypt (the Pyramids), South Africa (Robben Islands, where Nelson Mandela served most of his 27 years of jail term); Senegal (Goree Island, which was the point-of-no-return for slaves in those days of the ignoble trade in human cargoes).
A good travelogue captures interesting episodes of the writer’s visits to these places of interests.
Guide on Writing a Travelogue The following according to Okoye (2006) will guide a Travelogue writer to turn in a beautiful piece.
a.
Build the travelogue around a focusing theme and do not lose your focus.
b.
The places you visit in other lands may be significant to the natives of those lands but hardly to your readers back home.
You must decide why your readers should know about those places.
c. Draw lessons subtly; do not sermonize when you are comparing a better situation abroad with the situation at home.
d. Do not bore your readers with unnecessary details.
Many writers of travelogue waste time by describing how they went through the airport formalities and other trivialities.
e. Illustrate your travelogue with interesting pictures about the places you visited.
You should travel with your camera and take your own pictures.
However, there has to be a note of caution here.
Make sure you take pictures only in authorized places abroad, lest you be charged with spying.
f. You can mail your script to the local media of the place you visited so that they can see how a foreigner sees them.
g. The Nigerian media should equally publish or reprint the impressions of our country in the eyes of foreigners.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 42 Consult any Newspaper or magazine (current or past), look out for three Travelogue articles.
Compare the styles of the writers and the weight of the contents.
Does it follow the guides given above?
Writing How-to-do-it-yourself articles This kind of article describes systematically how the reader can learn to perform a skill or service.
The skill may be how to make soap or how to obtain a visa.
It is not just a list of instructions or recipe, but includes a step by step procedure in feature style.
If the reader follows the instructions diligently, he will arrive at the desired end and be able to teach others the procedure.
Specialized and general interest magazines as well as Sunday papers find this kind of article very useful to their readers.
Guide on Writing How-to-do-it-yourself articles The following according to Okoye (2006) will guide a writer of how-to-do-it yourself; a.
Do not just list instructions and ingredients.
Beef up the write up with detailed descriptions or even confessions of how you performed your own experiment.
b.
Technical and vernacular terms should be properly explained or defined.
c. The article should be of interest to the average reader of that publication.
It should not be too specialized or involving a huge capital outlay beyond the average reader.
4.0 CONCLUSION A travelogue is the account of a trip to a place of interest, written by a local boy, with a view to expanding the world view of the local audience.
On the other hand, How-to-do-it yourself is the kind of article which describes systematically how the reader can learn to perform a skill or service.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, effort has been made to introduce Travelogue and How-to-do-it yourself articles together.
Detailed tips on how to go about writing these two articles have been giving.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 43 Pick up 4 sheets of paper.
Now, go on a research either online or offline.
Study critically a location within Nigeria (do an thorough reading on the chosen location); then write an impressive Travelogue (write as though you went there yourself) on the location.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoye, I.
(2006) Feature Writing; Theory and Practice (2nd ed) Lagos.
Malthouse Press Limited.
TRAVELOGUE FEATURE WRITTEN BY LINDAY BARRET PUBLISHED BY DAILY TIMES, ON MARCH 11, 1991 CITED IN OMOJUYIGBE, 2005:120 Why Katsina People love Madaki President Ibrahim Babangida’s visit to Katsina State, one of the two new states created by his regime in 1987 was highly revelatory.
Right from the very first day of his tour, large and clearly spontaneous crowds of people turned out to express heartfelt gratitude for the creation of the state.
However, what surprised us as we followed the presidential entourage and sought the real views of the populace was the outpouring of confidence in, and support for, the efforts of Colonel Yahaya John Madaki, the third governor which the state has had since its founding a little over three years ago.
We have been warned about this phenomenon before we left Lagos when in preparation for our independent coverage of the presidential tour, we sought to find out from some prominent indigenes of the state just what they considered the status of growth and consolidation of the new state since its inception.
Out of the seventeen persons whom we questioned ranging from top businessmen through retired top government officials to a group of young technocrats and radical academics, we were astonished at the consensus of satisfied opinions concerning the performance of Governor Madaki.
In general, the Lagos-based Katsina State indigenes expressed the belief that the Madaki regime has ushered in greater accountability in government and a seriousness of purpose in the 44 execution of projects which they claim was patently absent from the activities of the predecessor regimes.
On our arrival in Katsina having last visited the state about 18 months previously, it was immediately obvious that the general impression of accelerated development which had been associated with the Madaki style of leadership was grounded in reality.
The main urban projects of road expansion and renewal has given rise to new routes which are simply overwhelming in the difference between what obtained before and what is in place now.
Certain key projects which seemed to be bogged down in a mire of continuous contractual squabbles such as the new market and motor park projects in the city centre had been completed within the last few months.
The Governor was extremely proud of being able to receive the largest executive jet in the presidential tour, we were able to uncover the real reason for the outpouring of public support which the Governor undoubtedly enjoys at this time that it is not unconnected with the very events and the attitudes which brought him into conflict with the press correspondents in the state at one point early in this administration.
The Governor is reputed to have a very direct and undiplomatic approach to his job.
As a result he is prone to taking to certain duties and responsibilities which place him in direct conflict with those contractors who may wish to delay their execution of projects for financial benefits.
In such a situation, Colonel Madaki appears to have a tendency to be highly vocal and even sometimes threatening in his attitude.
He has gained the nickname “jungle soldier” as a result and he appears to revel in this reputation for no-non-sense behavior.
However, quite apart from the fascination which this aspect of Governor Madaki’s behavior might hold for the idea of the acceleration of the development in the new state, there are a number of concrete achievements which can be laid at his feet which are certainly even more responsible for the existence of a real “love affair” between the Governor and the public in Katsina which is almost unique in the Nigerian polity today.
The rationalization of contract award which has reversed the proliferation of a number of new and virtually unknown contractor’s handling, and often abandoning, major projects, is very evident.
The pace of work on most major urban projects and some of the vital rural projects in the field of water management and agricultural development which the Governor met on the ground but which had shown no signs of progress, has moved forward rapidly.
As a result when President Babangida paid his first visit he was able to commission a string of workable rural projects rather than involve himself simply in ceremonial duties.
The Governor has succeeded as well in convincing the people of the state that any resources which they can generate for the development of the state will be matched with grants and support in cash and kind from the 45 Federal Government because he has demonstrated a willingness to take their demands and requests to the top in a way that gains a sympathetic hearing.
This latter attribute was attested to in public by the President himself at a civic reception in his honour when he commended the governor for not making open requests, but assured him at the same time that the Federal Government would do all in its power to make him succeed in his task of building a new state.
In recent weeks, the Katsina indigenes have responded to Governor Madaki’s efforts with the creation of a state development fund which raised over 50 million naira or so has been added to the fund since it was launched.
Our informants insisted that this was a reaction to Madaki’s own effort as he has given them a sense of confidence in the future of the state.
One remarkable statement from a retired government big-wig illustrated the true depth of support which the governor enjoys.
He said, “do you realize that before Madaki came some of us seriously considered asking Babangida to hand us back to Kaduna state?
It is certain that no such request was made of the President as he was escorted around the state in triumph in the last week of February, 1991.
46 MODULE 2: GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO MAGAZINE JOURNALISM Many undergraduates of mass communication, especially those in their early years, do not know the difference between writing for a Newspaper and writing for a magazine.
In this module, effort has been made to draw the attention of the students to the difference between the Newspaper and Magazine, Magazine and books.
The History of the magazine in America, Britain and Nigeria was traced, the functions, classification, types and formats of magazine was also treated accordingly.
Lastly, the contents of magazine were exposed so the students could know that magazine publication is a multi-article publication.
A summary of the module is as follows; Unit 1: What is Magazine?
Unit 2: A Brief History of Magazine Unit 3: Functions of Magazine Unit 4: Content of Magazine 47 UNIT 1 WHAT IS A MAGAZINE?
CONTENTS 8.0 Introduction 9.0 Objectives 10.0 Main Contents 10.1 What is Magazine?
10.2 Magazine contrasted with Newspaper 10.3 Magazine contrasted with books 11.0 Conclusion 12.0 Summary 13.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 14.0 References/Further Readings MAIN CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION An important part of the study or examination of anything is the study of its origin and why it was birthed.
Everything on the surface of the earth has a history and a definite role it should play in the entire cycle or scheme of things.
Magazine is not excluded.
As an important medium of mass communication, it has a peculiar antecedent which needs to be studied.
But before this is done, we want to look carefully at some definitions that have been advanced to the concept by notable scholars in the field of mass communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the student should be able to; 1.
Give four definitions of magazine.
2.
Differentiate between a magazine and a newspaper.
3.
Differentiate between a magazine and a book.
WHAT IS A MAGZINE?
According to Okoye (2004:2), 48 The English word magazine originally denoted a warehouse or storehouse, especially of arms and cartridges.
Further according to him, in the 18th century, magazine started being used to also denote a storehouse of information or entertainment, especially in a periodical.
According to Encarta Dictionary (2008), A magazine is a publication issued at regular intervals, usually weekly or monthly, containing articles, stories, photographs, advertisements, and other features, with a page size that is usually smaller than that of a newspaper but larger than that of a book.
According to Esimokha (2008:106), A magazine is a bound publication issued periodically and containing general editorial matter such as news, sports, entertainment, pictures and other features.
According to him, magazines are attractive and appealing because they are often printed in colour and glossy paper.
They are typically published weekly, bi-weekly, monthly or quarterly, with a date on the cover that is in advance of the date it is actually published.
According to Theodore Peterson in Esimokha (2011:19), Although magazines lacked the immediacy of the broadcast media and the newspaper, it nevertheless was timely enough to deal with the flow of events.
It‘s timeliness and continuity set it apart from the book.
As a continuing publication, it could provide a form of discussion by carrying responses from its audience; could sustain campaigns for indefinite periods and could work for circulation rather than single impact; yet its available space and the reading habit of the audience enables it to give fairly lengthy treatment to the subject it covers.
According to Mott (1957) in Akeh (2010:5), A magazine is a bound pamphlet issued more or less regularly and containing a variety of reading matter.
According to Ohaja (2004), A magazine is defined as a periodical publication (now usually illustrated) containing contributions by various writers.
These contributions can be feature stories, essays, opinion articles, fictional short stories and other types of literary matter.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 49 Identify four other definitions of magazines not listed above that could facilitate your understanding of the concept.
Feel free to consult the references provided by the Tutor of this course.
Characteristics of Magazines The definitions above show clearly some features or characteristics of magazines.
According to Okoye (2004:17), Modern magazines fall under the broad category of publications which librarians call periodicals.
A convenient way of describing the characteristics of magazines is to compare them with newspapers, on the one hand, and with books on the other hand.
Indeed, magazines are half way between newspapers and books.
Magazines contrasted with Newspapers According to Okoye (2004:17), magazines are different from newspapers in that while newspapers use cheap paper (newsprint) and come out more frequently (e.g.
daily), magazines are normally printed on finer paper (bond) and come out at longer intervals (e.g.
weekly, bi- weekly, monthly, quarterly, annually, e.t.c).
Other differences between newspapers and periodicals include contents, style of writing, use of illustrations and colour, e.t.c.
Basket and Scissors (1976:373) in Okoye (2004:17) gave the following comprehensive checklist of the differences between magazines and newspapers.
1.
Magazines use a better grade of paper, or stock.
The cover paper may be heavier than the paper for inside pages.
Different grades and weight of paper may be used for inside pages.
Tinted stock may be used.
2.
Magazines use colour, not only illustrations but in type and decorations as well.
3.
Illustrations are more dominant in a magazine than in a newspaper.
The illustrations may run (or bleed) of the page or extend into the fold.
4.
Magazines breathe; they use air or white space to emphasize text and illustrations.
5.
Magazines vary typefaces to help depict the mood or tone or place of the story.
They use initial capital letters to help readers turn to the message or to break up columns of type.
They wrap type around illustrations.
6.
Magazines may use reverse plates (white on black) or use display type over the illustration (overprinting) or use a mortise (portion cut out of a picture) for display headings or even text.
50 7.
Magazines may vary with the design of the headline.
Esimokha (2011:26) gave the following differences between Magazines and Newspapers: 1.
Timeliness: Newspapers hinge what they report on recent or current events.
They believe in telling or breaking the news whereas magazines interpret the news.
2.
Frequency of Publication: Newspapers are published on a daily basis while magazines are produced at intervals: weekly, monthly or quarterly.
3.
Illustration: Magazines generally make use of illustrations, graphics and pictures more than newspapers.
4.
Colour/Paper Quality: magazines use more colour and a better grade of paper or stock than newspapers which are usually printed on newsprint.
The extent newspapers can go is colour printing.
5.
Audience: Newspapers are published for the general public whereas magazines could be written for general as well as specific audience.
6.
Style of Writing: Newspapers employ article formal style while magazines are written in informal and relaxed-style than news stories.
7.
Layout: Magazines may use reverse plate or use display type over the illustration to display headlines or even text.
8.
Use of White Space: Magazines breathe; they use air or white space to emphasize text and illustrations more than newspapers.
9.
Typography: Magazines vary typefaces to help depict the moods, tone or place of the story more than newspapers.
10.
Diction: Unlike magazine that may sometimes use specialized language and terminologies, newspapers use simple and easy to understand language.
Magazines contrasted with books According to Okoye (2004), a basic difference between magazines and books is that whereas books are made to last longer, magazines are meant to be ephemeral.
This consideration influences the contents, design, method of printing, binding and cost of books and magazines.
Regarding content, Graham (1980:20) in Okoye (2004:18) points out that magazine usually deal with “the here and now” which are soon outdated.
What this means is that though the 51 information in a newspaper could gain ephemerality (i.e.
short lived) as soon as another one is published, for a magazine the ephemerality could still be prolonged.
But despite the time it takes for magazine to get outdated, it cannot be compared to the seemingly imperishable power of a book.
Okoye (2004:18) further states that the ephemeral quality of magazine content is symbolized by the look and design of the magazine.
A book looks more serious than a magazine.
In depth and scope of information, a book rates higher than a magazine, while a magazine rates higher than a newspaper.
But in entertainment, magazines compete favourably with all other media of mass communication.
4.0 CONCLUSION A magazine is a periodical publication (now usually illustrated) containing contributions by various writers.
These contributions can be feature stories, essays, opinion articles, fictional short stories and other types of literary matter.
Magazine is a lot different from Newspapers and books despite the fact that they are all mass circulated medium.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to give six outstanding definitions of magazine.
Some characteristics of magazine were also highlighted pointing out the difference between magazines, Newspapers and books.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT In just four paragraphs, give the difference between a Magazine, Newspaper and a book.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS G., E. (2011).
Newspapers and Magazines: Editing, Production, Marketing.
Osun: Visual Concepts.
I., O.
(2004).
Magazinology: The Systematic and Indepth Study of Magazine Types, Principles and Techniques.
Lagos: Mbeyi and Associates.
52 UNIT 2 A BRIEF HISTORY OF MAGAZINE?
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 History of Magazines: The British Experience 3.2 History of Magazines: The American Experience 3.3 History of Magazines: The Nigerian Experience 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION According to Okoye (2004), the English word magazine originally denoted a warehouse or storehouse, especially of arms and cartridges.
Partridge (1961) in Okoye (2004) puts that in the 18th century, magazine started being used to also denote a storehouse of information or entertainment, especially in a periodical, but the word must have been borrowed from either the French (magasin) or Italian (magazino) or Arabic (mahzan, mahazin), which means storehouse.
This suggests that the earliest magazines contained a wide variety of reading materials designed to cater to different interests.
1.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to 1.
Narrate the history of magazine in Britain, America and Nigeria.
2.
Give the factors responsible for the growth of the magazine in either Britain, America or Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 History of Magazines: The British Experience According to Okoye (2004), some rudimentary periodicals must have existed in the distant past, but the very first magazine in the modern sense is said to be the Gentleman’s magazine founded in 1731 by the English Printer and Journalist, Edward Cave (1691-1754).
Quoting Funk 53 and Wagnalls (Vol 18.411), Okoye (2004) further put that Cave’s magazine carried reports of political debates, essays, stories and poems, which were widely read.
Other notable pioneer British magazines included The Edinburgh Review (1802-1929), The Quarterly Review (1809) and Blackwood’s Magazine (1817).
Others were The Mirrow (1822-49), Chamber Journal (1832), Fraser’s Magazine (1860-1939), Illustrated London News (1842), English Illustrated Magazine (1883-1913), Fortnightly Review (1865-1950), The Contemporary Review (1866) and the Nineteeth Century (1877), which became Twentieth Century in 1950.
Some of these magazines, as their names imply, contained mainly reviews of major happenings in political, economic, social and academic circles, while others were essentially picture magazines.
Okoye (2004).
Factors that boosted Magazine Publishing in Old England According to Okoye (2004), the following factors accounted for the growth of magazines in England in the 18th and 19th centuries: 1.
The Political and economic reforms which started in the late seventeenth century England afforded more freedom of the press, thus creating a more conducive atmosphere for newspapers.
Hitherto, the rulers of England were less tolerant of the press than their counterparts in the neighbouring Western European countries such as Germany and Italy.
On the economic scene, the Industrial Revolution created a new urban working class who needed and could afford to buy newspapers and magazines for their enlightenment.
2.
The formation of many political parties, the increasing power of the parliament and the dwindling power of the nobility resulted in the greater participation of the citizenry in politics and mass communication.
3.
The invention of photography, improvement of typesetting and invention of the rotary press in the 19th century aided magazine publishing.
4.
The increasing level of literacy.
People knew how to read books, newspapers and magazines which were the only mass media available at the time.
5.
British Empires expanded because of the era of colonialism.
There was then need for books, magazines and newspapers published in England to these subjugated colonies.
54 3.2 History of Magazines: The America Experience According to Okoye (2004:4), the first two magazines to be published in America were the American Magazine owned by Andrew Bradford and General Magazine owned by Ben Franklin.
Both magazines out in 1741 and were modeled after the first English Magazine, the Gentleman’s Magazine which was founded a decade earlier.
History has it that Benjamin Franklin (1706-1760) was a distinguished/respected newspaper man and great advocate of press freedom.
Franklin made outstanding contributions in many other fields of human endeavour.
In fact, Emery and Emery (1988:35) in Okoye (2004:4) described him as an inventor, scientist, politician, diplomat, stateman, pioneer sociologist, businessman, educator and world citizen.
Franklin in addition was also a pioneer crusader against the inhuman slave trade.
Worthy of note is the fact that the pioneer magazines owned by Benjamin Franklin and his arch-rival, Andrew Bradford were not successful and died soon after their inception.
But the fact still has it that they were the pioneer American magazines.
According to Pasqua et al (1990:8), the first successful American magazine was the Royal American Magazine, published during the American Revolution by Isaiah Thomas.
The Royal American Magazine was distinct for its beautiful illustrations.
It was probably the first American magazine to be generously illustrated.
Next to the Royal America Magazine was the Pennsylvania magazine edited by the erudite Thomas Paine, who became famous for his philosophical articles which greatly encouraged the fighting American troops the War of Independence.
According to Okoye (2004:4), it was in the 19th and 20th centuries that American witnessed really large circulation magazines, some of which are still in existence.
The following American magazines which sprang up in the 19th century were successful and long lived: - Popular Science - Woman’s Home Champion - Outdoor Life - National Geographic - Ladies Home Journal - Cosmopolitan 55 - Youth’s Companion (1827- 1929) - Graham Magazine (1926-64) - The Southern Literary Messenger (1933-65) - Harper’s Magazine (originally known as Harper’s New Monthly Magazine (1887-1939).
- Home Journal (This Magazine became the first Magazine to hit a circulation of one million).
The arrival of the 20th century according to Henry Luce, the co-founder of Time Magazine was the American century.
According to him, it was the century where American magazine attained glory.
Early in that century, magazines were in the vanguard of investigative journalism which American media historian called “Muckraking”.
Magazines of that era carried lengthy reports which exposed corruption in business, government, politics, labour and industry.
Muckraking boosted the circulation of newspapers and magazines.
The 20th century also saw the birth and maturity of the great magazines such as Reader’s Digest, Time, The Weekly News Magazine (1923), Newsweek (1933), U.S News (1933), which later became U.S News and World Report.
There were also the defunct Life (1936-72) and Look (1937-71) which cannot easily be forgotten by older Americans three decades after they were rested.
Nor can anyone ignore the hand-hitting Play-Boy (1953), Penthouse, Sports Illustrated (1954), People and so many others.
According to Okoye (2004:5), the importance of these great or classical magazines lies not only in their large circulations running into millions, but also in the fact that they served as models for numerous magazines around the world.
Factors responsible for the growth of the Magazine Industry in the United States 1.
Democracy and Press Freedom 2.
High Literacy, Leisure and reading culture 3.
Big Business to provide advertisement patronage 4.
Buoyant economy and availability of disposable income for the average citizen 5.
Diversity of taste to cater for 6.
Technology and Manpower for the Production of all kinds of magazine 56 HISTORY OF MAGAZINE: THE NIGERIAN EXPERIENCE According to Esimokha (2011:4), in Nigeria, the history of magazine dates to the activities of early missionaries.
In Nigeria, the first publication to be referred to as magazine was a government periodical, the Nigerian Gazette, established in 1900.
As a government organ, it was concerned primarily with analyzing and interpreting the activities of the colonial regime.
The following religious magazines, according to Esimakha (2011:5) also played a pioneering role in the development of magazine in Nigeria and they are; - In Leisure Hours – August 1917 - African Church Gleaner – September 1917 - The African Hope- March 1919 - The Nigerian Methodist- 1925 - War Cry- 1925 - African Christian- 1931 - Catholic Life- 1937 In the 1960’s and 1970’s, some magazines were already making in road into the Nigeria magazine market, some of these successful consumer magazines include: 1.
Drum, established in 1960 and existed for over 30 years 2.
Spear, established in 1962 and existed for 23 years.
Drum and Spear magazines were published and marketed by the Daily Times Group.
3.
NewsBreed was also published in the 1970’s by Chris Okolie.
However, in 1978, The Obasanjo’s administration banned the magazine.
In the mid 1980’s, Newswatch Magazine pioneered investigative journalism in the Nigerian Magazine Press environment.
The magazine was established by Dele Giwa, Ray Ekpu, Dan Agbese and Yakubu Mohammed.
Before the establishment of Newswatch, magazine reading culture among Nigerians was very low.
The coming of Newswatch into Nigerian magazine scene changed the study as magazines started developing large readership.
This is because the founders of Newswatch commanded 57 large readership when they were editors and were columnists in newspapers where they worked.
Encouraged by the great success recorded by Newswatch, other magazines emerged in the Nigerian publishing scene.
They are TELL, The News, The Source to mention but a few.
Factors Responsible for the Sudden Growth of Magazine Industry in Nigeria Esimokha (2011:6) gave four reasons in this respect and they are; 1.
Increasing Literacy Level: The country’s literacy rate has no doubt tripled the figure that existed in the 1960’s, 1970’s and 1980’s.
This has remarkably influenced the magazine reading culture and growth because magazines appeal to the intellect and critical audience.
2.
Increasing Need for Specialized Information: The deregulation of the Nigerian economy and the attendant emergence of a crop of new professionals in the financial, telecommunication and other sectors led to the emergence of specialized magazine to cater to this diverse specialized information (interest) need.
In Nigeria, today, more specialized magazine are springing up to cater for the diverse specialized interest of the readers, such as magazine on Family Life, Soccer, Banking, Telecommunication, Stock and Bonds, Writing, evangelism and host of other vocation and hobbies.
3.
Improved Technology: Significant improvement in printing technology also facilitated the growth of magazine publishing in Nigeria.
Not too long ago, Nigeriam printers and publishers needed to go to the United Kingdom or America to do simple colour separation.
But today, the equipment for it is available in the country, even though at a higher cost.
4.
The Economics of magazine Publishing: Unlike newspapers or television stations which require large capital to set up, magazine do not need much money and infrastructure.
With a few committed staff and free lancers, a person can publish a magazine.
Because printing machines are capital intensive most magazine can’t afford them.
So the logical move is to contract with a commercial printing firm for production services.
4.0 CONCLUSION History has proven that magazine denoted a warehouse, especially of arms and catridges.
Patridge (1961) puts that in the 18th Century, magazine started being used to also denote a storehouse of information or entertainment, especially in a periodical.
It can however be concluded from the above that magazine is a storehouse of information.
58 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to trace the historical developments of magazine in Britain, America and Nigeria.
In the course of doing this, it was discovered that in England, the era of colonialism galvanized the establishment of magazine because of the need to generate and transfer information from and to these colonies.
It was also discovered that America witnessed a large circulation of magazines between 19th and 20th century, some of which are still in existence today.
And lastly, some factors that contributed to the growth of magazine in Nigeria included increasing Literacy level, increasing need for specialized information, improved technology, and the Economics of magazine publishing.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Summarize in a page the History of Magazine in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Esimokha, G. (2011).
Newspapers and Magazines: Editing, Production, Marketing.
Osun: Visual Concepts.
Okoye, I.
(2004).
Magazinology: The Systematic and Indepth Study of Magazine Types, Principles and Techniques.
Lagos: Mbeyi and Associates.
Pasqua.
T. et al (1990).
Mass Media in the Information Age.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
59 UNIT 3 FUNCTIONS OF MAGAZINE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Functions of Magazines 3.2 Classification of Magazines 3.3 Types of Magazines 3.4 Format of a magazine 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION According to Ohaja (2004:2), Magazines, just like newspapers meet the four-fold purpose of communication for their readers.
They acquaint them with new developments in various fields (information); add to their store of knowledge and improve their moral standards (education); relieve tension, evoke their emotions and make them laugh (entertainment) and change or reinforce their attitude and behavior (persuasion).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to; 1.
State and explain the classification of magazines there are 2.
Give and explain five types of magazines.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS Functions of Magazines The question to ask, however, is through what types of content do magazine meet or fulfill these purposes of communication?
Let us take information as an example.
The following contents could serve to inform the magazine reader.
Review/Summaries, Advertisements, Feature stories, Letters to the Editors, e.t.c.
A reader can suddenly discover the time and venue of a movie show or an improved cooking method through a magazine article.
60 According to Ohaja (2004:2), education can be gained through just about any kind of content.
For example, one’s vocabulary can be enhanced through reading different articles in the magazine.
One’s understanding of social and physical and physical phenomenom can also be sharpened through the reading of such magazine articles and features, essays and commentaries.
Societal values such as marital fidelity, honesty and diligence are inculcated through articles like features, opinion and fiction.
Contents like cartoons, riddles and jokes, puzzles, enduring quotations, features, reviews, pictures and opinion articles offer immense entertainment to the reader.
Also according to Ohaja (2004:3), Persuasion comes through commentaries, essays, opinion articles, advertisements and utility features.
Dressing fashionably, feeding better, developing harmonious relationships and attractive surroundings are some of the traits that can be imbibed through advertisements and utility features.
On the socio-political, economic and humanitarian levels, magazines champion “countless good causes conducting crusades the year round.
They also draw attention to ventures requiring philanthropic support such as medical research, treatment of terminally ill patients, motherless babies homes and provision of assistance to victims of accidents, communal clashes and natural disasters.
According to Anaeto et al (2009), the function of any magazine depends on its type (classification) as well as its mission and philosophy.
Generally, magazines perform the following functions; 1.
Provide in-depth coverage and analysis of issues 2.
Provide specialized information for consumers 3.
Serve as veritable medium for advertising.
They show off the advertisers products/services through their glossy paper and high reproduction quality.
4.
They provide materials for entertainment and relaxation such as short stories, jokes, puzzles and others.
5.
They offer practical advice to help readers make informed choices and decisions.
Okoye (2004:21) captured some vital functions of magazines.
6.
Magazines offer professionals and students the report of current researcher, techniques and ideas in their disciplines, thereby contributing to the growth of that body of knowledge.
This is the role of professional and trade journals.
61 7.
Magazines provide a means of re-enforcement for adherents of different points of views and interest.
Religion magazines, sports, ideological magazines, sex, e.t.c are examples of such magazines.
CLASSIFICATION OF MAGAZINES According to Anaeto et al (2009:11), there are three broad classifications of magazines and they are; 1.
Consumer Magazines, 2.
Professional/Trade Magazines and 3.
Company/Industrial Magazines.
1.
Consumer Magazines: These are magazines targeted at the general public.
This type of magazine is readily available to the public and its central purpose is provide information and entertainment.
They are sold at newsstands, newspaper vendors, book stores, supermarkets amongst others.
They can also be procured by subscription.
2.
Professional/Trade Magazines: Daramola (2003:98) describes these magazines as specialized magazines.
They are designed for specialized people, written in specialized language and directed at specialized group of people.
Therefore, the specialized jargons (language) used can only be comprehended or decoded by specialized people.
Examples of Professional/Trade Magazines include Nigerian Medical Journal, Archival News Bit, Pharmaceutical Journal among others.
3.
Company/Industrial Magazines: These are called In-house publications.
By In-house publications, I mean publications produced by a company or an industry, for the exchange of information between the organization and its internal and external publics.
By internal publics, I mean the (employees or staff) of the company and by external publics, I mean the customers (whether potential or existing).
Please note that In-house publications does not include publications like news letters, brochures, booklets, manuals, bools and calenders.
Those are not magazines.
Company magazines are usually well planned publications, usually not less than 20 pages.
Sometimes, due to financial constraints, what companies do is that they have a publication that will be aimed at all stake-holders, i.e staff, customers, middlemen, stock holders, community where the 62 company is situated; and others.
this kind of magazines then become bulkier in appearance because of the strategy to compress their information in a single edition.
Types of Magazines The following are the types of Magazines as given by Anaeto et al (2009:12).
1.
General Interest Magazine: This type of magazines deal with different issues that cut across people.
They appeal to the general public e.g.
Reality Magazine (Nigerian), Cosmopolitan Life (U.S.A) and others.
2.
News Magazines: The magazines under this category carry news and significant issues and events in the society.
E.g.
News Watch, Tell, The News, National Standard e.t.c (Nigerian), News Week, Time (U.S.A) and others.
3.
Mens Magazines: These are magazines specifically targeted at the male folk.
E.g.
GQ (U.S.A).
4.
Womens Magazines: These type of magazines are specifically targeted at the female group E.g of some of them are Genevieve (Nigerian), Good House-Keeping (U.S.A).
5.
Family Magazines: These are magazines that deal specifically with family issues e.g Parenting, Family Circle (USA).
6.
Sports Magazines: These are magazines that carries stories and information on various kinds of sports.
E.g Sports Illustrated (U.S.A), Four Four Two, Kick Off, Football Plus (Nigerian).
7.
Youth Magazines: These are magazines targeted at teenage and Youth Population.
E.g Dynamics Magazines, Happy People (Nigerian).
8.
Gossip Magazines: These magazines carry gossips about celebrities and other highly- placed people in the society.
E.g Global Excellence, City People (Nigerian), People (U.S.A).
9.
Picture Magazine: The contents of this kind of magazines are mainly pictures of events of all kinds.
They range from birthdays, house-warming, coronation, outings, burial ceremonies, wedding ceremonies, launching, commissioning, e.t.c.
The pictures could be supported with captions, small write-ups or the pictures could flow independently without words.
Vintage, Ovation (Nigerian).
63 10.
Health Magazines: These kinds of magazines carry information on health related matters.
E.g Indulge, Health Booster, Food Business International, Community Doctor, Health Care, Health Link (Nigerian).
11.
Fashion Magazine: These kind of magazines carry information on fashion and style.
The latest on clothes, shoes, accessories, ring, make-ups e.t.c are what forms the contents of such magazines.
E.g Elle, Vogue (U.S.A).
12.
Esimokha (2011), added the Humour/Comic magazines as another type of magazines.
Formats of a Magazine The format of a magazine refers to the size and shape of the magazine.
According to Areoye (2008:40), there are three standard magazine sizes and they are; 1.
Life-Size: These are very big and wide.
They could measure 101/2 X 13 inches 2.
Time-Size: These are normal-sized magazines that we see every day.
It measures 81/2 X 11 inches.
3.
Readers Digest Size: This type of magazines is small and portable.
They can be carried about easily.
It measures 5 X 7 inches.
1/2 1/2 4.0 CONCLUSION Magazines provide indepth coverage and analysis of issues, specialized information for consumers, serve as important medium for advertising and offer practical advice to help readers make informed choices and decision and decisions.
Also, it can be concluded that while magazines have many types there are only three classifications which are Consumer, Professional and Company magazines.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to outline some function of magazines as given by some experts in the discipline of mass communication.
Also, in this unit, the classification of magazine was given as Consumer Magazines,Trade/professional Magazines and Company Magazines.
Also, twelve types of magazines were given and their Formats also enlisted.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Of the twelve types of Magazines enlisted in this unit, give and explain six with coherent points.
64 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoye, I.
(2004).
Magazinology: The Systematic and Indepth Study of Magazine Types, Principles and Techniques.
Lagos: Mbeyi and Associates.
Daramola, I.(2003).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
Lagos: Rothan Press.
Anaeto, S.G, Anaeto M.S & Tejumaiye, J.A.(2009).
Newspaper and Magazine- Management, Production, Marketing.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers.
Ohaja, E.U.(2004).
Magazine Article Writing.
Lagos: John Letterman.
65 UNIT 4 CONTENTS OF A MAGAZINE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Contents of a Magazines 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The content of magazines are what the readers expect to find in a magazine when they have access to one.
There are several items that could be found in a magazine.
These items have been explained in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to 1.
Differentiate between the Vox Populi, Strip Poll and Opinion Poll.
2.
Enlist with short explanations, six contents of a magazine 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS Contents of a Magazine According to Esimokha (2011: 40), within the pages of today magazines are many kinds of information, opinions, news, non-news items and advertising.
Though, news story constitutes the basic menu for magazines, other universal and prominent contents or messages of the magazines are discussed below.
Uyo (19870) in Esimokha (2011:40) identified magazine messages to include the following; 1.
News Stories: This is the straight or hard news report also known as the objective report which is a timely account of an event.
The journalist traditional goal is to give the facts or in other words produce objective stories presumably devoid of personal opinion or bias.
It is the heart of modern journalism.
2.
Indepth Report: An indepth report is a step beyond straight news.
Unlike basic news stories, indepth reports require not just the facts but an exploration of the facts.
The 66 reporter gathers additional information that is independent of the event but that is related to it.
They are also likely to include a number of opinions from a number of authoritative news stories.
Naturally, they require a more detailed research than ordinary news stories do.
Verifiable facts are pivotal in indepth reporting as it is in straight news reporting.
3.
News Analysis: The rationale for this form of report is that it is better to know a lot about a little than to know a bit about a lot.
The news analysis involves, not looking at news situation in general as such, but breaking the situation down and analyzing a particular aspect of the total situation.
4.
Interpretative Report: This is also known as interpretative reports; they are step beyond straight news.
These usually focus on an issue, problem or controversy.
Here too, the substance is verifiable fact, not opinion.
Instead of presenting facts as straight news or depth report and hoping the facts to speak for themselves, the interpretative reporter clarifies, explains and analyses.
The interpretative reports usually focuses on why?
The WHY?
Question must be answered quite thoroughly to satisfy today’s reader.
Why did the President take the trip, appoint that man, and make that statement?
Why did the government establish the National Open University?
The rationale behind this type of report is that it is better to uncover a bit about a lot.
5.
Investigative Reporting: Sometimes called Muckraking, is similar to what goes on in interpretative reports, but is primarily concerned with uncovering hidden or suppressed facts behind a news event.
It is the practice of opening closed doors and closed mouths.
As in interpretative reporting, the focus is on problems, issues and controversies.
6.
Editorial: According to Anaeto et al (2009:17), the editorial is the position of the magazine or newspaper on any given issue.
It is the official stand of the paper.
Print media use the editorial to highlight issues, identify problems and make suggestions to solve them.
Usually, the editorial appear on a specially designed page and most time with the masthead of the paper/magazine.
The editorial, according to Anaeto et al (2007), gives background explanation and interpretation of events so that people can build or, at least, re-inforce their opinions about what is happening in the world or likely to happen.
According to Esimokha (2011:4), it is the voice of the magazine and is normally unsigned.
7.
Feature: Feature, according to Anaeto et al (20009:17) are another major content in magazines and newspapers.
They provide information but in more detailed form than the news.
Features cover a wide range of issues.
They are most to entertainment and 67 provide information to readers.
Features come in different formats: news features, personality features, or profile, human interest stories, expose or travelogue.
8.
Columns: Columns are special kind of opinion article that appears regularly in a newspaper reflecting the opinion of the writer.
They often take the form of commentaries on current events, although they can be totally informative and entertaining.
The column carries the scene title from issue to issue and is typically the work of the same writer.
Authorities or specialists in a particular field, as well as competent writers often write columns.
9. Review: Reviews present opinions about books, record, movies, plays, television programmes, concerts and other art or entertainment forms.
They usually help readers decide whether what is being reviewed is worth their time, attention and money.
The function of the review and criticism is to provide readers with an objective view as well as to enable readers understand and appreciate the work.
10.
Advertisement: Advertisements are spaces in a magazine paid for by someone who has goods or services to sell.
It is basically a sales message.
Advertisements are the main source of revenue for magazines.
Advertising aims to persuade or inform the public and can be used to induce products differentiation.
Advertisement may be classified or displayed.
Display advertisement is a type of advertisement that includes copy illustrations or photographs, headlines and other usual components.
Classified advertisements on the other hand is an inexpensive brief advert placed by individuals or local businesses classified by subject (e.g.
list of cars for rent, change of name).
11.
Letter to the Editor: Letter written to a magazine by a reader expressing his/her views regarding both public and personal matters, but especially of public concern.
It is usually published on the editorial page or page opposite editorial page.
Other names for this are Your Views, The Forum, Letters, Peoples Voice, and People’s Parliament.
12.
Carton and Comic: These are humorous or satirical drawing or strips of illustrations in a newspaper or magazine about a person, current event or situation.
A cartoon is a humorous drawing accompanied by a caption that induces laughter.
13.
Editorial Cartoon: This is a type of cartoon that comments on an issue, personality or current news event.
It usually appears on the editorial or op-ed (Opposite-editorial) page and takes a position that apparently bears the publications opinions or interpretation of issue.
68 14.
Photorama: This simply refers to a story told primarily through a series of photographs with apt captions related to current events or issues of public interest.
Photodrama is a combination of two words photograph and panorama.
Such pages therefore bear titles like The News in Picture, Photoview, Picture Panorama, The World in Pictures e.t.c.
15.
The Vox Pop/Strip Poll/ Public Opinion Poll: These according to Uyo (1987) in Esimokha (2011:43) are all products of interviews that scan or measure opinion of several or many people.
Now, they are made to stand by themselves.
The essential difference among vox pop/strip poll and public opinion is the degree of formality or precision with which the opinions expressed in the interviews are presented.
- The vox pop, short for Vox populi: This is the voice of the people.
It is an article relating the opinions and views of members of the general public about an issue of current public interest.
- The Strip Poll: This is informally conducted, but the people whose opinion are sought are a more select group in the sense that they tend to be experts, or are more adequately versed on the topic of the interview than those in the vox pop.
- The Public Opinion Poll: This is different from the vox pop and strip poll in that the people interviewed are selected through random probability sampling, a systematic, scientific technique that ensures a fair and equal representation of the total population of interest.
Other types of messages are: The Verbatim, Interview, Special news report, Personality Profile or Portrait, Advertorial/Supplement, News Side bar, Puzzle, Horoscope, The Game e.t.c.
4.0 CONCLUSION There are several items found in a magazine.
In fact, these days, especially with the advancement in technology, an illustration in magazines is getting more appealing.
Also, the items of a magazine are becoming more populated.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit effort has been made to outline the different contents that can be found in a magazine.
In doing this I have made the explanations very simple in other to aid learning.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Pick a recent magazine.
Examine it closely and enlist its contents carefully and compare with the ones listed in this unit.
(Write out your observations in one page).
69 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Esimokha, G (2011).
Newspapers and Magazines: Editing, Production, Marketing.
Osun: Visual Concepts.
Anaeto, S.G, Anaeto M.S.
& Tejumaiye, J.A.
(2009).
Newspaper and Magazine: Management Production, Marketing.
Ibadan: Stirling Horden.
70 MODULE 3: INTRODUCTION TO MAGAZINE WRITING The general aim of this module is to expose the students to the fundamental elements of good writing, mechanics of writing and the use of appropriate words in the formation of the entire body of writing.
The reason for this is because the recurrent rate of writing flaws in our newspapers and magazines is becoming unbearable.
The problem is lack of proper drill in the basic elements of writing.
In this module which is made up of four units, you will be exposed to five elements of good writing.
A step by step guide has been provided for you to practice and understand these elements.
The four units that constitute this module have been made simple enough to aid easy understanding.
In fact, effort has been made to address the topics here in an incredibly simple manner.
You will be glad you took this module at the end of the day.
I need your support in the area of assignments.
Please, faithfully work on the assignments yourself.
Do not delegate it to anybody.
The moment you do this the essence of the drill is lost and it would count to your disadvantage.
Unit 1 Basic Elements of Good Writing I Unit 2 Basic Elements of Good Writing II Unit 3 Mechanics of Writing Unit 4 Appropriate Word Usage 71 UNIT 1 BASIC ELEMENTS OF GOOD WRITING 1 CONTENTS 15.0 Introduction 16.0 Objectives 17.0 Main Contents 17.1 Economy 17.2 Correctness 17.3 Simplicity 18.0 Conclusion 19.0 Summary 20.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 21.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION I want to welcome you to this unit.
It promises to be a wonderful experience.
You may be wondering why we want to address writing as a separate class.
The reason is simple.
You know that the stock in trade of any journalist is writing.
And this is not just any kind of writing, I mean good writing.
It is amazing that the standard of good and effective journalism is dropping by the day.
The reason is simply because thorough attention is not given to writing at our undergraduate or diploma levels.
In this unit, we will re- acquaint ourselves with some germane elements of good writing required of a feature or magazine writer.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to; - Apply the element of Economy effectively - Apply the element of Correctness effectively 3.0 MAIN CONTENT BASIC ELEMENTS OF GOOD WRITING According to Ohaja (2004:10), good writing seems hard to come by these days.
In spite of the technological advancements available to the writer in this computer age, shoddy writing still abounds.
Two decades ago, when Nigerian Journalists and Writers did not have access to word processors, most people involved in magazine article writing (from writers to the editors) did 72 their home work well.
Magazines are fewer in number but of high literacy quality.
The articles were thoughtfully, thoroughly and skillfully crafted in the finest of cotemporary English language.
Have you noticed that these days, when you pick a magazine, you cannot but wonder what exactly has gone wrong with our magazine publishing in Nigeria.
Further, according to Ohaja (2004:10), there are two requirements that a magazine artcle should meet to be classified as good writing.
First, it should communicate whatever information, education or entertainment that the writer intends the reader to receive.
Second, it should do so in an interesting manner.
If the article is full of wisdom but ponderously written, it may be read by very few people.
But if the style is elegant yet the article appears to be saying nothing, the reader may feel cheated, may feel he has wasted his time, that the writer was merely showing off his literary prowess.
Such an exhibition of writing talent may not be enough to draw readers regularly unless the writer finds something meaningful to say.
The following are some qualities of good writing; 1.
Economy.
According to Ebele (2003:1) the first quality of any good writing is economy.
A good sentence should contain no unnecessary words for the same reason that a drawing should have no unnecessary lines and a machine no unnecessary parts.
This requires not that the writer makes the entire sentence short or that he avoids all details… but that every word tells.
Good economical writing is efficient writing.
It makes minimum demands on the reader but provides maximum information in the clearest language possible.
It avoids wordiness and promotes pleasure through right proportion, sense of form and good choice of words.
According to Ohaja (2004:26), when someone picks up a magazine, the last thing he expects is to be bored by interminable articles.
And half a page can seem interminable if the writing is not economical.
Ebele (2003:1) stress that wordiness and verbosity are twin problems for the writers who have been brought up to equate verbosity with intelligence and mastery of the English Language.
But merely cutting sentences down to a bare minimum or chopping up a simple idea into two or more little statements, does not make for word rconomy.
What you wish to say must be said in an adequate number of words to convey your menaing accurately and directly.
Now let us take a break by omitting words in the following sentences; 73 Example 1.
Wordy: A good male lover should be a person who knows the basic techniques that are involved in kissing a woman.
Concise: A good man should know the basic technique of kissing.
Wordy: Those who tend to drive under the influence of drugs or alcohol bring recklessness into the driving scene.
Concise: Those who drink and drive are reckless.
Wordy: Young drivers are found to be wanting as far as patience is concerned.
Concise: Most young drivers are impatient.
Ohaja (2004:29) however warns that in your pursuit of conciseness, you should also construct positive rather than negative sentences.
This would aid clarity of your work.
Examples are as follows; Negative Construct: He cannot be counted on to tell the truth on any matter Positive Construct: He is a habitual liar Negative Construct: He is not a man of means Positive Construct: He is a poor man.
Negative Construct: He is not a hardworking man Positive Construct: He is a lazy man.
The following are examples of worthy expressions and their concise forms.
Most people use such expressions without realizing the damage they do to their writing.
1.
Wordy: Get in touch with Concise: Meet, Call, or See 2.
Wordy: In this day and age Concise: Today, Now 3.
Wordy: In spite of the fact that he came late 74 Concise: In spite of his lateness 4.
Wordy: At the same time that Concise: While 5.
Wordy: As far as Mass Communication is concerned Concise: In Mass communication 6.
Wordy: In the final analysis Concise: Ultimately 7.
Wordy: For the purpose of Concise: For 8.
Wordy: At this point in time Concise: Now 9.
Wordy: Until such a time as Concise: Until 10.
Wordy: The question as to whether Concise: Whether 11.
Wordy: He was hardly able to work Concise: He staggered, He faltered 12.
Wordy: Call your attention to the fact that Concise: Inform you, Notify you 13.
Wordy: Owing or due to the fact that Concise: Since or Because 14.
Wordy: It is my belief that Concise: I believe that 15.
Wordy: I am of the opinion that 75 Concise: I feel that.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Re-write the following paragraphs to make them less verbose and more concise.
1.
The Lingua franca is an official or universal language of communication.
However, the idea of assigning a common official language to an area should depend on whether the society is homogenous in the major life aspects of the society and of the people.
It would thus be seen that where the society is homogenous entirely in the aspects like cultural background, religious and educational components of life, it would be quite easy to adopt one common language.
CORRECTNESS A writer is a perpetual learner.
This is because very many readers consume the work of a writer without careful attention as to whether the writer is correct or not.
Only a very few knowledgeable and those especially vast in the area of discuss that can identify or spot erroneous remarks made by the writer.
A writer must strive to improve his language so that he can communicate effectively.
Many readers believe that by the virtue of your position as a mass communicator, your works are models of good and enviable writing.
Steps to take to ensure correctness - Get a Spell-check - Read as many times as possible - Look out for details you are not sure of and amend them - If you are writing on an area you are not too knowledgeable, give it to an expert.
- Do a thorough research on the subject - Do not guess.
Guessing shows a lack of discipline and thoroughness which will eventually ruin your work.
- Ensure your mechanics are appropriate, so you do not bore your readers.
- Do not take your readers for granted.
Avoid jargons.
76 CLARITY AND SIMPLICITY An essential quality of good writing is clarity.
By clarity, I mean easy to understand and not causing confusion.
According to German Philosopher, Wittgenstein in Ebiere (2003), whatever can be said can be said clearly.
Obscurity and vagueness are often signs that the writer is not very sure of what he wants to say or what he means.
Also, a good writer avoids high-flown pompous or complex language.
Simplicity is a basic quality of good writing.
Steps to take to ensure clarity and Simplicity; - Substitute a high sounding word for a simple alternative - For every technical word, use a simple alternative - Re-construct sentences that lacks focus - Economize your words 4.0 CONCLUSION Verbosity is not good writing.
Some writers believe that until they load a paragraph with very many words (which most times are not needed) they have not written anything.
It is not always like that.
Economy is perhaps the first quality of any good writing.
A good sentence or paragraph should contain unnecessary words.
This should not make the writer make the entire sentence short but that every word tells.
A writer should also ensure that the material is correct.
By correctness, the implication it may have on the reader in terms of disinformation will then be reduced.
And for Clarity and Simplicity, a writer should write clearly and simply for the purpose of understanding.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to outline Economy, Correctness, Clarity and Simplicity as key elements of good writing.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT Revise the following sentences to make them clearer and more direct.
77 i.
In this day and age, removal of fuel subsidy should not be an occasion for societal brouhaha.
ii.
This statement calls up before my mind the fact that I need to study harder.
iii.
As you enter the gates of our University, there is a park which is rectangular in shape.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ebele, E. (1987) Effective Writing.
Ibadan.
Heinemann.
Ohaja, E.U.
(2004) Magazine Article Writing.
Lagos.
John Letterman.
78 UNIT 2 BASIC ELEMENTS OF GOOD WRITING II CONTENTS 22.0 Introduction 23.0 Objectives 24.0 Main Contents 24.1 Elegance 24.2 Unity 25.0 Conclusion 26.0 Summary 27.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 28.0 References/Further Readings INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of the last one.
It is absolutely necessary to add the content of this unit to strike a perfect point.
And the point is, there is no alternative to writing other than to write well.
In this unit, you will be exposed to the elements of Elegance and Unity.
You may want to ask why your writing must be elegant.
I will tell you.
Because feature and magazine writing writes in such a relaxed way, they take their readers to places they have never been before, give the fact in an unusual way; they have to beautify their language and make it lively, dramatic and sweet.
This is elegance.
The feeling of great taste the reader feels in his heart.
It doesn’t take any genius to turn in an elegant piece; all it takes is simple practice.
The same goes for unity.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students must be able to; - Identify what makes an elegant writing - Identify and use figurative languages effectively - Construct words with freshness of expression.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT ELEGANCE According to Ohaja (2004:31), unlike the straight news writer, the writer of magazine article is permitted to embroider his language.
In fact, his writing is expected to be impressive, to possess a beauty and adornment that invites the reader admiration.
The following will help a feature/magazine writer to turn out elegenat articles; 79 1.
Freshness of the Expression 2.
The Use of Figurative Language 3.
Humour and Wit and 4.
Change of Pace 1.
Freshness of the Expression: The task of writing for a magazine is a great one.
The readers may be defined but they cannot be controlled.
You cannot tell who will pick the magazine and read.
Therefore, a writer must ensure his writing is seasoned with freshness of expression.
There are two ways this can be achieved; i.
Avoid Clichés if you can: The Oxford Dictionary (1999:208) defines cliché as a phrase or an idea which is used so often that it is no longer interesting, effective or relevant.
Ohaja (2004:32) defines clichés as words or phrases that are so old and so overused that they have lost their original impact and meaning.
They no longer startle, amuse or interest the public.
The following are examples of clichés; - Moving the nation forward - Our nascent democracy - Blessing in disguise - Plans are in the pipeline - Use your good office - The grassroots - The power that be - Going back to the drawing board - Fell on deaf ears - Tip of the ice berg - Draw the curtain for today - In the final analysis - All things considered - High visibility SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE I want you to think deeply and recall some clichés that you are familiar with or that you have read of lately.
Write them down and try to make them better or fresh.
80 It is important to let you know that there are clichés with exaggeration.
For instance “light as a feather”- it is hard to find anyone that is as light as a feather, or straight as an arrow or thin as a rail.
ii.
Avoid slangs: The Oxford Dictionary (1999:111) defines slangs as very informal words and expressions that are more common in spoken language and are not thought suitable for formal situation.
The fresheness of your expression can be lessened by the use of slang.
A sprinkling of slang in an article for the general public gives the reader the impression that the writer lacks taste and a good grasp of conventional English.
2.
The Use of Figurative Langauge: Figurative language according to Obiaku (1999) communicates by analogy.
It makes the ordinary interesting by revealing striking similarities between seemingly unlike things.
The bible is one book that uses imagery and symbolism.
Let us consider the following passage; As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire, so persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.
Psalm 83: 14-15 When fire engulfs or hit a wood, it does it irreparably, in other words the psalm writer likens the destruction of his enemy to the event of wood and fire.
Furthermore, the relationship between God and the faithful is likened to that between a husband and his wife, a shepherd and his sheep and a potter with his vessel.
SOME TYPES OF FIGURES OF SPEECH a. SIMILE This figure of speech compares one thing to another using “like” or “as”.
The following are some examples; - The Student is as proud as a peacock - He will come like a thief in the night b. METAPHOR This figure of speech compares one thing to another without the use of “like” or “as”.
- My beloved is radiant and ruddy - The world is a stage c. HYPERBOLE This figure of speech exaggerates an idea to stress a point.
E.g.
81 - Calabar is not just far away, it is next to heaven - His house is not only far, it is next to heaven.
d. PERSONIFICATION This figure of speech portrays ideas, inanimate objects or animals as having human qualities or abilities.
E.g.
- I hear the trees clapping their hands in praise of the Almighty.
- She was snatched by the cold hands of death e. APOSTROPHE This figure of speech is related to personification, it addresses concepts, inanimate objects, the dead and the absent as if they are human, alive and present.
E.g.
- O death, where is your sting?, Grave where is your victory?
f. ANTONOMASIA This figure of speech is a form of the metaphor; it compares the object to well-known persons, places, events or objects.
E.g.
- Abacha was just another Idi-Amin - President Barack Obama is another John F. Kennedy.
Important Caveat While I acknowledge that figurative language is good and adds spice to a magazine article, I share the warning put forward by Ohaja (2004:43) that adornment of your writing with figures of speech should not be overdone.
He likens the unrestrained use of figurative language to over-spicing a meal; it wont be dull but it wont be edible either.
In essence, it is important for you to apply moderation.
In addition, do not make obscure analogies that the reader will not understand.
Figurative language become effective when the object is likened to something familiar so that the reader can, in his imagination, visualize the similarities.
3.
The Use of Humour and Wit.
Ohaja (2004:45) acknowledges that humour is particularly difficult to note.
Though, humour and wit can enrich a magazine article, they should be handled with great care.
The following should guide you in your humour development/writing if you have to.
i.
Do not explain a joke ii.
Do not attempt to import humour into a story iii.
Avoid tasteless humour if you want to gain respect 82 iv.
Just be yourself.
CONCLUSION Four things make a piece of writing elegant.
And they are freshness of the expression, accurate use of figurative language, addition of wit and change of pace.
SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to expose the secrets to writing elegantly.
To write with freshness of expression, the writer must avoid the use of clichés.
Clichés are words or phrases that are so old and so overused that they have lost their original impact and meaning.
Writers are advised in their own interest to stay clear of such words or phrases.
Slangs are another killer of freshness of expression.
The use of figurative expression is needed for the overall beautification of the piece of work.
And lastly, the use of humour is germane.
This must however be skillfully done, so it will not kill the essence of the material.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Go to a nearby library or online (internet) and read up on figurative expressions.
Identify ten (10) other figurative expressions not listed in this unit.
Form two sentences with each.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS.
Ohaja, E.U.
(2004) Magazine Article Writing.
Lagos.
John Letterman.
83 UNIT 3: MECHANICS OF WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Use of Period or Full Stop 3.2 The Use of the Comma 3.3 The Use of the Semi Colon 3.4 The Use of the Colon 3.5 The Use of the Apostrophe 3.6 The Use of the Dash 3.7 The Use of the Parenthesis and Brackets 3.8 The Use of the Hyphen 3.9 The Use of the Exclamation Marks 3.10 The Use of Underline 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Have you picked a magazine lately and wondered why badly written it appeared?
Have you also wondered why the days of good editing is fast fading out?
An important aspect of writing that needs proper attention is Punctuation.
Punctuation marks are marks that marks off words one from another, to show their grammatical relationship or to give emphasis to them.
Most of the marks have very distinct functions and once these functions are understood, it is easy to use them correctly.
Baker (1981) in Boyle (2002) rightly points out that punctuation give the silent page some of the breath of life.
It marks the pauses and emphases with which a speaker points to his meaning.
It in fact helps the clear and effective presentation of ideas.
The common marks of punctuation are as follows; - Period or full stop (.)
- Comma (,) - Semi Colon (;) 84 - Colon ( : ) - Question Mark (?)
- Exclamation Mark (!)
- Quotation Mark ( “ “) or (‘ ‘) - Apostrophe ( ‘) - Dash ( -) - Parenthesis ( ) 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to effectively identify poor mechanics in a written or printed material.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT We will examine them one after the other in a way you have never been exposed to.
Please examine the following paragraphs with care.
1.
Uses of Period or Full Stop A period or full stop indicates the end of a declarative sentence.
A declarative sentence is one that is neither a question, a command or an exclamation.
E.g, - My wife spoke extensively.
- We have a lunch tonight.
Also, a full stop is also used to mark an accepted abbreviation.
For instance, a Title; Prof., Dr., Gen., Arch., PhD., BSc., MSc., Name: E.O.
Ola Oketunbi Ambassador.
H.B.
Aderibigbe A.A. Month: Jun., Nov., Oct., Dec (It is important to note that there are some months that cannot be abbreviated).
According to Anene-Boyle (2002:104), if the final letter of the full word is retained in the abbreviation as in Dr (Doctor), Ltd (Limited), the Period is optional.
A full stop is further used before a decimal between naira and kobo, and between hours and minutes.
85 - That blackberry is less than N10.
14 - The right answer is 90.43 - He arrived at 8:39pm 2.
Uses of the Comma According to Anene-Boyle (2002:105), the comma is the most common mark of punctuation and the one with the most complex uses.
The following are however some of the functions of the comma.
(i) It helps to make the internal structure of a sentence clear, in three ways.
- To separate elements that might otherwise be confused.
This is perhaps the most important use of the comma, e.g.
Aderibigbe our teacher is here.
This statement is ambiguous as it is difficult to know if the statement is to, or about Mr. Aderibigbe.
With a comma, the meaning becomes clear, e.g.
– Mr. Aderibigbe, our teacher is here or Mr. Aderibigbe our teacher, is here.
This statement is ambiguous as it is difficult to know if the statement is to, or about Mr. Aderibigbe with a comma, the meaning becomes clear, e.g.
(cid:1) Mr. Aderibigbe, our teacher is here or (cid:1) Mr. Aderibigbe our, is here.
(ii) Comma is also used as coordinator, to separate two main clauses or sentences joined by and, but, or, nor, yet, so far e.t.c, e.g.
(cid:1) He was tired and he went to bed (cid:1) Wear your Jacket or you will catch cold.
(cid:1) Yemi needs the scholarship but, does not find the terms attractive enough.
(iii) It separates elements in a series e.g.
(a).
Gambling, dancing and singing, are my favourite recreation.
(b) Mrs. Omoboriowo is a loyal, dependable and competent assistant It is important to note that series may consist of clauses, pharases, or single words.
(iv) Comma separates contrasted elements in a this or that construction.
(a) She is tired, not sick (b) This problem demands sympathy, not harshness.
(v) Comma often separates directly quoted material from the speech tag.
(a) Adebola said, “I’d love to come with you to Alabama”.
(b) This, Adebola declared, is our chance.
86 (vi) Comma separates elements in dates, addresses and places names.
(a) 25th June, 1904 (b) 70, Alagomeji Street, Yaba, Lagos State.
(c) Chukwu was born in Alabama, U.S.A. (vii) Comma is also used in some miscellaneous constructions.
(a) In figure- 80,000;000,000,000,000 (b) In names followed by titles- Hassan T.J. BSc, MSc, M.A, Ph.D, rpa.
(c) At the end of salutation in informal letters - Dear Ngozi, - Dear Shade, - Dear Halimat.
(d) After introductory yes or no- - No, it is not possible to visit Kama today.
- Yes, we will gather together tomorrow.
(viii) Comma is used to mark off the following constructions.
(1) Apposite expressions- An apposite is a noun or pronoun, a noun phrase, or a noun clause that is considered grammatically equivalent to the noun or pronoun it refers to.
(a) Prof. Eteh wants us, you and me, to present today.
(b) His Mother, the Permanent Secretary of the Radio Station will address the class tomorrow.
(c) Jegga, his elder brother, is a brilliant scholar and politician.
(2) Nouns of address- a noun of address is, a noun naming the listener to whom we are speaking: (a) Mr. President, do we go back to work?
(b) I would like to ask you, Mr. Nwabueze, for your opinion.
(c) I wish I were going with you Akin.
(ix) Comma also marks or emphasizes an inverted element any word, phrase or clause written out of its normal position is called inverted.
(a) Myself, I will vote in favour of it.
(b) Except for Spanish, my course are not quite difficult.
(x) Comma is used to set off a long introductory phrase or an adverbial clause preceding the main clause.
Examples.
(a) Being the only student at the meeting, I waited for everyone to take their seat.
87 (b) Pulling over to the curb at the first opportunity, I waited for the luxury buses to pass.
(3) Uses of the Semi Colon.
According to Anene-Boyle (2002:107), it is erroneous to believe as many students do, that semicolon is either a weak colon or a strong comma.
Semicolon is best in pulling together and contrasting two independent clauses that could stand alone as sentences.
(a) Try this one; it looks like your colour (b) His mother wont let him; she is afraid he might get injured.
(c) Golf demands the best of time and space; tennis, the best.
Uses - Use a semicolon between independent clause joined by a transitional connective (moreover, therefore, then, however or nevertheless, e.t.c.).
(a) He argued brilliantly; however, his opponent had a stronger case.
(b) She failed the examination; therefore, she left for the village school.
- Use a semicolon to separate elements in a series that themselves contain commas.
(a).
The guests included Prof Niyi Osundare, the Head of English; Dr. Dunbi Ojani, the Coordinator of General Studies; Mrs. E. Somorin, the Chairperson of the Alpha Set; and Dr. Grange, Assistant Director of Amedia.
Please pay careful attention to this.
Besides helping in unscrambling a long line of phrase and clauses as in (a) above, semicolon also allows us to drop a repeated verb as in the second example below.
(a) Golf demands the best of time and space; tennis demands the best of personal energy.
(b) Golf demands the best of time and space; tennis, the best of personal energy.
( The second demand is dropped because of the use of semicolon.
(4) Use of the Colon The colon emphatically and precisely introduces a series, the clarifying detail, the illustrative example and the formal quotation.
(1) Use the colon to introduce clarifying detail (a) Chief Owonikoko lived for only one thing: money.
(b) Here are the facts: the three thousand dollars was there on the table when he came to work this morning, it was missing immediately he left at 2:00pm; the next day he bought a new record player, though he had already spent all his months pay/allowance.
88 (2) Use the colon to introduce a series.
An example is as follows; - The following volley ball players will start: Hassan, Emeka, Dotun and Ebele.
(3) Use the colon to introduce the illustrative.
- Only few players can be called super stars: Kanu Nwankwo is one of them.
(4) Use the colon to introduce formal quotation: - His famous quotation is: “to obey is better than sacrifice”.
SPECIALIZED USES OF COLON (a) After salutation in formal letters: Dear Sir: (b) Between hours and minutes: The bus leaves at 10:50 (c) Between chapter and verse in Biblical citations: John 10:1-5 (d) Between volume and page in a magazine citation: Forum 18:98-200 (e) Between place and publishers in a bibliography: Ibadan: Stirling Horden.
(5) Use of the Apostrophe (‘) The apostrophe has three main uses.
(i) It is used to indicate possessive case of nouns and some pronouns.
To denote the possessive an apostrophe followed by “S” is added to the regular form of the following types of nouns and pronouns.
(a) Singular and Plural nouns that do not end in “S”.
- Boy’s, Men’s, Ben’s - Ben’s son - Philip’s car - The boy’s shoes.
(b) Singular nouns ending in “S” James- Jame’s Dickens- Dicken’s Charles- Charle’s It is important to add that many writers prefer to omit the final “s”.
instead of James therefore, they wrote James adding just an apostrophe.
Students are advised to use the latter even though it is necessary to be conscious of the former.
(ii) To indicate infinite pronouns - Anybody’s, Anyone’s, Everybody’s, - One’s, Nobody’s, Someone’s.
89 (iii) To indicate the omission of letters of figure: - I’ve (I have) - I can’t (cannot) - You’re (you are) - I’ll (I will/shall) - Hasn’t (Has not) - ’60 (1960) e.t.c.
(6) Dash It is important that students should not use comma, semi colon or colon in place of dash.
The main uses of dash are; - To stress a phrase or a word at the end of a sentence.
- To show interruption or unfinished construction We’d like to, he said but we’re- - To show a sudden shift in thought.
(I thought you could help with seeing our lawyer- but perhaps we can wait).
- To show a break in construction of thought especially as a result of additional information.
(The doctor- he comes from the north- was very understanding) (The answer- if we call it an answer- is completely meaningless) - To summarize and conclude, or restate an involved sentence (To live as free people, to enjoy the right to think and speak as we like; to be a trustee and a partner in the conduct of a nation- all this is what democracy mean to us).
(7) Parenthesis and Brackets The common uses of parenthesis, known as Brackets in British usage are: - To enclose an explanation, qualification or example.
(a) Her husband (she married about a year ago) is the current head of department.
(b) His firm of Chartered Accountants (Akintola Williams) is the most reputable in this country.
- To enclose cross references (a) That boy call’s you father.
Do not bear a hand in his death (Things Fall Apart, Page 40).
- To repeat a sum previously stated in words, especially in official transaction.
(a) I enclose sixty thousand (N60,000) to make up for the cost of the books we ordered last month.
(8) Hyphen 90 Hyphens serve two main purposes; to divide a word at the end of a line and to join two or more words to a compound.
(i) Use of hyphen to break a word at the end of a line (a) One syllable words like cry, change, book and well, should not be broken.
If there is not place at the end of the line for any of them, then carry the entire word to the next line.
(b) Words should be broken only between syllables, e.g.
back-ward, mile-age.
(ii) Use hyphen between elements of a compound when usage calls for it.
Example: Father-in-law, ready-made, up-to-date, are often hyphenated.
(iii) Hyphenate a compound consisting of a prefix and a proper noun.
E.g.
Anti- America, Ex-President, Pro-Awolowo.
(iv) One can also hyphenate after prefixes that demand emphasis or clarity.
E.g.
Ex- husband, Re-collect (“to collect again”, as against recollect, “to remember”).
(v) Hyphenate most compounds beginning with “self”: Self-Satisfied, Self- government, Self-reliances.
(vi) Hyphenate suffixes to single capital letters.
(a) (T-shirt, X-ray) (b) Hyphenate two word numbers e.g.
Twenty-one, three-fourths e.t.c.
(9) Question and Exclamation Marks.
Question marks (?)
are used mainly to indicate the sentences are in the interrogative that it is to be understood as a question): - Did you ask him to come over tonight?
- Is he ill?
There are however, times when questions serve as very polite requests.
In such cases, the end punctuations are full stops not question marks.
- Will you please hand in your manuscripts now.
- Shall we all stand for a short prayer.
Exclamation mark on the other hand indicates that a statement is imperative, or that it is spoken with very strong emotion: - Oh, what a mess!
- Don’t just stand there!
Do something!
(10).
Underlining 91 The most acceptable use of underlining especially in scholarly writing is in connection with books.
It is therefore, a decent and proper habit to underline names of books whenever one mentions them in ones writing.
Things Fall Apart is Chinua Achebe’s first work of fiction I read a pirated copy of Osofisan’s Women of Owu last week.
Death and the Kings Horsemen is perhaps Soyinka’s most involving play.
4.0 CONCLUSION A major problem in the field of writing especially among amateur and some acclaimed professionals is poor mechanics.
If you do not punctuate your write-up effectively it will lack understanding from your readers.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to identify with clarifying examples some of these mechanics.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT Reach out for two newspaper or magazine stories of exhaustive length.
Identify the mechanical errors made in the write-up and forward a re-written copy of just one of them to the Tutor.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS.
Ayodele, S.O (1989) Faster Reading for Better Comprehension, Ibadan: Y Books.
Gbenedio, U & Anene-Boyle, F.A.
An Introduction to Language Art (Unpublished Memograph).
92 UNIT 4 APPROPRIATE WORD USAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Wrong Words 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION I recently came across a book by the title What Not To Write by Kay Sayce.
It is a small book which I recommend that every writer should have.
The writer did a good job to place in proper place some errors that writers make and how this could be addressed.
In fact, the book will be the basis for this unit.
I am sure you will enjoy it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This unit has a single objective.
This objective is that at the end of this unit, the student will be more careful with the use of words.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT People often write words that seem, sound or look like right word, but they are not right.
Sometimes, the chosen word means quite the opposite of what the writer intents.
The following words will show you this clearly.
1.
AFFECT/EFFECT: “Affect” means ‘influence’ or ‘pretend’.
‘Effect’, used as a verb, means ‘bring about’ or cause.
When you use ‘effect’ as a noun, it means ‘result’ or ‘consequence’.
Here are some examples; The changes affected her work.
She affected concern, but she wasn’t interested.
He effected important changes.
The effect of the changes was greater efficiency.
93 2.
AGGRAVATE/IRRITATE: ‘Aggravate’ is often used, incorrectly, to mean ‘annoy’ or ‘irritate’.
It means make worse.
Here are some examples.
The problems were aggravated by low staff morale.
His poor time keeping irritated her.
3.
ANTICIPATE/EXPECT: ‘Anticipate’ means ‘foresee’ or ‘prepare for’ something.
It does not have the same meaning as expect.
Here are some examples.
He anticipated his opponent’s intention and moved out of the way.
I anticipate the comedian’s punch line.
We expected to find some good books.
4.
APPRAISE/APPRISE: ‘Appraise’ means estimate the value of something.
‘Apprise’ means inform.
Here are some examples.
He appraised the paintings for insurance purposes.
I apprised him of the details of the contract.
5.
ASCRIBE/SUBSCRIBE: ‘Ascribe’ means ‘attribute to’.
‘Subscribe’ means ‘follow’ or ‘pay for’.
Here are some examples.
He ascribed his success to hard work.
He subscribed to the idea that hard work leads to success.
She subscribed to the MTN Fast link.
6.
AVOID/PREVENT: ‘Avoid’ means ‘go round’ or keep away from’.
Prevent means ‘stop happening’.
Here are some examples.
They avoided each other at the meeting.
A last- minute agreement prevented strike action.
7.
CLASSIC/CLASSICAL: ‘Classic’ describes things that are outstanding examples of their kind.
‘Classical’ refers to (i) things from Greece, Rome or similar ancient civilizations and (ii) formal concert music written by such composers as Beethoven and Mozart.
Here are some examples.
The Derby Bentley is a classic car.
He made the classic blunder of arguing with the traffic warden.
The museum displayed many classical vases.
She had dozens of classical music CDs, but only a few jazz ones.
8.
COMPLEMENTARY/COMPLIMENTARY: ‘Complementary’ means ‘matching’ or ‘corresponding’.
‘Complimentary’ means ‘free’, ‘on the house’, ‘flattering’ or ‘congratulatory’.
Here are some examples.
They were dressed in complementary autumn colours, she in yellow, he in orange.
The Hotel offers a complimentary breakfast.
He was complimentary about her report.
9.
CONTINUOUS/CONTINUAL: Use ‘continuous’ when you are describing an uninterrupted process.
Use ‘continual’ when a break in the process is implied, and you mean ‘recurring’ or ‘repeated’.
Here are some examples.
There was a continuous improvement in sales over the years.
They had continual problems with the new software.
10.
CONVINCE/PERSUADE: ‘Convince’ means changing someone’s beliefs or opinions, and is usually followed by ‘that’ or ‘of’.
Persuade means spurring someone into action, and is usually followed by ‘to’.
Here are some examples.
I convinced him that the report had to be rewritten.
I persuaded him to put the report in the bin and start again.
94 11.
DECEPTIVE/DECEITFUL: ‘Deceptive’ means ‘misleading’.
‘Deceitful’ carries the stronger suggestion of ‘deliberately lying’ or being untruthful’.
Here are some examples.
The regulations sought to stop them from making deceptive statements.
It is deceitful to claim that you are younger than you really are.
12.
DEFUSE/DIFFUSE: ‘Defuse’ means ‘disarm’ or pacify (literally, ‘remove the fuse’).
‘Diffuse’ means ‘spread out’ or ‘scatter’.
Here are some examples.
They defused a tense situation through quiet negotiation.
The odour diffused slowly throughout the house.
13.
DEPENDANT/DEPENDENT: ‘Dependant’ is a noun, meaning someone who depends on someone else.
‘Dependent’ is an adjective.
See some examples.
The woman had three dependants, her two children and an aunt.
The seaside holiday business is dependent on good summer weather.
14.
DISCREET/DISCRETE: ‘Discreet’ means ‘judicious’, ‘tactful’ or ‘keeping a secret’.
‘Discrete’ means ‘separate’ or ‘not attached to’.
See examples here.
This information is potentially embarrassing, so do be discreet.
Gases consist of discrete molecules.
15.
DISINTERESTED/UNINTERESTED: ‘Disinterested’ means ‘impartial’, ‘neutral’ or ‘unbiased’.
‘Uninterested’ means ‘not interested’.
See examples.
We need a disinterested party to mediate in the dispute.
He is uninterested in anything to do with bicycles.
16.
DRAMATIC/DRASTIC: ‘Dramatic’ means ‘Significant’ or ‘remarkable’ and can have positive or negative associations.
‘Drastic’ means ‘severe’ and generally has negative associations.
See examples.
After the training, there was a dramatic improvement in her performance.
Poor planning had drastic results.
17.
ECONOMIC/ECONOMICAL: ‘Economic’ means ‘profitable’ or relating to economics’ ‘Economical’ means being careful with resources.
Here are some examples.
It is more economic to make the toys in China.
From all economic perspectives, the country was in trouble.
With a reduction in the grant, the charity had to be more economical.
18.
ENORMITY/ENORMOUSNESS: ‘Enormity’ refers to things that are outrageous, often in the sense of ‘evil’ or ‘crossing moral boundaries’.
‘Enormousness’ refers to size, usually meaning ‘immensity’.
Here are few examples.
It was only when the troops entered Belsen that they realized the enormity of Hitler’s crime.
The enormousness of the sculpture was not apparent until you got close to it.
19.
EQUABLE/EQUITABLE: ‘Equable’ means ‘moderate’, ‘calm’ or ‘even-tempered’.
‘Equitable’ means ‘fair’ or ‘just’.
See some examples.
Her untidiness would upset the most equable person.
The contract terms seemed equitable.
20.
ESPECIALLY/SPECIALLY: ‘Especially’ means ‘above all’, ‘chiefly’ or ‘particularly’.
‘Specially’ means ‘solely’ or ‘for a specific purpose’.
Here are few examples.
They looked through all the reports, especially the most recent ones.
He was especially keen to 95 expand the gift section.
She flew to Geneva specially to see the head of the organization.
21.
GRAND/GRANDIOSE: ‘Grand’ means ‘majestic’, ‘splendid’ or ‘imposing’.
Grandiose suggests pretentiousness, affectation or pompousness.
Here are few examples.
The new bridge spanning the River Benue is a grand structure.
The hotel lobby, with its crystal chandeliers, marble columns and monumental staircases guarded by life-size granite lions, was rather grandiose.
22.
HOMOGENEOUS/HOMOGENOUS: ‘Homogenous’ means ‘the same kind’ or ‘uniform in composition’.
‘Homogenous’ means similar through common descent; it is usually used in Biology.
Here are few examples.
The people in forest areas are in a fairly homogeneous group.
The party is not homogeneous; there are many shades of opinion.
The forelimbs of fish are homogenous.
23.
INCREDULOUS/INCREDIBLE: ‘Incredulous’ means ‘disbelieving’ or ‘showing disbelief’.
‘Incredible’ means ‘unbelievable’, ‘improbable’ or beyond belief.
See some examples.
She was incredulous at the news of inheriting such a large sum.
It is incredible that he was able to walk after the accident.
24.
MILITATE/MITIGATE: ‘Militate’ means ‘have a strong effect on’ and is usually followed by ‘against’.
‘Mitigate’ means ‘reduce’ the effect of and is not followed by ‘against’.
Here are some examples.
His offhand manner militated against good working relationships.
He is sorry, but this does not mitigate his treatment of the staff.
The effect of the cancellation was mitigated by the offer of extra air miles.
25.
OFFICIAL/OFFICIOUS: ‘Official’ relates to authority, whereas ‘officious’ relates to applying rules and regulations too strictly or in an overbearing way.
Examples; The Tenants received official notice of the rent increase.
They will fight any officious action that threatens to delay the project.
26.
PRESCRIBE/PROSCRIBE: ‘Prescribe’ means to recommend or authorize something.
‘Proscribe’ means to ban something.
Examples are; The doctor prescribed antibiotics.
Her boss prescribed a long holiday.
Smoking in the office is proscribed.
Sexist comments are proscribed.
27.
SYSTEMIC/SYSTEMATIC: ‘Systemic’ relates to a whole system.
‘Systematic’ means ‘methodical’ or following a set system or method.
Examples are; The tendency to use jargon was systemic in the company.
Solving the murder required sifting through the evidence systematically.
4.0 CONCLUSION The mistakes we make as journalists could sometimes be unforgiving yet sometimes unavoidable.
This is because there is hardly enough time for proper editing and copy 96 editing.
But a feature or magazine writer may not be forgiven for this, because to a large extent, he has some time to work on his article.
This unit is coming as an eye opener to you on the need to be careful, so that you write what you mean and mean what you write.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to itemize fifty four words in English Language incorrectly substituted or used to mean each other, thereby creating confusion of meaning.
I want to strongly advise you to be careful of these avoidable mistakes.
7.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENTS Pick a recent Magazine, particularly the one published this month.
Identify five words incorrectly placed in any of the articles therein.
8.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Sayce, K (2006).
What not to Write; A Guide TO Dos and Don’t of Good English.
London.
Words at Work.
97 MODULE 4: TYPES OF MAGAZINE ARTICLES The general aim of this module is to first expose the students to the types of articles found in a magazine and second to equip them with the knowledge of how to write them.
To achieve this, some articles and literatures have been collected to show the students classic examples of relevant articles.
I believe that by doing this and with the constant practice of the students themselves, magazine articles would become encompassingly easy to approach by students.
This module comprises the following; Unit 1: The Editor’s Note Unit 2: Fiction Writing Unit 3: Review Writing Unit 4: Photography 98 UNIT 1 THE EDITOR’S NOTE CONTENTS 29.0 Introduction 30.0 Objectives 31.0 Main Contents 31.1 The Editor’s Note 31.2 Tips on Writing the Editor’s Note 31.3 Content of the Editor’s Note 32.0 Conclusion 33.0 Summary 34.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 35.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Editor’s Note is perhaps one article in a magazine publication that could easily be predicted.
You will always find it.
It serves as an introduction.
In fact, it is one article that could easily summarize the content of the magazine without losing the readers.
Also, if improperly handled, it may discourage the same readers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to write in the capacity of an Editor in Chief and therefore produce a remarkable Editor’s note.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS THE EDITOR’S NOTE First, let us examine some labels magazine writers give to this page.
1.
From the Editor 2.
From the Editorial Suite 3.
Editor’s Comment 4.
Editor’s Remark 5.
Editor’s Note 6.
Editor’s Page 7.
Editorial 8.
Editor’s Desk 99 9.
Editor’s Letter The Editor’s note is usually the first, full blown article you will find in a standard magazine.
It serves as a preface to each edition of the magazine and draws attention to the theme for that edition and other notable issues covered.
The aim of this page or note is to prepare the reader or whet the reader’s appetite and lure him into reading the various articles in the magazine.
Sometimes, the name of the writers are included especially if they are well-known and pull a large crowd.
CONTENTS OF AN EDITORS NOTE The following forms the core of what should be found in the Editor’s Note.
The contents of the Editor’s note are usually determined by the content of the magazine for that particular edition.
And depending on the style and genius of the writer, the Editorial note can sell the magazine for high readership if properly written.
1.
The Language As I have established, the content of the magazine informs what should form the content of the Editors note.
Again, the language of the magazine matters.
Is it a soft-sell magazine, news magazine, fashion magazine, a college magazine.
The writing should be tailored to the targeted readers.
A fashion magazine for instance does does not need the formal language found in a seminar room, rather you write for the fashion curious.
Research has shown that people hardly consult the Editor’s note page and this is informed by the careless handling of this page.
2.
The Signature In most magazine Editorial, editors either append their signature or put their full names.
In case you do not have a consistent signature, it could be scanned in to the computer and reproduced for sub-sequent editions.
But there is not golden rule that states that this page has to be signed.
3.
Name This depends on what you started your first Edition with.
If you started your first edition with your name, it is advisable you continue with that.
For aesthetics, you could write your name with a particular attractive font type which gives a form of statement to the writing of your name.
4.
A summary of the Magazine content Depending on your writing approach, you could find a way to summarize what your readers should expect in the edition.
TIPS ON WRITING A REMARKABLE EDITOR’S NOTE 1.
Use a fascinating font type 100 2.
Use colourful illustration 3.
Provoke a readership feeling from your first paragraph 4.
Avoid clichés as much as possible 5.
Do not be too serious even if it is a news-magazine 6.
Link your thoughts carefully The following are examples of Editor’s Note from selected Magazines.
Magazine: National Standard Date Published: June 15, 2007 Magazine Type: News Magazine The inauguration of Umaru Musa Yar’adua, the third elected President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, remains the singular event that has shot Nigeria into international discourse lately.
But if it crossed any mind that the money-men who underwrote the N820 million event are father Christmas, that is tantamount to losing the lessons of history.
Investigations show that the exit of Olusegun Obasanjo from the Aso Rock and indeed the subdued influence of his benefactor, Aliko Dangote cleared the coast for the Diesel Don, Femi Otedola, the CEO of Zenon Group.
In view of the influence big time investors have exerted on elected leaders throughout history, our team digs into how the oil merchant and President of Nigerian Chambers of Shipping, a powerful and highly influencial body in the maritime sector, postured himself, by his foresight, large-heartedness and massive buy-overs of juicy companies, to emerge one of the business moguls with strong influence on Yar’Adua.
It is our vintage cover.
Biyi Adegoroye and Adedeji Ademigbuji gave us thoroughly investigated supporting stories like Inside Yar’Adua’s Head, the plans to reverse OBJ’s last minute decisions, a conjecture on his kitchen cabinet and How Tribunal Will Shock Nigerians in the next few months.
Also, irrespressible citizens unburdened their minds to Bayo Amodu on their expectations, tasking Yar’Adua to be circumspect about viewing politics as the conduct of public affairs for private advantage.
This is a bumper package, peculiar only to NATIONAL STANDARD.
101 Magazine: Info Mania Date Published: 2010 Magazine Type: General Interest I cannot begin to tell you what we all went through to keep a date with you in this wonderful edition of your highly educative and informative magazine.
Getting information out sometimes could be extremely difficult, but He made it happen.
I would like to thank our advertisers and readers for their continuous loyalty over the years.
I will not fail to inform our readers that they can send their feedback or comments to our e- mail sharing with us their views and contributions about the magazine.
This is a special edition where we have decided to celebrate our mothers.
As women, I believe we are specially equipped to love and show respect; that is why it comes naturally for us to manage our homes well as virtuous women.
As mothers therefore, we naturally appreciate and respect people for who they are.
An adage in Yoruba has it that; ‘No matter how bad a child is, a mother will not throw him away’.
We got the views of Nigerians concerning their mother’s contributions to their lives and the response we got was quite revealing, just dig in and find out what people had to say about their mothers influence in their lives.
A lot has been packaged for your enjoyment such as jokes, Health, Leadership articles, amongst others to give you an interesting time out.
We believe you would be informed and entertained.
CHEERIO!
YVONNE, U. EDAGHESE Signature.
102 Magazine: Style Date Published: June 14, 2009 Magazine Type: Fashion magazine Hi folks, As we speak, I am in SA for the ARISE Africa Fashion Week where over 50 designers from all over Africa would be showcasing their various designs.
After which ARISE magazine would be launched.
It promises to be an event filled with beehive of activities and needless to say, we would undoubtedly regale you with every single moment on our return!
Have you noticed that no matter how hard some people try, they just do not cut the mustard when it comes to creating the right impression.
Aside from how you carry yourself, right clothes are also very important.
When Making Your Mark, certain key points have to be taken into consideration.
Style wise, we have a few keynotes for you to follow diligently so next time you are to attend an event, you can use them as your reference point.
I know some of you are saying to yourself.
“Gosh… how hard can such a simple task be for crying out loud?” Well, you’d be surprised just how far off the mark some people are as you can see in our Do’s & Don’ts section.
It is almost comical the extreme people go through hoping to achieve their aim but then miss the plot entirely!
The good news is that it is never too late to learn, after all isn’t that what life is?
A learning curve?
Some just get the message slower than others.
And all that you get is all that matters though.
It’s not how far but how well!
Have a great week!
Signature/Name.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Editors note should not be trivialized by any Editor.
It is as important as the other articles inside a magazine.
If properly handled, the Editor’s note could sell the magazine easily.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to expose the students to the contents of an Editor’s note and some tips on writing a remarkable Editor’s note.
Also, some good Editor’s note has been added to enhance the students learning.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 103 Assume the position of the Editor-in-Chief of a Departmental Magazine titled SAYERS and do the following in the present edition.
Submit two remarkable Editor’s note.
104 UNIT 2 FICTION WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Elements of fiction writing 3.2 Sample Fiction stories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION According to Ohaja (2004:114), magazines often publish fiction in the form of short stories or serialized novels.
The fictional article consists of elegant prose that uses vivid description, rapid action, conversation, figures of speech and suspense.
Sometimes, the fictional story line is super-imposed on real locations and historical facts.
Though primarily geared towards entertaining the reader, this kind of article can also serve educational purposes by enriching the reader’s language, exposing him to phenomena he may have had scant knowledge of and offering him moral lessons.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to identify the elements of fiction and write a remarkable fiction story for a Newspaper or magazine.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS ELEMENTS OF FICTION There are basic elements that any writer of fiction must master before attempting to write on any topic.
These elements enlisted in this unit are not exhaustive, but are basic and germane for any fiction writer.
1.
SETTING: The time and location in which a story takes place is called the setting.
For some stories the setting is very important, while for others it is not.
There are several aspects of a story’s setting to consider when examining how setting contributes to a story (some, or all, may be present in a story).
105 a.
Place: geographic location.
Where is the location of the story taking place?
b.
Time: When is the story taking place?
(Historical period, time of day, year, e.t.c.).
c. Weather conditions: Is it rainy, sunny, stormy, e.t.c.
d. Social conditions: What is the daily life of the characters like?
Does the story contain local colour (writing that focuses on the speech, dress, mannerism, custom, e.t.c of a particular place).
e. Mood or atmosphere: What feeling is created at the beginning of the story?
Is it bright and cheerful or dark and frightening?
2.
PLOT: The plot is how the author arranges events to develop his basic idea; it is the sequence of events in a story or play.
The plot is a planned, logical series of events having a beginning, middle, and end.
The short story usually has one plot so it can be read in one sitting.
There are five essential parts of plot: a. Introduction- The beginning of the story where the characters and the setting is revealed.
b.
Rising Action- This is where the events in the story become complicated and the conflict in the story is revealed (events between the introduction and climax).
c. Climax- This is the highest point of interest and the turning point of the story.
The reader wonders what will happen next; will the conflict be resolved or not?
d. Falling action- The events and complications begin to resolve themselves.
The reader knows what has happened next and if the conflict was resolved or not (events between climax and denouement).
e. Denouement- This is the final outcome or untangling of events in the story.
It is helpful to consider climax as a three-fold phenomenon: 1) the main character receives new information 2) accepts this information (realizes it but does not necessarily agree with it) 3) acts on this information (makes a choice that will determine whether or not he/she gains his objective.
3.
CONFLICT: Conflict is essential to plot.
Without conflict there is no plot.
It is the opposition of forces which ties one incident to another and makes the plot move.
Conflict is not merely limited to open arguments, rather it is any form of opposition that faces the main character.
Within a short story there may be only one central struggle, or there may be one dominant struggle with many minor one.
There are two types of conflict: 1.
External- A struggle with a force outside one’s self.
2.
Internal- A struggle within one’s self; a person must make some decision, overcome pain, quiet their temper, resist an urge, e.t.c.
106  There are four kinds of conflict: 1) Man vs Man (Physical)- The leading character struggles with his physical strength against other men, forces of nature, or animals.
2) Man vs Circumstances (classical)- The leading character struggles against fate, or the circumstances of life facing him/her.
3) Man vs Society (social)- The leading character struggles against ideas, practices, or customs of other people.
4) Man vs Himself/Herself (Psychological)- The leading character struggles with himself/herself; with his/her own soul, ideas of right or wrong, physical limitations, choices.
CHARACTER- There are two meanings for the word character: 1.
The person in a work of fiction 2.
The characteristics of a person Person in a work of fiction- Antagonist and Protagonist Short stories use few characters.
One character is clearly central to the story with all major events having some importance to this character- he/she is the PROTAGONIST.
The oppose rof the main character is called the ANTAGONIST.
The Characteristics of a Person In order for a story to seem real to the reader its characters must seem real.
Characterization is the information the author gives the reader about the characters themselves.
The author may reveal a character in several ways; a) His/her physical appearance b) What he/she says, thinks, feels and dreams c) What he/she does or does not do d) What others say about him/her and how others react to him/her Characters are convincing if they are; consistent, motivated, and life-like (resemble real people).
Characters are… 1.
Individual- round, many sided and complex personalities 2.
Developing- dynamic, many sided personalities that change, for better or worse, by the end of the story.
107 3.
Static- stereotype, have one or two characteristics that never change and are emphasized e.g.
brilliant detective, drunk, scrooge, cruel stepmother, e.t.c.
POINT OF VIEW Point of view, or P.O.V., is defined as the angle from which the story is told.
This could come from the following angles; 1.
Innocent Eye- The story is told through the eyes of a child (his/her judgment being from that of an adult).
2.
Stream of Consciousness: The story is told so that the reader feels as if they are inside the head of one character and knows all their thoughts and reactions.
3.
First Person- The story is told by the protagonist or one of the characters who interacts closely with the protagonist or other characters (using pronouns I, Me, We, e.t.c.).
The reader sees the story through this person’s eye as he/she experiences it and only knows what he/she knows or feels.
4.
Omniscient- The author can narrate the story using the omniscient point of view.
He can move from character to character, event to event, having free access to the thought, feelings and motivations of his characters and he introduces information where and when he chooses.
There are two main types of omniscient point of view and they are; a).
Omniscient Limited- The author tells the story in third person (using pronouns they, she, he, it, e.t.c.).
We know only what the characters knows and what the author allows him/her to tell us.
We can see the thoughts and feelings of characters if the author chooses to reveal them to us.
b) Omniscient Objective- The author tells the story in the third person.
It appears as though a camera is following the characters, going anywhere, and recording only what is seen and heard.
There is no comment on the characters or their thoughts.
No interpretations are offered.
The reader is placed in the position of spectator without the author there to explain.
The reader has to interpret events on his own.
THEME- The theme in a piece of fiction is its controlling idea or its central insight.
It is the author’s underlying thoughts about a topic or view of human nature.
The theme may be the author’s thought about a topic or view of human nature.
The title of the short story usually points to what the writer is saying and he may use various figures of speech to emphasize his theme, such as; symbol, allusion, simile, metaphor, hyperbole, or irony.
Some simple examples of common themes from literature, T.V, and film are: 108 - Love is blind - Believe in yourself - People are afraid of change - Do not judge a book by its cover.
TITLE OF STORY: A LIFE IN FULL WRITER: JUDE DIBIA LADIES FLITTERED ON THE streets, restless as dust, and the voices of children playing sometimes found their way into the homes in Macaulay Avenue.
Mabel Osondu wiped the sweat that gathered on her brow with the corner of her waist cloth and sighed deeply.
It was not so much that the sun bothered her, but rather it was the effort of planting seeds that refused to bloom or bear fruits.
She tilled the small garden at the back of her son’s home.
She cleared the weeds and watered the soil until it was clamp and swallowed the tomato seeds with little difficulty.
This would be her third attempt, since she came, planting vegetables on the small patch of land in her son’s backyard; first she tried pumpkin and okra, then garden eggs, but each time just when she thought there were signs of hope, the plant stalks would stoop like aged folks, turn pale yellow and by the next day would be as dry as the scent leaves- utazi- she used while cooking pepper soup.
Mabel grabbed the railings by the fence, using them for support as she stood up.
She stretched, throwing both her hands behind her back, resting them on her waist and turning slightly.
Across the fence, the flourishing tomatoes and peppers with their uncompromising fullness and redness smiled at her.
The ground there seemed so rich to Mabel, not once had she observed the garden without the hues of fertility.
It gave her hope, though, that all her efforts were not in vain, that surely her tomatoes seeds would flourish and bear fruits.
Mrs Bassey, the young wife of Dr Kenule Bassey, who lived in the house across the fence, was hanging some bed sheets and the laundry on the clothesline not far from the fulsome tomatoes and peppers.
Mabel admired her, like she always did, thinking how fortunate that Dr Bassey had married such a beautiful and hardworking woman.
And they had two lovely children already.
Sometimes Mabel would hear the squeals and laughter of the Bassey children right in her son’s living-room, drowning out the ones of 109 the street vendors, and in those moments, she would imagine that they were her grandchildren.
“Good afternoon, Mama Osondu,” Mrs Bassey said the instant she noticed Mabel, “How are you today?”.
“Thank you, my daughter,” Mabel’s voice sounded as sweet as birdsong.
“I am well.
How are your children and husband?” Mrs Bassey assured her that everyone was fine.
Mabel nodded and continued to smile, her eyes moving from Mrs Bassey’s face to a bunch of ripe, drooping tomatoes begging to be plucked.
“Mama Osondu, I can bring some fresh tomatoes and peppers to you if you like.” Mrs Bassey said, noticing how engrossed Mabel was in the tomatoes.
“You are too kind, my daughter.
But no, thank you.
I have just planted some of my own and maybe this time they shall bear fruits.” “Yes, Ma,” Mrs Bassey responded, like a good daughter, before she turned away and entered her house.
Mabel watched her leave and all she could think of was how much younger Dr Bassey was than her own son, Victor.
Victor was 38 this past January and yet he remained unmarried and without children.
She had worried endlessly about Victor and wondered why he, after so many years, was still without a wife.
In the early years, just after he had graduated from university, his excuse was that he was still trying to find his footing in the world, he needed to secure a job and at least, a level of financial security before he considered marriage.
After Victor had worked for a year, she had broached the subject of a wife with him again.
He had told her then that it was too early, that he still had no savings and it would be foolish to start a family without the basic necessities.
She had smiled then, thinking what a responsible man she had raised.
She had decided to wait; after all, Victor was not yet 30.
And she had consoled herself with the knowledge that even if he did marry in his early thirties, he would still be very eligible, still be considered fresh, unlike women, who would have passed their prime and would be considered old maids.
110 But Victor was no longer in his early thirties.
He was fast approaching that age when an unmarried, childless man was considered less than whole.
Mabel looked away from the bountiful garden across the fence and started briefly at the barren that was her patch.
She grabbed the hose beside her and watered the ground one more time before she retreated into the kitchen.
4.0 CONCLUSION Fiction stories are not just written.
There are established elements of a fiction work.
These elements have been outlined in this unit to help the students write better.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit attempts to introduce fiction writing to the students in a simple way.
This was achieved by exposing them to the elements of fiction.
Also, a remarkable fiction work by a Nigerian Author was added to aid their learning.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the four kinds of conflict in a work of fiction.
Attempt a one page fiction work on any topic.
Do not mind how you start, just start something.
111 UNIT 3 REVIEW WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Review Writing 3.2 The job of a reviewer 3.3 What can be reviewed?
3.4 Guides for Review Writing 3.5 Sample Reviews 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION According to Ohaja (2004), a review is used to offer criticisms/judgment on a work of art.
Such a work could be from the literary arts (an anthology or a novel), fine and applied arts (a painting or a sculpture), or the Performing arts (a musical or drama presentation).
The reviewer acquaints the reader with the basic elements of the work with his personal assessment of it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to write outstanding reviews for magazines.
They should be able to master the guides for writing reviews.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS REVIEW WRITING The purpose of a review of any kind is to importantly encourage such creative people to strive for the highest standards in their works.
There is however a blurred line when distinguishing “reviewer” and a “critic” because they are used interchangeably.
Notwithstanding, review in the magazine will naturally be less scholarly than the one in a specialized journal.
Also, it is important to note that review in the specialized journal will cover many technical angles that magazine review ignore due to the differences in their readership.
Readers of reviews in magazine just want to be notified of what to expect in the work if it is new.
112  According to Faber & Faber (1983), a good reviewer combines the knowledge of the scholar with the with the judgment and cogency of the critic and the readability of the journalist.
The term criticism and reviewing refer to telling about, explaining, interpreting and evaluating books of all kinds, plays in the theatre, films, T.V and radio programmes, concerts, art exhibitions and other cultural events, criticism is used mostly to refer to the academic kind of commentary to be found in books and literacy journals; reviewing suggests workaday journalism in newspapers and magazines.
The job of the Reviewer According to Hennessy (2004:246), the first thing a reviewer has to do is to decide where their readers are at, whether or not they could have read, seen, heard (e.t.c.)
the work.
The following are however the task the reviewer must fulfil.
- To say what kind of work is being reviewed, and what it is about.
- To give an informed judgment as to whether it is worth the readers time and money.
- To back up evidence and persuasive language based on knowledge and experiences.
- To act as a bridge between practitioners in the arts and the audience.
This is the reviewers interpretative role.
The reviewer must be sensitive and perceptive enough to recognize the merits of new or difficult work.
- To help, while trying to be readable and entertaining, to get standards, moral and beauty in the arts.
What can be reviewed?
Many people hold the assumption that it is only a book that can be reviewed.
This is because majority of the reviews that appear regularly on our newspapers and magazines are book reviews.
On the contrary however, there are many more materials that can be reviewed.
The following are a list of materials that can be reviewed in a magazine?
1.
Books: This range from Academic and non-academic books.
Academic textbooks from primary, secondary and higher level course text can be reviewed so parents, teachers and guardians can develop an interest in such a magazine.
Also, non-academic materials like fiction, non-fiction and anthology can be reviewed.
2.
Applied Arts Works: Works in the applied arts are paintings, sculpture, wood-works.
3.
Performing Art Works: Works in the performing arts range from music, drama, dance, movies, concerts e.t.c.
4.
Media Contents: Television and radio programmes GUIDES FOR REVIEW WRITING 113 Ohaja (2004:101) gave seven guides to writing a great review in a magazine.
1.
Write on the forms of art that you love: If you love stage drama and perhaps you have a little professional training in stage acting, you will be more likely to have the patience to see all the progress in the play carefully and thereby write a faithful and meaningful review on the command performance.
The same goes for movies.
You will watch them so often that you will have many points of reference for comparison.
Also, if you do not like to read, a book review may not be too good for you.
Because, you will not be patient enough to read between the lines to spot the writers drawbacks or setbacks.
2.
Learn the techniques and terminologies of the craft you wish to write on: Every discipline has its terminologies.
These terminologies come handy especially in books.
How much of these you use for your reviews depend on your knowledge and your research.
Importantly, knowledge of the basic elements of each craft will help you to educate the average reader who may not know what to look for in a work.
It will also give weight to your opinion.
Failure to acquire knowledge in the area will make your reviews shallow.
If, for example, you want to review a drama presentation or home video, some of the points you may wish to briefly comment on may include.
- Quality of Acting - Casting - Quality of Script/Interpretation of roles - Construction of the set, lightning (for drama), choice of location for (home video).
- Costumes and make-up - Quality of music - Production and direction (home video).
3.
Use simple and accessible language: Do not use technical words that your average reader will not understand.
4.
Do not tell the whole story again.
5.
Begin with a striking lead: A lead is usually an introduction, but a technical one.
It is usually a loaded introduction that needs to be carefully written.
Otherwise, the reader may not go through the entire review.
You can start with a teaser as used below Director Desmond Eliot has committed what this reviewer abhors most in any production.
Or you can start with a thought-provoking or controversial question or an epigram.
Ensure that the lead captures the readers attention and compels him to read the rest of the review.
114 6.
State your views boldly.
Provide ample evidence if possible to support them.
7.
Write humanely: it is important to point out that there is a great tendency to be careless or dismissive when commenting on someone else’s work forgetting the mental and material torture that person went through to create or produce that work.
As a review writer, comment or point out some outstanding features that the book has before highlighting the setbacks if there are any.
Often times, there are, because no piece of work is perfect, not even the writer or painter as a person.
4.0 CONCLUSION Contrary to the assumption that many people hold that it is only books that can be reviewed, this unit has shown to the students that there are four items that can be reviewed.
They are books, Applied Arts works, Performing Art Works and Media Contents.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the job of the reviewer has been properly spelt out.
A list of what can be reviewed was also provided.
Also, guides to writing outstanding reviews were exposed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Read up four reviews in four different magazine editions.
Now, sit down and assume the role of a reviewer.
With the knowledge you now have of reviews, review any book you have around now.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Hannessy, B.
(2004).
Writing Feature Articles: A Practical Guide to Methods and Markets.
3rd ed.
Focal press Burlington.
Friedlander I, Edward J & Lee J (1988) Feature Writing for Newspapers and Magazines.
Harper and Row, Newyork.
Ohaja, E.U.
(2004) Magazine Article Writing.
Lagos.
John Letterman.
115 UNIT 4 PHOTOGRAPHY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 History of Photography 3.2 Forms of Photography 3.3 Functions of Photographs 3.4 Types of Photography 3.5 Principles of Photo-journalism 3.6 Caption and Cutline writings 3.7 Photo Editing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Pictures are the glory or beauty of a magazine.
Newspapers could be forgiven if it fails to produce pictures in some occasions.
But for magazines, pictures are its main attraction.
To further convince you on the importance of pictures, do you know that there are magazines today, whose main stock in trade is pictures?
A typical example is Ovation.
This unit will expose you to the brief history of photography, its functions, principles of photo-journalism, types of photography and importantly the different processes of editing in magazines and newspapers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to - Give and explain the forms of photography - State the function of photograph - Give and explain the types of photography - State the principles of photojournalism 116 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS WHAT IS PHOTOGRAPHY?
According to Osho (2007), photography means writing or drawing with light.
Photo means light while graph means writing or drawing.
Professionally, photography is the process of recording events in pictorial form.
It is also the process of mirroring reality in pictorial form which is permanent.
It is also an interplay of light and chemicals.
BRIEF HISTORY OF PHOTOGRAPHY According to Osho (2007) photography started as drawing and paintings even before man developed form of writing or an alphabet.
The drawing were produced before types were also developed.
Though the first publications came from printing presses in the 17th century in China, it was perfected in the 15th century by Germany.
Prior to Gutenberg’s experiments in type cutting and casting, some pictures had been printed.
But they had first been carved out of blocks of woods, which were crude in process.
It was several centuries beyond Gutenberg before intricate drawings and printings could be reproduced.
It was in the mid 19th century before the camera was perfected.
In 1872, in France, the principle of photography was applied to the reproduction of artwork.
And photo-engraving was born.
By the turn of the century, reproduced pictures/photographs, drawing and paintings-were common place in newspapers and magazines around the world.
FORMS OF PHOTOGRAPHY Pictures can be classified into three forms; 1.
Representation: Pictures can be representative of objects.
An example is the dead-duck pictures taken to represent individuals, events, and places.
2.
Form: Pictures can be record of events in form through the display scenes.
Such include the recording of natural features or environment in form such as mountains, plains, valleys, blue sky, blue sea, ocean, forest, hill and others.
117 3.
Expression: Pictures can be a form of expression through which we communicate happenings, events, ideas, views, and others.
These are called Action pictures or communicative pictures.
FUNCTIONS OF PHOTOGRAPHS According to Esimokha (2011), photographs aid page make-up because it makes it look attractive and are in themselves an attraction to readers.
A photograph may appear in a newspaper or magazine in any manner that will enhance news presentation.
Basically, pictures perform the following functions; - To authenticate a news story or feature story - To tell a story - To serve as fillers (Let me explain this.
Sometimes, pictures serve the simple purpose of filling a blank space, so that such a space will not be left obvious or vacant).
- To make the page attractive.
- To make printed materials dramatic to the readers.
- To draw readers attention.
TYPES OF PHOTOGRAPHY Osho (2007) gave the following types of photographs; 1.
Formal Pictures: These are arranged pictures that are usually taken at occasions such as marriages, funerals, birthdays, matriculations, graduations or convocation ceremonies.
2.
Informal Pictures: These are pictures that are not arranged.
They are being taken as the situation warrants.
3.
Action Pictures: These are pictures that tell stories.
They express one form of idea or view.
Photo journalists are expected to take action pictures that communicate even without captions.
118 4.
Spontaneous Action Pictures: These are pictures that are quarrelsome in nature.
They depict events as they occur such as the picture of a plane crash, a car crash or the picture of a falling person from a storey building.
5.
Dramatic Pictures: These are pictures that are meant to entertain readers, in a newspaper or magazine.
Such include sports pictures, art and culture pictures and dramatic entertainments.
6.
Quarrel-Necessity Action Picture: This is the reportage of a pathetic scene through the lenses of a camera.
Such include neither the gory sight of wrangled bodies in a car crash nor the rescue operation of earthquake victims.
7.
People without People: These are pictures that depicts an event after it must have ended.
It tells the story of a people about their activities in a particular venue after they must have left.
Such include war torn places, accident scenes, party venues among others.
8.
Photojournalism: This is the account of an event through pictures.
Such pictures must obey the rules of news worthiness such as immediacy or freshness, proximity, human angle, timeliness and prominence among others.
Hence, a photojournalist must have nose for news or be news minded.
PRINCIPLES OF PHOTOJOURNALISM A feature or magazine writer/photographer must know the principles guiding the profession of photojournalism.
This is to ensure accuracy and avoid pictures that does not conform to normal standards.
The principles are as follows; 1.
Must be Literal: Tell a story that should be non-fictional.
2.
Must be Accurate: Report events that is accurately presented visually.
3.
Must be Factual: Visualize events that must be truthful.
4.
Must be Believable: Readers must believe photo news.
5.
Must be Relevant: Pornographic and indecent pictures should be avoided.
6.
Must be Just: Should be just with the lenses of the camera 7.
Must be Fair: Should be fair to all the subjects, parties in a picture.
119 WRITING CAPTIONS AND CUTLINES According to Osho (2007), there are several basic rules for caption writing.
These include: 1.
Do not try to be clever.
Make your point clear in the first line of the caption.
2.
Always ask yourself who, what, where, when, why and how?
And make sure none of them remain unanswered in the cutline.
3.
Make sure that the cutline is firmly attached to the back of the print, but make sure it is easily detachable without damaging either the print or the caption.
4.
Always type your cutline- Do not handwrite it.
5.
Never write or type on both sides of a sheet of paper.
The reverse side will not be read.
6.
Make sure that every piece of paper, picture, caption or covering letters has your name on it.
7.
Always date your captions.
If not, there may be some confusion as to whether it is a recent or past picture.
8.
Always keep a copy of every caption you send out.
PHOTO EDITING According to Esimokha (2011), just as a copy is edited, pictures also have to be edited to prepare them for reproduction.
Once the photo has been taken, several steps still remain before the finished picture could be published.
After the film has been developed, an appropriate picture will be selected and printed.
Newspapers and magazines undergo one or a combination of the following processes.
- Cropping: This is the first step in picture editing.
It involves the elimination of unwanted portions of a photograph by marking of such areas.
For example, you might want to remove some persons from one side of a group photograph, you can remove them by the process of cropping.
Cropping enhances a photograph by making its centre of interest more prominent.
It removes clutter and other things that interfere with a clean, clear view of the subject.
- Scaling and Sizing: This is the process of enlarging or reducing a photograph so that it will fit a desired space on the newspaper or magazine page.
The picture size that 120 results from cropping is probably not the size of the photo that will appear on the magazine printed page.
The next step is that of scaling that picture to the exact size that will appear on the magazine.
- Bleeding: This means blowing, or printing or running the picture off the edge of the page of the magazine.
Instead of surrounding the picture with margin or grids, it runs off the page.
This is common in magazine production.
We hardly bleed pictures in newspapers.
Bleeding expands a photograph both physically and psychologically making the picture look livelier and bigger than it really is.
It gives the magazines a contemporary look.
Generally, only large photograph should be bled in make up.
We do not bled consistently.
Instead, we may provide the needed contrast by a combination.
- Flopping: This is the changing of the direction of a picture.
In other words, it is used to make a picture which would have been looking “outside” the page to look inward.
It is a photo-trick.
Flopping has its own disadvantages, for example, a watch worn on the left wrist automatically transfers to the right hand of the person in the picture.
Where there is a sign, slogan or writing on the picture or character, that subject turns the other way e.g “No” become “ON” “100” changes to “001”.
- Doctoring: This refers to making the desired shapes round the edges of the reproduced picture such as triangle, circle, star, square, if these are not the photographs original shape.
Drawing black lines round the original shape of the picture is another form of doctoring.
Doctoring is done for occasional impact.
- Slicing: This means cutting pictures for negative effect of the subject to excite attention.
Some magazines split the photo vertically by half and bleed the half to give a WOW!
look.
It is a form of doctoring.
- Retouching: This is a process of improving artwork especially photographs.
For example, if the only picture of the governor available is the one he took several years ago holding a cigarette, and you want to use the same picture without cigarette, you can eliminate the cigarette through retouching.
Also, the woman in a photograph can be made prettier through retouching.
121 - Scanning: This involves transferring the original picture into a computerized machine, from where the image is then transferred to the desired place on the page design.
Scanning helps to improve the quality of the tone of a picture for better reproduction and for retouching the picture.
3.1 CONCLUSION Magazines depend on pictures to be beautiful.
Without pictures, magazines will not be attractive but not just any kind of pictures.
The pictures must represent, inform and express.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to give a short history of photography, functions, types and principles of photography.
Tips were given on how to write captions and cutlines.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain three forms of photography and write on any five functions of photographs.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Esimokha, G. (2011) Newspaper & Magazine: Editing, Production, Marketing.
Osun.
Waltodany Visual Concepts.
Osho, S.A. (2007) Graphic Arts and Design in Mass Communication (2nd ed).
Ogun.
Ess- Oh Consult Publications.
122 MODULE 5: RESEARCH AND FEATURE WRITING INTRODUCTION This course will not be complete without the inclusion of this module.
I have come to discover that many who claim to be writers are not at home with basic writing research.
A scholar in the field of language and Literature once said that what simply makes a powerful writer is how well he has consulted the writings of other people either in his field or outside his field.
A writer of the feature category needs to be an omnipotent reader.
He must read anything, at any time, at anywhere in order to achieve a world class write-up.
The general aim of this module is to provide an in-depth and practical knowledge of some basic skills for research.
The four units in this module has been designed to help the students understand the need for study skills, note taking skills, Information sourcing skills and to get them acquainted with the basic tools of writing.
I have not assumed that the students know any of this; thereby informing the subtle way I have treated this module.
Unit 1: Study Skills Unit 2: Information Sourcing Unit 3: Tools of Writing Unit 4: Note-Taking Skills 123 UNIT 1 STUDY SKILLS CONTENTS 36.0 Introduction 37.0 Objectives 38.0 Main Contents 38.1 Using the Library 38.2 The Dictionary as a research tool 39.0 Conclusion 40.0 Summary 41.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 42.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Not many people have the enduring capacity to study.
To be the best at any discipline or chosen endeavour, one must study hard.
There is virtually no field or discipline that does not have its own documentation somewhere, either online or offline.
A feature writer is a mini authority in almost all the existing branch of knowledge.
The reason is he could write about anything at any time.
The scope and depth of his writing will however be a function of his searches in the course of planning.
Study skills are important.
Welcome to this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students will be able to; - Identify useful materials in the Library - Functions and roles of a dictionary as a research material 3.0 MAIN CONTENT USING THE LIBRARY A library is not just a collection of books.
Rather, it is a highly organized system of obtaining, classifying, storing and retrieving information and knowledge.
It is in fact the repository of knowledge.
As a result, the library is very valuable educational centre in any institution.
The ability to use the library effectively is, therefore necessary in enhancing the chances of success for the writer and the researcher no matter the level.
The library contains written, printed and other information storages such as films, slides, 124 phonographical video cassettes and types.
These are stored and preserved in a well- organized form so that retrieval is easy for the learner through the assistance of the library staff.
USEFUL MATERIALS IN THE LIBRARY FOR THE FEATURE WRITER REFERENCE WORK Libraries keep a collection of reference materials, usually in the reference room.
These materials may not be removed from the library.
They are often bulky in size and contain general information.
They contain useful information which act as introductory hint that lead the student into more detailed study or research.
The reference room contains encyclopedia’s, dictionaries, year books, guides and bibliographies.
GENERAL ENCYCLOPEDIA The two major general encyclopedias are encyclopedia Britannica and Encyclopedia Americana.
There are other encyclopedia’s which the student can also refer to.
These belong to the major subjects such as Encyclopedia of philosophy, Social Sciences, Literature, Engineering and the Sciences.
In whatever form, the encyclopedia contain useful information on a general and introductory basis that guide the student into more detailed reference.
The encyclopedia also contain useful bibliographies.
DICTIONARIES (UNABRIDGED) The dictionaries give the meanings of terms, concepts, words or phrases.
There are general dictionaries and those of the specific subject areas such as a Dictionary of Literature Terms, A Dictionary of Music, A Dictionary of Geography, e.t.c.
These give full meanings of words or terms used in each field.
BIBLIOGRAPHIES These are reference works which contain bibliographical information of people in various subjects.
They are usually bibliographical information about inventors, statesmen, writers, artists and composers of music.
YEARBOOKS AND DIRECTORIES 125 Yearbooks are devoted to the chief occurrences or events of the preceding year and are published as soon as possible the following year.
Information in yearbooks can be in the form of statistics in economics, trade and population.
Directories are updated information about persons and organizations, giving details of their addresses, telephone numbers and official designations and functions.
Examples are the Nigerian Yearbook and the Telephone Directories GENERAL PUBLICATIONS AND DOCUMENTS Government releases certain important information to the public at intervals.
This could be yearly or quarterly or at certain periods it chooses.
These information are contained in publications such as the official Gazette, Annual Reports, Budget Speeches and Reports of the various commissions set up to look into aspects of national life.
Such publications are secured with extra care by the libraries.
SERIAL AND NEWSPAPERS Any publication that is issued in successive parts and appearing at regular intervals for an indefinite period is called a serial publication.
The term covers all periodicals, newspapers, magazines and monographs.
The newspapers are daily publications containing news about current events.
INDEXES AND ABSTRACTS Indexes are useful guides to different periodicals on different subjects and they help students to know about relevant works in their field or any field.
The abstract contain a summary of a published article.
An abstract can carry brief statements on the published article in journal but this requires that one needs to read the article itself before understanding the topic.
Other abstracts however may be very informative which means they contain sufficient information on the article and the reader need not read the original article to gain the required information.
USING THE DICTIONARY The dictionary enables the writer to become familiar with or gain knowledge of words.
The meanings, usage, pronunciation and spellings of words must be known by the writer.
The words in a dictionary are arranged in alphabetical order and explanations and meanings of each word are given.
A dictionary is designed to improve the learner’s 126 use of language, one cannot claim to know all the words in a language.
As a result, every body needs to use the dictionary at one time or another.
The dictionary is a guide to all users of a particular language.
FUCNTIONS/ROLES OF THE DICTIONARY AS A RESEARCH TOOL As a Vocabulary Guide A dictionary is intended primarily to give the meanings of words.
The reader has to look up the meaning of words he comes across which are new or strange to him.
Sometimes, he may be able to derive or infer the meaning of words from their contexts but at other times he must look up the words in the dictionary before the meanings can become clear.
The alphabetical order in which words have been arranged in the dictionary makes them easy to locate.
Pronunciation The dictionary provides a guide to pronunciation.
There are undoubtedly, slight variations in the way different people pronounce words but this variations should not lead to mis-understanding in the meaning of words.
As a result, there are guides provided in the dictionary to enable the learner realize sounds of the language as nearly as they should be in order to communicate effectively in English.
The guides are in the form of sound patterns or phonetic symbols usually enclosed in bars/ and which come before the meaning of each word in the dictionary.
Spelling Guide The dictionary is a final authority in matters of spelling.
Often, when disputes arise over the correct spelling of a word, the dictionary is the right authority to consult.
A user of the language is expected to be familiar with the spelling of words that he comes across.
The spelling guidelines often have expectations to them and these create difficulty for the learner.
To overcome spelling problems, particularly when the writer is in doubt, the dictionary offers the required solution to them.
The learner may run into difficulty when words of similar sounds are involved.
Such words may have just one letter that differentiates them from other words of similar sound.
In such cases, the meaning of each word will enable the learner identify the word for which spelling he seeks.
127 DICTIONARY AS A RESEARCH GUIDE The dictionary provides information on how to use a particular word and the possible context in which the word or its form can apply.
The learner will find these guides useful if he uses them as models upon which he can construct his own sentences.
The probable guides on usage which a dictionary provides are: the various tense forms and the occurrence of the word in, various grammatical structures such as in sentences, phrases, clauses and in figurative or idiomatic expressions.
The learner is expected to acquaint himself with the various forms of word usage a dictionary provides.
ETYMOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF A DICTIONARY Many words in English have been borrowed from either Greek, Latin or French.
This is a result of the various external influences to which the English culture has been subjected over the centuries.
The origin of most borrowed words in English is given in dictionaries.
These words are usually broken into syllables or roots from which such words are formed.
Through the knowledge of the origin of a word, a learner will be able to trace the changes in meaning that may have occurred to the word over the years.
The knowledge of the origin of a word will also enable the user derive the various forms of the word and use them with a greater measure of confidence and exactitude.
4.0 CONCLUSION The knowledge of the Library is the key to understanding the importance of study skills.
Many writer do not know what could be found in a library.
Many assume that what they can find is simply books.
No, it goes beyond this.
In fact, in a standard library, there are provisions for Video, Audio, Journals, some artefacts e.t.c.
The moment a writer knows this, he takes the library seriously.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to identify and elaborate on the useful materials for the writers in a library environment.
The dictionary was also identified as an important resource materials.
The roles and functions of the dictionary was carefully enlisted.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT 128 Go to a nearby Library, either public or private.
Move around the library and enlist other materials found in the library that have not been captured here.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS.
Abamba, P. (1955) Military Politics and the Nigerian Economy, Newswatch.
Enekwe, O.O (1966) The Modern Nigerian Theatre in Nsukka Studies in African Literature.
Ed.
Achebe Chinua.
Enugu: Intellect Publishers.
Booth, W (1983) The Rhetoric of Fiction.
Chicago.
University of Chicago Press.
Finnegan, R. (1970) Oral Literature in Africa.
London: Oxford University Press.
129 UNIT 2 INFORMATION SOURCING CONTENTS 43.0 Introduction 44.0 Objectives 45.0 Main Contents 45.1 The Library 45.2 The Internet 45.3 Personal Observations 45.4 The Interview 46.0 Conclusion 47.0 Summary 48.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 49.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the problems that confront writers in Nigeria before and even now is where to source for materials to flesh their ideas or topics.
The reason for this is because information is gradually being diverted to the information super highway; thereby leaving the print media of books, journals e.t.c as only alternatives.
But even at that, a writer must be exposed to the print media for reasons of digging up the past.
This unit among other things will expose the students to relevant resource avenues for the feature writer and guide on how to explore them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to; - Give reasons why the Library is still an important avenue for research - Give reasons why the internet is an indispensable research medium - List other sources of information available to a feature writer.
130 3.0 MAIN CONTENT According to Okoye (2006), having decided on the topic to write on, the feature writer must take the next step, which is, to obtain information for the article.
This is one way in which the feature differs from school-type essays whereby students lock themselves in their rooms and fabricate stories.
To produce an article that is factual and interesting, the feature writer must tap live resources for information.
He must use one or a combination of these resources, if he must do a good job; - The Library resources - The Internet - Personal Observation - Interviewing The Library According to Okoye (2006), writing a good feature article should actually begin from the library.
The feature writer should check the morgue for the articles published in the past by his or other newspaper and magazines, which are related to his present assignment.
If a similar thing has already been written on the topic, he must decide the new angle to give his article to ensure its relevance.
The Internet According to Wikipedia (2012), the internet is a global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard internet protocol suit (TCP/IP) to serve billions of users worldwide.
It is a network of networks that consists of millions of private, public, academic, business, and government networks, of local to global scope.
These networks are linked by many electronic, wireless and optical networking technologies.
The internet carries an extensive range of information resources and services, such as the inter-linked hypertext documents of the World Wide Web (WWW) and infrastructures to support electronic mail.
The internet has enable and accelerated news forms of human interactions through instant messaging, internet forums, and social networking.
Academic research has 131 moved beyond the conventional library.
Publications of all kinds are accessed on the internet at no strenuous cost.
According to Okoye (2000) in Okoye (2006), journalists all over the world are increasingly depending on the internet for assistance in the daily routine.
Feature writers, Editorial Writers, Sport writers and sub editors need to locate information on a wide variety of topics.
Through the internet, information, facts and figures, experts, books and breaking news on any topic can be sourced.
But the question is how do you use the internet?
Or to ask more simpler, where do you go on the internet to look for information?
The answer is simple.
Use the search engines.
What are search engines?
Search engines bring information to you online with the help of an unseen robot.
The robot travels the net retrieving documents requested all over the world just with the click of a mouse.
This robot works day and night and can source for documents with speed rates of gigabytes.
Examples of Search Engines Ask anyone which search engine they use to source for information online, and you will most likely hear Google, MSN, Yahoo and Ask.
Maybe not in the order I have just enlisted.
The truth is there are many more.
But this is hinged on what you are actually looking for.
Some other search engines available are Tripleme.com, Shopzilla, Altavista.com, Dogpile.com, Find.com, Getlyrics.com, Monster.com e.t.c.
The job of a search engine is to place you on course with the help of the inputs you have fed it.
Let us take for instance, you take-off from Lagos, and you are heading for Department of Communication and Language Arts, University of Ibadan.
And on the way, you got lost.
You sight a young woman somewhere at the Ibadan Toll gate in a black who approached to help you; after you divulged your location to her, she immediately takes you to the Department of Communication and Language Arts, U.I.
That woman is the search engine.
But the import caveat is give the right key-word.
If for instance, you told the woman in a black car that you are heading for U.I gate and 132 nothing more, she would definitely drop you at the gate, but you will need to trek to your location.
Let us have a practical session now.
Pick up your internet modem or browser or internet enabled phone or black berry and let us do the following.
- Let us assume you are looking for information on lecture notes in the Department of Mass Communication, National Open University of Nigeria.
- The first step to achieve this is to load the search engine page (e.g www.google.com) - Once the page is loaded, simply type in the word carefully - National Open University of Nigeria- Lecture Notes, Mass Communication - You will be amazed by the list it will turn in.
- In fact, if you need the Lecture notes prepared in a PDF file, all you need do is add (PDF) after the last word and the engine will enlist all the Lectures prepared in a PDF for you.
As a Feature writer, you need a fair knowledge of the internet if you are still ignorant in the use of the internet.
There are two ways to learn it.
Either you register in a computer school where internet surfing sessions are handled or you buy a book and call for immediate assistance from colleagues, family members, associates or friends.
You must as a matter of urgency address this.
Believe me, there are wide arrays of materials online for your use.
Please tap them.
Personal Observation According to Okoye (2006), Personal observation is superior to other forms of fact gathering for the following reasons; - When a newsman with a nose for news observes a scene, he takes note of certain important details which the uninitiated might overlook.
- Personal observation enhances the credibility of the feature story and, by extension, that of the news medium.
133 - Personal observation enables the feature writer to demonstrate his descriptive capability and writing style in a way that uplifts the art of feature writing.
Okoye (2006) was however apt to warn that care must be taken not to become emotionally involved in what is happening.
Emotional involvement leads to unbalanced write-ups, bias, prejudice and distortion of facts.
The advantage of personal observation is that history or events takes its dramatic turn right in your face.
You saw it happened life.
Even at that, there are times when what you saw need to be given flesh with documented facts and figures to give it more life, so the importance of the internet and the library is still key.
Interviewing Also according to Okoye (2006), interviewing is the act of tapping other human sources for information which will be included in the write-up.
He further state that those usually interviewed by newsmen are key players in the news, victims, winners, losers, eye-witnesses, experts, relatives, neighbours and associates of those involved.
Interview can come in different ways.
This ranges from face-to-face, electronic and physical letter interview.
Interviews according to Okoye (2006) can be conducted in three ways and these are; (i) Face-to Face (ii) Mail (iii) Telephone Face-to-Face Interview With face-to-face interview, you have the advantage of asking your interviewee as many questions as possible especially when you are both in a relaxed environment.
Face-to- face interview can be conducted in several places.
You could invite the interviewee to a serene location, you could go to the interviewees residence, office or hang out location e.t.c.
However, it is important to stress that, you do not approach an interview without adequate preparation.
You must be prepared both physically and mentally.
Do not 134 approach an with an empty stomach, do not approach an interview with a disturbing psychological or emotional state.
If it is absolutely necessary you do the interview, calm yourself down by taking as many deep breaths as possible.
As part of the preparation for the interview, please take along your recorder, note book or pad, at least two writing pens.
Even with the presence of the recorder, take as much notes as possible because you may think the recorder is active and it is not.
Mailing Interview.
In case you do not know, interviews can be conducted through the electronic mail.
In the event that your interviewee is not anywhere around; probably out of the country, email then becomes a viable alternative.
There are times when your interviewee is not around but not reachable.
The interviewer could enlist his questions carefully and send it through mail to the respondent.
The response would be sent and analyzed.
One problem with this method of interview is that in the event that the interviewer omits an important question it becomes difficult to recall the attention of the respondent.
But this could be rectified if the interviewer has access to the interviewees mobile number to so further discussions could be made on phone.
Telephone Interview Okoye (2006) maintains that telephone interview is the fastest means of obtaining information for news and features.
It saves the journalist the trouble of travelling all the way to meet the news maker or information source face-to-face.
Also the telephone can be used to establish preliminary contact with the news source, which will culminate in a face-to-face encounter.
Tips for Telephone Interviewing Okoye (2006) offered the following tips for telephone interview.
i.
Introduce yourself, your newspaper and the purpose of your call, properly and without delay.
ii.
As your questions in a straight-forward manner 135 iii.
Assure the source he will not be misquoted I like to add more tips to the above; iv.
Be polite.
Even when you greet, ensure you do not do this impolitely.
The interviewee could sometimes be younger than you.
For instance, a sub-editor of about the age of 49 talking to a young millionaire of just 22 may want to sound elderly.
Please, be polite to get a great response from your respondent.
4.0 CONCLUSION A feature writer must be a person who thirsts for knowledge.
He must always seek to know and know more.
And the only way this could be done is to consult a living library, go online (internet), conduct interviews and make phone calls.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to expose the students to important sources of information acquisition.
These sources are the library, the internet, personal interviews and phone calls.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT Justify in 10 paragraphs why the internet is an important resource avenue for the feature writer of today.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoye, I.
(2006) Feature Writing; Theory and Practice (2nd ed) Lagos.
Malthouse Press Limited.
Internet Sources en.wikipedia.org/wiki/internet www.hawaii/Peter/searchengine.htm.
136 UNIT 3 TOOLS OF A FEATURE AND MAGAZINE WRITER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Computer 3.2 Pen and Notebook 3.3 Camera 3.4 Tape Recorder 3.5 Telephone 3.6 Word Processor 3.7 The Interview 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings INTRODUCTION Every profession has its tools of operations.
Whether Engineering, Law, Medicine and Surgery, e.t.c.
These tools are the apparatus he uses to create his products.
The writer works on words with some tools.
These tools and how each of them assist the writer is what this unit is about.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to; - Identify and explain the tools of a writer - Identify the benefits of these equipments 3.0 MAIN CONTENT COMPUTER According to Ohaja (2004), a writer must have a personal computer and a modem that connects it to the internet which should ensure that the writer has access to exhaustive information on any topic, be it from the natural sciences, the humanities or the social sciences.
The internet helps the writer to get lists of references on any subject and gives him the information in the list he wishes.
137 Because a desktop computer is situated in one place, I want to advise any serious writer to procure a Laptop computer.
This is to enable him get information anywhere and at any time.
With a Laptop, the writer can sit in his car, somewhere on the field, and access the computer for information processing, dounloading, uploading e.t.c.
PEN AND NOTEBOOK The pen is the first and probably the most important tool of a writer.
Let me explain this.
Whenever ideas come upon a writer, the nearest tool for capturing the dictates of the idea is a pen.
With a pen, the writer jots down all that could be jotted and may later transfer same and expand the scope of the idea later.
Ideas or inspiration as some people call it could come upon a writer while driving, please pull over the vehicle whenever this happens, it could come while having your breakfast, it could come while swimming, the list is many.
I like to advise writers to identify the kind of pen they are more at home with.
Very early in my writing career, I became fascinated with a particular pen that without it I could not write, even when ideas come, I had to look out for the pen which gives me satisfaction.
If you fall in this category, please always harm yourself with some of this favourite pen.
Similarly, a writer needs a notebook.
Notebooks are essential.
They are what the wrier needs to write his ideas or develop them when.
I always advise writers to buy a pocket jotter that could be retrieved at any time for writing.
CAMERA According to Ohaja (2004), a camera helps to provide photographs of interviewees, scenes of events and whatever else the writer wants to illustrate his article with.
These days, cameras are not a problem.
All that the writer needs is to have a good phone with a good pixel rate camera to capture his numerous scenes.
Except for a pre-planned event where the writer requires many shots, it is advisable to use his mobile phones to cover his photographic shots.
In fact, there are some phones now that has capturing rate and capacity equal to many digital camera and at no extra cost.
A writer should see this as a great opportunity.
138 TAPE RECORDER Tape recorders are designed to capture conversations.
They are tools important for interview sessions, press conferences e.t.c.
Ohaja (2004) however advised that the recorder should be pretested to avoid malfunctioning at crucial moments.
Please, be informed that there are mobile phones with a larger capturing and storage memory than any recorder around.
A wrier should see such a phone as an asset rather than a luxury.
TELEPHONE.
With the introduction of mobile phones, the function of phones has gone beyond just making calls.
Today, phone now has many of the facilities one needs for businesses and entertainment.
A phone could do the following; - Play video and record video - Play music, record music, - Play voice, record voice - Word Process - Surf the internet - Take pictures - Keep diaries - Connect to the radio - Connect to the television - Conference call, video conferencing - Alarm, To-do-List e.t.c WORD PROCESSOR 139 Today, I will be right if I say that the typewriter has become obsolete already.
Computer has virtually taken over the word processing business at all fronts.
But I am not totally against the knowledge of the type writer.
I know for sure that those who learnt how to type with the typewriter are better typist today.
This is just like learning how to drive with the old beetle and then you suddenly find yourself driving a 2012 Toyota Camry, if you are not careful, you could think it is a toy.
I know that these days, computers now come with typing tutor.
A writer who cannot type should spare some time out to stay in front of the computer and diligently or painfully learn how to type.
It is important.
The reason is if you type yourself, you could be assured of minimal error, because as you type, you read.
But if you are to give same to a typist, even some of the mistakes you did not make would be added for you.
4.0 CONCLUSION A good work man is known by his tools.
The tools of the writer are important assets to him.
He needs to identify them and perhaps always have them handy with him all the time.
A writer is an exceptional human being who could be over-powered by a phenomenal thought, idea, inspiration at any time.
The only means to capture this awesome visitation is through the available tools of pen, paper, recording gadgets, and phones.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, efforts have been made to identify with clarifying details, the tools of a writer.
The tools identified are Computer, Pen and Notebook, Camera, Telephone, Tape recorder and Word processor.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT Produce a 2 paged summary of what you have learnt today.
In addition, think of one tool of a writer that you think was not mentioned in this unit.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ohaja, E.U.
(2004) Magazine Article Writing.
Lagos.
John Letterman.
140 UNIT 4 NOTE TAKING SKILLS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Important reasons to take notes 3.2 Guidelines for Note Taking 3.3 Some Methods of Note Taking 3.4 Note-taking Tips 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The skill to take down notes is a must for every writer.
Research has showed that over 80% of the information from lectures, reading or observation is lost within two weeks if no effort is made to record or remember the material.
Note taking helps you to remember both what you heard and what you understood.
It is learning about the subject and not simply recording all that the speaker says.
Note taking helps you to pay closer attention to and become more familiar with the new information.
In this unit, effort has been made to expose the students to some reasons why note taking is essential, some guidelines for note taking and some methods of note taking.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students will be able to; - State five reasons why note taking is essential for a writer - Explain and use two Note taking Methods of their choice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Reasons why writers have to take down notes.
Every writer, regardless of the depth of knowledge will still find research a matter of must.
To carry out effective research, whether through interviews, lectures, reading e.t.c, note taking is 141 an effective tool to this effect.
Because of the enormity of information the writer needs and the various and scattered sources he needs to consult, note-taking is then a means to collect all these sources together for later consultation and use.
The following are the reasons why writers have to take note; i.
To track down information ii.
To helps to remember information taken down iii.
Your notes often contain information that cannot be found elsewhere (i.e.
in textbooks) iv.
Notes helps you to concentrate while writing v. Note serves as a guide to your write-up.
This is because most of the information you need to flesh your work has already been noted vi.
A writers notes serves as an a GUIDELINES FOR NOTE-TAKING To take down note from any research effort, the following needs to be noted; i.
Concentrate on the interview, reading, observation or lecture so as to capture all the necessary facts or figures.
ii.
Be Consistent.
By being consistent, I mean, do not feel any information is not necessary, if you look closely, the information you trivialize can become very important later.
So capture it.
iii.
Be brief.
Because of the enormity of information a writer could find in any information centre or study, there is a need to be brief.
By this, I mean write down only the major points and important information.
iv.
Write legibly.
Be careful to write in such a way that is readable to a poor reader.
Sometimes, because of the exigency of time, writers write in such a way that even they themselves may find it hard to read later.
Please avoid this.
Notes are useless if you cannot read them.
142 v. Do not be concerned with spelling and grammar.
One mistake amateur writers make when taking down notes is to ensure the appropriateness of grammar and spelling.
This is a time waster.
Do not bother about this.
Just keep writing.
SOME NOTE-TAKING METHODS According to Okinda (2009), the common methods of note-taking include; 1.
Cornell Method 2.
Outlining Method 3.
Mapping Method 4.
Charting Method 5.
Sentence Method.
The Cornel Method This method provides a systematic format for condensing and organizing notes without laborious recopying.
Write notes in the main space and use the left-had space to label each idea and detail with a key word or “cue.” Method (cid:1) Rule your note with two and a half margin on the left leaving a sic-inch area on the right in which to make notes.
(cid:1) During any research session, take down information in the six-inch area.
(cid:1) Move to a new line when the interviewee seems too fast or has gone off-point.
(cid:1) After the research session, complete phrases and sentences as much as possible.
The Mapping Method This method uses comprehension/concentration skills and evolves in a not taking form which relates each fact or idea to every other fact or idea.
It is a graphic representation of the content of a lecture.
It is a method that maximizes active participation, affords immediate knowledge as to its understanding, and emphasizes critical thinking.
Method 143 - Create a graphic representation of what is heard, read or observed.
- Use any symbol, draw, do all you can to capture the information as vividly as possible.
- Be simple.
Advantages of the Mapping Method - Helps you to visually track your lecture regardless of conditions - Little thinking is needed and relationships can easily be seen - Easy to edit your notes by adding numbers, marks, and colour coding - Review by covering lines for memory drill and relationships - Main points can be written on flash or note cards and pieced together into a table or larger structure at a later date.
NOTE-TAKING TIPS General Tips for taking Notes (cid:1) Determine which pieces of information in any research situation are important and which pieces are not by being critical when you read or listen.
(cid:1) Take information that is important, relevant and credible.
(cid:1) Distinguish between facts, opinions, and examples.
(cid:1) Write down important, relevant, educated opinions e.g.
if the interviewee is giving a point that compares the ideas of different theorists, it would be important to write down a summary of each theorist’s opinion in your note.
(cid:1) Be critical of the material you are listening to or that you are reading.
(cid:1) Use shortcuts that you will understand and that make the writing process quicker.
Abbreviations (e.g instead of for example), symbols (= instead of “equals”).
(cid:1) Do not write down notes word for word (notes should be a summary of the main ideas and should be used to help jog your memory).
Tips for taking notes from readings (cid:1) Understand what you are looking for in the reading 144 (cid:1) A well structured reading, should begin by outlining the main premise, argument or ideas in the first few sentences, and certainly in the first paragraph (cid:1) Pick out the main premise and write it down (cid:1) If you understand the premise, do not read the examples given to support it.
Never include examples in your notes.
Only include the facts, avoid experiences and anecdotes where possible.
Tips for taking notes from lectures (cid:1) Understand why you are attending the lecture (cid:1) Prepare for the lecture and think about what you are hoping to achieve (cid:1) Always revisit your notes as soon as possible after taking them and never rely solely on someone else’s notes 4.0 CONCLUSION Note-taking is essential to any writer who wants to write well.
This is because with good note-taking, a writer has given himself the edge of summarizing all the needed information in a single note.
It would then be easy to make consultation later when he is about to flesh up the topic.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, effort has been made to expose the students to important reasons to take notes, guides to note-taking, some methods of note-taking and some general tips to effective note taking.
6.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okinda C.F (2009) Communication Skills, Creative and Critical Thinking in PDF Created with desk PDF PDF Writer- Trial::http://www.docudesk.com 145
