INTRODUCTION TO NSS 217 SOCIOLOGY 1 Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE NSS 217 COURSE GUIDE NSS 217 INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLOGY 1 Course Developer/Writer Dr. J. O. Fayeye Department of Sociology University of Ilorin, Ilorin Course Coordinator Mr. Kayode S. Olubiyi National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Programme Leader Prof. Afolabi Adebanjo National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE NSS 217 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-436-6 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE NSS 217 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………….
1 What you will learn in this course…………………………... 1 Course Aim………………………………………………….. 1 Course Objectives…………………………………………... 1-2 Working through this course………………………………… 2 Study Units………………………………………………….. 2-3 Recommended textbooks for this course…………………….
3-4 Assignment file……………………………………………… 4 Presentation Schedule……………………………………….. 4 Assessment………………………………………………….. 4 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA)………………………….. 4-6 Final Examination and Grading……………………………... 6 Course marking scheme……………………………………... 6 Course Overview…………………………………………….
6-7 How To Get The Most Out Of The Course………………….
7-8 Tutors and Tutorials………………………………………… 8-9 ivCOURSE GUIDE NSS 217 Introduction NSS 217: Introduction to Sociology 1 is a two credit course for students in the Nursing programme.
The course is made up of 22 study units.
It will introduce the students to Sociology, society, nature and individuals.
It will also touch on the origin and development of sociology, founding fathers of sociology as well as perspective of it.
Furthermore in the study, we shall examine the societal movement and collective behaviour, social organization and roles as well as social institutions.
At the end of the course, the learner is expected to demonstrate clear understanding and importance of Sociology and society to the survival of man and be prepared to apply it in the true life experience.
This course guide provides you with what to expect in the course, how to work through the course material as a distance learner saddled with the responsibility of studying on your own and your overall responsibilities and expectations.
Tutorial sessions are also linked up with the course to provide the needed support you required.
What You Will Learn In This Course Sociology as a social science deals with man in the society.
You will understand the systematic approach to study human relations and the products of such relationships.
Course Aim This course aims at providing the learners with in depth understanding of sociology and society in relation to health.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets the overall objective.
In addition, each unit has specific objectives stated at the beginning of a unit.
Learners are advised to read them carefully before going through the unit.
You will have to refer to them during the course of your study to monitor your progress.
You are encouraged to always refer to the Unit objectives after completing a Unit.
This is the way you can be certain that you have done what was required of you in the unit.
The wider objectives of the course are set below.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
1COURSE GUIDE NSS 217 On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Explain the term sociology and how it was derived.
• Describe the society and justify its existence • Explain the relationship between society and nature • Classify society by societal organization • Describe the factors that influence the expansion of Sociology.
• Highlight the foundling fathers of sociology • Know the benefits of Sociological perspectives.
• Explain the difference between sociology and other concrete sciences.
• Explain the relative closeness in social interaction.
• Describe the levels of social organization • Describe the classification of groups • Understand the foundation of culture • Understand the differing views on social institutions.
• Know the contemporary classification of institutions.
• Define the basic concepts of organization • Understand the characteristics of pure bureaucracy • Understand the importance of Organizational environment.
Working through this course To complete this course, you are required to study through the units, the recommendeed textbooks and other relevant matrerialas.
Each unit contains some self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments and at some point in this course, you are required to submit the tutor marked assignmnets.
This will be followed by an end of term examination.
The following are the components of this course: 1.
The course guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignmnet file 5.
Presentation schedule Study Units This course is made up 22 study units.
These are: Module 1 Unit 1 Meaning of Sociology and Society Unit 2 Society, Nature and Individuals Unit 3 Sociology and Human Society 2COURSE GUIDE NSS 217 Unit 4 Origin and Development of Sociology Unit 5 The Subject Matter of Sociology Module 2 Unit 1 Founding Fathers Of Sociology Unit 2 Perspectives Of Sociology Unit 3 The Scientific Study Of Society Unit 4 Sociological Analysis Unit 5 Social Interaction and Processes Module 3 Unit 1 Social Movements And Collective Behaviour Unit 2 Social Organization And Roles Unit 3 Groups And Human Relationships Unit 4 Groups And Normative Patterns Unit 5 The Sociological Study Of Culture Module 4 Unit 1 Social Institutions Unit 2 Perspectives of Social Institutions Unit 3 Synopsis of Social Institutions Unit 4 Concepts of Nature of Complex Organisation Unit 5 Structure and Nature of Formal Organisation Module 5 Unit 1 Bureaucracy and Organization Unit 2 Organization in Contemporary Times Each unit contains self assessment exercise and tutor marked assignments of which the learners are required to attempt.
Expectedly, it is believed that the exercise will help you to achieve the stated objective.
Recommended Textbooks for this Course Giddens, a. and M. Dunnier (2000): Introduction to Sociology.
New York, W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. Igbo, M.E.
(2003): Basic Sociology.
Enugu, CIDJAP Press Olurode, L. and O. Soyombo (2003 ed): Sociology for Beginners.
Lagos, John West Publications.
3COURSE GUIDE NSS 217 Otite, O and W. Ogionwo (2003): An introduction to sociological studies.
Ibadan, Heinemann Educational Books (INigeria) Plc.
Heinslin, J.M.
(2000).
Essentials of Sociology: A Down to Earth Approach.
Boston.
Allyn and Bacon.
Maiconis, J.J.(2000).
Society The Basics.
London Prentice-Hall International Ltd. Schaefar, R.T.(2004).
Sociology: A Brief Introduction.
Boston.
McGraw-Hill Assignment file The assignment file will be the Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) which will constitute part of the continuous assessment (CA) of the course.
There are 15 assignments in this course guide (for your evaluation) with each unit having an activity/exercise and additional Tutor marked assignment for you to do to facilitate your learning as an individual.
Presentation Schedule This presentation schedule in this course provides with important dates for completion of each tutor marked assignment.
Please try to meet the deadlines.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course namely the Tutor marked assignment and written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and strategies gathered during the course.
The assignments must be turned in to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the stated presentation schedules.
The works you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 40% of your total course work.
At the end of the course you will need to sit for a final written examination of three hour’s duration.
This examination will also count for 60% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) There are 15 tutor-marked assignments in the course guide.
You are advised in your own interest to attempt and submit the assignments at the stipulated time in study centre.
You will be able to complete the assignments from the information and materials contained in your 4COURSE GUIDE NSS 217 reading and study units.
There is other self activity contained in the instructional material to facilitate your studies.
Try to attempt it all.
Feel free to consult any of the references to provide you with broader view and a deeper understanding of the course.
Extensions will only be granted for submission after deadline on exceptional cases.
Tutor Marked Assignment (TMAs) Unit 1: Define Sociology and discuss its importance to the society.
Unit 2: Explain the interdependence of society and individuals.
Unit 3: Explain two of the specifics of sociological study of society.
Unit 4: Describe the roles of the ancient philosophers in the study of the society before 1838.
Unit 5: Mention the methods adopted between each of the approaches adapted for sociology.
Highlight the central concerns and criticisms of each of the method used by sociologists.
Unit 6: Mention five (5) contributions of Auguste Comte and Durkheim to the development of Sociology.
Unit 7: Give a coincise description of the sociological perspective.
Highlight the charactersitics of sociological perspectives.
Unit 8: What is social interaction?.
Explain the forms of cooperation that are found in society.
Unit 9: Describe and classify social movements by forms,degree of organization, leadership and goals.
Unit 10: Explain the levels of social organisation.
Discuss the relationship between roles and status.
Unit 11: Explain the sociological definition of a group?.
Describe the distinctive features of a primary group.
Unit 12: Distinguish between Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft Societies Unit 13: Explain the origin of social institution.
What are the connecvtions between mores and institutions?
Unit 14: Discuss the roles of social institutions in the survival of the society.
Why are pivotal institutions needed in the society.
5COURSE GUIDE NSS 217 Unit 14: HIV/AIDS is always associated with stigma, repression and discrimination.
Discuss these in line with your experience in the life of a 35 year old business executive.
Unit 15: Define the following concepts: The Organization, Bureaucracy and Organizational status and hierarchy.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination of NSS 217 will be of 2 hours duration and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which have bearings with the attempted self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments that you have previously encountered.
Furthermore, all areas of the course will be evaluated.
Make sure you give enough time to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table includes the course marking scheme Table 1 Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 15 15 assignments for the best 4 Total = 10% x 4 = 40% Final examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview This table indicates the units, the number of weeks required to complete the assignments.
Unit Title of Work Week Activity Assessment Course Guide Week 1 Module 1 Unit 1 Meaning of Sociology and Society Unit 2 Society, Nature and Individuals Unit 3 Sociology and Human Society Unit 4 Origin and development of sociology Unit 5 The subject matter of Sociology 6COURSE GUIDE NSS 217 Module 2 Unit 1 Founding Fathers of Sociology Unit 2 Perspective of Sociology Unit 3 The Scientific Study of Society Unit 4 Sociological Analysis Unit 5 Social Interactions and Processes Module 3 Unit 1 Societal Movement and Collective Behaviour Unit 2 Social Organization and Roles Unit 3 Groups and Human Relationships Unit 4 Groups and Normative Patterns Unit 5 The Sociological Study of Culture Module 4 Unit 1 Social Institutions Perspectives of Social Unit 2 Institutions Unit 3 Synopsis of Social Institutions Unit 4 Concepts and Nature of Complex Organization Unit 5 Structure and Nature of Formal Organization Module 5 Unit 1 Bureaucracy and Organization Unit 2 Organization in Contemporary Times How To Get The Most Out Of The Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the greatest advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace and at time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture notes instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading task, the study units tell you when to read your 7COURSE GUIDE NSS 217 other material.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercise for you to do at appropriate points.
The following are practical strategies for working through the course: • Read the course guide thoroughly.
• Organize a study schedule.
• Stick to your own created study schedule.
• Read the introduction and objectives very well.
• Assemble your study materials.
• Work through the unit.
• Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing all your assignment carefully.
• Review the stated objectives.
• Don’t proceed to the next unit until you are sure you have understood the previous unit.
• Keep to your schedules of studying and assignments.
• Review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of effective tutorial provided in support of this course.
Details will be communicated to you together with the name and phone number of your tutor through the study centre.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and any difficulties you might encounter and also provide assistance to you during the course.
You must ensure that you submit your assignment as and at when due.
You will get a feedback from your tutor as soon as possible to the assignments.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor or study centre on phone or email in case of any of the following circumstances: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned reading • You have difficulty with the self test or exercises.
• You have questions or problems with an assignment, tutors comments or grading of an assignment.
You are encouraged to attend the tutorials to allow for face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which you needed answers immediately.
It is also an opportunity to discuss any grey area with your tutor.
You can equally prepare questions to the tutorial class for 8COURSE GUIDE NSS 217 meaningful interactions.
You are sure to gain a lot from actively participating in the discussion.
Best of Luck.
9
