 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: POL216 COURSE TITLE: EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT COURSE GUIDE POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Course Team Henry V. Okotie (Writer) - NDCA Prof. Kunle Ajayi (Editor) - ADO-EKITI Prof. A. R. Yesufu (Programme Leader) - NOUN Mrs. Ifeyiwa M. Ogbonna- Nwaogu (Coordinator) - NOUN ii POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-500-1 All Rights Reserved iii POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS PAGE Introduction(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)..(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).
1 Course Aims...................................................................................... 1 Course Objectives............................................................................. 1 Working through this Course........................................................... 2 Course Materials............................................................................... 2 Study Units....................................................................................... 2 Textbooks and References................................................................ 3 Assessment........................................................................................ 3 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs)................................................. 4 Final Examination and Grading........................................................ 4 Course Marking Scheme................................................................... 4 Presentation Schedule....................................................................... 4 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule.......................................... 5 How to Get the Most from this Course.............................................. 6 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials........................................................ 8 Summary........................................................................................... 8 iv POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Introduction Welcome to POL216: Evolution of Nigerian Local Government This course is a three-credit unit course for undergraduate students in Political Science.
The materials have been developed with the Nigerian context in view.
This course guide gives you an overview of the course.
It also provides you with information on the organisation and requirements of the course.
Course Aims The aims are to help you understand the evolution of the Nigerian Local Government as a unit of governance and as a field of study.
Hence, conscious efforts have been made to expose the complexity associated with the development of the Local Government system in Nigeria.
These main aims will be achieved by: i.
Introducing you to the basic concepts and features of Local Government system.
ii.
Examining the development of Local Government in Nigeria.
iii.
To expose you to the study of Local Government Administration iv.
To help you widen your horizon of knowledge.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, POL216 has overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are at the beginning of each unit.
I advise that you read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check your progress.
Below are the wider objectives for the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you count yourself as having met the aims of the course.
On the successful completion of the course, you should be able to: a.
Define the basic concepts and features of local government.
b.
Explain some theories of local government.
c. Know the importance of local government as unit of governance.
d. Differentiate between local government as a field of study and as a unit of government.
v POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT e. Understand local government as closely related to other Social sciences.
f. Discuss the justifications and types of local government.
g. Learn the evolution of local government in Nigeria.
h. Understand the local government administration under the military regimes.
i.
Discuss the management of local government finance and personnel.
j.
Know the main functions of local government in Nigeria.
k. Discuss the main problems associated with local government.
l. Explain local government and inter-governmental relations.
Working through this Course To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: • Course Guide • Study unit • Assignments file • Relevant textbooks including the ones listed under each unit • As a student you might need to visit some local government areas of your choice • You might also need to follow up with the trends of local government development Study Units There are 25 units (of five modules) in this course.
These are listed below: Module 1 Basic Concepts Unit 1 Meaning of Local Government Unit 2 Theories of Local Government Unit 3 Features of Local Government Unit 4 Types/Classification of Local Government Systems Unit 5 Justification for Local Government Module 2 Evolution of Local Government in Nigeria vi POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Unit 1 Local Government in Pre-Colonial Nigeria Unit 2 Local Government in Colonial Era in Nigeria: Native Administration Unit 3 Local Government Reform in the 1950 in Nigeria Unit 4 Local Government under the Military Regimes in Nigeria Unit 5 The 1976 Local Government Reform in Nigeria Module 3 Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 1 Administrative Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 2 Political Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 3 Economic/Developmental Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 4 Exclusive Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 5 Concurrent and Delegated Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Module 4 Sources and Management of Local Government Finance in Nigeria Unit 1 Internal Revenue Generation for Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 2 External Revenue Generation for Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 3 Management of Local Governments Finance in Nigeria Unit 4 Personnel Management of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 5 Local Government and Inter-Governmental Relations in Nigeria Module 5 Problems of Local Government in Nigeria Unit 1 Political Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 2 Socio-Economic Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 3 Developmental Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 4 Financial Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 5 Environmental Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria Textbooks and References Certain books have been recommended in this course.
You may wish to purchase them for further reading.
vii POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Assessment File As assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you find details of the works you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course, the tutor marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs) You will have to submit a specified number of the (TMAs).
Every unit in this course has a tutor-marked assignment.
You will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the (TMAs) will be used for your 30% grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor-Marked assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submission.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a test of three hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Find time to read the unit all over before your examination.
The final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflects the kind of self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignment you have previously encountered.
And all aspects of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments (Best three assignments out of four marked) 30% Final Examination 70% Total 100% Presentation Schedule viii POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
Course Overview Unit Title of work Weeks Assignments Activity Course Guide Module 1 Basic Concepts 1 Meaning of Local Government Week 1 Assignment 1 2 Theories of Local Government Week 1 Assignment 2 3 Features of Local Government Week 2 Assignment 3 4 Types/Classification of Local Week 3 Assignment 4 Government Systems 5 Justification for Local Government Week 3 Assignment 5 Module 2 Evolution of Local Government in Nigeria 1 Local Government in Pre-Colonial Week 4 Assignment 1 Nigeria 2 Local Government in Colonial Era Week 5 Assignment 2 in Nigeria: Native Administration 3 Local Government Reform in the Week 5 Assignment 3 1950 in Nigeria 4 Local Government under the Week 6 Assignment 4 Military Regimes in Nigeria 5 The 1976 Local Government Week 6 Assignment 5 Reform in Nigeria Module 3 Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria 1 Administrative Functions of Local Week 7 Assignment 1 Governments in Nigeria 2 Political Functions of Local Week 8 Assignment 2 Governments in Nigeria 3 Economic/ Developmental Week 8 Assignment 3 Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria 4 Exclusive Functions of Local Week 9 Assignment 4 Governments in Nigeria 5 Concurrent and Delegated Week 9 Assignment 5 Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Module 4 Sources and Management of Local Government Finance in Nigeria 1 Internal Revenue Generation for Week 10 Assignment 1 Local Governments in Nigeria.
ix POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 2 External Revenue Generation for Week 10 Assignment 2 Local Governments in Nigeria 3 Management of Local Government Week 11 Assignment 3 Finance in Nigeria 4 Personnel Management of Local Week 12 Assignment 4 Government in Nigeria.
5 Local Government and Inter- Week 12 Assignment 5 Governmental Relations in Nigeria Module 5 Problems of Local Government in Nigeria 1 Political Problems of Local Week 13 Assignment 1 Governments in Nigeria 2 Socio-Economic Problems of Local Week 13 Assignment 2 Governments in Nigeria 3 Developmental Problems of Local Week 14 Assignment 3 Governments in Nigeria 4 Financial Problems of Local Week 14 Assignment 4 Governments in Nigeria 5 Environmental Problems of Local Week 15 Assignment 5 Governments in Nigeria Revision 1 Examination 1 Total 17 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have complete the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a x POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT reading section.
The following are the practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor(cid:8217)s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this course guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organise a study schedule.
Design a (cid:8220)Course Overview(cid:8221) to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work if you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit(cid:8217)s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
xi POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor(cid:8217)s comments, both on the tutor marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the course guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date 9at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • You have difficulty with the exercises • You have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor(cid:8217)s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary The course gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches you the basic concepts, scope as well as the evolution of local government in Nigeria.
It will also acquaint you with the new dimensions and development of local government as a unit of governance and as a field of study.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
xii POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT xiii POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Course Code POL216 Course Title Evolution of Nigerian Local Government Course Team Henry V. Okotie (Writer) - NDCA Prof. Kunle Ajayi (Editor) - ADO-EKITI Prof. A. R. Yesufu (Programme Leader) - NOUN Mrs. Ifeyiwa M. Ogbonna- Nwaogu (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xiv POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-500-1 All Rights Reserved xv POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230) 1 Unit 1 Meaning of Local Government.................................. 1 Unit 2 Theories of Local Government.................................. 7 Unit 3 Features of Local Government................................... 13 Unit 4 Types/Classification of Local Government Systems 18 Unit 5 Justification for Local Government............................ 23 Module 2 (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).(cid:8230)(cid:8230).
28 Unit 1 Local Government in Pre-Colonial Nigeria................ 28 Unit 2 Local Government in Colonial Era in Nigeria in Native Administration............................................... 34 Unit 3 Local Government Reforms in the 1950s in Nigeria.
38 Unit 4 Local Government under Military Regimes in Nigeria.
43 Unit 5 The 1976 Local Government Reform in Nigeria(cid:8230)(cid:8230).
49 Module 3 .................................................................................... 55 Unit 1 Administrative Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria......................................................................... 55 Unit 2 Political Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria......................................................................... 61 Unit 3 Economic/Developmental Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria.............................................. 68 Unit 4 Exclusive Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria......................................................................... 72 Unit 5 Concurrent and Delegated Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria.............................................. 78 Module 4 .................................................................................... 82 Unit 1 Internal Revenue Generation for Local Governments in Nigeria............................................. 82 Unit 2 External Revenue Generation for Local Governments in Nigeria............................................. 86 Unit 3 Management of Local Government Finance in Nigeria....................................................................... 90 Unit 4 Personnel Management of Local Government in Nigeria........................................................................ 98 Unit 5 Local Government and Inter-Governmental Relations in Nigeria.................................................... 106 xvi POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Module 5 .................................................................................... 111 Unit 1 Political Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria..................................................................... 111 Unit 2 Socio-Economic Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria.......................................... 115 Unit 3 Developmental Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria.......................................... 119 Unit 4 Financial Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria..................................................................... 124 Unit 5 Environmental Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria.......................................... 129 x vii NonePOL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT MODULE 1 Unit 1 Meaning of Local Government Unit 2 Theories of Local Government Unit 3 Features of Local Government Unit 4 Types/Classification of Local Government Systems Unit 5 Justification for Local Government UNIT 1 MEANING OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Local Government 3.2 Local Government as a Unit of Government 3.3 The Local Government as a Field of Study in Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The humankind has always lived in community.
From the days of the early man, gathering fruits for food, to the Greek city-states or Polis, humankind has always sought to live peaceful communities.
It is from these community arrangements that resulted in governmental organisation in modern times.
The current arrangement of nature-states or states is the organisation of people and territories under one government.
A state is a community of persons occupying a defined territory with independence and having an organised government.
The four essential elements of a state are fixed territory, population, government and sovereignty.
It is for the ease of administering a state and to bring the instrument of governance closer to the people, that government are broken into segments or smaller units.
The essence is to capture and involve the people at the grassroots to be part of governance in their own affairs.
The local government is the smallest unit of governance and the aim is to serve the people at the grassroots.
In Nigeria, the local government system has gone through a lot of transformation and has come to stay as a unit of government.
1POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define local government as a unit of government • identify local government as a field of study in public administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Local Government Local government refers to a political sub-division, which are created within a state for the exercise of duties and responsibilities granted by constitutional provisions or legislative enactments.
Local governments are infra-sovereign geographic units found within sovereign nation or quasi-sovereign state.
Like other units of governments, local governments possess a defined area, a population, an organisation, also the authority to undertake, and the power to perform public activities.
Local government is the smallest unit of administration in any political system.
It is the lowest level of government in a modern state structure that is legally distinct with powers to raise its own revenue and to undertake delegated responsibilities as provided for by the constitution.
It is the lowest level through which representative government can be practiced.
In Nigeria, there are three-tier of government, i.e.
Federal, State and Local Government.
The local government is the third-tier of government and that placed it in a position of nearness to the people at the grassroots or local communities.
Its closeness to the local populace enables it to perform special functions and services, which bother on the interests and aspirations of the local communities.
Blair defined local government as an organisation with a resident population occupying a defined area that has a usually authorised organisation and government body; a separated legal entity, the power to provide certain public or governmental services and a substantial degree of autonomy including legal or actual power to raise part of its own revenue.
Akpan sees local government as essentially a political institution, which aims at not only to train its members for citizenship but also to get various services run for the benefit of the community.
Within its territory, a local government unit seeks to give opportunities to the people for the expression of their opinion concerning local affairs.
It enables them to choose their representatives to take care of local affairs on their behalf.
Quasi-sovereign state are those in which the supreme political authority and power is divided between the central government 2 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT of the country as a whole and the federated state government of the major constituent geographical pasts.
Each of them within its own sphere is supreme and independent of the other.
Jackson is of the view that local government is concerned with localities and not with the country as a whole; it must for this reason be subordinate to the national government.
The term further implies some jurisdiction or activity of public nature; it implies the existence of authorities empowered to exercise that jurisdiction and activity.
According to US Bureau of the census, a unit of local government must exhibit three qualifications; first, it must exist as an organised entity possessing organisation and some minimum powers, second, it must have governmental character as an agency of the public to whom it must be accountable and third, it must possess substantial autonomy.
Lockard also defines local government as a public organisation authorised to decide and administer a large range of public policies within a relatively small territory, which is subdivided of a regional or national government.
Local government is at the bottom of a pyramid of governmental institutions with the national government at the top and intermediate governmental state, regions, provinces, occupying in middle range.
3.2 Local Government as a Unit of Government Arising from the various policy changes regarding the size, structure, functions and operations of the local government system and, in particular, the decision to implement the federal executive presidential system of government, and its logic at local government level, it has become necessary to comprehensively include the local government as viable unit of government.
Local Government as a unit of government placed it in a position where it perform those specific functions and duties which the other two-tiers of government would not have been able to perform with efficiency and effectiveness.
The local government is the first-stop interaction of governance with the local communities and the people.
The local government is the platform through which the people are represented in government at the lowest level of governance.
As a unit of government, the local government is created to meet the peculiar needs of the people at the grassroots, this is very vital because every community has its peculiar characteristics, needs and value system, that differentiate it from another community.
As a unit of government, it is also a channel through which local interest are aggregated and transmitted to the other two-tiers of government.
The local government as a unit of government is set out to define the scope and limits of the powers, functions and responsibilities of the different arms and functionaries of government at the local level as well as their 3POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT roles or relationships with the organs and functionaries of the higher tiers of government with a view to minimising the effects and burden of governance associated with federal and state government.
In the past local government was not recognised as a unit of government because there was no constitutional backing.
It was perceived as an administrative convenience, which serves the purpose of an outlet for federal and state government.
It is the consistent development and evolution of local government, coupled with the increasing functions performed by local government to the people at the grassroots that has transformed the local government as a viable unit of government.
In the primitive era, it serves the interests and aspirations of the local people, in the colonial era, it serves the more the interest of the colonialists, under the military regimes, it serves the interest of the people as dictated by the military and under the democratic regimes it is perceived to serve the interests and aspirations of the people at the grassroots.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss Local Government as a unit of government 3.3 Local Government as a Field of Study in Public Administration The Social Science is a wide field of study.
It consists of disciplines such as Sociology, Economics, Geography, Psychology, Political Science and sometimes Management Sciences.
Each of these fields also has its branches or areas of specialisation.
Our main concern in this study is Political Science, which has International Relations, Political Economy, Public Administration and Comparative and Development Studies as its branches.
Local government as a study is a sub-unit under Public Administration.
It is one of the various branches of Public Administration.
As a field of study Local Government has gained prominence since the early 1980s and some universities in Nigeria have started awarding degrees in Local Government studies.
The essence is to create an in-depth knowledge on the importance of local government as a vital unit of governance.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss Local Government as a field of study 4.0 CONCLUSION The concept of the local government as a third-tier of governance is predicated on the principle of bringing the instrument of governance closer to the communities and harnessing the interests and aspirations of 4 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT the local communities as an inputs-outputs analysis in governance.
The local government also is an avenue through which the people can exercise their political rights through representatives at the local councils established by law to perform specific powers within their jurisdictions.
The local government is a distinct legal entity and has power to raise its own revenue within its areas of jurisdiction as provided for in the constitution.
5.0 SUMMARY An attempt has been made to give the definition of local government as the smallest unit of administration in any political system.
It is the lowest level of government in a modern state structure that is legally distinct with powers to raise its own revenue and to undertake delegated responsibilities as provided for by the constitution.
We also established that local government is the lowest of the three-tier of government in Nigeria.
We have also established that it has its own power in its areas of jurisdictions to perform specific functions as delegated by the constitution.
We also indicated that the local government is the closest unit of government to the people and communities and by virtue of this, can aggregate the interests and aspirations of the people at the local levels for further transmission to the other tiers of government.
Finally, we also identify the local government as a field of study in public administration, which is a branch of political science in order to expose the intellectual complexity associate with local government administration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define local government as a concept as well as a unit of governance.
2.
The local government is the platform through which the people are represented in government at the lowest level of governance.
Explain 5POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Akpan, N.U.
(cid:8220)Epitaph to Indirect Rule(cid:8221), in O. Oyediran, (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications Ltd. Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Blair, G.S.
(1997).
Government at the Grassroots.
L. A. California: Palisade Publishers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 Constitution.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Jackson, W.E.
(1960).
The Structure of Local Government in England and Wales cited in Vishnoo Bhagwan and Vidya Bhushan (2005).
Public Administration, 17th edition New Delhi India: S. Chand and Company Ltd. Lockard, Duane (1968).
(cid:8220)An Article on Local Government(cid:8221) in International Encyclopaedia of Social Sciences, Vol.
IX cited in Vishnoo Bhagwan and Vidya Bhushan (2005).
Maddox, W. and Robert, F. Fuquay (1965) State and Local Government cited in Vishnoo Bhagwan and Vidya Bhushan (2005).
Nanda, T.R.
(1993).
Political Science.
New Delhi, India: Anmol Publications.
Vishnoo Bhagwan and Vidya Bhushan (2005).
Public Administration (17th ed.).
New Delhi India: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 6 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 2 THEORIES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Efficiency Services Delivery Theory 3.2 The Democratic Participatory Theory 3.3 The Developmental and Accountability Control Theory 3.4 The Holistic Integrationist School 3.5 Integrating the Different Schools of Thoughts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every field of study is explained by the use of theory.
Theory is the tool for the simplification of a phenomenon.
It is difficult to go about a particular field of study without an underlying theory to explain such field of study particularly to new beginners in the field.
Theory is the road-map for the study of both complex and simple phenomenon.
It serves as a guide from the known to the unknown.
A theory can be defined as a proposition or a set of propositions that tries to explain certain phenomenon.
It is also a systematic observation drawn from generalisation and subjected to confirmation over a long period.
It is a tool or instrument of inquiry that can be applied in predicting and explaining certain outcomes in a subject or field of study.
A theory must be universally acceptable and applicable when applied to a similar or related phenomenon.
One important aspects of theory is that it must be verifiable and reliable.
It must be able to stand the test of proof through its validity and reliability.
However, it is not all theories that must, pass through the acid test to gain acceptability and reliability, particularly the theories in the social sciences which deal with human behaviour.
Human behaviour is often times highly unpredictable, this allowed for variance in social science theories.
7POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the following theories of local government: • the Efficiency Services Delivery Theory • the Democratic Participatory Theory • the Developmental and Accountability Control Theory • the Holistic Integrationist School • integrating the different schools of thoughts 3.0 MAIN CONTENT There have been debates among scholars as to whether there is a theory or theories of local government.
The local government as a field of study is relatively new; therefore, scholars are still skeptical about a sacrosanct theory for local government.
As a fast growing field of study and administrative unit of government, the local government evolved some theories, which are useful for our discussion in this unit.
We shall examine the efficiency services theory, the democracy school of local government and the Accountability and control theory.
3.1 The Efficiency Services Delivery Theory This is of the view that local government occupies the best position for the efficient performance of those specific functions, which the constitution prescribed.
The peculiar nature of the local government placed it in a position to perform those functions efficiently due to it nearness and closeness to the people at the grassroots.
The efficiency services theory also stipulates that the smallness of the population allow for efficient provision of the basic social amenities.
It also allows for flexibility in decision-making and implementation.
In addition, the theory stipulates that local government exist to articulate and aggregate the interests and aspirations of the people for better and more efficient services.
The theory argues that what is central and important to the people is the knowledge and articulation of the problem confronting the people and finding appropriate solutions to the problems.
The theory further argued that since the officials of the local government councils are indigenes of the areas, they are in a better position to understand the needs of the people and provide efficient services for their welfare.
3.2 The Democratic Participatory Theory This theory perceives the local government as an avenue for the local populace to participate in politics.
This school of thought believes that 8 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT the local government provides the training ground for local populace to engage in democratic governance.
The theory argues essentially that, the local government provides the citizens at the community level, the opportunities for political participation, interest aggregation, political education and political socialisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Distinguish between the Efficiency Services Delivery Theory and the Democratic Participatory Theory.
3.3 The Developmental and Accountability Control Theory This theory stipulates that the local government is an effective agent of change.
This change encompasses social and economic development, work force resource development, national integration and better share of the national wealth.
The theory also argues that the local government also create an avenue for proper accountability and control because, the people are familiar with the elected officials and the success of the representatives can be judged in the way the people perceived the performance of their duties effectively and efficiently for the collective good of the communities.
The extent to which the elected officials achieve their designated duties and functions determines the level of trust and confidence the people will have in re-electing such an official.
Therefore, the developmental and accountability control theory serve as a check and litmus test on the representatives of the local government.
3.4 The Holistic Integrationist School This school view local government from a narrower and more particularistic point.
The school is of the opinion that a political system that is culturally plural, socially diffused and not strictly differentiated, a more holistic view of roles is inevitable.
The practical implication of the view of this school is that local government exists consciously to make its own contributions to and thereby help to achieve national integration, national evolution and national consciousness.
Emil Sady has suggested that local governments perform this holistic- integrationist function through: 1.
Decongesting government at the centre thereby freeing national leaders from onerous details and unnecessary involvement in local issues.
9POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 2.
Increasing people(cid:8217)s understanding and enlightening people about economic (community) development.
3.
Making programmes to foster social and economic betterment at the local level more realistic and lasting.
4.
Training people in the art of self government SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Differentiate between the Developmental, Accountability Control Theory and the Holistic Integrationist School 3.5 Integrating the Different Schools of Thoughts The holistic integrationist school is more concerned with the programmatic approach of how local government can be an effective agent of a better life, bring about an improved means of living, develop a people more conscious of their dependence on, and need for one another.
Both the democratic participatory school and the efficiency services schools are built on basic values that are not in any way contradictory to the ideals of the holistic school.
Ola summed up the functional criteria of the theories under two major heads as follows: 1.
The General category, which sums up the deals of the Democratic-Participatory School and the Efficiency-Services Delivery School under the functional items are: a. democratic ideals b. political participation c. protective services d. infrastructural services 2.
The Development category consists mainly of the Holistic- Integrationists ideals summoned under the functional items are: a. national integration b. socio- economic development c. manpower resource development 4.0 CONCLUSION The theory of local government is an important aspect of the local government discourse both as a unit of government and as a field of study.
The theories are to explain the complex phenomenon associated with local government.
The local government as the smallest unit of 10 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT government might appear simple, but its complexity and dynamics need to be approached and explain with the use of local government theories.
It is only with theoretical explanation that an in-depth knowledge of the study of local government can be accomplished.
Therefore, the use of the theories of local government cannot be overemphasised in this study.
4.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have attempted to look at the meaning and use of theory to the study of local government.
We have been able to establish that theory is a tool for the explanation of complex phenomenon and its use cannot be overemphasised in the study of local government.
We discussed five basic theories of local government to include the efficiency services delivery theory, which perceived the local government as the best unit of government to render efficient services at the local level and to aggregate, articulate the interests and aspirations of the people for efficient service to them.
We also discussed the democratic participatory theory, which perceives the local government as the best avenue for political participation, and socialisation for the citizens and the developmental accountability control theory, which sees the local government as a unit of developmental social change, and it also, take into account the level of efficiency and accountability rendered to the people.
Others are the holistic integrationist school, which is more concerned with the programmatic approach of how local government can be an effective agent of a better life, bring about an improved means of living and develop a people more conscious of their dependence on and need for one another through collaboration and cooperation and the integration of the different schools of thoughts.
Finally, we established that these theoretical explanations will give in- dept knowledge in the study of local government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the three basic theories of local government.
11POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akpan, N.U.
(cid:8220)Epitaph to Indirect Rule(cid:8221), in O. Oyediran, (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications Ltd. Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Blair, G.S.
(1997).
Government at the Grassroots.
L. A. California: Palisade Publishers.
Ola, R.O.F.
(1984).
Local Government Administration in Nigeria.
London: Kegan Paul Ola R.O.F.
(1988) (cid:8220)Some Thoughts on the Role of Local Government in Developing Countries (Nigeria)(cid:8221) In L. Adamolekun et al (eds.).
Local Government in West Africa since Independence, Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
12 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 3 FEATURES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is decentralisation?
3.2 Deconcentration 3.3 Delegation 3.4 Devolution 3.5 Privatisation 3.6 Other features of Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the major features of local government administration is decentralisation.
This is one distinctive feature of local government that the central government does not have.
Adamolekun states that decentralisation denotes (cid:8220)the organisation of government activity outside the headquarters of the central government either as an administrative measure involving the transfer of resources and responsibilities to agents of the central government located outside the headquarters or as a political arrangement involving the devolution of specific powers, functions and resources by the central government to sub-national level government units(cid:8221).
Decentralisation is one major platform through which local resources, initiatives and inputs are mobilised and transformed for national development.
It is through decentralisation that local autonomy, management of their own affairs, transfer of power from central government to local authorities can be realised.
Other features include deconcentration, delegation, devolution and privatisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain the following: • decentralisation • deconcentration • delegation • devolution • privatisation • other features of local government 13POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Decentralisation The strategic position of the local government is more pronounced through the instrument of decentralisation.
This is an important aspect of local government as a unit of government because it creates the enabling environment for democratisation and development.
The goals of decentralisation can be perceived as follows; according to Laleye, local government provide for popular participation through the implementation of the democratic principle of elective representativeness in the public decision-making process; encourage local initiative and sacrifice and mobilise the human and financial resources that are available in the locality for development; ensure adequate provision for social services necessary for a decent life; and establish a functioning communication channel between the central authority and the local institutions with a view to ensuring the effectiveness of the central governments actions.
Decentralisation can also be discussed in four basic variances such as deconcentration, delegation, devolution and privatisation.
3.2 Deconcentration This is the transfer of administrative functions from central government or national ministries to field agencies within the local level.
It involves the redistribution of executive responsibilities to sub-administrative structure.
Here, the local or sub-ordinate levels of governments serve as agents of the central government.
Deconcentration is a process of breaking down tasks and transferring it to the local levels for implementation.
The feature here is that, the decision-making is at the central level, while the local government presents the platform for implementation, e.g.
primary health care, universal primary education etc.
Deconcentration can be regarded as a limited form of decentralisation and it lessen the burden of central government.
For deconcentration to take place, provincial or local government is essential.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss deconcentration and delegation as variances of decentralisation 3.3 Delegation The central government transfers some level of responsibilities for decision-making and implementation of specific functions to some other branch of government through this process.
Under the delegation, these 14 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT other branch of governments and agencies are granted some level of autonomy or powers to formulate and implement programmes over specific functions without the direct control of the central government.
Delegation also means conferring of specified authority to a lower authority.
Legally, the delegated authority still belongs to the principal, but in practice, its exercise is allowed to the subordinate or lower authority.
Delegation is full when complete powers are conferred on the agent or lower authority.
Delegation is conditional when the action of a subordinate is subject to confirmation or revision by the superior; it is unconditional when the subordinate or lower authority is free to act without reservations.
Delegation is formal when embodied in written form based on customs, conventions and understanding.
Delegation is direct when no third person intervenes between the two parties to delegation; it is intermediate when it is made through third person.
Delegation of authority means more than simply assigning duties to others in more or less detail.
The essence of delegation is to confer discretion upon others to use their judgement in meeting specific problems within the framework of their duties.
One cannot delegate the authority which himself does not possess.
Authority once delegated can be enhanced, reduced or withdrawn according to the changing circumstances.
3.4 Devolution This involves the transfer of functional responsibilities including decision-making authority to legally incorporated sub-national units of government.
It entails therefore, the transfer of political authority to make decisions in some spheres of public policy from the central government to local government or similar units at the local level.
The central and the local governments are structurally differentiated in the structural pattern of devolution.
Each level has its own powers and separate institutions for performing its own functions and activities.
Devolution is associated with local autonomy and with increase scope for popular participation in governmental activities.
Under the devolution category, local governments are granted powers to source for their revenue control their finances as well as recruit their own personnel.
Devolution indicate status and policy making power.
Devolution of power is also designed to create a political environment in which power to access political, economical and social resources is distributed between the central government and lower levels of government.
State authority is divided among a wide range of actors, making politics less threatening and therefore encouraging joint problem solving.
Devolution creates a fairer political ground, protects groups and 15POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT individual human rights, establishes check and balances to central power and prevents political violence among rival groups.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the differences between Devolution and Privatisation 3.5 Privatisation This is a new form of decentralisation.
Under privatisation, other players such as community groups, corporate organisations, voluntary associations, cooperatives, business association, civil society groups and other non-governmental organisations enter into Public-Private Partnership (PPP) to provide goods and services for the benefits of the local communities.
PPP can also refer to contractual agreements formed between a public agency and private sector entity that allow for greater private sector participation in the delivery of essential goods and services.
PPP relate or connote perfection and practices affecting public private sector relationships in ensuring national global health, development and well being of the society 3.6 Other Features of Local Government There are other features of local government, which include structural differentiation, that is, it has a corporate identity and status different from other forms of government.
It possesses the authority and institutional powers for which it has been created.
The local government also has multi-functional powers, which include the power to legislate, formulate and implement policies for the benefits of its people.
The local government also has defined territorial boundaries, just like other tiers of government, it has jurisdiction over people inhabiting its geographical territories, and finally, its elected or appointed officers or representatives have specified tenure of office.
4.0 CONCLUSION The peculiarity of local government is situated in its decentralisation features.
An examination of these features depicts local government system as an indispensable unit in every democratic society.
The instrument of decentralisation permits the local government to have and exercise its own identity as a unit of governance.
This distinctive attributes make the local government to acquire its significance in the performance of its specific functions in the general administration of the country.
16 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 5.0 SUMMARY We have examined decentralisation with its variance such as deconcentration, delegation, devolution and privatisation.
We have also identified the goals of decentralisation as tools for measuring local government achievements.
We also enumerate other features of local government to include structural differentiation, as having multi- functional powers, defined territories and its officers whether elected or appointed as having specified tenure of office.
We have been able to establish that decentralisation gives the local government its distinctive nature and it is through the process of decentralisation and other features that the local government expresses its essence and inter-relates with other units of government.
These features provides the basic framework for integrating and harnessing local initiatives, interests and aspirations into national development agenda and also serves as a channel for transmitting national policies and decisions to the local levels.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the various features of local government administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.).
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa since Independence.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government, Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos Malthouse Press.
Blair, G.S.
(1997).
Government at the Grassroots L.A. California: Palisade Publishers.
Olatubosun, D (1975).
Nigeria(cid:8217)s Neglected Rural Majority.
London: Oxford University Press Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi, (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications Vishnoo Bhagwan and Vidya Bhushan (2005) Public Administration (17th ed.).
New Delhi, India: S. Chand and Company.
17POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 4 TYPES/CLASSIFICATION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The French System of Local Government 3.2 The Socialist/Communist System 3.3 The Anglo-Saxon (British) System 3.4 The Traditional System 3.5 The Post-Colonial System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Local government has been variously classified into different types to provide the needed clarity in understanding the scope, structure, functions and opportunities it provide for participation in government and as a machinery for policy direction at the local level.
Local government has been classified into different categories based on the prevailing political system under which such local government is to operate.
The classification of local government stem from the fact that it is semi-autonomous and a sub-national political arrangement.
In view of this the categorisation must reflect the political ideology or system of the central government.
The major categorisation of local government includes the French system, the Communist system, the Anglo-Saxon (British) system, the Traditional system and the Post-Colonial system.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain: • the French system of local government • the Socialist/Communist system • the Anglo-Saxon (British) system • the Traditional system • the Post-Colonial system.
18 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The French System of Local Government The French system of local government is the most widespread of all the patterns in the world.
In this system, local government is perceived more or less as the local arm of the central government.
In this pattern, the central government appoints an agent at the local government.
This agent is called (cid:8220)Prefect(cid:8221).
The prefect is a Senior Civil Servant and a representative of the central government who looks after the interests and programmes of the central government in the assigned area of jurisdiction as well as overseeing the affairs of the local administrative machinery.
The French system of local government is highly centralised.
Centralisation is the essence of the system.
All authority converges inward and upward.
It can be charted in the form of a perfect pyramid.
In France, it is assumed that the Minister of Interior presses the button and the Prefects, the Sub-Prefects, the Mayors and Deputy Mayors do the rest.
The peculiarity of this style of local government is that the central government places in sub-regions of the nation an agent of the central government to oversee and if necessary to counter, suspend or replace local government.
3.2 The Socialist/Communist System The Socialist/Communist system of local government constitutes part of complex governmental agencies whose purpose is socialist planning for economic development of the whole country.
Here, the communist party exercises firm direction and leadership required for central planning.
In this system, all subordinate units of government operate and take directions from centrally pre-determined decision.
There is little or no initiative emanating from the local or sub-national government.
Local independence is restricted as control device are extensive and vigorously applied.
This system connotes that the local government is an agency of the central government and part of the central administration through strict party discipline and compliance.
The local government in the communist countries is examples of deconcentration of authority rather than decentralisation.
In other words, the local government unit is an agency of the central government and its functions are an integral element of hierarchical administrative system of the state.
The area of local independence is narrow and extends only to minor matters whereas control devices are extensive and vigorously applied.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the special features of the French system of local government 19POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.3 The Anglo-Saxon or the British System The Anglo-Saxon or the British system of local government bases its emphasis on the autonomy of the local government.
This autonomy is expressed through its policy-making organ or a council of elected or appointed members representing local interest.
Here, the institutions of local government are distinctively separated from those of the central government.
Also, as a separate tier of government its sources of revenue and personnel management are clearly defined and spelt out in an official document.
In this type of local government system, there is often time, a local government service commission or board, which is charged with the responsibilities for the recruitment and management of local government personnel.
The underlying basis of local government is the principle of self-determination in which every community is given substantial measure of freedom in the administration of its own affairs.
This prevents the local government from rigid and absolute control from above however, the degree of autonomy of local governments varies from country to country but in all cases, a considerable degree of local independence prevails.
3.4 The Traditional System The Traditional system of local government is sometimes referred to as the (cid:8220)non-western(cid:8221) patterns of local government.
This pattern refers to the pre-colonial or pre-literate types in many underdeveloped or developing countries of the world where local administration are centred or structured around traditional political institutions such as the chief or traditional rulers, council of elders, the extended family system or the clan system.
Here, the local traditional institutions formulate and implement policies for the traditional communities.
The policies often times have been a reflection of the socio-political and culture realities of their environments.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the relevance of the traditional local government system in contemporary governance.
3.5 The Post-Colonial System The Post-Colonial system of the local government is associated with the newly independent nations of the world faced with the need for economic growth and the extension of new national power to the communities and the rapidly growing cities.
The post colonial system cut across all the other system in a modern day local government structure.
The creation of new nations from former colonies involves 20 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT varying degrees of change in local government.
In some cases, the imposition of a strong single party political system has subverted adjustments rather than revolutionary change have been made, local government patterns have not altered drastically.
The legacy of colonialism is omnipresent however much the new leaders strive for break from the colonial past.
4.0 CONCLUSION The classification of local government into various types is predicated on the functions, which are to be performed, the political system under which it is to operate and the communities that it is meant to serve.
The basic essence of the classification is to determine the level of autonomy that is to be granted to the local government authorities.
It is also to locate the amount of powers and authorities that such local government is to possess.
It is this classification into categories that set the rules and principles under which the local government is to operate.
It is the classification that determines the level of the political and economic participation that the local communities are permitted to exhibits.
Since local government, autonomy is not absolute; their level of autonomy can be found in their categorisation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the basic tasks has been to identify and discuss the various types of local government system.
We have been able to discussed the most common classification of local government systems to include the French system which is often referred to as the (cid:8220)Prefect(cid:8221) system as practiced by the French system of government.
We also discussed the socialist/communist system which is common among the Socialists and Communist states; where the local government is centrally controlled.
Next, we examine the Anglo-Saxon or the British system where the level of autonomy and structure is clearly defined.
The traditional system we examined as common in the developing countries where traditional institutions formulate and implement policies for the local communities.
Finally, we identified the post-colonial system as associated with the newly independent states.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identity and discuss the various types of local government system.
21POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.).
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa since Independence.Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Agagu, A.A, (cid:8220)The Concept of Local Government(cid:8221) in Kolawole, D.
(ed.).
Reading in Political Science.
Ibadan: Dekaal Publishers Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics, Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Lockard, D.M.
(1968).
(cid:8220)Local Government(cid:8221) in International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences.
New York: Voloa Publisher.
Vishnoo Bhagwan and Vidya Bhushan (2005).
Public Administration (17th ed.).
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. Wralth, Ronald (1964).
Local Government in West Africa.
London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. 22 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 5 JUSTIFICATION FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Political Justification 3.2 Administrative Justification 3.3 Developmental Justification 3.4 Local Government as a Channel of Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the major issues in the study of local government is the reason or justification for the establishment of local government.
Local government is universally regarded as the nearest institution to the people at the grassroots involved in the task of governance.
As an instrument of development, the local government is founded upon the premise that the sub-unit of government stimulates popular participation in developmental and political activities.
J.S.
Mills argues that certain functions of government are purely local in character and should be locally administered and controlled; local government gives a valuable opportunity for education in citizenship or an opportunity for democratic decision making; and that local councils are more easily held accountable to local groups and individuals than the central government and its agencies.
These statements can be broken down into four justifications for local government establishment as political, administrative, developmental and as a channel of communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the following: • political justification • administrative justification • developmental justification • local government as a channel of communication.
23POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Political Justification This is one of the major reasons for the establishment of local government.
Local government is said to provide the platform for local participation in politics and democracy.
It provides the local citizens an opportunity to participate in the public affairs of their communities.
Local government brings the government closer to the people within a geographical locality.
It serves as an alternative to over concentration of political power at the central government.
The complexity of modern government is simplified with the existence of local government.
It promotes liberty, equality and local autonomy which requires the individuals and groups to express their views and that such view should be given equal regard in decision making process.
Local government also serves as an avenue for gathering inputs from diverse localities into the policy making process at the central government.
As an essential ingredient of democracy, local government provide the training ground for political leaders at the grassroots who gather such experience for national leadership.
However, that local government provides a training ground for political leaders particularly at the central level is subject to debate, because, there are political leaders at the national level who did not participate in political affairs at the local level, this is coupled with the fact that some political leaders have failed elections at the local level, only to win at the national level.
Again, there are no formal schools for political education at the local level that prepare political leaders for national politics.
It has also been argue that national politics is so different in scale and dynamics that local experience and knowledge might be inadequate for understanding national affairs.
The above not withstanding, local participation is a vital instrument in democracy.
Local government may be said to involve the conception of territorial, non-sovereign community possessing the legal right and the necessary organisation to regulate its own affairs.
Local government also seek its justification from the fact that it is that part of government of a nation or state which deals mainly with such matters as concern the inhabitants of a particular district or place together with those matters which parliament has deemed it desirable subordinate to the central or national government.
3.2 Administrative Justification The local government is perceived first and foremost to some scholars as administrative agency for efficient provision of services.
Local government administration is to enhance the effective and efficient provision of services to the people at the local level.
Here, the local government makes for the decongestion and decentralisation of 24 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT administration at the central level and serves as an efficient administration of resources and provision of services to a measurable standard for the local communities.
Most importantly, is the fact that the local government is closer to the people and it is in a position to understand and analysed the problems of the people.
This closeness of the local government to the people also place it in a position to have better knowledge and information of the local communities with a view to providing those specific functions that directly affects the people.
Again, the local government also gives the people a sense of belonging by participating in the alleviation of their immediate problems and promoting the necessary welfare which otherwise would have been difficult by the national or central government.
However, the point must be made that there are specialised administrative functions that cannot be performed by the local government, this is because, the local government is a multi-purpose institution which provide general services to the people.
Local government is governments consisting of certain sub-ordinate bodies which have defined power making rules and regulations within their prescribed area of administration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examine the main feature of political and administrative justifications of local government system of government.
3.3 Development Justification The local government is regarded as the bedrock of developmental activities because of the feeling of attachment which the people have for the programmes emanating from their local communities.
It provides the people a springboard to conduct their own affairs, mobilise, sustain and execute local developmental initiative in line with the local needs interests and aspirations of the people.
Again, the local government is perceived as complementary in the division of labour among the various levels of governments, because the local government is said to have specialty in the efficient provision of those developmental services that are local specific.
However, some critics have argued that this justification of local government promote sectionalism and parochial interests and therefore, inimical to political and developmental integration at the national level.
Inspite of this, the role of the local government in developmental efforts particularly in those programmes and activities which they help to initiate cannot be over emphasised.
Local government helps to cultivate, civil sense and responsibility among citizens and coordinates harmonies collaboration in common administration of common interest.
25POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.4 As a Channel of Communication Local government serves as inputs and outputs in the policy making process of the national government.
New policies and programmes are sometimes test run at the local level by the national or central government to seek the realities and outcomes before it is implemented at the national level.
The local government also serves as a channel of communication between the national government and the local government by aggregating the feelings, interests and aspirations of the local populace and transmitting same to the national.
At the same time channel the decisions from the national down to the local people.
It is also important to note that local government serves as channel of communication among themselves.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State the relevance of local government as a channel of communication among various levels of government in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION The ultimate goal of every local government is to justify its creation and maintain its existence for the benefits of the people.
It is also the ultimate aim of every democratic setting that the people should be governed by the smallest and closest unit of government for good governance and best practices.
Therefore, the basic essence of creating local government is to service the interest of the people at the local level of government by performing those specific functions which affects the daily existence of the people.
It is these justifications for the existence of these governments that have made it a permanent feature in any modern democracy.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed the essence and justification for the creation of local government as a unit of government.
In the unit we have examined four basic reasons for the creation and maintenance of local government to include political justification, which gives the people at the local level an opportunity to be part of the political process and to represent their own political affairs; administrative justification which sees the local government as administrative agency for efficient provision of services for the local people; developmental justification which perceived the local government as the bedrock of developmental activities; and as 26 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT channel of communication which portray the local government as a two- way channel of communication between the central and local government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGMENT In your view, what are the justifications for local government creation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER REDING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi, (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Oyediran, Oyeleye (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications Ltd. 27POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT MODULE 2 Unit 1 Local Government in Pre-Colonial Nigeria Unit 2 Local Government in Colonial Era in Nigeria Native Administration Unit 3 Local Government Reforms in the 1950s in Nigeria Unit 4 Local Government under Military Regimes in Nigeria Unit 5 The 1976 Local Government Reform in Nigeria UNIT 1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN PRE-COLONIAL NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Pre-Colonial Administration in the Hausa-Fulani Societies 3.2 Pre-Colonial Administration in the Yoruba Societies 3.3 Pre-Colonial Administration in the Igbo societies 3.4 Pre-Colonial Administration in the Benin Kingdom 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Local government as a unit of government or administration dates back to the pre-colonial or primitive societies.
Every society has always had a way of administering itself based on the structure of the society.
Pre- colonial administrations in Nigeria have been based on the traditional setting that is prevalent in such societies.
In this unit, we shall look at pre-colonial Nigeria from the regional groupings, that is, Hausa(cid:8211)Fulani in the northern parts of Nigeria where the emirate system is very strong and prevalent; the Yoruba in the western part where the Oba traditional system is prevalent; and the Igbo in the east which was republican in nature with the elders(cid:8217) council.
Administration in pre-colonial societies in Nigeria was independent of each other.
The various regions administered their societies according to their culture and traditional institutions.
28 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain the main structure of the pre-colonial administration in: • Hausa-Fulani societies • Yoruba societies • Igbo societies • Benin Kingdom.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Pre-Colonial Administration in the Hausa-Fulani Societies Not until the Jihad, there was a pre-existing Hausa (Habe) Sarauta system.
These Hausa societies were ruled by Habe kings, who were kings over each kingdom comprised of the capital city where the king hired and other numerous villages or cleavages characterised by the ruling class (Sarakuna) and the subjects (Talakawa) groupings.
The villages were independent of each other but recognised the authority of the king.
The king does not interfere in the village affairs except when the regular taxes or tributes for the maintenance and defence of the kingdom are not forthcoming.
Each village was headed by the oldest male member of the strongest and most influential family and assisted by the elders of the less powerful families.
This system of administration was truncated after the Fulani conquest and the introduction of the fiefs.
With the introduction of the fiefdoms, the villages lost their independence and were now ruled by fief-holders who only have access to the paramount ruler or emirs.
The Hausa-Fulani political system in the pre-colonial era was structured as follows: • the compound as the basic unit of organisation • the ward comprising of groups of compound • the village which consisted of a collection of wards • the fief was a group of villages • the emirate was a totality of the fiefs within a definable area • the capital city was the seat of government These structures also reflected the hierarchy of government, where the reporting and commanding structure is a vertical relationship.
29POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.2 Pre-Colonial Administration in the Yoruba Societies The Yoruba societies, particular the Oyo Empire was a well organised system of government.
Although the political system was headed by a king (Alaafin), it was more or less a constitutional government with the various levels of governance well defined and structured.
The Oyo government was structured to reflect the three arms of modern state of executive, legislature and the judiciary.
At the head of government and the executive is the king (Alaafin) who was regarded as a divine king and the personification of the whole state, theoretically, he could do any thing but in practice he was assisted in government of the kingdom by his senior chiefs, who are responsible for collection of tributes, settlements of disputes and daily administration of the kingdom.
The Oyo empire was so well organised and structured that there were constitutional checks on the powers of the Alaafin which include a constitutional process for the removal of the Alaafin if and when he lost the confidence of his subjects, he is presented with an empty calabash which signify his impeachment as the king over the kingdom with the expectation that he is to commit suicide.
The Oyomesi Council comes closely below the Alaafin.
The Council consists of seven members which are the Bashorun who is the head of the council, the Agbakin, Shamu, Alapini, Laguna, Akiniku and Ashipa.
The Oyomesi council acts as the legislature of the kingdom.
The council deliberates on crucial matters affecting the society.
They are also the king maker and acted in all respects as a check and balance to the Alaafin.
The Ogboni Cult of the Earth was next in importance in the local administration of the kingdom.
The Ogboni cult was a powerful and dreaded association and was expected to use its power and authority to prevent any misuse of power by the Oyomesi particularly concerning the rejection or impeachment of an Alaafin.
It was this position of check and balance that effectively controlled an ambitious Bashorun from usurping the power of the Alaafin.
One of the tools used by the Ogboni cult was the Ifa oracle to consult the gods of the land.
In fact the Ogboni cult played the role of modern day judiciary in the Oyo kingdom.
The last ruling figure was the army headed by the Are-Ona-Kakanfo.
The army was not expected to dabble into political affairs, it sole duty was to expand and defend the empire against internal and external aggression.
One of the unique features of the Oyo army was that, its leader, the Are-Ona-Kakanfo was not expected to suffer any defeat in the hands of the enemies.
When such happens, he was expected to go into exile or commit suicide.
Indeed the Oyo Empire was a complex one 30 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT taking into consideration every facet of government which reflects almost all the institutions of contemporary governance.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the main structure of the Hausa-Fulani pre-colonial administration and state the relevance in contemporary democracy in Nigeria.
3.3 Pre-Colonial Administration in the Igbo Societies The Igbo (Ibo) societies were republican in nature and often times regarded as a stateless state.
In the first place, authority in Igbo land was not centralised but segmented and diffused.
Power was not focused on one person but on councils and village assemblies, kingship groups or titled men (Ndichies), age set, and societies (women and youth) played considerable role in the governance of the society.
Consequently, there were not individual traditional authorities which could rule over the people.
The kingship groups presided over by the eldest male were the basic unit of deliberation, decision making, implementation and administration.
Above all, the Igbo political system was based on the village assembly or councils.
These assemblies or village councils were the highest authority organ of legislature and it decisions were supreme and binding.
The age grades were part of the machinery for the implementation of the decision taken by the councils.
The Igbo societies were not used to direct taxation and disputes were settled by the elders(cid:8217) council as there was absence of a king or central figure.
The village head or the council membership were not hereditary or ascribed but through age and achievement.
3.4 Pre-Colonial Administration in the Benin Kingdom The pre-colonial Benin Empire occupied the land to the South East of the Yoruba Kingdom, Ibo on the Eastern borders, Itsekiri and Ijaw lining the rivers in the South West.
The kingdom adopted a monarchical system of government headed by the Oba (King).
The political life of the people is centred on the Oba.
The Oba(cid:8217)s great strength is as a result of the people who perceived him as a semi-divine or the representative of the gods and the ancestors.
The Oba ruled the kingdom with the help of the chiefs.
The Obas were very skilled rulers who utilised the policy of division of labour.
The Enigies, who were either the Oba(cid:8217)s brothers or his sons, were in control of selected strategic villages.
The various categories of chiefs have their functions and most of them occupied positions that were hereditary.
The functions of the chiefs were so defined by the Oba that there was political stability in the kingdom.
In the kingdom, there is the Uzama council of chiefs or Councillors of the 31POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT state and king makers.
The Uzama are the high rank chiefs of the kingdom and their titles are also hereditary.
They are responsible for the coronation of a new Oba who in all times is the eldest son of the dying king.
The Uzama Council occupied an advisory role to the Oba.
Though the Uzama can crown the new king, but cannot reject a ruling king since no provision was made for this in the kingdom constitution (convention).
The kingdom also maintains a large army headed by the Ologbosere.
Finally, the Oba has the right to reward or decorate with honour any deserving sons and daughters of the land.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Compare and contrast the Uzama council of the Benin Kingdom to the Local Government Councillors in modern day Nigeria 4.0 CONCLUSION In the final analysis, it could be said that there existed a well structured political and administrative system of governance in pre-colonial societies in Nigeria.
The government and administrative system were fashioned to reflect the interests and aspirations of the societies in which they operated.
One fundamental issue was that each society put in place it development and administrative system that advance the society before the advent of the colonial era.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, attempts have been made to expose the myth that the pre- colonial societies in Nigeria were primitive.
We discussed the emirate councils with its clearly defined hierarchy and structure to suit the government in the North.
The Oyo empire exhibits a complex political system that could be compared to contemporary democracies with all it various arms of government.
Finally we discussed the Igbo societies with its elements of democratic and republican nature.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT Compare the Oyo system of government with contemporary democracy in Nigeria.
32 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.).
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa Since Independence.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Agagu, A.A, (cid:8220)The Concept of local Government(cid:8221) in kolawole, D (ed.).
Reading in Political Science.
Ibadan: Dekaal Publishers Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics, Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Emezi, C. (1984) (cid:8220)Nigerian Local Government in historical Perspective(cid:8221) in Nigerian Journal of Public Administration and Local Government.
Vol.2, No.2.
Kirk-Green, A.H.M.
(1965).
The Principle of Native Administration in Nigeria in Oyediran, Oyeleye.
(1988) Oyediran, Oyeleye (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications Ltd. 33POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 2 LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN COLONIAL ERA IN NIGERIA NATIVE ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Local Government in the Northern Region of Nigeria in Colonial Era 3.2 Local Government in the Western Region of Nigeria in Colonial Era 3.3 Local Government in the Eastern Region of Nigeria in Colonial Era 3.4 Local Government in the Southern Region of Nigeria in Colonial Era 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The advent of the colonial administration did not introduce the local government administration, but it rather strengthened and restructures it to meet with the administrative tenets of indirect rule.
Though at rudimentary level, local government administration predate the advent of colonial administration.
The colonial administration quickly took note of the well established traditional institutions and the enormous powers of the traditional rulers and hence capitalised upon it to establish and rule through the indirect rule system.
The colonial administration regarded the local government system as (cid:8216)a system of rule through native chiefs, who were regarded as an integral part of the machinery of government with well defined powers and functions recognised by government and by law and not dependent on the caprice of an executive officer(cid:8217).
Therefore, local governments during the colonial rule serve the purpose of the British colonial administration at different levels and degrees in the different regions in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain the local government administration during colonial era in the following regions of Nigeria: • Northern 34 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT • Western • Eastern • Southern.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Local Government in the Northern Region of Nigeria in Colonial Era In the North, the colonial administration represents a system of indirect rule administered through the traditional rulers or emirs.
The colonialist explores the position of the traditional rulers or emirs for the implementation of colonial policies formulated in Britain.
The emirate system in Northern Nigeria provided the needed platform for indirect rule to thrive; this is because of the well established traditional system of administration which was highly centralised.
Through this system the colonial administration had no direct dealings with the people, but with the emirs and traditional chiefs who provided the needed machinery of governance.
In view of this, the indirect rule system through the native authorities achieved a great success in Northern Nigeria.
3.2 Local Government in Western Region of Nigeria in Colonial Era Local government in the Western Nigeria during the colonial rule also took the form of indirect rule, the Obas and chiefs also presented the needed platform for the colonial native administration.
The Obas and chiefs were also responsible for the daily administration of the people but they were only administering the colonial policies, which include the collection of taxes.
However, the system was partially successful as the Obas and chiefs had no absolute control over the citizens.
This was further compounded by the fact that almost every part of the region had its own Oba or chief, unlike the Northern region where the emirs were larger than life.
Again, the west had religious multiplicity, i.e.
the Christian faith and Islam, unlike the North where Islam was basically the major religion used as a unifying factor.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate between local government administration in Northern and Western regions during colonial era in Nigeria.
35POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.3 Local Government in Eastern Region of Nigeria in Colonial Era In the east, an attempt was also made to rule through the chiefs and traditional rulers in order to maintain the principle of indirect rule, unfortunately, this was not possible due to the absence of a central figure as a traditional ruler.
In other words, there was lack of a central authority or traditional institution.
In order to cover this gap, the colonial administration introduced and appointed warrant chiefs for the purpose of local administration.
The introduction of the warrant chiefs into a society that was basically republican sparked off a strong resistance from the people, who were not used to direct taxation introduced alongside the warrant chiefs.
The situation was also compounded by the corrupt practices engaged upon by the warrant chiefs who perceived the position and privilege as an opportunity to enrich themselves.
Therefore, local administration during the local era was a failure in the Eastern region of Nigeria.
In fact part of the failure was the Aba women(cid:8217)s riot of 1929.
3.4 Local Government in Southern Region of Nigeria in Colonial Era The Southern region of Nigeria was divided and grouped under the Western region and Eastern region.
In the pre-colonial era, these southern kingdoms of Benin, the Ijaws, Urhobos, Itsekiris, Ibibios, Kalabaris and the Efiks were grouped for administrative reasons under the Western and Eastern regions.
The Benin kingdom, the Urhobos and Itsekiris were ground under the Western region while, the Ijaws were split between the Western and Eastern regions with the larger part under the Eastern region.
The Ibibios, Efiks and Kalabaris were under the Eastern region during the colonial era.
In the Eastern region local government administration were according to the dictates of the colonial masters which was the appointment of warrant officers in these riverine communities of Ijaws, Itsekiris, and Efiks.
In the Benin, Urhobos and Itsekiris kingdoms, the policy of the indirect rule through the Oba and chiefs as in the central Yoruba kingdom of Western region also applied.
The southern communities only follow the dictates and reacted according to the region in which they found themselves.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Differentiate between local government administration in Eastern and Southern regions during colonial era in Nigeria.
36 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION Local government under colonial rule in Nigeria could be said to be an experiment at local administration.
The administrative patterns were different in the three regions.
In the North, it was successful based on an already well established system of traditional institution; it was partially successful in the West because of the presence of a traditional institution who also had partial control over its citizens.
The situation was completely different in the East due to lack of any established traditional institution, therefore, the system was a failure due to the citizens resistance to a system they perceived as alien.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have attempted to look at local administration during the colonial era in Nigeria.
We undertake a clear study of the administration in each region taking into consideration the importance of the traditional institutions in each region, the success, partial success and failure recorded in the three regions respectively.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the success and failure of local administration in Nigeria during the colonial era.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.).
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa Since Independence.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Agagu, A.A, (cid:8220)The Concept of local Government(cid:8221) in kolawole, D (ed.).
Reading in Political Science.
Ibadan: Dekaal Publishers Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics, Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Emezi, C. (1984) (cid:8220)Nigerian Local Government in historical Perspective(cid:8221) in Nigerian Journal of Public Administration and Local Government.
Vol.2, No.2.
Kirk-Green, A.H.M.
(1965).
The Principle of Native Administration in Nigeria in Oyediran, Oyeleye.
(1988) Oyediran, Oyeleye (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications Ltd. 37POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 3 LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORMS IN THE 1950S IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Local Government in the 1950s in the Northern Region of Nigeria 3.2 Local Government in the 1950s in the Western Region of Nigeria 3.3 Local Government in the 1950s in the Eastern Region of Nigeria 3.4 Local Government in the 1950s in the Southern Region of Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The native administration introduced during the colonial era was at the verge of total collapse in the 1930s.
Due to the varied degree of success in the regions which was not favourable for the smooth running of the country(cid:8217)s administration, the colonial administration were of the opinion that the indirect rule system had to be gradually discontinued because it had outlived its usefulness.
This was coupled by the stiff opposition that the system received from the nationalists, the people and other pressure groups.
In view of this, it became apparent that the local administration needed to be reformed.
The reform was necessitated by the need to make the system more effective, efficient, democratic, responsive and to encourage more local participations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to describe the local government reform in the 1950s in the following regions of Nigeria: • Northern • Western • Eastern • Southern.
38 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Local Government Reforms in the 1950s in the Northern Region of Nigeria In view of the significant success recorded in the north by the colonial administration during the indirect rule system.
The agitation for reforms in local administration was at a slow pace.
Unlike the Eastern and Western regions, the North refused to be rushed not only on the issue of democratisation but also on making any drastic reform in the system of local government inherited from the colonial administrators.
There was no significant reform in the North until 1954 through the enactment of the native law of 1954 which provided for democratic reforms.
The first noticeable change was that abolition of sole native authorities, which was replaced with the Chiefs-in-Council and Chiefs-and-Council native authorities.
In the Chief-in-Council, an Emir or Chief was obliged to consult with his Councilors in all decision making but could override the decision of the councilors.
On the other hand, the Chief-and Council, the Emir would have to go along with the decision of the councilors.
This was the situation in the North until 1960 when the country got its independence down to 1966, when the military intervene in Nigeria politics.
3.2 Local Government Reforms in the 1950s in the Western Region of Nigeria The wave of local government reform also swept through the Western region in the early 1950s.
One of the fundamental changes was the composition of local government councils.
In the Western region, the passage of the local government law of 1952 transformed the system, so much so that, no sole native authority remained in the region.
The new legislation introduced a three tier structure of divisional, district and local councils.
In the reforms, councils were made up of elected and traditional rulers, with a minimum of three elected councilors for each traditional ruler.
Furthermore, councils were regarded or classified either as Chiefs-in-Council or Chief-and-Council.
The 1952 reform was replaced by the 1957 law, due to numerous problems encountered by the local councils, some of which bothers on lack of funds and trained staff.
The major provisions of the 1957 law was the authority given to the councils to set up joint Boards for the operation of work or service, power to collect taxes and levy rates.
Although, the 1957 did not bring about any fundamental improvement in the administration of the local councils, particularly in the improvement of socio-economic services, the expectation was that local authorities would enable people to have more equitable access to modern benefits.
Such expectations never came 39POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT and nothing was done to change the laws because by 1957 the agitations for independence have reached its zenith.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the main features of the 1950s local government reforms in Northern and Western regions of Nigeria 3.3 Local Government Reform in the 1950s in the Eastern Region of Nigeria In view of the fact that the indirect rule system was least successful in the East, the region was the first to flag off local government reforms.
The local government ordinance of 1950 provided for remedies of the limitations of the native authority system.
The reform was facilitated by the non-existence of centralised political system on which the native authority system was based.
The 1950 law represented a clear break with the colonial tradition of native administration and was originated by African politicians working in harmony with a new post war generation of expatriate administrators.
The law established three types of local government councils, that is, the county, urban or rural district and local councils, working independently.
Each county comprised of six to ten district councils and each district had about ten councils.
Each district council was designed to be the centre of local government structure and each council was established by an instrument which defined its powers, functions and boundary.
The tenure of members was three years.
The ordinance provided for direct election to local councils and indirect election from local councils to the district and county councils.
Generally, the councils had power to make standing rules and to appoint and dismiss its own staff.
However, the regional government could withdraw powers conferred on a council if found wanting and had power to approve all bye- laws, annual estimate and loans.
In addition, the Eastern regional government went further in 1955 to enact a local government law as a replacement to the 1950 ordinance in order to improve on the local government administration.
The law laid down the local government areas, their internal divisions or wards, the number of Councilors to be appointed or elected or a mixture of the two.
Again, this was the status quo before independence in 1960 and the military intervention in 1966.
3.4 Local Government Reform in 1950 in Southern Nigeria The Southern communities or kingdoms of Nigeria which consist of the Benin Kingdom, the Urhobo, Itsekiri, Ibibios, Ijaws and Efiks could not really make any reform because of their minority status.
Their major problem was that they were divided between the Western and Eastern 40 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT region.
Therefore, reforms in any of the region affected them based on the region they belong to geographically.
For examples, reforms could affect the Ijaws in the Eastern region differently from the Ijaws in the Western region.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the main features of the 1950s local government reforms in Eastern and Southern regions of Nigeria 4.0 CONCLUSION Local government administration improved from just being a mere native administration to democratic system.
The reforms of the 1950s were drastic innovations in the local government system of administration.
From that point on, the space of governance began to expand, particularly in the east and western regions where the system of indirect rule met stiff and little oppositions.
The reforms also created greater opportunities for more people to participate in their own administration, particularly, the Councilors who were elected.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have attempted to study the regional local government reforms of the 1950s in Nigeria.
We have learnt that the reform was slow to come in the North, moderate in the Western region and drastic and radical in the Eastern region.
The reforms were a turning point in native authority administration in Nigeria.
It also created the platform for the future of modern local government in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the main features of the 1950s local government reforms in Nigeria.
41POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Iyoha, F.E.
(1999).
Local Government and Rural Development: A Bottom-Up Perspective.
Benin City: Sylva publishers.
Kirk-Green, A.H.M.
(1965).
The Principle of Native Administration in Nigeria Cited Oyediran, Oyeleye.
(1988) Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Oyediran, Oyeleye (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications Ltd. 42 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 4 LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNDER MILITARY REGIMES IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Local Government Administration under Aguiyi-Ironsi 1966-1966 3.2 Local Government Administration under Gowon 1966(cid:8211) 1975 3.3 Local Government Administration under Buhari 1984(cid:8211) 1985 3.4 Local Government Administration under Babangida 1985- 1993 3.5 Local Government Administration under Abacha 1993(cid:8211) 1998 3.6 Local Government Administration under Abubakar 1998(cid:8211) 1999 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The military intervention in politics changed the political and administrative landscape in Nigeria.
The first military administration came in January, 1966 not to foster political participation but to enhance administrative efficiency.
The military was not interested in involving too many citizens in the process of political participation; their main concern was achieving the aims and objectives of government as quickly as possible.
The main aim of the military for local government was the provision of services and therefore, did not see the local government councils as democratic ideals or as an avenue for democratic participation for the citizens.
The military dissolved all the existing local government councils and replaced them with sole administrators who performed both administrative and political responsibilities.
The sole administrators were working according to the dictates of the regional Governors, while the little achievement made in the area of local government democratic activities were growing the military involvement in politics reversed the trends.
43POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the local government administration under the following military regimes: • Aguiyi-Ironsi 1966-1966 • Gowon 1966(cid:8211)1975 • Buhari 1984(cid:8211)1985 • Babangida 1985-1993 • Abacha 1993(cid:8211)1998 • Abubakar 1998(cid:8211)1999.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Local Government Administration under Aguiyi-Ironsi 1966-1966 General Johnson T. U. Aguiyi-Ironsi became the Head of State as a result of the failure of the January 1966 coup led by Major Kaduna Chukuma Nzeogwu and four others.
The regime inherited the local government reforms of the 1950s carried out by regional governments.
As the first military regime, the administration was faced with the issue of unity in the country.
General Aguiyi-Ironsi appointed Military Governors for the regions.
The Governors dissolved all existing councils and appointed civil servants as sole administrators to run both the political and administrative functions of the councils.
As a result of the appointment of the sole administrators, the little achievements of local councils as democratic system were eroded.
3.2 Local Government Administration under General Yakubu Gowon Military Regime July 1966(cid:8211)July 1975 The January, 1966 coup that brought in Gen. Aguiyi Ironsi was seen as an ethnically motivated coup and only lasted six months with a retaliatory coup by the Northern arm of the military that brought in the then Lt. Col Yakubu Gowon.
This brought discontentment and the Eastern region then asked for secession from the federal republic.
This led to the Nigerian civil war with the then Lt. Col Odumegwu Ojukwu leading the East.
The coups and the civil war dismantled all form of progress, both administrative and democratic goals achieved in the area of local government.
In 1967, the administrative structure of Nigeria changed with the creation of twelve states from the existing four regions.
Military Governors were appointed and they dissolved all the existing local government structures.
In the Northern part of Nigeria the local government witnessed some structural and administrative changes 44 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT with a view to improve on the system to allow for more decentralisation of powers and widening the scope of representation.
Part of the reforms was that each state enacted an edict to reflect the changes as dictated by the state Governors.
As a result of the reforms, some large councils were sub-divided into smaller units.
The name native authorities were changed to local government authority or local government area depending on the state.
In the Western part of the country, local advisory councils or committees replaced the sole administrators in the councils.
In 1971, the conditions of service of local government staff were harmonised with those of civil servants at the state level.
This was done with the aim of attracting qualified personnel to the local government service.
In 1972, the council-manager model of the United States and Canada was adopted.
It abolished and replaced the advisory committee system and provided for a standing management committee as well as an administrative executive.
The management committee acted as the legislative body of the council performing such duties as; formulating policies, plans and schemes, making bye-laws for the council area of jurisdiction, enacting local ordinances and regulations and governing the citizens under its jurisdiction, this was the practice until the 1976 reforms.
In the Eastern states, the civil war had diverstating effects on local government administration and as such the growth and development of the local government were retarded.
However, these Eastern states and the then Bendel state adapted the French model which emphasis was on development administration for their local government system.
To achieve the intended social and economic development, a two tier local government system was created that is, County/Urban Development Council and Area Development Committees.
At the state levels or capitals, there was a local government central development committee headed by a Chairman referred to as the coordinator of development administration.
3.3 Local Government Administration under General Mohamadu Buhari Military Regime 1984(cid:8211)1985 The Buhari military regime came at the heels when the country was just trying to consolidate its democracy.
The regime as expected of a military regime dismantled all democratic structures including local government councils, and appointed sole administrators for each local government council.
The sole administrators as usual were responsible to the Military Governors of the state.
The regime then set up a 21 member committee headed by Ibrahim Dasuki to review the existing local government system with a view to reform the system.
The term of reference for the committee among others were; to evolve the most suitable mode of managing the local government within the context of the present military administration; to re-examine the existing structures, functions and financial resources available to local government for the 45POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT performance of these functions; evolve proper place of traditional authorities in local government.
The committee among other things recommended that the existing structures and functions of local governments as contained in the 1976 reformed be sustained and maintained.
The Buhari regime was sacked by the Babangida palace coup in 1985 before a white paper in the report of the committee could be published.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the main features of local government administration under the Gowon military regime.
3.4 Local Government Administration under General Ibrahim Babangida Military Regime 1985(cid:8211)1993 The Babangida administration made tremendous steps in elevating the status and functions of the local government.
He introduced the executive presidential system of government into the local government to complement with what operate at the state and federal level.
By the decree 23 of 1991, each local government were to have and operate an executive cabinet composed of the Chairman, with five Supervisory Councilors and Secretary appointed by the Chairman.
Each local council also consisted of a legislature; the system was anchored on the practice of separation of power.
The 1991 reforms also gave the local government the functions of primary education and primary health infrastructure.
The local government was to take over the payment of salaries, allowances, pensions and gratuities of the primary education and primary health facilities.
In order to be able to perform these additional tasks, the statutory allocations to local government was increased from 10% to 15% from the federation account.
The allocation was also to be given direct without passing through the state.
Thus the Babangida regime was committed to an autonomous local government system.
3.5 Local Government Administration under General Sani Abacha Military Regime 1993-1998 The Abacha regime also dissolved all the democratic structures at all levels including the elected councils.
He appointed caretaker committee with career civil servant as secretaries.
The regime increased the numbers of local councils from 589 to 774 and conducted elections with the local council first on non-party basis, then on a multi-party basis.
The elections were fraught with irregularities as candidates had to identify with Abacha to be cleared for or to win elections.
The insincerity associated with the regime in its course of pursuing the 46 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT transition programme led to its demise and the death of the Head of State was the last straw that broke the camel(cid:8217)s back.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss Babangida military regime(cid:8217)s contributions to local government administration in Nigeria.
3.6 Local Government Administration under General Abdulsalam Abubakar Military Regime 1998 - 1999 Gen. Abubakar became the Head of State following the death of Gen. Abacha.
Abubakar regime was basically a transition regime.
However, like all other military regimes before him, he was quick to dissolve the elected local government councils and replaced them with career civil servants as sole administrators and later caretaker committees with non- partisan members.
As part of its transition to civil rule programme, the administration successfully conducted local government elections on multi-party basis in December, 1998 as its first step of disengaging from power.
It was on this foundation that created the platform for the success of the transition to democratic rule.
4.0 CONCLUSION The local government administration went through various modifications and reforms during the military regime.
One basic thing is clear and that is, that the local government came out stronger and more reformed and structured under the military.
It was under the military that the current 774 local government councils in Nigeria were created.
The civilian administrations were not able to create any local government council which the military regimes were able to do using the military fiat and decrees.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to examine local government administration under the various military regimes.
We discussed the peculiar nature and reforms undertaken by the various military regimes from 1966 (cid:8211) 1999 with the exception of 1976 local government reforms which we shall discuss in the next unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the features of the local government administration under the Babangida military regime.
47POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adeyeye, M (1990).
(cid:8220)A Survey of Local Government Administration in Nigeria 900(cid:8211)1986(cid:8221), In Adewale, A (ed.).
Issues on the Practice of Local Government in Nigeria.
Ikeja: Comfort Press.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Emezi, C.E.
(1983).
(cid:8220)The Changing Pattern of Local Government(cid:8221) in Nigeria Journal of Local Government Studies.
Vol 1, June.
Gboyega, A.
(1987).
Political Values and Local Government in Nigeria.
Lagos: Malthouse Press.
Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
48 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 5 THE 1976 LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORM IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Standardisation of Local Government 3.2 Local Government as Third Tier of Government 3.3 Establishment of Local Government Service Board 3.4 Recognition of Traditional Institutions 3.5 Establishment of Police/Community Relations Committee 3.6 Establishment of Local Government Peace and Security Committee 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References /Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The local government structure and administration in Nigeria took a different turn during the General Murtala Mohammed/General Olusegun Obasanjo military regime of 1975(cid:8211)1979.
The regime was the most fundamental in terms of local government reforms that makes the 1976 local government reform in Nigeria a reference point in local government administration in Nigeria.
The administration was clear in making local government a third tier of government in Nigeria.
The regime came out with what it called (cid:8220)Guidelines for local government reform Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1976.
The intention of the regime was to stabilise and rationalise government at the local level.
And the regime was determined to make local government system more effective and efficient at the grassroots or local level.
The regime reform remained the most radical transformation of the local government system in Nigeria.
However, the assassination of Gen. Mohammed did not adversely affects the reforms as Obasanjo continued judiciously the administration programmes for local government reforms.
The 1976 local government reform perceived local government as (cid:8220)government of local level exercised through representative council established within defined areas.
These powers should give the council substantial control over local affairs as well as the staff and institutional and financial powers to initiate and direct the provision of services and to determine and implement projects so as to complement the activities of the state and federal government in their areas(cid:8221) The 1976 reform marked the beginning of stable local government administration in Nigeria.
49POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to outline the special features of the 1976 local government reforms such as: • the standardisation of local government administration in Nigeria • local government as third tier of government • establishment of Local Government Service Board • recognition of traditional institutions • establishment of Police/Community Relations Committee • establishment of Local Government Peace and Security Committee.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Standardisation of Local Government The 1976 local government reforms in Nigeria marks a point of departure from the colonial and post colonial local government administration.
It elevated the local government council to the third tier administration in Nigeria.
The reforms made an attempt to correct the defects of the previous local government system in Nigeria and for the first time in the history of local government, we had a document that provided guidelines for the creation of uniform local government in all the states of the federation.
One of the major reasons for the 1976 reforms was the persistent instability that characterised Nigeria local government.
It was believed that the standardisation of the basic structure, functions and powers of local government by the reforms would minimise the problem of instability.
The reform spelt out in specific terms the mission of local government as follows; to make appropriate services and development activities responsive to local wishes and initiatives by devolving and delegating them to local government representative bodies; to facilitate the exercise of democratic self-government close to the grassroots of our society and to encourage initiative and leadership potentials; mobilisation of human material resources through the involvement of members of public in their local development; to provide a two way channel of communication between local communities and government (both state and federal).
3.2 Local Government as Third Tier of Government The special features of the 1976 reforms include among others, local government as a third tier of government; multi-purpose single tier structure; elected local government councils, a unified local government 50 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT service to be established by each state through the local government service board; each local government area is to have a population of between 150,000 and 800,000, but no town should be spilt no matter its population; 10% statutory allocation to all local councils from the federation account; recognition of traditional council in each local government and a police committee for each local government.
With these, local government administration occupies a prominent place in governance in Nigeria.
The 1976 reform remains a point of departure for local government administration in Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the special features of the 1976 local government reforms 3.3 Establishment of Local Government Service Board The 1976 reform empower the various state governments to set up a local government service board to perform personnel management functions as it relates to recruitment, posting, promotion and discipline of all members of staff of the councils.
The Board is basically to perform the same kind of functions like the state civil service commission and it is to harmonise salaries, pension, gratuities and other benefits with that of the state civil servant.
It is perceived that with the harmonization of these conditions of service with that of the state and federal the sound development civil servants, local government will attract the needed professional and competent personnel for the sound development of local government as a third-tier of government.
3.4 Recognition of Traditional Institutions The 1976 reform gives statutory recognition to the traditional institutions by setting up traditional council in each local government of the federation.
The council is composed of traditional rulers and representative of the council.
The council is charged to act as advisory body to the local government; coordinate development plans of the local government by joint discussion and advice; community tax assessment and collection in the area; and control of chieftaincy matters.
3.5 Establishment of Police/Community Relations Committee The 1976 local government reform also made provision for the establishment of police-community relations in each local government with the sole purpose of enforcing local government laws and maintaining law and order.
The Composition is as follows: 51POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT i.
Local government chairman Chairman ii.
Vice chairman of the local government Member iii.
President of the emirate/traditional council Or his representative Member iv.
The most senior police officer in the local Government area Member v. One representative of the Christian association Of Nigeria Member vi.
One representative of the Muslim organisation Member vii.
President of the Hotelier association Member viii.
President of Market association Member ix.
One representative of the non-indigenes association member x.
Two community leaders Members xi.
Secretary to the local government Secretary The main functions of the committee are as follows: i. to regularly assess the performance of the police force in their task of maintenance of law and order, ii.
to suggest areas of improvement to the police and to assist in achieving closer rapport with the police force, iii.
to serve as avenue for providing useful information to the police and to improve the image of the police in the public.
3.6 Establishment of Local Government Peace and Security Committee The 1976 reform also made provision for the establishment of the peace and security committee for the sole aim of maintaining peace and security in the local government.
The Composition of the committee is as follows: • Chairman of the local government Chairman • One representative of the Nigeria Police force (DPO) Deputy • Secretary to the local government Secretary • One representative of the state security service member • One representative of the Army unit (where applicable) • One representative of the Naval Unit (where applicable) • One representative of the Air Force Unit (where applicable) • The most senior traditional ruler in the local Government area or his representative Member • Two community leaders one of whom shall be A non-indigene of the local government area Member • Two religious leaders appointed by the local Government chairman Member • One representative of women organisations (where applicable) 52 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT The committee(cid:8217)s main functions shall include the following: • the committee shall meet regularly and its input will be readily available to the meetings of the state security committee; • it shall review the security situation in the local government area and offer suggestions to arrest unpleasant situations or avert similar occurrences in the future; • it shall assess the reactions of the people on government policies and programmes with a view to offering suggestions for modifications, etc • it shall take stock of immigrant to ensure that they have valid entry papers and to ensure that they do not constitute themselves into nuisance or security risks etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Examine the functions of the traditional rulers in the 1976 reforms 4.0 CONCLUSION The 1976 Mohammed/Obasanjo local government reform laid a solid foundation for local government administration in Nigeria.
The regime was committed to making local government councils spring board for democratic transitions.
Most of the features of the 1976 local government reforms were reflected in the 1979 constitution of Nigeria which ushers in the Alhaji Shehu Shagari civilian administration.
The 1976 reform still remains the most comprehensive local government reforms in Nigeria 5.0 SUMMARY We have been able to learn the major features of the 1976 local government reform.
How the reform change the face and direction of local government administration in Nigeria and most importantly, how local government administration, following the reform is now entrenched as a third-tier of government in the Nigerian constitution.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT The 1976 local government reform is of importance in the local government administration in Nigeria.
Discuss.
53POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.).
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa since Independence.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politic.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (1976).
Guidelines for Local Government Reforms.
Lagos: Government Printers.
Iyoha, F.E.
(1999).
Local Government and Rural Development: A Bottom-Up Perspective.
Benin City: Sylva Publishers Limited.
Oyediran, Oyeleye (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications Ltd.
The Presidency (1999).
Local Government Administration and Bye Laws in Nigeria., Abuja.
54 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT MODULE 3 Unit 1 Administrative Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 2 Political Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 3 Economic/Developmental Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 4 Exclusive Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 5 Concurrent and Delegated Functions of Local Governments in Nigeria UNIT 1 ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Local Government as Administrative Unit 3.2 Decongestion of State Administrative Machinery 3.3 The Vice-Chairman 3.4 The Secretary to the Local Government 3.5 The Supervisors 3.6 Head of the Personnel Management Department 3.7 The Local Government Treasurer 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The local government system has always been a part of the administrative system of every state from the primitive time to this contemporary time.
The only difference is that it has gone through various modifications and development in Nigeria local government administration have developed to the extent that it is being given a place of importance in the administration of the state.
The Nigeria local government system has metamorphosed from the primitive era, to the colonial era, through the past-colonial era, down to the military era, to the current democratic dispensation as an instrument for public administration.
Above all, the local government as a unit of administration and third- tier of government took its roots from the 1976 local government reforms.
55POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify the following: • local government as administrative unit • decongestion of state administrative machinery • the Vice-Chairman • the Secretary to the local government • the Supervisors • Head of the Personnel Management Department • The local government Treasurer 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Local Government as Administrative Unit The position of the local government in the administrative hierarchy of government is one of the major reasons for setting up local government to perform certain administrative functions which are peculiar to local communities and which the state or local government might not be able to perform effectively and efficiently.
This is what gives the local government its distinctive character as a level of government.
These administrative functions are recognised as part of the provisions of the constitution.
Local government performs administrative functions especially as part of the administrative decentralisation of the nation(cid:8217)s government.
As third-tier of the government, the local government has its own administrative structure such as the executive, legislature and of course the customary courts which acts as part of the judiciary.
The attraction of local government as administrative unit is predicated on the fact that the local government is close to the local problems and it is supposed to be better placed to mobilised and manage local resources to meet such problems than the central state government and its agencies.
3.2 Decongestion of State Administrative Machinery The administrative functions of local government also include the day- to-day running of the local councils.
It involves those functions which required detailed local knowledge for efficient performance, those functions in which success depends on communities responsiveness and participation, those functions which are of personal nature requiring provision close to where the individuals lives is affected and; in which significant use of discretion or understanding of individual is needed.
Fundamentally, the administrative functions of local government decongest the administrative burden of the state and federal levels of government.
56 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examine the local government as an administrative unit of governance 3.3 The Vice-Chairman The Vice-Chairman who is normally elected with the chairman of the local government is assigned responsibility for the administration of a department of the local government and among others; he/she performs the following functions: i. he shall act for the chairman in his absence ii.
the vice chairman may be called upon at anytime even after leaving office to account for his/her tenure as vice chairman.
3.4 The Secretary to the Local Government The chairman shall delegate substantial parts of his/her administrative and financial functions and authority to the vice chairman, supervisors and the secretary who shall be fully involved in the key decision-making processes of the local government.
The secretary to the local government shall be appointed by the chairman and shall hold his/her office at the pleasure of the chairman, he/she shall: i. serve as the secretary of the meetings of executive committee of the local government and keep the records thereof; ii.
coordinate the activities of the departments of the local government; iii.
liaise on behalf of the chairman with the local government council through the leader of the council iv.
liaise with the secretary to the state government and other necessary state functionaries on state-local relations and v. perform such other duties as may be assigned to him from time to time, by the chairman.
3.5 The Supervisors The Supervisors shall be appointed by the chairman of the local government in consultation with the local government council.
Each supervisor shall be appointed by the chairman of the local government and the supervisor(cid:8217)s tenure shall automatically end with the tenure of the chairman who made the appointment.
57POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT The supervisors shall be closely and intimately involved in the management of their respective departments by performing the following functions: • serving as political heads of their respective departments • serving as members of the executive committee of the local government which, in effect, is the cabinet of the local government • giving directives to the professional heads of their respective department on general policy issues • assisting the chairman to supervise the execution of local government projects within their respective department and • carrying out such other functions as the chairman may assign from time to time 3.6 Head of the Personnel Management Department The head of the personnel management department shall perform the following functions: i. heads of department of personnel management ii.
signs all cheques, contractual agreements, local purchase order forms and other documents relating to contracts, supplies etc.
subject to the prior approval of the approving authority iii.
heads of junior staff management committee as its chairman iv.
assists the secretary in the formulations, execution and review of local government policies v. performs other duties as may be assigned to him/her by the chairman or secretary to the local government.
3.7 The Local Government Treasurer The treasurer to the local government shall perform the following functions: i. performing the duties of chief financial adviser to the local government ii.
having responsibility for the administrative control of the financial department of the local government iii.
performing duties as chief accounts officer of the receipts and payments of the local government iv.
ensuring that the account system as laid down in the financial memoranda is complied with by all the departments of the local government v. having responsibility for budgetary control and supervising the accounts of all the departments of the local government 58 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT vi.
preparing and publishing monthly and annual financial statements of the local government vii.
performing such other related functions as laid down in financial memoranda viii.
being a signatory to local government cheques and vouchers ix.
ensuring that all instructions relating to the expenditure of public funds are in writing x. making all accounting officers to understand that they are responsible to the public accounts committee for all monies voted for each local government and xi.
performing such other related duties as may be assigned by the chairman or by law by the local government council.
All heads of departments shall remain career officers whose tenure of office, remuneration, functions, responsibilities and condition of service shall remain as in the approved scheme of service for local government employees.
All substantive heads of department are of equal status.
The equivalence of the post of the Director-general in the state public service does not exist in the local government service.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Enumerate the main functions of the local government Treasurer 4.0 CONCLUSION The recognition of local government as a third-tier of government has opened the administrative space of governance.
Citizens have orientated themselves to approach their local councils for governmental assistance before proceeding to the state or federal level.
The increasing trend in most developing countries is that some very important and challenging jobs are being undertaken by local government councils.
The Service delivery, human and material resources mobilisation of local government serves as administrative channels of communication between the people and government.
The fact that the people are always intimidated by the distance and complexity of the state and federal government makes the local government more attractive to the local populace as an administrative unit of governance.
5.0 SUMMARY We have attempted to discuss the local government as an administrative unit.
The Unit exposed the fact that the local government as a third-tier of government has been able to decongest the state and federal levels in terms of administrative burdens.
This is also strengthened by the fact that the local government is the first port of call by the people.
Again, 59POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT with the wave of democracy, administration is no longer centralised in one man or authority, therefore, the local government readily comes in as an instrument of governmental decentralisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT State categorically the administrative functions of local government in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.).
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa since Independence., Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Aghayere, V.O.
(1997).
Dominant Issues in Nigeria Local Government System: A Contemporary Focus.
Benin City: Imprint Services.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds) (1999).
Elements of Politics, Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Iyoha, F.E.
(1999).
Local Government and Rural Development: A Bottom-Up Perspective.
Benin City: Sylva Publishers Limited.
Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Oyewo, A.T. (1987).
Nigerian Local Government Administrative Practice and Management.
Ibadan: Jator Publishing Company.
The Presidency (1999).
Local Government Administration and Bye Laws in Nigeria.
Abuja.
60 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 2 POLITICAL FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS INNIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Facilitation of Local Political Participation.
3.2 The Facilitation of Political Autonomy to Suit Local Conditions 3.3.
Legislative Functions of Local Government 3.4 Executive Functions of Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The local government often times is perceived as a political Unit.
Many have argued that the main reason for creation of local government councils is to perform political functions.
It is assumed that once the political power is granted to local government councils, then the councils will be able to use its political platform to achieve all other needs.
It is also believed that the political autonomy of local government as a third-tier of government have reduced the political tension at the state and federal levels.
The constitution of Nigeria recognised the local government council to perform certain political functions as a governmental unit in an attempt to expand the political terrain to accommodate more political participants.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the political functions of local government as distinct from other function performed by local government administration: • the facilitation of local political participation • the facilitation of political autonomy to suit local conditions • legislative functions of local government • executive functions of local government.
61POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Facilitation of Local Political Participation Generally, local government is said to perform political functions by facilitating the process of political participation at the local level and by bringing government closer to the people at the grassroots.
The peculiar nature of local government distinguished it from other levels of government because of all the structures of government that is also present at the local level.
Local government permits the local people the opportunity to have a choice and a say in decision making.
Due to the fact that the system provides for election of local representatives in the administration of local affairs, political accountability can be assured.
3.2 The Facilitation of Political Autonomy to Suit Local Conditions The local government also has the political autonomy to adjust governmental programmes to suit local conditions and initiatives.
The political autonomy of local government also permits the generation of local inputs into the nation(cid:8217)s polity.
The local government has executive political powers to formulate policies and programmes for the good governance of the council.
It also exhibit legislative powers by making edits and bye-laws for local jurisdictions for the maintenance of peace, order and good government of the localities.
The political aspects of local government have improved the advancement of the people over time in terms of political education and enlightenment.
However, the political autonomy of local government can sometimes be undermined by the perception and use of political powers by the central ruling elites.
Sometimes, it is perceived that the local government has become too political so that the central and local arenas of political activities are merged so that the ruling elites in power at the central government can easily utilise the instruments of local government to enhance their own positions at the central level.
It is apparent to state that the local government is an essential aspect of representative government in a democracy.
Therefore, the political functions of local government as a unit of government cannot be over emphasised.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss how local government creates avenues for political participation at the grassroots.
62 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.3 Legislative Functions In addition to any other powers that may be conferred on it by law, the local government council also performs the following legislative functions: a. debating, approving or amending the annual budget of the local government council subject to the chairman veto which may be set aside by two thirds majority of the members of the local government council.
b. vetting and monitoring the implementation of projects and programmes in the annual budget of the local government.
c. examining and debating the monthly statement of income and expenditure rendered by the chairman of local government.
d. advising, consulting and liaising with the chairman of the local government, and, e. performing such other functions as may be assigned to it from time to time, by an edict or law of the state in which it is situated.
The legislative powers vested in the local government council shall be exercised by bye-law duly passed by the local government council.
To become effective, such bye-laws must receive the assent of the chairman of the local government.
The chairman may withhold his assent in exercise of his power of veto.
If the bye-law is passed again by the local government council by two thirds majority of the members of the councils in such cases, the bye-laws shall become effective and the assent of the chairman of the local government shall not be required in respect of such a bye-law.
The local government council shall before approval of any project ensure that the project is desirable and likely to facilitate the meaningful development of the local government area.
It shall ensure that adequate provisions have been made for the execution of each project such that it is not likely to be abandoned and that development projects are not unduly concentrated in any particular section of the local government area.
Once a project is approved and has received the assent of the Chairman of the local government, the vetting and monitoring role of the council shall be restricted to the following: a. carrying out on the spot inspection of the projects contained in the approved budgets to ensure that the projects are being implemented as approved.
This shall involved periodic inspection visits to each project by members of the relevant committee of the local government council.
63POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT b. comparing situation on the ground with contents of the monthly reports rendered to the local government council by the Chairman of the local government and c. summoning by means of a motion the local government Chairman or any other relevant official of the executive arm of the local government to the council to explain any observed discrepancies.
Finally, the legislative arm also has the responsibility of impeaching the Chairman or Vice-Chairman.
A Chairman or Vice-Chairman of local government, who is found guilty of gross misconduct within the context of the existing laws of the federation, could be impeached by the local government council.
Impeachment is an instrument of last resort designed to enhance public probity and accountability and shall not be employed frivolously, selfishly or as a tool for personal vendetta or political victimisation.
3.4 Executive Functions of Local Government The executive functions of the local government rest on the chairman and his administrative staff.
The chairman of each local government shall be the chief executive and accounting officer of the local government provided his role as accounting officer shall exclude signing vouchers and cheques.
For the avoidance of doubt, vouchers and cheque shall be signed by the head of the personnel management department and the treasurer to the local government.
The chairman as the chief executive and accounting officer shall perform the following functions: i. He/she shall observe and comply fully with the checks and balances spelt out in the existing guidelines and financial regulations governing receipts.
ii.
His/her accountability shall not cease by virtue of his/her leaving office and he/she may be called upon, at any time, even after leaving office, to account for his/her tenure as chairman iii.
The chairman as chief executive and accounting officer shall face periodic checks in order to ensure full adherence to the finance (control and management) act of 1958 and all amendments.
To this end: a.
All instructions relating to expenditure of public funds by the accounting officer shall be in writing.
b.
All accounting officers shall be responsible to account to the public accounts committee for all monies voted for each department and shall be pecuniarily liable.
64 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT c. The chairman as Chief executive and accounting officer shall render monthly statements of income and expenditure and annual reports to the local government council for it to consider and debate in order to ensure accountability and enforce the performance ethnics.
The format and content of the annual report shall place emphasis on performance and concrete achievements of the local government targets and output during the relevant year.
d. The local government chairman shall render quarterly returns of the actual income and expenditure of the local government to the state government for onward transmission to the office of the vice president of the federal republic of Nigeria with a copy to the central bank of Nigeria.
e. The chairman, as accounting officer, shall be bound by the provisions of any other rules, regulations, guidelines, edicts and laws governing the roles and functions of a chief executive and accounting officer.
f. The chairman shall ensure the strict observance of the spending limits by all concerned.
g. All reference to the secretary as accounting officer in the financial regulations and any other rules, regulations, guidelines, edicts or laws shall be construed as reference to the chairman.
h. The chairman shall direct the affairs of the local government and shall allocate responsibilities to the vice chairman, supervisors and the secretary to the local government.
i.
The chairman shall hold meetings with the members of the executive committee of the local government i.e.
vice-chairman, secretary and supervisors at least once every week.
j.
He shall maintain liaison with the local government legislature an the leader of the legislature in the interest of the local government.
k. He shall countersign the annual performance evaluation report of the head secretary to local government.
l. The chairman shall at least once a year, address the local government council and present to the council an account of his/her stewardship, stating clearly his achievements and problems during the year.
65POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT m. The chairman shall at the beginning of every year present his budget proposals to the local government council for it to consider and approve.
n. All correspondence flowing to and from the local government shall be in name of the chairman to the local government provided that the chairman shall delegate the processing of such correspondence received in his/her absence as soon as he/she returns to the office.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Enumerate the executive functions of local government 4.0 CONCLUSION To avoid a feeling of alienation at the grassroots and for people to participate effectively and constructively in matters that directly affect them politically, the local government must be strengthened as a unit of governance.
It is important to note that the local government have bee performing this function for long.
In the primitive, colonial and post- colonial eras, these functions were being performed but at a lower magnitude.
The functions became more pronounced during the military regimes, because it was one way the military could reach the local people and another way of legitimising their government.
The political functions become part of our political lives with the entrenchment of the local government functions in the 1979 and other subsequent constitution of Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY Attempts have been made to streamline the political functions of local government from other functions.
It has been exposed that local government generate political activities and encourage popular participation at the local levels.
It gives the people at the local level a feeling of belongingness in the nation(cid:8217)s polity.
The local government also presents itself as a political training grounds or nursery for democratic activities.
The local government is also perceived to provide the political platform for people to share in government and resolve their differences.
Local government serves as an instrument for facilitating and mobilising the spread of democratic participation at the local level particularly in this period when democracy is sweeping across the globe.
We also examined the functions of the executive and legislative arms of local government, which is a reflection of the fact that the local government is a third tier of government.
The point must also be made 66 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT that the judiciary is not very pronounced as part of the function of the local government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate the political functions of local government in Nigeria 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.).
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa since Independence.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Aghayere, V.O.
(1997).
Dominant Issues in Nigeria Local Government System: A Contemporary Focus.
Benin City: Imprint Services.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Iyoha, F.E.
(1999).
Local Government and Rural Development: A Bottom-Up Perspective.
Benin City: Sylva Publishers Limited.
Omotoso, Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Oyewo, A.T. (1987).
Nigerian Local Government Administrative Practice and Management.
Ibadan: Jator Publishing Company.
The Presidency (1999).
Local Government Administration and Bye Laws in Nigeria.
Abuja.
67POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 3 ECONOMIC/DEVELOPMENTAL FUNCTIONS OF LOCALGOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Participation in Resource Mobilisations 3.2 Participation in Projects Executions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The basic functions of governance are for the promotion of the socio- economic development of societies.
The aim of every level and structure of government whether federal, state or local government, its aim is to improve on the socio-economic wellbeing of its people under its areas of jurisdiction.
The achievement of government at every level is measured by the socio-economic development of the people and the developmental projects that affect the lives of the people positively.
Therefore, one of the main reasons for creating local government as a unit of governance is to perform those functions which are regarded as socio-economic and developmental, that are expected to improve the lives of the people.
For instance, many citizens are not, and may not, be interested in political and administrative functions of local government, but are concerned on the socio-economic gains that the local government will direct towards their lives.
To some people, if the local government can not create the necessary and enabling environment for them to develop socio-economically, then the reason for creating the local government as the third-tier of government is then defeated.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the participation of the local government in: • resource mobilisations • projects executions.
68 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Participation in Resource Mobilisations One of the Major functions of local government is the socio-economic and developmental duties that it performs.
Local government is the link for resource mobilisation for developmental activities.
Without the local government administration, there will be a big gap or de-link between the people and the state and central government.
The local government has opened the space for local communities to be involved in socio- economic development as it affects their every day lives.
Such programmes as the community banks, cooperative societies, micro- credit finance, and community health care development, amongst others, have gone a long way to improve the living standard of local communities.
These are projects the local communities can easily associate with and thereby easy to mobilise local resources for their implementations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss how your local government has been able to mobilise resources for economic development.
3.2 Participation in Projects Executions Some local government councils have even undertaken such projects as inter-states and inter-cities transport system and in the riverine areas, they have been able to establish water transportation system.
Some local government councils have undertaken to rehabilitate state and federal roads neglected for a long time for the benefits of the local communities, and in order to facilitate economic activities in the area.
The local government, as a unit of government, has been able to reduce rural-urban migration due to its socio-economic activities.
However, this progress is sometimes hindered by unfavorable government policies which tend to put the local government in check.
Again, these activities can also be hampered where there is a bad chief executive at the local government level.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Develop a viable project that you would like your local government to execute for the benefit of the people.
69POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of socio-economic development cannot be over emphasised in the lives of the people.
Local government gives the people the understanding on how to be involved in socio-economic activities at the local level.
It provides the opportunity for small-scale involvement which would not have been possible at the central level because of the enormous financial implications.
The people also feel a sense of belonging and ownership whenever they are able to execute a project that will benefit their communities.
Again, the projects executed are those that are of immediate benefits to the local communities, therefore, it is easily adaptable.
This wipes away the problem of the state or federal governments formulating and implementing projects that are alien to the local communities and at the end will not be beneficial to the people.
5.0 SUMMARY We have been able to throw lights on the socio-economic and developmental functions of local government which is one major way the people feel the impact of government.
These functions of local government are very important because, these are the ones that the people often times identify with directly.
Most of the citizens might not be involved in politics or administrative aspects of local government, but their lives are influenced by the level of socio-economic development.
The local government also creates the needed link with the socio- economic activities of the state or federal in order to get to the people.
For example, the local government serves as channel for the immunisation programme of the federal government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the socio-economic and development activities of your local government council.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aghayere, V.O.
(1997).
Dominant Issues in Nigeria Local Government System: A Contemporary Focus.
Benin City: Imprint Services.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. 70 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Emezi, C.E.
(1983).
(cid:8220)The Changing Pattern of Local Government(cid:8221) in Nigeria Journal of Local Government Studies.
Vol 1, June.
Iyoha, F.E.
(1999).
Local Government and Rural Development: A Bottom-Up Perspective.
Benin City: Sylva Publishers Limited.
Omotoso, Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
71POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 4 EXCLUSIVE FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Constitutional Provision on Exclusive Functions 3.2 Uniqueness of the Local Government 3.3 Unified Local Government Service 3.4 Organisation Structure of the Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Local governments are created to perform certain exclusive functions because of their peculiarities.
The recognition of these peculiarities such as the nearness to the people, understanding the local content and needs make the constitution to allocate certain exclusive functions to the local government councils.
These exclusive functions bother on the day-to- day activities of the local communities.
It is these exclusive functions that make the local government to be regarded basically as the government of the grassroots, these functions gives the local government its distinctive nature from the state and federal governments.
Therefore, local government administration is structured and established to perform these exclusive functions in order to make the common citizens be part of the government.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify the following functions of the local government: • constitutional provision • to differentiate the exclusive functions from other functions of local • government i.e.
its uniqueness • unified local government service • organisation structure of the local government.
72 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Constitutional Provision The Fourth Schedule of the 1999 constitution of Nigeria gives the exclusive functions of the local government as follows: Collection of rates, radio and television licenses; establishment and maintenance of cemeteries, burial grounds and homes for destitute or infirm, licensing of bicycles, trucks, canoes, wheel barrows and cars; establishment, maintenance and regulation of slaughter houses, markets, motor parks, and public conveniences, construction and maintenance of roads, streets, streets lightings drains and other public high ways, parks, gardens, open spaces, naming of roads and streets and numbering of houses, registration of all births, deaths, and marriages.
Others include levying of tenements rates, control and regulation of out-door advertising and hoarding, movement and keeping of pets of all description, shops and kiosks, restaurants, bakeries and other places for sale of food to the public, laundries and licensing, regulation and control of the sale of liquor.
3.2 Uniqueness of the Local Government The uniqueness of the local government can easily be deducted from the performance of the exclusive functions.
These are the most important functions of local government that have serious implications on the administration, the people, and the environment which is constitutionally required of every local government councils.
The ability to perform these functions is part of the criteria for the creation of local government councils.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate the uniqueness of the local government from the other levels of government 3.3 Unified Local Government Service In view of the peculiarities of the Local Government Service, and the felt need to protect career Local Government officials from the buffetings of partisan politics, and to ensure the maximum utilisation of the scarce high-caliber manpower resources available to Local Government to enhance capable hands in the service and preserve the significant gains made in building the Local Government Services in the recent past, the United Local Government Service shall remain in each state accordingly, section III (I) of the civil Service Reforms, which forbids the posting of officers (cid:8220)from one ministry to another shall not 73POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT apply in the Local Government Service in respect of Local Government employees on salary Grade Levels 07 and above.
However, the posting of officers on Grade levels 01-06 from one local government to another shall not be allowed save in exceptional circumstance and on mutual agreement among the local governments concerned.
From Grade Levels 07 and above, officers shall come under the control of the United Local Government Service.
Such officers shall be subject to posting to relevant department of various Local Governments provided that the posting of a Head of Department will be done in consultation with the receiving Local Government.
Each Local Government shall undertake the appointment, discipline and promotion of its staff on Grade Levels 01-06 under general and unified guidelines to be provided by the Local Government Service commission while officers on Grade levels 07 and above shall be appointed, posted, disciplined and promoted by the Local Government Service commission provided that all appointments shall be made to unfrozen posts in the approved budget of the Local Government.
With respect to recruitment, appropriate pre-entry qualifications shall be uniformly applied as provided in the approved scheme of service for Local Government Employees.
In carrying out recruitment into the Local Government Service, the Local Government and Local Government Service Commission shall take full account of the geographical spread and socio-economic diversities of the Local Government Area.
Each Local Government shall be restructured vertically and horizontally to ensure overall management efficiency and effectiveness high degree of specialisation, job satisfaction, optimum span of control and clear lines of authority and responsibility.
3.4 Organisation Structure of the Local Government Organisation structure of a Local Government shall consist of the following Departments: i.
One (1) Department of Personnel Management ii.
One (1) Department of Finance, Supplies, Planning Research and Statistics iii.
Not more than four (4) (cid:8220)Operations(cid:8221) departments reflecting the basic functions areas of concern of Local Government as follows: a.
Education b.
Agriculture and Natural Resources c. Works, Housing, Land and Survey and d. Medical and Primary Health 74 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Depending on Local circumstances and with the endorsement of the department of local governments in the Governor(cid:8217)s Office, a local government may have a full department of budget and planning research and statistics, however so called, to enhance its management capability provided that the total number of departments does not exceed six.
Therefore, any expansion in the local government shall be accommodated through the sub-divisions below the level of department provided that, in each case, the span of control does not exceed six.
Each department shall sub-divide into division to reflect broad professional areas within a department.
Each division shall sub-divide into branches to reflect sub-professional area.
Each branch shall be sub- divided into sections to reflect specialised activities within a sub- professional area in all cases, the span of control shall not exceed six (6).
The department, divisions, branches and sections of local government department shall be headed as in the Approved Scheme of Service for local government employees.
Each officer shall bear a functional title reflecting his profession or area of specialisation.
Other local government employees (e.g.
Drivers, Artisans, Messengers, Porters, and Cleaners etc) shall continue to use their current functional tittles, with the existing grade levels attached to them.
Every local government employee who satisfies the laid down criteria for advancement, can rise to the topmost post in the local government service, namely; that of Head of Department.
Also, any local government employee that possesses the relevant qualification, training and experience may cross from one department of his/her local government to another department within the local government, in case of posts graded department, or within the Unified Local Government Service shall be subject only to requisite qualification, training experience, good report and vacancy.
Rewards and sanctions shall be based on concrete measureable performance and in consultation with the vice-chairman; secretary to local government and supervisor, a local government chairman shall set the target which employee in the local government shall aim at even in routine matters.
In setting targets, it shall be noted that the targets are different from functions or job description.
Targets shall be set in terms of time, cost, quantity and/or quality.
Again, in setting targets for local government employees, the chief executive shall first take into account the relevant local government policies, the development plan and annual budgets.
The new evaluation scheme is based on four criteria suitably weighted and differentiated between categories of staff namely: 75POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT i. actual performance compared with performance standards ii.
character traits iii.
attendance and punctuality at work and iv.
leadership performance The actual evaluation of an officer will take the form of awarding marks in respect of each of the four criteria.
The head of a local government department shall be subjected to annual performance evaluation according to weighted criteria based principally on the concrete achievements of the units under him.
The head of department will be evaluated by the secretary to local government in consultation with the chairman.
The secretary will be evaluated by the chairman of the relevant local government.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State the organisational structure of local government and discuss their functions.
4.0 CONCLUSION The exclusive functions of local government as guaranteed by the 1999 constitution reveal the importance of local government as a unit of government.
It is these exclusive functions which the local government alone can perform with much effectiveness and efficiency that gives it its uniqueness as a third-tier of government.
It is these exclusive functions that explain the purposeful roles of local government in national development.
It is through these functions that the decentralisation and decongestion of the state and federal government can be measured, because these are functions where local government has full responsibilities and autonomy without interference from either the state or federal.
Again, local government derived most of its revenue and finances from the performance of the exclusive functions.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taken into consideration the listing of the exclusive functions of local government because; these are the peculiar functions that give it its locus standi.
It is explained that, it is these functions that separate the local government distinctively from the state or federal.
It is also these exclusive functions that the citizens at the local communities can easily identify and for which the local governments are held responsible.
76 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the importance of the exclusive functions of local government.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Blair, G.S.
(1997).
Government at the Grassroots.
LA, California: Palisade Publishers.
Emezi, C. E. (1983).
(cid:8220)The Changing Pattern of Local Government(cid:8221) In Nigeria Journal of Local Government Studies.
Vol 1, June.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1976).
Guidelines for Local Government Reforms.
Lagos: Government Printers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).
Constitution.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Omotoso, Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
77POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 5 CONCURRENT AND DELEGATED FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concurrent Functions of Local Government in Nigeria 3.2 Delegated Functions of Local Government in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Governance operates at different levels.
There are exclusive functions which are assigned to every level, but at the same time, there are functions which all the levels must perform jointly for the good government of the country.
Concurrent functions are those functions which the federal, state and local government can legislate on and perform jointly and simultaneously while delegated functions are those functions which the federal or state can delegate to the local government to perform as the need and situation arises.
These concurrent and delegated legislation or functions are also guaranteed by the fourth schedule of the 1999 constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
These are functions that one level of government can not perform effectively and efficiently without the involvement of the other levels.
These functions involve huge financial implications which all three-tier of government must be engaged.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify: • concurrent functions of local government in Nigeria • delegated functions of local government in Nigeria.
78 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concurrent Functions of Local Government in Nigeria In a federal system of government, powers are shared between the central and federating units and Nigeria federalism has three-tier of government where the local government is the third-tier.
In this arrangement certain powers and functions are devolved to the lower tiers for the good governance of the country.
These powers and functions are usually guaranteed by the constitution.
The 1999 Constitution of Nigeria provides for local government concurrent list as follows; the provision and maintenance of primary, adult and vocational education; the provision and maintenance of health services; the development of agriculture and natural resources other than the exploitation of minerals; and such other functions as may be conferred on local government by an act of the National Assembly.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate between concurrent and delegated functions of local government 3.2 Delegated Functions of Local Government in Nigeria These are functions that are delegated by the House of Assembly of the State to local government councils and it include such functions as housing and industrial estate, using local government structures for electoral purposes, immunisation and distribution of essential commodities, using the local government as a basic yardstick for quota and federal character allocation of resources and positions.
These are all part of the covert functions of local government councils.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Justify why local government should perform delegated functions.
4.0 CONCLUSION The local government as a unit of administration is becoming more and more important.
The scope and functions of the local government are increasing as the society is developing.
Therefore, the local government has been very relevant in the governmental process of the country.
As the space of government increased on a daily basis, so the local government is expected to be saddled with more functions and responsibilities of governance.
These concurrent and delegated functions of local government have given the local government 79POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT enormous responsibilities and at the same time have exposed the complexity of the functions performed by the state and federal governments.
Through these functions, the local government is able to feel the burden of governance carried by the state and federal governments.
However, local government often falls short of performing these functions effectively and efficiently due to their enormousity.
They also involve huge financial implications which the local government often times is not able to undertake.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have enumerated the concurrent and delegated functions of local government which perform jointly or separately with the state and federal governments.
We also explained that these functions actually share the burden of governance with the other tiers of government.
It involves a huge financial burden, therefore, all levels of government must be involved in order to achieve its goals and objectives.
For example, the provision of educational facilities to the citizens should be the responsibility and functions of every level of government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the importance of the local government in the performance of concurrent and delegated functions.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Blair, G.S.
(1997).
Government at the Grassroots.
LA, California: Palisade Publishers.
Emezi, C. E. (1983).
(cid:8220)The Changing Pattern of Local Government(cid:8221) In Nigeria Journal of Local Government Studies, Vol 1, June.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1976).
Guidelines for Local Government Reforms.
Lagos: Government Printers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999).
Constitution.
Lagos: Federal Government Press 80 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Omotoso, Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Oyediran, Oyeleye (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications.
81POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT MODULE 4 Unit 1 Internal Revenue Generation for Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 2 External Revenue Generation for Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 3 Management of Local Government Finance in Nigeria Unit 4 Personnel Management of Local Government in Nigeria Unit 5 Local Government and Inter-Governmental Relations in Nigeria UNIT 1 INTERNAL REVENUE GENERATION FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Contents 3.1 Taxes 3.2 Rates 3.3 Commercial Activities 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are several ways in which local government is financed.
One of the major avenues for the finance of local government is through internal revenue generation.
Internal revenue generation is such a strategic avenue of revenue generation that the local government cannot survive without it.
The level of internal revenue generated by each local government depends on the size of the local government, the level of business activities, the urban or rural nature of the local government, the rate to be charged, the instruments engaged in the collection of the revenue including the political will and the acceptability by the people to pay based on the legitimacy of the council and the socio-cultural beliefs of the citizens regarding the issue of taxation.
Local government, until the 1976 reforms, depended for the greater proportion of their revenue on income generated from their own internal sources.
This was because revenue from the federal or state governments was irregular and sometimes was not received at all.
This was also coupled with the fact that, revenue allocation to local government council was not clearly 82 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT provided for by the constitution.
However, with the 1976 reforms, the greater proportion of local government revenue no longer comes from the internally generated revenue.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the various sources of internally generated revenue such as: • taxes • rates • commercial activities.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The local government is empowered by the constitution to have control and regulation over certain activities in their jurisdiction, and in so doing, is able to impose some taxes and rates on these economic activities.
There are three major ways that the local government can generate revenue internally.
These include the following: taxes, rates and commercial activities.
3.1 Taxes This is one way local government raise their revenue by taxing the workable adults in the community.
This is referred to as poll tax and it is supposed to be a substantial source of annual income for the council.
Unfortunately, because of lack of adequate population statistics, it is difficult to adequately know and tax the employable adults in the locality.
This is coupled by the fact that there is large scale evasion of taxes in Nigeria by the simple excuse that the rate of unemployment is high.
3.2 Rates This is another major source of revenue for the local government councils and involves a wide range of activities where fees are charged.
These include among others; tenement rate, radio and television licenses fees, bicycle license fees, hoarding permit fees, motor park fees, registration of marriage fees, registration of birth and deaths, slaughter fees, truck licence fees, advertisement fees, market fees, hawkers permits, registration of local government contractors fees, administrative charges, liquor licence fees, sale of land of local government layout, dispensary and maternity and registration fees, miscellaneous receipts.
The list is not exhaustive.
Rates often times are flat irrespective of the 83POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT ability of the payer to pay.
This is one of the major defects of rates which make payers to avoid paying whenever they can.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Draw a sharp distinction between taxes and rates 3.3 Commercial Activities This is another major source of revenue for the local government council.
It involves the council administration management ability to engage in commercial activities such as setting up of business ventures which might include micro finance, savings and loans or mortgage finance, building of stalls and shopping malls, renting out of local government properties like reception halls, chairs, canopies, tables, hire of local government plants such as tractors, generators, local and inter state transportation and ferry and boat transportation in the riverine areas and commercial farming amongst others.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Develop a commercial activity that will generate revenue for your local government.
4.0 CONCLUSION The internally generated revenue is the oldest source of revenue generation and often times the most reliable.
The importance of the internally generated revenue or local taxation is predicated on the fact that it helps in providing the resources for the smooth running of the local government administration without necessarily waiting for the state and federal allocations that involves a lot of politics.
In fact, the more viable or commercial oriented a local government is, the more revenue it is likely to generate.
Those local government councils that are located in the urban areas are likely to generate more internal revenue than those located in the rural areas.
Again, the larger the population, particularly those with a vibrant work force is also likely to generate more internal revenue than the others.
However, the internally generated revenue is the most difficult for the local government to generate and the level of income generated is dependent on the instruments used in the process.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, attempt has been made to discuss the various avenues and means through which local government generate its internal revenue.
84 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT We have been able to expose the fact that the internally generated revenue can be grouped into three major areas, that is, taxes, rates and commercial activities.
In fact, in contemporary times, local government councils with good management are likely to raise more internal revenue through commercial activities than through taxes and rates which are often times fixed and could be avoided by prospective payers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the three major sources of internally generated revenue for local government councils.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Bello-Imam, I.
B.
(ed.).
(1990).
Local Government Finance in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NISER.
Diakwa, H. (1990).
(cid:8220)Poll Tax(cid:8221) in Kunle Ajayi (ed.).
(2000).
Emezi, C.E.
(1983).
(cid:8220)The Changing Pattern of Local Government(cid:8221) In Nigeria Journal of Local Government Studies, Vol 1, June.
Fadipe, D. (1987).
(cid:8220)Sources and Strategies for Revenue Generation in Local Government Areas of Ondo State(cid:8221) in Kunle Ajayi (ed) (2000).
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1976).
Guidelines for Local Government Reforms, Lagos: Government Printers Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 Constitution.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Omotoso, Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Orewa, G. O.
(1979).
(cid:8220)Government Grants to Local Government in Comparative Perspective(cid:8221) In Adamolekun, L. and Rowland, L, (eds.).
The new Local Government System in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books Nig.
85POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 2 EXTERNAL REVENUE GENERATION FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Statutory Allocation 3.2 Grants 3.3 Loans 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Local government also has another avenue of generating revenue other than the internally generated revenue.
The other avenue is regarded as external revenue generation.
The externally generated revenues are those revenues that local government acquired without a direct burden on the citizens of the locality.
These are revenues that are given to local government for development of the citizens and for good government of the local government areas.
The local government may often times derived more revenue from the external sources, but it is not as stable as the internally generated revenue that are fraught with uncertainties and conditionality.
The three major sources of externally generated revenue are the statutory allocation, which is often times very political in the allocation; the next is grants which must satisfy certain conditions before it is given and loans which attract some level of interests.
However, the three sources are very important in local government financing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objectives of this unit are for you to learn the three major components of externally generated revenue for local government in Nigeria as follows: • statutory allocation • grants • loans.
86 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are three main sources of externally generated revenue accruable to local government.
These include: statutory allocation from federal and states government, grants and loans from federal, state and other sources.
3.1 Statutory Allocation The 1999 Constitution of Nigeria made provisions for statutory allocations of public revenue to local government councils within the state.
Section 7 (6a-b) of the constitution provides that the federal and states government are required by law to provide funds for local government to develop and for the administration of good government.
This is a major source of revenue to the local government and it is usually reviewed upward.
The statutory allocation to local government councils was 10% of the Federation Account in 1979; it was reviewed to 15% in 1991 and 20% in 1992.
The statutory allocations have always been a major source of political debate as there are always agitations for more allocations from the federation account.
The federal government on its own part has always fulfilled it obligation of releasing to local governments their statutory allocations but state governments have often times failed in meeting with this obligation.
In fact, because of the allocations from the federal government, many states have proposed a joint account for states and local governments so as to control the local government funds.
In some regimes like the Obasanjo civilian regime, many local government councils were made incapacitated and weak.
And many local government chairmen have taken this as an excuse not to meet up with the constitutional and administrative obligations to the citizens in their council areas of jurisdiction.
3.2 Grants Grant is another avenue of the externally generated revenue to local governments.
Grants is different from statutory allocations because while statutory allocations are mandatory and constitutional rights of the councils, grants are voluntary and seasonal depending on the exigencies of federal and state governments.
Grants could also come from the state or federal governments to local governments to help them undertake certain developmental projects.
Grants are often earmarked for particular projects that are of utmost important to the local communities.
Such projects are often supervised by the donor of the grants in order to be sure that the aim is achieved.
Grants can also be for recurrent purposes.
Apart from capital projects, recurrent grants can be given to local government to meet up with certain obligations like the payment of staff salaries.
Again, it is often said that the relationship between the state, 87POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT federal and local governments determines the level and frequencies of the grants received.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate between statutory allocation and Grants as a means of revenue generation 3.3 Loans This is another source of revenue for the local government.
Loans are often sort from financial institutions by local government for both short- term and long-term projects.
Often times, local government councils raise loans to invest in capital projects such as road transportation, building of shopping malls and financing budget deficits.
Loans are often discouraged because of mismanagement and embezzlement by corrupt local government officials who perceived the loans as personal funds.
Again, some officials undertake series of loans from financial institutions and passed the burden over to the incoming administration, which weaken the financial base of the local government council.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Develop feasibility on how your local government can access a loan from a financial institution.
4.0 CONCLUSION Finance, whether through internal or external revenue generation is very important in local government administration.
There is no meaningful project that can be achieved without adequate finance.
The external revenue generation is a major source of local government finance.
In fact no local government can survive without external revenue generation, particularly from the statutory allocations.
It is also important for local government to be more active in developing avenues for generating revenue such as investment in capital projects that are likely to appreciate and build returns on investments.
It is no longer fashionable for local government management just to sit down and wait for statutory allocations.
It must find ways and means of developing diverse sources of revenue generation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the three main sources of externally generated revenue, that is, statutory allocation, grants and loans.
We have discussed that statutory allocations and grant are form the state and federal governments to local governments.
While the statutory 88 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT allocations are compulsory and guaranteed by the constitution, grants are voluntary and it comes periodically or when it is perceived that such grants will be necessary to undertake a project of utmost importance to the community or local government area.
Loans on the other hand, are requested from financial institutions by the local government management and such loans are given after meeting certain conditions and the interest attached.
Again, while the statutory allocation is for good governance and citizen(cid:8217)s welfare, grants and loans are basically channeled towards developmental activities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the differences between internally generated revenue and externally generated revenue of local government.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press.
Bello-Imam, I.
B.
(ed.).
(1990).
Local Government Finance in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NISER.
Diakwa, H. (1990).
(cid:8220)Poll Tax(cid:8221) in Kunle Ajayi.
(ed.).
(2000).
Emezi, C.E.
(1983).
(cid:8220)The Changing Pattern of Local Government(cid:8221) In Nigeria Journal of Local Government Studies, Vol 1, June.
Fadipe, D. (1987).
(cid:8220)Sources and Strategies for Revenue Generation in Local Government Areas of Ondo State(cid:8221) in Kunle Ajayi (ed.).
(2000).
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1976).
Guidelines for Local Government Reforms.
Lagos: Government Printers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 Constitution.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Omotoso, Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Orewa, G. O.
(1979).
(cid:8220)Government Grants to Local Government in Comparative Perspective(cid:8221) In Adamolekun, L. and Rowland, L, (eds.).
The new Local Government System in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books Nig.
89POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 3 MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Financial Management under the Military Regimes 3.2 Financial Management under the Democratic Regimes 3.3 Spending Limits 3.4 Internal Audit 3.5 Local Government Audit Alarm Committee 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Management is the ability to have prudent control of the available sources and the ability to utilise these scare resources to the optimum, particularly for the development and the welfare of the citizens.
Financial management involves the prudent utilisation of the income and expenditure.
Although the development of every society depends on the amount of resources available to them, but most importantly, it is the method and means by which these resources are employed that give the ultimate results.
Evidence has shown that poorly managed resources have been responsible for our lack of concrete development.
In view of this, checks must be put in place on the prudent utilisation of the financial resources of local government in order to avoid the excesses of those in authority to manage these resources.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain the following ways of managing finance by the local government: • financial management under the military regimes • financial management under the democratic regimes • spending limits • internal audit • state Auditor General for Local Government • local government Audit Alarm Committee.
90 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT The management of the local government finance has been perceived in different manners depending on the regimes under which the local government is operating.
3.1 Financial Management under the Military Local government financial management under the various military regimes was basically to the dictates of the sole administrators who were appointed by the various states military governors.
The sole administrators were not in any way accountable to the people but to the regimes or military administration.
Again, the sole administrators were career civil servants who were perceived to be in good book of the military governors, they were often times not chosen on merits.
And because, they were not chosen by the people, they were not also accountable to the people.
Therefore, many of the local government councils were full of abandoned projects; teachers and other local government workers were owed salaries of several months and years.
The point must be made that local government statutory allocation was increased and guaranteed during the 1976 local government reforms and during Babangida regime, the fact also remains that these finances were diverted into private pockets and the projects the money were meant for never saw the light of the day.
Basically, management of finance of local government in military regimes was just an avenue for embezzlement of funds as accountability was to the extent to which the regime perceived it.
3.2 Financial Management under the Democratic Regimes Management of finance under democratic regimes is more prudent because there are so many checks put in place for financial control.
One of such control is the legislative control.
Local government operates under a legislative framework established by the constitution.
These legislative provisions constitute the system of control binding the local authorities on financial disbursement.
Technically, the local government operates under three levels of legislative framework.
That is, the National Assembly, the State Assembly and the Legislative Councils, but practically operates more under the local councils legislative councils who are directly responsible for the budget and implementation of the local government finance.
The chairman and its supervisory councilors operate the budget of the council as passed by the legislative councilors.
At the federal and state levels, the legislature can pass a law on financial management and the local government is bound to conform.
There are also the financial and monetary regulations and policies of the central government that also affects the financial management of local 91POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT government.
It is now the financial policies of the central government to publish all monies allocated to both the states and local government.
This is further strengthened by the use of both internal and external auditors who must audit the spending activities of the local government.
Other forms of management of the local government finance include grants which are not to be lodged in the central purse of the local government accounts but are meant for special projects and finally, loans which are also meant for investment purposes or for debt settling.
However, it is important to state that the human factor and the financial and management skills of the personnel of local government must not be ruled out.
The more skillful and efficient the personnel of the council are, the better, the utilisation of local government resources.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State the differences between financial management under the military and democratic regimes 3.3 Spending Limits It is no longer necessary to maintain spending limits for the executive committee of the local government (consisting of the local government chairman, vice-chairman, supervisors and the secretary to the local government, treasurer in attendance) as in the past.
This is subject to the following conditions: i.
The provision of the financial memoranda should be scrupulously adhere with particularly those relating to the control expenditure as well as contract, purchases, payments and personal advances procedures; ii.
The projects should be contained in the approved budget or approved supplementary estimates of the local government for the year and iii.
For the avoidance of doubt, it shall no longer be necessary to refer any contract, whatever its size, to any organ or functionary of the state government for approval provided the project had received the prior approval of the legislative arm of the local government during the normal process of the annual budget exercise.
However, individual monthly spending limits will be maintained for local government functionaries as follows: 92 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Functionary Annual Internally Generated Revenue Above N2m N1-2m Below N1m0 Chairman 75,000 30,000 15,000 Leader 20,000 12,000 7,000 Vice-chairman 18,000 9,000 5,000 Secretary 15,000 8,000 4,500 Supervisor 15,000 8,000 4,500 Clerk 8,000 4,500 3,000 Head of department 8,000 4,500 3,000 The individual spending limits are subject to the following conditions: i.
All expenditures approved by an individual officer shall be reported within a week to the next higher officer for information; ii.
Each officer authorising expenditure shall be held personally accountable even after leaving office, for the expenditure approved by him; iii.
The limit of authority to approve expenditure shall be subject in the usual manner to budgetary appropriation, availability of funds and financial memoranda; iv.
All expenditure beyond the individual spending limits shall be referred to the next higher officer or to the executive committee of the local government as the case may be; v. The total monthly expenditure authorised by each officer shall be formally reported in the monthly statement expenditure rendered to the legislative arm of each local government vi.
Until all local governments can boast of qualified personnel in budget preparation, the inspectorate staff of local governments in the deputy governor(cid:8217)s office shall continue to assist needy local government in ensuring that the budgets are prepared in accordance with stipulated guidelines; vii.
All contractual agreements, local government purchase orders, job order forms or such other documents relating to contracts, supplies etc, shall be signed by the head of personnel management department only after the appropriate approving authority has given the necessary approval.
If the head of personnel management department observes any irregularity, he/she shall invite the attention of the approving authority to it.
However, if that authority insists, he/she shall raise an audit alarm; viii.
The inspectorate staff of the deputy governor shall continue to provide technical assistance, advice and guidance (not control) to local governments as and when necessary; ix All approvals for expenditure shall be in writing 93POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.4 Internal Audit Every local government is to have an internal audit headed by a qualified accountant to provide a complete and continuous audit of the accounts and records of revenue, expenditure, plant, allocated and unallocated stores where applicable.
Notwithstanding the existence of an audit unit in a local government, the individual officer(cid:8217)s responsibilities shall subsist and departmental checks shall continue.
The internal Auditor of each local government shall be directly responsible to the accounting officer.
He shall submit to the accounting officer, as well as the state auditor general for local governments, on the true progress of the audit.
He shall also issue special reports, if necessary, where in his opinion; the attention of the state auditor general for local governments should be drawn to any irregularity or apparent departure from earlier internal audit reports/recommendations.
In any local government where a system of stores stock verification does not exist, the internal auditor shall assume the control of stock verification staff and direct their programme of inspection.
3.5 State Auditor-General for Local Government The state Auditor-General for local government shall perform the following functions: a. has power to carry out, on regular basis, the auditing of local government accounts; b. has power to sanction and surcharge any officer as stipulated in the guidelines governing offences and sanctions.
However, appeals against such decisions shall be to the public accounts committee which shall be a permanent body of government with power to hear and determine such appeals; c. be the chairman of the local government audit alarm committee; d. has access to the state governor through the governor(cid:8217)s representative on the audit alarm committee and; e. notifies the public accounts committee of audits of significant importance and serious pre-payment audit queries for which the accounting officer of the local government is liable or responsible.
In addition, any other sensitive issue which, because of its urgency cannot wait until the committee is convene, shall be dealt with by the state Auditor-General for local governments.
The state Auditor-General for local governments shall be appointed by the state governor in the same manner as the state auditor general.
He shall possess qualifications and cognate experience comparable with those of the state auditor general with whom he shall enjoy with those of the state auditor general.
94 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT The state Auditor-General for local governments shall have an independent outfit and shall be based at the state headquarters.
Audit queries shall be addressed to the chairman and answered within the time limit stipulated in the rules governing offences and sanctions.
Where the query concerns the accounting officer, it shall be answered by him in person.
If the accounting officer does not respond within the stipulated time limit to a query that affects his office, the state auditor general for local governments shall inform the public accounts committee, the governor and the relevant legislative arm of the local government in writing.
Where the failure to answer the audit query is by an officer other than the chairman of local government, the state Auditor-General for local government shall impose, through the local government service commission, the necessary sanctions or punishment on the erring officer who shall have the right to appeal to the public accounts committee.
To ensure the effectiveness of audit functions, all local governments entering into contract agreements is suppose to include a clause enabling the state Auditor-General for local governments have access to sites for purpose of auditing or monitoring contract performance.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Examine the main functions of the Auditor-General of a local government 3.6 Local Government Audit Alarm Committee Every state is supposed to have a local government audit alarm committee in each state comprising the following: i.
State Auditor-General for local government ii.
Director of local government inspectorate (representing the governor(cid:8217)s office) iii.
Representative of the state accountant general(cid:8217)s office The work of the Audit Alarm Committee shall be facilitated by the following local government officials: i.
All Heads of Department ii.
Treasurer to local government and iii.
Head of Internal Audit It shall be their individual and joint responsibility to alert the local government audit alarm committee before irregular or illegal payment is 95POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT made.
Failure to do so promptly will make them liable to appropriate share of punishment as provided under the guidelines on audit queries and sanctions.
It shall be an offence for any local government functionary to process any queried payment under the audit alarm system any further, without an audit clearance certificate issued by the state auditor general for local governments once a prepayment audit alarm has been raised.
All revenue officers of local government shall ensure the collection of revenue and shall continue to account for them and render returns to local government treasurers in accordance with the existing financial regulations.
Local governments shall render monthly returns of receipts and expenditure to the legislative arm of the local government and the state auditor general for local governments with copies to the governor(cid:8217)s office not later than the third week of the following month.
The office of the treasurer to the local government and that of the internal auditor shall be strengthened to enable them function more effectively.
4.0 CONCLUSION The management of local government finance is very important in the life and survival of the local government.
As a result of the mismanagement in the past, emphasis is now being placed on accountability and transparency, good governance and the rule of law.
Financial and monetary policies are been put in place to regulate financial spending and budgeting.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss the modes of financial management of local government.
We discussed the financial management under the military regimes which were less accountable to the people and the people could not also call for accountability because of the dictatorial posture of the military regimes.
On the other hand, we discussed financial management under the democratic regimes.
We found out that there are checks, policies and regulations put in place for prudent financial management.
These include legislative control, the financial and monetary policies, auditors, grants and loans for specific projects as control mechanisms.
We also explained that the human factor and the skills of the local government personnel in financial management are also very vital.
96 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the various ways local government finance can be efficiently managed.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Bello-Imam, I.
B.
(ed.).
(1990).
Local Government Finance in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NISER.
Diakwa, H. (1990).
(cid:8220)Poll Tax(cid:8221) in Kunle Ajayi.
Emezi, C.E.
(1983).
(cid:8220)The Changing Pattern of Local Government(cid:8221) In Nigeria Journal of Local Government Studies, Vol 1, June.
Fadipe, D. (1987).
(cid:8220)Sources and Strategies for Revenue Generation in Local Government Areas of Ondo State(cid:8221) in Kunle Ajayi.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1976).
Guidelines for Local Government Reforms.
Lagos: Government Printers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 Constitution.
Lagos: Federal Government Press Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi, (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Orewa, G. O.
(1979).
(cid:8220)Government Grants to Local Government in Comparative Perspective(cid:8221) in Adamolekun, L. and Rowland, L, (eds.).
The New Local Government System in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books.
The Presidency (1999).
Local Government Administration and Bye Laws in Nigeria.
Abuja.
97POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 4 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Elected Category of Local Government Staff 3.2 The Career Civil Servants of the Local Government 3.3 Human Resource Management 3.4 Local Government Service Commission 3.5 Appointment and Staff Welfare 3.6 Contract Appointment 3.7 Promotion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Personnel management has to do with human resources of the local government.
How does the local government acquire its human resource and how they are managed for service delivery?
Human capital is very important in any endeavour and the management of human capital must not be left to chance.
It is the human capital that combines all other resources for production and service delivery.
Therefore, the development of human resource is of utmost importance to any establishment.
Local government in the past has suffered from human capital development and getting high caliber of personnel has been the bane of local government administration.
The remuneration and prestige of working in local government in the past have not been very encouraging; therefore, it was believed that the low caliber staff should be reserved for the local government.
This perception have changed after the 1976 local government reforms which upgraded the civil service scale of local government with that of state government.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the following: • the elected staff • the career civil servants.
• human resource management • local government service commission 98 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT • appointment and staff welfare • contract appointment • promotion.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Elected Category of Local Government Staff This category of staff is only possible in a democratic regime.
In the military regimes, there were only sole administrators who were often times appointed by the military governor or administrators.
These sole administrators performed both the executive and legislative functions as both functions were fused into the office of the sole administrators.
Under the democratic dispensation, the elected officers consist of the chairman and his deputy and the councillors.
The chairman and his deputy are elected by the whole local government while the councillors are elected from the wards level.
The chairman is the chief executive and the chief accounting officer of the local government.
He presides over the budget and its implementation in the local government.
He appoints his supervisory councillors and gives them different portfolios.
The chairman of the local government sees to the daily activities of the council with the aid of the council(cid:8217)s secretary as appointed by him.
He is the head of the administrative staff and they are answerable to him in their daily roles and functions.
After the chairman, you have the elected councillors that make up the legislative arm of the local government.
They are the law makers of the local government and are responsible for the approval of the local government budget.
The councillors play the representative role of the people.
They represent the interests and aspirations of the people that voted them into the council.
The quality of local government policies is a reflection of the quality of people voted in as councillors.
The elected officers of the local government are paid from the local government coffers, based on approval remunerations by the salaries and wages commission.
The chairman can be impeached by the councillors by 2/3 majority if found wanting in his official duties.
The councillors on the other hand, can be recall by the people if he is perceived not to be representing the interest of the people.
Since the chairman and the councillors are elected under the umbrella of a political party, they are also very influenced by the programmes or manifestos of the party on whose platform they were elected.
There are situations where elected officers who are suppose to be politically neutral after elections become more loyal to the party than the people.
3.2 The Career Civil Servants of the Local Government Staff of the local government is also categorised into administrative cadre, professional cadre, clerical cadre and the unskilled cadre.
All the 99POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT categories are subject to the civil service rules of the states in terms of recruitment, promotion and discipline.
The administrative cadre is officers of grade level 07 and above, and they carry out the administrative functions of the local government which include the implementation of policies, recruitment, training, deployment and staff discipline.
They assist the chairman in the day to day administration of the local government.
Next is the professional cadre which includes the medical personnel, the engineering personnel and the accounting personnel.
They play very important and special professional roles for the good governance of the council.
Then you have the clerical personnel who are on grade level 01(cid:8211)06.
They perform the clerical duties of the local government and are responsible to the chief clerical officer.
The last category is the unskilled and often times uneducated cadre of the local government.
They perform the menial duties of the local government such as environment clearing, cleaners of offices, drivers, clearing of refuse, messengers and security or gate men in the local government.
3.3 Human Resource Management Each local government shall have a Junior Staff Management Committee (JSMC) which will have responsibility for the appointment, promotion and discipline of officers on grade levels 01-06.
In all cases, the composition of the Junior Staff Management Committee shall, as much as possible, reflect the geographical spread of the local government area.
In each local government, the Junior Staff Management Committee shall consist of one representative from each department of the local government not below grade level 09 and shall be chaired by the head of the department of personnel management in the local government.
The committee shall determine personnel matters of local government employee on grade 01-06.
The appointment, promotion and discipline of officers on grade levels 07 and above shall be the responsibility of the local government services commission.
Any officer who is dissatisfied or aggrieved as a result of any decision of the Junior Staff Management Committee shall have the right of appeal.
Appeals against the decisions of the junior staff management committee shall lie; in the first instance to the chairman of the local government.
All such petitions to the chairman shall be forwarded by the officer concerned through the Head of the department of personnel management.
The head of the department of personnel management shall forward such petitions to the chairman together with the briefs, minutes and comments of the relevant junior staff management committee(cid:8217)s meeting and as well as the comment of the head of the department of personnel management within two weeks of receipt.
The decision of the chairman on the petition shall be communicated to the officer concerned within two weeks of the receipt of the petition.
100 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Appeals against the decision of the chairman shall lie to the local government service commission.
All such petitions to the commission together with the brief and minutes of the relevant meeting of the junior staff management committee, the comments of the head of the department of personnel management, as well as the chairman(cid:8217)s decision and whatever other comments the chairman may wish to make on the petition, within two weeks of receipt.
And advance copy of the petition shall be sent by the petitioner to the commission.
The decision of the commission on such petitions shall be binding on all concerned.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examine the functions of the elected and career staff of the local government 3.4 Local Government Service Commission The Local Government Service Commission shall perform the following functions: a. Appoints, post, promote and discipline local government employees on grade level 07 and above.
In doing so, the principle of geographical spread and socio economic diversity of the state shall be taken into full account.
The guideline for promotion shall be based on the generally accepted principle of experience, performance on the job, length of service, good conduct, relevant qualification, training, performance at interview and relevant examination where appropriate; b.
Set up general uniform guidelines for appointment, posting, promotion and discipline; c. Monitor the activities of each local government on appointment, discipline and promotion of local government employees on grade 01-06 in order to ensure that the guidelines are strictly and uniformly applied; d. Serve ass an appellate body for all petitions from local governments in respect of appointments, promotions and discipline; the decision of the local government service commission shall be binding on all local governments and shall have the right to appeal to the governor e. Maintain comprehensive and up to date seniority lists and nominal rolls for the local government service as a whole; f. Submit an annual report of its activities to: i.
All chairmen of local government in the state ii.
The office of the state governor and iii.
The state House of Assembly 101POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT g. Maintain a monthly local government gazette newsletter to convey, in particular; i.
The bye-law passed by the local governments in the state and ii.
Staff movements including new appointments, confirmations, promotions and retirement/dismissals; h. Assure responsibility for manpower planning, development and training in the senior cadres (GL 07-and above) of the local government service i.
Keep the 1% local government training fund for the training of members of the unified staff.
j.
Restructure and strengthen the department of personnel management and thereafter, periodically review and propose modifications in operational method and organisational structure of the local government services; k. The local government staff pension board office, which is at present a separate office, shall remain so.
However, the chairman of the pensions board; 3.5 Appointment and Staff Welfare All recruitments by the local government Junior Staff Management Committee (JSMC) must, as a rule be in consonance with the manpower needs of the local government as provided in the approved local government estimates.
All applicants for positions in grade level 01-06 in a local government shall apply directly to the local government of their choice and all eligible candidates for appointments shall be interviewed by the junior staff management committee.
All direct appointment to the post on grade level 07 and above shall be by open advertisement to the general public, and copies of such advertisements shall be sent to all the local governments within the state.
All letters of appointment shall be signed by the head of the department of personnel management in the case of posts graded 01-06 and by the secretary of the local government service commission in the post on grade 07 and above.
Returns of all appointments made by each local government shall be rendered monthly to the local government service commission.
Confirmation of all probationary appointments shall be carried out by the local governments in the case of officers on grade level 01-06 and by the local government service commission in the case of officers on grade level 07 and above.
The appropriate heads of departments shall make recommendations to the head of the department of personnel management for consideration of the junior staff management committee (JSMC).
The names of officers so confirmed shall be 102 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT submitted on a monthly basis to the local government service commission for gazette action.
Recruitment of persons into vacation, part time or temporary post not exceeding three months shall be decentralised.
Returns of all vacation, part time and temporary appointment made shall be sent to the local government service commission monthly, such returns shall show the name, date of birth, date of appointment, grade, qualifications, state of origin of employee and up to date, intra state distribution of existing staff in that grade in the local government.
Acting appointments, where necessary, shall be approved by the chairman of local government in respect of local government employees on grade levels 01-06 and relevant returns rendered to the commission on monthly basis.
In case of officers on grade 07 and above, acting appointment, where necessary, shall be approved by the local government service commission.
All local governments shall observe the presidential order which grants disabled persons special concessions in appointment to posts in the public service.
All returns and information required to be submitted to the local government service commission shall be so submitted not later than the last day of the subsequent month such returns shall be accompanied with the minutes of the relevant meeting of the junior staff management committee.
In order to boost the morale of local government employees, each local government is to evolve appropriate staff welfare schemes such as housing, recreation, canteen etc.
3.6 Contract Appointment The provision of the local government staff regulations shall apply in all cases to contract appointments, except in the case of non-Nigerians married to Nigerians.
Such Nigerians shall remain on contract until granted Nigerians citizenship.
Where they are not eligible for Nigeria citizenship, and then contract shall be reviewed every two years and they shall be considered for promotion along with their colleagues as appropriate, as long as they stay married to Nigerians.
Retired officers may only be re-engaged into career posts in accordance with the rules and regulations spelt out in the existing local government staff regulations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the various methods of recruitment in local government.
103POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.7 Promotion All promotions shall be based on relative merit (performance, seniority, additional qualifications, etc).
Local government shall have power to promote and give advancements to all staff on grade levels 01-06 subject following criteria: i) basic qualification ii) performance iii) interview performance iv) additional qualification/cognate experience; and v) seniority The Head of the Department of Personnel Management shall prepare, at the end of every year, a comprehensive staff list showing the order of seniority of all staff in each grade on grade levels 01-06 while the secretary to the local government service commission shall prepare same in respect of officers on grade levels 07 and above within each cadre.
Seniority shall be based on the provisions of the existing rules.
4.0 CONCLUSION All the personnel of the local government do not enjoy the same tenure of office.
The elected officers enjoy four years tenure of office and can then seek for a re-election.
The chairman is allowed to run for two term tenure and as many times as possible for the councillors.
The career civil servants enjoy tenure of office as applicable to the state civil service rules.
It is pertinent to say that local government personnel now have a fruitful career as against the past when citizens were not interested in developing a career at the local government.
Local government career were seen as a last resort or a stepping stone for career pursuit.
The situation has change particularly in this era of democratic dispensation where the local government has been highly elevated as a third tier of government.
5.0 SUMMARY In this, unit we have tried to look at the composition of local government personnel.
We have discussed that there are two broad categories of local government staff.
That is, the elected officers and the career civil servants.
We also explained that the elected officers constitute the chairman and the councillors, while the career civil servants constitute the administrative cadre, the professional cadre, the clerical cadre and the unskilled cadre.
All perform different roles and functions, different remunerations, promotion, training and discipline for the good governance and service delivery to the people.
104 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the various categories of the personnel of local government.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Bello-Imam, I.
B.
(ed.).
(1990).
Local Government Finance in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NISER.
Diakwa, H. (1990).
(cid:8220)Poll Tax(cid:8221) in Kunle Ajayi.
Fadipe, D. (1987).
(cid:8220)Sources and Strategies for Revenue Generation in Local Government Areas of Ondo State(cid:8221) in Kunle Ajayi .
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1976).Guidelines for Local Government Reforms.
Lagos: Government Printers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 Constitution.
Lagos: Federal Government Press Omotoso, Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Orewa, G. O.
(1979).
(cid:8220)Government Grants to Local Government in Comparative Perspective(cid:8221) in Adamolekun, L. and Rowland, L, (eds.).
The New Local Government System in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books.
The Presidency (1999).
Local Government Administration and Bye Laws in Nigeria.
Abuja.
105POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 5 LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND INTER- GOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Federal-Local Government Relations 3.2 State-Local Government Relations 3.3 Local-Local Government Relations 3.4 Two-Way Relationship 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In a federal system, the issue of inter-governmental relations has become more and more important in contemporary times.
The federal principle involves the central government and federating units.
Nigeria operates a third-tier federal system, which presupposes that the three tiers must relate vertical and horizontally for the good government of the country.
The stability of the federal system depends on the level of collaboration of all levels of government.
Inter-governmental relations are the level of positive or negative interactions and transactions among the various units of government.
In modern times, with the expansion of government activities, it is no longer fashionable for government to operates in isolation therefore, the scope of inter-governmental relations have expanded to accommodate the socio-political and economic issues that bothers on the lives of the government and citizens.
Local government relates with other levels of government in three ways, that is, federal-local government relations, state-local government relations and local(cid:8211)local government relations.
The first two are vertical relations while the last is regarded as horizontal relations.
2.0 OBECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain the: • federal-local government relations • state-local government relations • local-local government relations • two-way relationship.
106 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT The federal, state and local governments must co-operation for the benefits of carrying out government programmes and policies for the good governance of the country.
In this unit we shall discuss the three levels of interactions as it affects local government administration.
3.1 Federal-Local Government Relations This is a vertical relation that involves the federal and local government in carrying out programmes and policies which the federal government cannot carry out alone.
For better implementation of such programmes, which is perceived to have a lot of local contents and implications, the local government must be carried along at the level of its formulation and implementation.
Government programme such as National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy (NEEDS) is also replicated at the local government level as Local Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy (LEEDS) in order to achieve the goals and objectives at the local level.
The Expanded Programmes on Immunisation (EPI) of the federal government cannot be successfully implemented without the involvement of the local government councils.
There is also the relation in the areas of control of local government by federal government.
After all, the local government is the creation of the federal government, therefore, the federal exercise some level of policy control over the local government particularly in the areas of financial and statutory allocation, health, education, and transport amongst others.
3.2 State-Local Government Relations This is the most popular and the closest inter- governmental relations.
The local governments feel that they belong more to the state than the federal.
Most of the state policies and programmes are often times projected to be executed at the local government level.
Co-operation between state government and local government councils might be vertical, but the relationship is almost fused because it occurs on a daily basis.
Political party difference or ideology is almost non-existent in state(cid:8211)local government relations.
As a matter of fact the state policies cannot be successful implemented without the co-operation of the local government councils.
Since the federal is an abstraction, it is the state and local government that can relate in practical terms.
Therefore, states cannot afford to isolate the local government from the implementation of its programmes.
State and local government co-operate in almost every areas, such as education, health, human development feeder roads, transport, politics and finance.
107POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the kind of cooperation that exists between the local government and other levels of government.
3.3 Local-Local Government Relations This is a horizontal relation.
Co-operation can be in the area of economic venture or in the area of solving common problem that affect their corporate existence.
For instance, two local governments may decide to construct a feeder road that links them to an urban centre.
There can also be co-operation in the areas of political and social economic issues of a national scale.
For instance if the local government councils feels that their political right is being threatened, they may co- operate in order to speak with one voice which will gather more magnitude that each pursuing their case individually.
This is one of the reasons for the formation of the Association of Local Governments Chairman of Nigeria (ALGON), Association of Local Government Secretaries, Association of Local Government Treasurers, etc.
Basically local-local relations are to discuss and co-operate in the areas that affect the people of the locality, which often times are people of the same ethnic nationality.
3.4 Two-Way Relationship Inter-government relations are a two-way relationship which de- emphasises all about central control of the units but brings out the true nature of the relationship which rests effectively upon a mutual flow of policy-making and technical information.
In other words, for the central government to make the right policy, it depends on the unit to make or supply the necessary technical information.
The complementary nature of central-local government relations rests its principles on inter- governmental relations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Examine the advantages of local-local government relationship 4.0 CONCLUSION Inter-governmental relations are for the co-operation of governments at different levels for the successful implementation of programmes and policies with the needed effectiveness and efficiency.
No single level of government carries out programmes and policies that involve the daily existence of the people without the co-operation of all the levels of government.
However, the nature of inter- governmental relations does 108 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT not always present a rosy situations of co-operation, acceptance, peaceful, smooth and friendliness at all times.
Relations among the federal, state and local government can sometimes be very hostile and antagonistic.
Particularly, where the political ideology or party is different, where there is personality clash, perception of political and party leaders etc.
In fact, discontentment and disagreement are even more rampant under the democratic dispensation because of the freedom of expression, association and democratic principles than under the military regime where everyone is to conform to the dictates of the ruler.
It is pertinent to conclude that, the more the three tiers of government co-operate in the implementation of programmes and policies, the more developed and united the federal system will be and the more the people will benefit from the government policies.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss the three levels of governmental relations as it affects the local government.
There are basically five levels of inter governmental relations which are; federal- state relations, federal-local relations, state-state relations, state(cid:8211)local relations, local-local relations.
Our area of concern does not include federal-state and state(cid:8211)state relations.
However, this could also have certain influence on the areas that we have discussed.
We have explained that inter-governmental relations have a great advantage in the successful implementation of programmes and policies that affect the lives of the people positively.
We have also stated that inter-governmental relations can sometimes be very hostile which can have a backlash on the programmes and policies of government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the three levels of inter-governmental relations as it relate to local government.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Barber, M.P.
(1972).
Public Administration.
London: Macdonald and Evans Ltd. 109POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Emezi, C.E.
(1983).
(cid:8220)The Changing Pattern of Local Government(cid:8221) In Nigeria Journal of Local Government Studies, Vol 1, June.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1976).
Guidelines for Local Government Reforms.
Lagos: Government Printers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 Constitution.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Omotoso, Femi (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Orewa, G. O.
(1979).
(cid:8220)Government Grants to Local Government in Comparative Perspective(cid:8221) in Adamolekun, L. and Rowland, L, (eds.).
The New LocalGovernment System in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books.
110 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT MODULE 5 Unit 1 Political Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 2 Socio-Economic Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 3 Developmental Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 4 Financial Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria Unit 5 Environmental Problems of Local Governments in Nigeria UNIT 1 POLITICAL PROBLEMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Local Party Rivalries 3.2 Political Rivalries between State and Local Governments 3.3 Frequent Political Reforms 3.4 Frequent interference by State and Federal Governments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Local Government in Nigeria just like any other Government institution is confronted with a number of problems and challenges.
These problems and challenges influence and sometimes hampered the effective and efficient performance in the discharge of its functions.
Local Government over the years has been facing a lot of problems which have militated against its ability to fulfill and to actually develop as a strong tier of Government.
One of the major problems of the Local Government has been political problems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES In this unit, you will learn the political problems of local government such as: • local party rivalries • political rivalries between state and local governments 111POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT • frequent political reforms • frequent interference by state and federal governments.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Local Party Rivalries One of the major problems of local government is political problems, which bother on the fact that local government is regarded as a training field for political participation.
Therefore, local government is regarded as a guinea pig for politicians.
There is also the problem of sharing of key political posts such as the chairman, Councilors and supervisory Councilors.
Politics at the local government is highly tempestuous, which involves a lot of victimisation and discrimination.
Rather than pull resources together for the advantage of the community, energy is dissipated on minor irrelevancies such as interpersonal rivalries, party differences, godfatherism, and location of ward and local government headquarters.
There is also the problem of rivalries between the executive and the legislative arm of the local government.
In such situations, the Chairman of the Local Government feels a sense of supremacy over the Councillors and therefore undermines the power of the Councilors.
This normally creates a lot of rift to the extent that each Councillor and the Chairman appeal to the sentiments of their people thereby causing serious problems at the grassroots.
3.2 Political Rivalries between State and Local Governments Another dimension of political problem at the local government is that which might result between the local government authorities and the state government, particularly when they subscribed to different political ideology or party.
The state government is likely to discriminate against that particular local government in political appointment and revenue sharing or allocation.
This might result in a lot of discontentment in the local government concerned.
That particular local government at the end might be apolitical to the policies and programmes the state government.
Political problem could also emanate from the sitting of projects and distribution of amenities to favour a particular Local Government against others especially where those local governments are not in the good books of the state government.
Political problems and challenges have a way of degenerating into other problems, which could have multiplier effects and thereby slow down the pace of development in the local government.
112 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the effects of local party rivalries on the administration of local government.
3.3 Frequent Political Reforms Another dimension of political problem is the issue of frequent reforms of the local government.
Successive regimes over the years reform the local government to suit their regimes.
For instance, the Federal Government at various times have abolished the Local Government Councils and changed the leadership, issued guidelines and decrees amending laws and imposed extra-budgetary expenses.
It is important to state that political stability at the local government is a necessary condition for even development at the grassroots.
Therefore, political problems at the local government level must be kept at the barest minimum.
3.4 Frequent Interference by State and Federal Governments The local government as the smallest unit of government is exposed to frequent interference by the state and federal governments.
Although the local government is said to have political autonomy, such autonomy is often times infringed upon through policy direction and policy changes from the state and federal government.
There have been cases where the local government council has been dissolved by the state government and in other cases the tenure of office of local government council has been reduced by the state government.
Under military regimes, local government officials have no fixed tenure of office.
Their tenure of office was to the whips and caprices of the State Governor or Military Administrator (MILAD).
Under the civilian regime, the constitution places the local government under the direction of the state, particularly as it relates to electoral matters.
Therefore, the state electoral bodies have at different times changed the tenure of office of the local government elected officers.
In all of these, the local government autonomy is often times challenged.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Examine the effects of frequent political reforms on the administration of local government.
113POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION The political problems of local government stem from the fact that local government does not have absolute political autonomy.
It is therefore, subject to the whips and caprices of the upper levels of government that is, the federal and state.
There is also the issue that local government is a ground for political experiment and training.
Therefore, local government has to come to grip on how to fully play its representative role.
However, these problems are expected to be surmounted over time as the democratic process improves.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have attempted to discuss the political problems of local government, which include interpersonal rivalries, party and ideological differences, godfatherism, lack of absolute political autonomy, interference or frequent reforms of the local government by the central government, imposition or change of leadership, location of wards and local government council headquarters and political wrangling between the state and local governments.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the impacts of political problems on Local Government development?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo, Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Egonmwan, J.
A.
(1984).
Principles and Practice of Local Government in Nigeria: An Insight into the Problems of Policy Formulation and Implementation.
Benin City: S.M.O.
Aka & Brothers Press.
Lawal, Sikiru (2000).
(cid:8220)Local Government Administration in Nigeria: A Practical Approach(cid:8221) in Kunle Ajayi (ed.).
(2000).
Oke, Leke (2001).
(cid:8220)Local Government System in Nigeria(cid:8221) in Femi Omotoso (ed.)
(2001).
Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi, (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications Orewa, G.O.
Adewumi, J.B. (1983).
Local Government in Nigeria: The Changing Scene.
Benin City: Ethiope Publishers.
114 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 2 SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Lack of Developed Human Capacity 3.2 Lack of Infrastructure 3.3 Issues of Socio-Cultural Beliefs 3.4 Friction with Traditional Institutions 3.5 Corruption among Staff 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every local government has its own socio-economic problems which is part of their daily existence.
The basic reasons for the creation of local government are to solve the socio-economic problems that affect the people particularly at the local communities.
If the principle of good governance is well practiced, at the local government level, then, the socio-economic lives of the people are suppose to be affected positively.
The notion of even-development is for harmonious and equitable utilisation of resources for the enhancement of the socio-economic lives of the people.
However, the socio-economic problems faced by local government have deprived the people these even-developments.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify the following as socio-economic problems of local governments in Nigeria: • lack of developed human capacity • lack of infrastructure • issues of socio-cultural beliefs • friction with traditional institutions • corruption among staff.
.
115POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Lack of Developed Human Capacity One of the major socio-economic problems facing local governments in Nigeria is lack of developed human capacity.
Local government lacks the technical and professional staff that could contribute meaningfully to the social development of the people.
The professional and technical staff does not perceive the local government as a place to fully actualise and develop their career as those of their counterparts at the federal or state levels.
This is further compounded by the fact that employment at the local level is not based on merit but rather on patronage such as appeals to ethnicity, political consideration, quota system, allegiance to political godfatherism, and other primordial factors.
The effect of this is poor service delivery.
3.2 Lack of Infrastructure Another major problem is lack of social amenities and infrastructure, which greatly affect the economic development of these local governments.
Local government suffers more in terms of poor roads, electricity, portable water, medical and healthcare facilities, poor educational facilities and transportation.
The absence of these social amenities does not attract economic investors to the local government areas and the result is that most local governments are not economically viable.
They only depend on the statutory allocations from the federal and state governments.
Again, the absence of these social amenities results in high prevalence of sicknesses and diseases, which often times, the local governments are not able to handle due to poor healthcare facilities or infrastructure.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the effects of lack of infrastructure on the administration of local government 3.3 Issues of Socio-Cultural Beliefs Another socio-economic problem of the Local Government is the socio- cultural beliefs.
There are certain cultural beliefs that inhibit development in some local government areas.
There are certain places in some local government areas that are regarded as sacred and therefore, certain projects cannot be sited or located in such areas even if it is perceived to bring about development.
There is also the issue of cultural biases and sentimental attachment to preserve the culture of the communities.
116 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.4 Friction with Traditional Institutions One of the major problems of local government is how to contain the powers of traditional institutions.
It must be noted that the evolution of local government took it roots from the traditional institutions who oversee the governance of the local communities.
Contemporary governance and emerging democracies have reduced the powers and influence of these traditional institutions which have resulted in a lot of friction between them and the elected local government officials.
The traditional institutions are not too comfortable with the loss of power.
As a result, there is competition for the citizen(cid:8217)s attention and allegiance.
While some citizens subscribe to the local government council, others subscribe to the traditional institutions because of the closeness to the traditional institutions.
In some cases, the traditional rulers are so powerful and influential that officials of the local government pay obeisance to them, others solicits their support to stand for local government elections.
However, an attempt to reduce these frictions has made the state and federal government to recognise these traditional institutions through the various states council of chiefs and traditional rulers.
3.5 Corruption among Staff Economic corruption has been elevated to a very high status even at the local government level in Nigeria.
It has been argued that the local government officials have often times perceived the allocation to the council as their personal fund and share of the national cake, and have therefore, restricted themselves to paying salaries of staff and do away with the rest.
Accountability is very poor at the local government level.
This is coupled with the fact that the local government staff perceives their services to the people as personal service rather than as government services to the public.
Therefore, they often times use their official capacity to extort money from the public.
The local government council, like the state and federal governments has become one haven of official and economic corruption.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Examine corruption as a major problem in the administration of local government 4.0 CONCLUSION Local governments are everyday engaged in an attempt to solve the socio-economic problems of their localities.
This is because the survival and the acceptance of the local government depend on the ability of the Local Councils to solve the socio-economic problems that confront the 117POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT local communities.
Some members of the communities might not be directly affected by the political issues of the local government, but every citizen is affected by the problem resulting from the socio- economic angle.
Therefore, local government administration must take seriously the issues involved in socio-economic problems of local government.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the socio-economic issues and problems that affect every citizen of the Local Government.
This is because the issues involved are those that affect the standard of living of every citizen.
The issues of healthcare, education, water, sanitation, human capacity development, transport, economic investment are problems that one is confronted with on a daily basis.
The cultural diversity of the people is another problem that inhibits even development as certain culture forbids the sitting of certain industries or company in their environment.
Therefore, socio-economic issues are serious problems that can have negative effects on the development of Local Government in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly examine those socio-economic problems that can affect the growth and development of Local Governments in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo, Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press.
Egonmwan, J.
A.
(1984).
Principles and Practice of Local Government in Nigeria: An Insight into the Problems of Policy Formulation and Implementation.
Benin City: S.M.O.
Aka & Brothers Press.
Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi, (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Onah, Emmanuel (2006).
(cid:8220)Local Government Efficiency and Federal Stability in Nigeria(cid:8221) in Nigerian Forum.
Lagos: NIIA, vol.
27, Nos.
3-4, March/April Orewa, G.O.
Adewumi, J.B. (1983).
Local Government in Nigeria: The Changing Scene.
Benin City: Ethiope Publishers.
118 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 3 DEVELOPMENTAL PROBLEMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Over Fragmentation of the Nation into Local Councils 3.2 Frequent change of Government Developmental Policies 3.3 Absence of Local Contents and Inputs 3.4 Ineffective Public Support 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the major justifications for the creation of local government is for developmental reasons.
Proponents of local government have argued that the state and federal governments cannot effectively carry out all the developmental projects without the involvement of local government.
Here, local government becomes a catalyst for developmental projects, particularly as it relate to the principle of even development.
It is also perceived that the local government is in a better position to harness all the local ingredients and local content for developmental purposes.
However, this has not been the case, as most developmental programmes at the local government are besieged with a lot of problems.
These problems incapacitate the development of local government and hindered it from its initial justification of providing the needed social and developmental amenities for the local communities.
The resultant effect is that the Local government system becomes moribund in performing its duties.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to learn and identify the following as the developmental problems of Local Governments: • over fragmentation of the Nation into Local Councils • frequent change of government developmental policies • absence of local contents and inputs • ineffective public support.
119POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Over Fragmentation of the Nation into Local Councils One of the major developmental problems of local government results from over fragmentation of the nation into local government councils.
The effect of this is that local governments, in essence, are too small and too weak to muster high developmental projects that can affect the lives of the people positively.
Therefore, local government undertake only little and small development projects that do not have a significant effect on the lives of the people.
Again, there is the issue of the other levels of governments, state and federal putting too heavy burden of projects on the local government.
Often times, these projects outweigh the available capacity of the local government system.
The resultant effect is that there are lots of abandoned projects all over the place.
This is further exacerbated by the fact that local government lacks the high technological base and personnel to undertake some of these developmental projects.
The (cid:8220)bottom-up(cid:8221) approach to development which is supposed to encourage and initiate development from the grassroots is on the reverse.
Instead, what you have is (cid:8220)up-bottom(cid:8221) approach where the decision on developmental projects are made and forced down on the people who often times do not understand the essence and the technology involved in implementing such projects.
3.2 Frequent Change of Government Developmental Policies Another major problem to development of local governments is the frequent change of government and government policies.
This was so frequent during the military era that the people did not believe in any developmental projects by local governments.
There were cases where a Sole Administrator was appointed today and sacked the next day.
Government projects were basically on paper and most of them were white elephant projects.
In situations where there is frequent change of government, there is always lack of continuity of government programmes and policies which affects the continuity of development projects.
In a situation where the incoming administration do not believe in the capability of the outgoing either in the personality or ideology, the on-going projects often times are reviewed or discontinued.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss how frequent change of government policies can hinder development at the local government.
120 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.3 Absence of Local Contents and Inputs The low level of participation of the people particularly in the formulation and implementation of these developmental projects is another area of concern.
From past evidence, local government officials formulate, prepare estimates and carry out the implementation of projects without consultation with the people to know their needs, problems and challenges that they are facing in the community.
There have been cases where the people are in need of portable water; instead they were given recreational centers.
This is further worsen by the fact that, there is often times the absence of local content and inputs in developmental projects, particularly where the federal or state government wish is to come to the aid of local government in their development agenda.
These projects are sometimes allocated and located indiscriminately using undemocratic criteria that are unprogressive to the people.
The implication of this is that projects are foist on local government without their knowledge and contribution to such projects and as such cannot maintain such projects.
Development becomes disarticulated, uncoordinated and therefore failed to meet the expectations of the people.
3.4 Ineffective Public Support Another problem of the local government is that of lack of public support for local government developmental activities and projects embarks upon by the local government.
The public sometimes perceived these developmental activities and projects as an avenue for the local government officials to enrich themselves and their close associates, therefore the necessary public support needed for such projects and developmental activities are lacking.
This is evident from the number of abandoned projects and developmental activities found in the various local government areas.
And because they lack public support, the projects are often times criticise before its take off stage.
It is important to emphasise that public support is very necessary in the execution of developmental projects.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Examine how lack of local contents and inputs affects the development of local government.
4.0 CONCLUSION Only very few government institutions have gone through frequent changes as the local government.
These frequent changes and reforms have also had negative effects on the developmental projects of the local 121POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT government.
The whole essence of local government is to give development to the people.
Development promotes unity among the people and by extension improves the living standard of the people.
When the local communities are involved in developmental projects, it become easier to mobilise resources, incorporate local content and inputs which the people can easily identified with.
The projects become their own by means of identification and mobilisation.
All these promote the peculiar nature and values of the people, which could be reflected in good governance and accountability.
Again, because most developmental projects at its formulation, estimates and implementation are shrouded in secrecy, the projects do not often have the support of the local communities.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed some of the drawbacks that can affect developmental issues in local government.
We have exposed the fact that some of these developmental projects are exogenous and are not supported by the local communities.
There is also the problem of over burden of projects on the local government and are therefore, not able to carry the project to its conclusion.
This account for several abandoned projects that littered all the local government areas.
There is also the absence of local content in the formulation and implementation of these developmental projects.
The local communities are aliens to some of these projects because they are foisted on them, this account for why most developmental projects do not meet and satisfy the needs of the people.
Frequent change in government and government policies and programmes is also identified as a problem to local government, as this brings about lack of continuity in development.
We also identified over fragmentation of the local government, which is also responsible for their inability to undertake heavy developmental projects.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the problems that can hinder development at the Local Government in Nigeria.
122 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.).
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa since Independence.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo, Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Blair, G.S.
(1997).
Government at the Grassroots.
LA, California: Palisade Publishers.
Egonmwan, J.
A.
(1984).
Principles and Practice of Local Government in Nigeria: An Insight into the Problems of Policy Formulation and Implementation.
Benin City: S.M.O.
Aka & Brothers Press.
Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi, (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Oyediran, Oyeleye (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications Ltd. 123POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 4 FINANCIAL PROBLEMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Over Dependence on Statutory Allocations 3.2 Undue Financial Control by the State Governments 3.3 Problem of Tax Evasion 3.4 Lack of Business Initiatives 3.5 Diversion of Local Government Allocation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The importance of finance in any human endeavour cannot be over emphasised.
The success or failure and the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of local government depends on the financial resources available to the individual local authorities and the way these resources are utilised.
Most of the local government lacks the financial muscles to carry out their duties effectively and efficiently.
The basic essence of creating local government is to provide grassroots developments and to perform these functions; they have to be financially stable.
However, the position is that most of the local governments is financially handicap because they are not adequately funded.
The principal sources of their income are the statutory allocation and grant from the federation accounts.
Others are internally generated revenue, loans and investment.
The argument is that most of the 774 Local Governments Councils are not financially viable, particularly those in the rural areas and are therefore dependent only on the allocations from the federation account.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify the financial problems of Local Governments in Nigeria such as: • over dependence on statutory allocations • undue financial control by the state governments • problem of tax evasion • lack of business initiatives • diversion of local government allocation.
124 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Over-Dependence on Statutory Allocation One of the major financial problems of local government is the over dependence on the State and Federal Government statutory allocations and grants.
Most of the local governments are not financially viable and so cannot raise the funds needed for the performance of their roles and duties.
It has been argued that the internally generated revenue forms a very small percentage of the local government revenue which often times is not enough to pay the workers salaries.
It therefore comes to reason that when the statutory allocation is low or irregular, some of the local governments, particularly those in the rural areas find it difficult to perform their constitutional functions.
3.2 Undue Financial Control by the State Government This is another problem of local governments as it relate to finance.
Often times, the state government altered the financial plans of the local government by state polices, either by instructing the local government administration to maintain certain banking or financial regulations or ordering the local government to maintain joint accounts with the state government, this allows the state government to interfere with the finances of the local government.
Another chronic financial problem of local government is the unilateral determination by states governments of the limits of income and of the income group local government can tax.
In the process, the state selects the lucrative areas for themselves and allows the local government those areas that do not yield much income.
Coupled with this, is the problem of revenue sharing formula which is always changing in favour of the higher levels of government.
The local government often times does not have a say or contribution in determining the revenue sharing formula.
Therefore, the revenue to the local government most times is always changing and unstable.
There has been time when local government received zero-allocation from the federation account.
The effect is that most of the local governments cannot break even or meet up with their financial obligations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examine how undue financial control of local governments by state governments affects the development of local governments.
3.3 Problem of Tax Evasion Another problem is the issue of tax evasion.
This is a very serious issue because the local government does not have adequate statistical data of 125POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT both the employed and unemployed; therefore, tax evasion is very prevalent in the Local Councils.
This is coupled with the fact that the instruments of collection of the taxes are very crude and undeveloped.
Some times, the tax collectors are not trained on the principles and method of tax collection.
3.4 Lack of Business Initiatives Another problem is the lack of business initiatives by local governments.
Most of the local government depends solely on statutory allocation, internally generated revenue and grants at the expense of investing or formulating business ventures that can generate revenue for the development of the communities.
There is also the problem of corruption and mismanagement, local government official have often times corruptly enriched themselves from the little fund meant for the execution of economic and social services.
These officials often times perceived local government funds as their personal money.
Some local government officials have embezzled government funds through the execution of white elephant projects.
3.5 Diversion of Local Government Allocation Local governments have consistently faced the problem of diversion of their allocated funds.
They often times do not get the right funding allocated to it by the budgeting authorities.
The fund budgeted to local governments are either not released on time, or where it is, the correct amount do not get to the local government councils.
The fund allocated are sometimes intercepted and hijacked by the state governments under the guise of financial control and accountability.
These situations of diverting local government funds were very visible under the President Obasanjo civilian administration under the guise of state and local government joint count.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Examine how tax evasion is a major problem to local government finance administration and development.
4.0 CONCLUSION Finance is one of the major cardinal issues involves in the development and administration of local government.
Lack of adequate finance will continue to be a recurrent decimal as long as the problems identified above persists.
For instance, the unemployed professional, traders, market women, the unemployed and artisans make up the bulk of the population in the local government.
These groups of people are the ones 126 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT that evade tax the more and they are very difficult to tax and to track.
In essence, for local government to increase and improve on their financial conditions, they must device strategies and means of tacking some of the problems enumerated above.
They must reduce their over-reliance on statutory allocations and grants from States and Federal Governments.
They must train their personnel on the modern issues and method of tax collection.
The local government must also develop a method of curtailing the excesses of their officials in official spending and embezzlement.
They must learn to be business oriented in order to create a viable local government that can solve the socio-economic and developmental programmes of the people.
They must learn above all to increase their internally generated revenue without placing the burden on the people.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have identified the financial problems of local governments and the effects on the development of the people economically and socially.
We have identified over-dependence on the statutory allocations from the federal government, undue control of the local government by the state governments, tax evasion by majority of the population, the undeveloped instrument of tax collection, lack of business initiatives, unfavourable revenue sharing formula, unilateral determination by state governments of the limits and income group that can be tax by local government and corruption and mismanagement by the local government administration.
We explained that no local government can perform its constitutional duties and obligations without adequate finance.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the financial problems of Local Government in Nigeria and proffer strategies on how to improve on Local Government finance 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.).
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa since Independence.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed.).
(2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo, Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. 127POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Blair, G.S.
(1997).
Government at the Grassroots.
LA, California: Palisade Publishers.
Egonmwan, J.
A.
(1984).
Principles and Practice of Local Government in Nigeria: An Insight into the Problems of Policy Formulation and Implementation.
Benin City, S.M.O.Aka & Brothers Press.
Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi, (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Oyediran, Oyeleye (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications.
128 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT 5 ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Erosion and Environment Degradation 3.2 Problem of Drought and Deforestation 3.3 Problem of Poor Road Network 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the major problems faced by local government in Nigeria is environmental problems.
Often times, this problem is underestimated and sometimes not given the attention it deserved.
People and governments are more concerned with socio-economic, financial, political and developmental problems.
Most times, environmental problems of local governments are discussed under socio-economic problems, but an environmental problem goes beyond that and it has its own adverse effects on the people and government of the local communities.
Evidence has shown that some of the environmental problems have devastating effects on the lives of the people.
Sometimes, it is so severe that the Local Government Councils are not able to handle them, so much so that it requires the intervention of other levels of government such as the state and the federal.
In extreme cases, it requires the intervention of non-governmental organisations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objectives of this unit are to enable you learn the environmental problems of Local Governments, and the effects of such problems on the development and welfare of the people: • erosion and environment degradation • problem of drought and deforestation • problem of poor road network.
129POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Erosion and Environment Degradation One of the major environmental problems, which the local government has been contending with, is that of erosion and environmental degradation.
Often times, this problem has been perceived as that of the state and federal governments and the opinion has been to wait for the state and federal government to bring the solution to solving the problem.
In most cases, while waiting for the state and federal government to tackle the problem of erosion, it is the local communities that bear the brunt of the problem.
Most importantly is the fact that the devastating effect of erosion is felt more by the local people and the local government cannot really do anything to solve the problem because of the enormous amount of fund required for erosion control in their localities.
The effects of this environmental degradation through erosion are enormous because roads, farmlands and some developmental projects are destroyed.
3.2 Problem of Drought and Deforestation Another environmental problem is drought and deforestation which is very prevalent in the northern parts of the country.
Drought and deforestation is such a major problem that all levels of governments are involved in order to solve the problems.
Local government has been known to launch tree planting programmes in order to control drought and deforestation.
Some have engaged in irrigation programmes and supply of fertilisers to farmers in order to boost their farm products.
Some of the local government expends enormous resources in controlling this menace.
Sometimes, this problem is so severe that dams, lakes and rivers are dried up and the desert encroaches more on the available farmlands.
This problem dovetailed often times into communal land conflicts, which result in villages fighting for communal lands for farming purposes.
3.3 Problem of Poor Road Network Another major environmental problem faced by local government is bad road network.
Most of the roads in our local government areas are failing and deplorable.
And because of these bad roads network, many farmers cannot afford to transport their harvest to the market.
This is coupled with the fact that there are no storage facilities for the farm produce.
The effect is that most of the farm produce are wasted.
The local government has very little or no capacity to construct roads because of the enormous financial implications involved.
Though, the environmental problems are often over looked at the local government 130 POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT level, it affect the rural people more because, the federal and the state government are rather far from the local communities.
Industrial and sea pollution are environmental problem that affects the local communities particularly those in the riverine areas.
Refuse and environmental waste is another serious problem of local government, particularly where there is no proper waste disposal mechanism or dump.
3.4 Power Communication and Power Almost all the local government areas, with the exception of those in the urban areas, lack communication network and are far behind in the information highway.
Most of the local government headquarters and villages lack Internet services, fax, and telephoning system.
Therefore, they all rely on Global Satellite Mobile (GSM) to carry official transactions, which often times result in the loss of information.
This is further compounded by the poor electricity power supply which the country is trying to grapple with.
4.0 CONCLUSION Environmental problems have a lot of impact on the development of local communities.
It could be so severe that most of the times appeal is made to the non-governmental and international institutions to intervene or assist in solving these problems.
There are times when some communities are cut off from others due to erosion or Collapse Bridge.
These affect the socio-economic lives of the people.
The sad part of the issue is that some times, governments play politics and bulk passing in solving these environmental problems.
At the end, it is the local communities that bear the brunt of the problems.
Again, there is the problem of delay in implementing government policies and programmes while the people suffer the consequences of the delay.
Some of these problems can be alleviated if the local government should device a means of mobilising the local communities to participate in community development.
Local resources can be mobilised to assist the local government council in solving some of these environmental problems.
For example, the communities can be mobilised to construct feeder roads to ease the problem of transportation thereby getting their farm produce to the market.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learned about environmental problems as they affect local governments and the citizens.
We have explained that though environmental problems are always considered as state or federal government issues, but the people in the locality suffer the effects of 131POL216 EVOLUTION OF NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT environmental problems more than those in urban areas.
We have identified the environmental problems to include drought and deforestation, erosion menace, bad road network, communal land conflict, industrial and sea pollution among others.
We have expatiated that these problems are not what the local government administration single can handedly solve because of the enormous financial implications involved.
However, appeal can always be made to the state, federal governments and the non-governmental organisations to assist in solving some of these problems.
The local communities and local resources can also be mobilised to help alleviate some of these problems.
It is important to state that environmental problems affect everybody in the society and therefore, require holistic cooperation in an attempt to solve the problems.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the effects of environmental problems on Local Government in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. et al (eds.)
(1988).
Local Government in West Africa since Independence.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Ajayi, Kunle (ed) (2000).
Theory and Practice of Local Government.
Ado-Ekiti: University of Ado-Ekiti.
Anifowose, Remi and Enemuo Francis (eds.).
(1999).
Elements of Politics.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Blair, G.S.
(1997).
Government at the Grassroots.
LA, California: Palisade Publishers.
Egonmwan, J.
A.
(1984).
Principles and Practice of Local Government in Nigeria: An Insight into the Problems of Policy Formulation and Implementation.
Benin City, S.M.O.
Aka & Brothers Press.
Omotoso, (cid:8216)Femi, (ed.).
(2001).
Contemporary Issues in Public Administration.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Oyediran, Oyeleye (1988).
Essays on Local Government and Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Project Publications.
132
