 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE : AEM311 COURSE TITLE : INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE AEM311 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE Course Team Dr. S. D. Y Alfred (Developer/Writer) - FUTA Prof. S. O. Ewuola (Editor) - FUTA Prof. Afolabi Adebanjo (Programme Leader) - NOUN Dr. N. E. Mundi (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii AEM311 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office: No.5 Dar-es-Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-008-5 All Rights Reserved iii AEM311 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………..………….. 1 What You Will Learn in the Course…………………………..…….
1 Course Aims…………………………………………………..…….
1 Course Objectives……………………………………………..…… 2 Working through the Course……………………………….……… 2 Course Materials…………………………………………..……….. 3 Study Units………………………………………………………... 3 Textbooks and References…………………………………..……... 4 Instructional Media…………………………………………..……... 4 Assignment File…………………………………………….……… 4 Assessment…………………………………………….…………… 4 iv NoneAEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE Introduction Introduction to Rural Life is one of the fundamental courses for a Bachelor’s Degree programme in Agriculture (B.Sc.)
and Agricultural Education (B.Sc.
Ed) in any university.
This course will also be suitable as an elective course for anyone who intends to study sociology and social science-related professional programmes since it deals with the fundamental principles focusing on scientific study of human society and rural social behaviour.
This Course Guide has five modules.
The five modules have 21 units.
The first module starts with an introduction.
This gives a focus on the meaning of the concept and scope of rural life.
The second module focuses on urban settlements which will acquaint you with the characteristics of urban settlements and the differences between rural and urban settlements.
The module will also enable you to have an insight into the symbiotic relationship existing between rural and urban areas.
The third module explains the economic life of rural people.
You are expected to have an insight into the economic communities of the rural people and also the sources of information on agricultural development and credit.
The fourth module is on the quality of life of rural dwellers.
With this module, you will learn the factors that determine the quality of life and the characteristics of communities.
In addition, module five highlights the problems and development of rural areas and it also discusses the causes of poverty among people.
In this module you will also be acquainted with formation of development associations and the general beliefs in deified beings.
What You Will Learn in this Course You will learn about the concept and scope of rurality and rural life; urban settlement, economic life of rural people, quality of life and its measurement and the problems and developments of rural areas.
Course aims The aim of this course is to create in-depth awareness of the distinguishing factors between rural and urban settlements and to emphasize the characteristics of the two types of settlements.
This will facilitate the interaction between extension workers or other social workers and rural communities.
ii AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE Thus, the aim of the Introduction to Rural Life course is to: 1.
Discuss the concept and scope of rurality and rural life 2.
Explain the characteristics of rural and urban settlement 3.
Discuss the economic life of rural people 4.
Explain the quality of life and its measurement, and 5.
Discuss the problems and developments of rural areas.
Course Objectives In other to achieve the course aims, there are some overall objectives set for the course.
Besides, each module and each unit has its respective objectives which you and your course facilitator must constantly refer to, so that no objective is skipped.
At the end of course, you should be able to: • acquaint yourself with the meaning of rural life • state the characteristics of rural and urban areas • identify the economic communities • discuss the sources of information and credit in rural areas • explain the quality of life in the rural areas and how it can be measured • discuss the problems of rural life and • explain the role of agriculture in the rural communities.
Working through this course This course contains some packages that you will be given at the beginning of the semester.
One of them is the course material.
Your full participation in both the continuous assessment and the final written examination is expected of you during and at the end of the course.
The 21 units of the course packaged for you in modules are as shown below: Course Materials Major Course Materials of the Course are: 1.
Course Guide: This looks like a blue print that spells out what constitutes the Course itself.
2.
Study Units: Each of these provides an overview of the content and number of units that will be covered in this course.
3.
Assignment Files: These files contain challenging tutorial questions termed Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) that will enable you to assess yourself at the end of every assignment that will be handed out by your tutor.
iii AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE Study Units Details of the study units have earlier been presented.
It is spelt out in modules with corresponding units and titles.
You will be expected to spend 2 – 3 hours in studying a unit.
Module 1 Introduction Unit 1 Concepts and Scope of Rural Life Unit 2 Characteristics of Rural Areas I Unit 3 Characteristics of Rural Areas II Unit 4 Semi-Urban and Urban Settlements Module 2 Urban Settlement Unit 1 Characteristics of Urban Areas Unit 2 Characteristics of Urban Areas Unit 3 Differences between Rural and Urban Settlements I Unit 4 Differences between Rural and Urban Settlements II Unit 5 Interdependence of the Rural & Urban Settlements Module 3 Economic Life of the Rural People Unit 1 Economic Communities I Unit 2 Economic Communities II Unit 3 Sources of Credit in Rural Areas Unit 4 Sources of Information for Economic Development Module 4 Quality of Rural Life Unit 1 Factors Determining the Quality of Life Unit 2 Characteristics of the Communities I Unit 3 Characteristics of the Communities II Module 5 Problems and Development of Rural Areas Unit 1 Problems of Rural Areas Unit 2 Poverty Unit 3 Roles of Agriculture in Rural Community Life Unit 4 Formation of Development Associations Unit 5 Beliefs in Deified Beings You should be able to complete this two-credit unit course in about 15 weeks in a semester.
Well spread out in each unit are introduction to the unit, specific objectives, reading material on sub-topics, Self Assessment iv AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE Exercises (SAEs), some exercises, Conclusion, Summary, Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMA) and References/Further Reading.
Textbooks and References Apart from this study unit, some reference materials are provided as additional reading materials to support your study.
You may come across them in NOUN library or elsewhere.
Instructional Media As an open and distance learning University, several relevant multimedia that can make learning are available.
Assignment File This has been discussed earlier.
It is mandatory to always turn in your assignments to the tutor (facilitator) assigned.
Assessment You will be expected to complete at least ten assignments by the end of the course.
Some of these will be in the form of a project and continuous assessments.
You will be expected to write a final examination on the course.
The overall score in the course will be a sum of 40% of CA and 60% of written examination.
You will be expected to have at least 50% in the CA and 50% in the written examination.
Anything short of this will count as failure.
v AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE MAIN COURSE Course Code AEM311 Course Title Introduction to Rural Life Course Team Dr. S. D. Y Alfred (Developer/Writer) - FUTA Prof. S. O. Ewuola (Editor) - FUTA Prof. Afolabi Adebanjo (Programme Leader) - NOUN Dr. N. E. Mundi (Coordinator) - NOUN vi AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office: No.5 Dar-es-Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-008-5 All Rights Reserved vii AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Introduction……………………..………………… 1 Unit 1 Concepts and Scope of Rural Life……………..…… 1 Unit 2 Characteristics of Rural Areas I…………………..… 5 Unit 3 Characteristics of Rural Areas II………………..….. 9 Unit 4 Semi-Urban and Urban Settlements……………..….
12 Module 2 Urban Settlement………………………………..… 16 Unit 1 Characteristics of Urban Areas……………………… 16 Unit 2 Characteristics of Urban Areas……………………… 20 Unit 3 Differences between Rural and Urban Settlements I... 22 Unit 4 Differences between Rural and Urban Settlements II... 26 Unit 5 Interdependence of the Rural and Urban Settlements… 29 Module 3 Economic Life of the Rural People……………….. 32 Unit 1 Economic Communities I…………………………….
32 Unit 2 Economic Communities II………………………....... 36 Unit 3 Sources of Credit in Rural Areas…………………….
39 Unit 4 Sources of Information for Economic Development... 42 Module 4 Quality of Rural Life……………………………….. 45 Unit 1 Factors Determining the Quality of Life…………….. 45 Unit 2 Characteristics of the Communities I………………... 49 Unit 3 Characteristics of the Communities II……………….. 53 Module 5 Problems and Development of Rural Areas……… 57 Unit 1 Problems of Rural Areas…………………………….. 57 Unit 2 Poverty……………………………………………….
61 Unit 3 Roles of Agriculture in Rural Community Life…….. 66 Unit 4 Formation of Development Associations…………... 70 Unit 5 Beliefs in Deified Beings…………………………….
74 viii AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION Unit 1 Concepts and Scope of Rural Life Unit 2 Characteristics of Rural Areas I Unit 3 Characteristics of Rural Areas II Unit 4 Semi-Urban and Urban Settlements UNIT 1 CONCEPTS OF RURALITY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Scope of Rural Life 3.2 Concept of Rurality 3.3 Why Study Rural Life?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Having gone through the course guide, you would have become acquainted with the arrangement of the course content and specifically the position of this unit as it relates to the entire course.
This is because you will need to have the basic background knowledge of what the course is all about.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the term rurality • explain the scope of rural life • discuss the significance of this course to the wholeness of your degree.
1 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Scope of Rural Life You might have argued once or more times and probably have come across one or two person(s) who argued about the status of their “home town”, whether it is a town (urban) or village (rural area).
Consequently, you might have been further confused about what parameters can be used to conclude whether a particular settlement is urban or rural.
It is also a common derogatory saying, when someone behaves a particular way that doesn’t portray an acceptable decorum such as; you are a bush man, you must be a villager or a rural man.
There is therefore, an indication that behaviour may be used to determine who is a cosmopolite or a localite.
Rural persons’ norms, values, beliefs and culture often differ significantly from those of the urban areas.
As an agriculturist, a social worker or a social scientist, you will find it relevant to actually study the life patterns of rural people, particularly their social life, their economic life and their cultural life.
It is assumed that if you have better understanding of rural life you will be more effective in persuading farmers to accept change.
For instance, it would be unfair to refer to all rural people as being traditional, illiterate, ignorant and unprogressive without having an understanding of the values and beliefs of the people.
This is because villages and groups may be naturally quite diverse.
3.2 Concept of Rurality The average man, if asked to differentiate between a village and a town will quickly jump to the answer that, the town is simply where bright lights are found, where the tempo of life is fast and where all the good things of life are abundantly available whereas the village is the one with the opposite attributes.
This is because a common person today does not base his/her differentiation between a village and a town from the point of population but on social amenities available.
According to Ekong (1988), in the strictly traditional sense, various parts of Nigeria had their own conception of the rural area referring to the farm and farming settlements while the town referred to the seat of an important chief or ruler.
Among the traditional Yoruba, Nupe, Hausa and Fulani, the rural area was more or less a temporary farming settlement, while the town was the place where the permanent family house was located, where the dead were buried, where marriages and other feasts were celebrated.
In the Eastern part of Nigeria, among the Igbos, the people traditionally lived in villages surrounded by farms and 2 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE virgin forests, hence most large towns in the present eastern Nigeria are of recent emergence.
By now you should be able to identify your home place as a town or a rural area.
Olawoye (1987) posited that, the concept of rurality is dependent upon its relationship with urbanity for its meaning.
A community that is not rural is by definition urban.
Historically, rural referred to areas with low population density, small size; relative isolation, where one major economic activity was agricultural production, and where the people were relatively homogenous in their values, attitudes and behaviour(Bealer et.al; 1965).
Any community with less than 20,000 people is said to be rural.
3.3 Why Study Rural Life?
Have you, questioned the rationale behind your being made to offer this course?
Or have you asked of what benefit is this course to you?
You cannot be blamed for holding to an opinion or questioning a rationale.
Therefore you should be acquainted with the significance of this course as a partial requirement for your degree-in-view.
This course is relevant because: 1.
You will be exposed to the socio-cultural environment and the physical forces around rural dwellers.
2.
You will be able to interprete the values of the society and also be able to identify who determines the values.
3.
You will understand the livelihood activities of rural communities.
4.
You will be acquainted with the relationship existing between rural and urban communities.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have been exposed to the knowledge of rural life as differentiated from urban life.
That in rural life, the tempo of life is slower than the urban life and that rural area is isolated with lesser number of social amenities and is mostly agrarian.
Population wise, the occupants of a rural area are less than 20,000.
You have equally realized that the course has a lot of benefits to impart to you.
3 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 5.0 SUMMARY The unit has focused on the discussion on the scope of rural life and has explained the concept of rurality.
So, you should by now be able to: • discuss the scope of rural life • explain the concept of rurality • identify the areas the course will benefit you as an agriculturist or social worker.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. Who is a rural dweller?
2.
Mention four ways through which this course will be of benefit to you.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bealer R. C.; Fern K.W.
and William P.K.
(1965).
The Meaning of Rurality in American Society: Some Implications of Alternative Definitions.
Rural Sociology 30:255-266.
Ekong, E. E. (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Printers Ltd., 1:2-3.
Olawoye, J. E. (1987).
Degree of Rurality: Questioning the Empirical Existence of the Typical Village.
The Rural Sociologist, Volume 4, No.4.
4 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 2 CHARACTERISTICS OF RURAL AREAS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Characteristics of Rural Areas 3.1.1 Poor Local Network 3.1.2 Large Dependence on Agriculture 3.1.3 Lack of Portable Water and Electricity 3.1.4 Poor Communication Facilities 3.1.5 Absence of Good Markets 3.1.6 Prevalence of Unemployed School Leavers 3.1.7 Minimal Capital Investment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last unit has provided you the knowledge of a rural area.
In this unit, you will learn of the characteristics by which a rural area is identified and distinguished from an urban area.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain at least seven characteristics of rural areas.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Characteristics of Rural Areas 3.1.1 Poor Road Network If you are from a rural area or if you have ever visited one, you would have observed that the road network cannot in anyway be compared with that of the urban area in terms of motorableness and other qualities.
Both the inter and intra-networks are bad.
The gutters are not dug, the roads are not tarred and therefore predisposed to erosion.
Most roads to the farms are mere foot paths.
Bad road network in the area is one of the 5 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE factors that increases cost of food production, hence, increase in prices of farm products.
3.1.2 Large Dependence on Agriculture Another characteristic of rural area is that, a large percentage of the adults are engaged in agriculture or other agriculture-related activities.
The term “rural” can as well be defined as an area or settlement in which half or more of the adult male working population is engaged in farming.
According to Imoudu (1986), while urban dwellers are generally non-agricultural, ruralites are essentially agricultural.
Consequently, the word ‘rural’ can be equated to agriculture and other agriculture-related occupations carried on in the rural areas.
3.1.3 Lack of Portable Water and Electricity Not until recently that the government administrations and other international donor agencies began to give consideration to the provision of portable water and electricity, typical rural areas have been associated with the lack of them.
In fact, lack of these and some other social amenities, have been the REASON WHY the youth often migrate to the urban areas in search for better living standard.
The absence of these necessary amenities is also the reason why cottage industries such as farm product processing facilities cannot be provided.
So, while the rural areas produce the farm products the processing is mainly done in the urban areas.
3.1.4 Poor Communication Facilities Rural areas are also characterized by poor communication facilities.
Rural areas lack postal services, telephones, fax and electronic mails (e- mail).
Television and radio are scarcely used due to lack of electricity.
Village criers normally convey information from the ruler to the subjects.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention four effects of lack of portable water, electricity and poor communication on the lives of the rural dwellers.
3.1.5 Absence of Good Markets Have you been to any market in the rural area?
If you have, you would have observed that, the markets often don’t have lock-up shops but in 6 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE the open and usually no standard of measurement but on the bargaining ability of the buyer.
Farm products usually predominate rural markets.
3.1.6 Larger Number of Old People than the Youth Rural area usually has larger number of old people than the youth.
This is because the youth often migrate to the urban areas in search of work, higher education, apprenticeship to a trade or other engagements for survival.
3.1.7 Minimal Capital Investment Rural area is also identified with minimal capital investment.
The rhythm of poverty prevailing in rural settings does not afford the rural dwellers the opportunity for high capital investment.
Their source of income is mainly from the savings from the sale of their farm products.
Strict collateral security, often demanded by credit institutions, does not equally afford the rural dwellers the opportunity for leans as obtained in urban areas.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has identified some of the characteristics of rural areas.
In general, these characteristics are true to type in most rural areas.
Therefore, any settlement where these characteristics are noticed is referred to as a rural area.
5.0 SUMMARY If you have thoroughly studied this unit, you should be able to: • Discuss at least seven characteristics associated with rural communities • Mention at least three communities where you might have observed these characteristics in your state.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss three characteristics of a rural area.
2.
Mention five communities in your State where these characteristics have been observed.
3.
Mention the effect of minimal capital investment on the activities of the rural dwellers.
7 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Imoudu,P.B.
(1986).
The Role of Credit in Rural Development in Nigeria.
A Paper Presented at Training Course in Administration of Rural Development Programme Organized by the Department of Farm Management and Extension, FUTA and Rural Development Agency of Ondo State, 6th – 9th December.
8 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 3 CHARACTERISTICS OF RURAL AREAS II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Large percentage of illiterates 3.2 Large Dependence on Local Farm Tools 3.3 Dependence on Household Labour 3.4 Smallness of Farm Holdings 3.5 Settlement of Temporary Abode Beliefs in Superstitions 3.6 Beliefs in Superstitions and Taboos 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a build-up on the previous unit.
In this unit some other characteristics that distinguish rural from the urban settlements are further discussed.
In the last unit (Unit 2); you remember that you were acquainted with seven characteristics.
In this unit you, will learn six more characteristics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss not less than six characteristics of rural areas other than the ones discussed in unit two • mention two other sources of labour apart from that of the household • mention two superstitions from your hometown.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Large Percentage of Illiterates Have you ever noticed that a large percentage of people in the rural areas are illiterate?
In the previous unit, you remember that it was mentioned that there are more elderly people than the youth?
Yes, these elder people did not have the opportunity for western education and that is why a larger percentage of them are farmers, since they cannot do to 9 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE other jobs which may demand some levels of literacy.
The educated ones are found in the towns and cities striving for survival.
3.2 Large Dependence on Local Farm Tools Can you mention some local farm tools used in the rural areas?
Yes, if you mention hoe, cutlass, knife then you are correct.
The rural people cannot afford mechanized farming because of its need for high capital outlay.
So, rural farmers are into subsistence farming.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is the other type of farming known as?
Explain the term.
3.3 Dependence on Household Labour Another characteristics of rural areas is that, the main source of their labour is by the household.
Can you define a household?
What is the difference between a household and a family?
Labour supply for the various farming activities is from the household family mainly.
Though hired labour or cooperative labour are also available, the unpaid and cheap labour force from the household family is most prevalent.
3.4 Smallness of Farm Holdings Earlier you have learnt that the rural settlers have minimal capital investment, they use local farm tools and depend mostly on household labour supply.
All these are the factors militating against big farm enterprise resulting in the smallness of holdings among rural farmers.
Olajide (1980) has earlier classified small farmers as people having less than two hectares of farm size.
Not only that the farms are small they are equally scattered over distant areas.
3.5 Settlement of Temporary Abode Rural settlers often see themselves as living in a temporary abode.
They believe that rural area dwellers have the bigger towns they belong to, where they celebrate Christian or Muslim or traditional festivals, where they contract marriages and where their dead are buried.
So, it is a common to hear the rural dwellers to say we are going home anytime they are leaving for the town.
3.6 Beliefs in Superstitions and Taboos One other characteristic of rural dwellers is their strong belief in superstition.
Almost throughout of Nigeria, superstition avails.
Do you 10 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE mean that you cannot define superstition?
Let us take the definition by Ekong (1988).
He defined the term as beliefs in regard to the supernatural, irrational fear of the unknown usually leading to misdirected reverence, while he defined taboos as, prohibitions on certain behaviours, objects or exchange to which some religious attributes are imputed.
Superstition and taboos are scarcely given consideration in the urban areas because of the erosion of such beliefs by western education, western religious activities, information technology and civilization generally, but still prevail dominantly in rural areas.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention five superstitions and five taboos believed in your local area.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has been able to add six other characteristics to the seven discussed in the previous unit.
This implies that you now know thirteen characteristics of the rural areas.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has further enlightened and enabled to: • Explain six more characteristics of rural area • Differentiate between superstition and taboos • Differentiate between household and family • Mention sources of labour for the rural dweller.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why do rural dwellers have small farms?
2.
What is subsistence agriculture?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong, E. E. (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Printers, pp.
426-430.
Olajide, S.O.
(1980).
Nigerian Small Farmers: Problems and Prospects in Integrated Rural Development.
CARD, University of Ibadan, Nigeria,19p.
11 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 4 SEMI-URBAN AND URBAN SETTLEMENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Settlements in Nigeria 3.1.1 Farm Camp 3.1.2 Medium size Farming Village 3.1.3 Large Farming Village 3.1.4 Medium Urban Town 3.1.5 Large Urban Centre 3.1.6 The Metropolitan City 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit we are moving a little bit ahead of what we learnt in Units 1 – 3.Other than rural settlements, there are also semi-urban and urban settlements.
Though the emphasis of the course is on rural areas, it becomes pertinent for you to also learn about other settlements for the purpose of further understanding and comparison.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • further differentiate between rural area, semi-urban and urban settlements by population and other social infrastructure • diagrammatically represent the rural-urban dichotomy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Settlements in Nigeria Settlements in Nigeria, and indeed all over the world, vary from the pure rural to the pure urban types with a lot of variations in between.
The term “rural Nigeria” will be used to embrace those places in Nigeria with less than 20,000 people as well as those with larger population but in which a greater proportion of the inhabitants (50% or more) are engaged in farming and are equally lacking in most basic amenities.
12 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE Figure 4.1: The Rural-Urban Continuum Farm Camp Medium Medium Metropolitan Farming Urban town City Village Small farming Large Large urban Village farming centre Village (Pure Rural Type) (Pure Urban Type) Source: An Introduction to Rural Sociology Ekong E.E.
(1988) From Figure 4.1, the rural areas are: (i) Farm Camp (ii) Small farming village (iii) Medium size farming village The semi-urban consists of: (i) Large farming village (ii) Medium urban town The urban areas are: (i) Large urban centre (ii) Metropolitan city 3.1.1 Farm Camp/Farming Village/Hamlet The category of settlements referred to as Farm Camp/Farming Village/Hamlet are those that have less than 500 people in population.
There are usually no social amenities apart from those naturally provided such as streams, rocks, vegetation and the like.
The inhabitants 13 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE are mainly farmers or hunters.
Such places are usually temporary abodes.
3.1.2 Medium Size Farming Village This settlement has a population of up to 2,000.
It may have a primary school or koranic school.
Places of worship, such as churches or mosques, may be available and there may be a market place.
3.1.3 Large Farming Village There is a preponderance of this category of settlement in south western Nigeria.
It has about 20,000 inhabitants but nearly everyone is engaged in agriculture, or agriculture-related activities.
This settlement may support few schools and places of worship but not much of social amenities.
3.1.4 Medium Urban Town This settlement may have up to 20,000 people but differs from large farming village in that, it has a few branches of government ministries or departments.
Unlike the farming village whose population is greatly homogenous, medium urban town accommodates few strangers.
It also attracts commercial activities and has an appreciable number of basic amenities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List five communities in your State that fall within medium size farming village and medium urban town.
3.1.5 Large Urban Centre A settlement is regarded as large urban if it attracts a population of about 100,000.
There is concentration of social amenities and infrastructure.
The settlement plays hosts to government establishments, ministries and parastatals.
Higher institutions of learning are also found.
The present States’ capitals in Nigeria are typical examples of large urban centers.
3.1.6 The Metropolitan City Have you ever traveled to Lagos, Port-Harcourt, Ibadan, Abuja, Kano or Kaduna?
If you have, how will you describe it in relationship with other towns of smaller status?
Definitely you would have observed that, the population is explosive, to the tune of 500,000 and above.
Those mentioned settlements are typical examples of metropolitan cities.
They 14 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE combine a lot of functions which are governmental, commercial, industrial, educational and recreational among others.
They are usually heterogeneous (consists of people of different ethnic groups and professionals) in all respects.
4.0 CONCLUSION Having gone through this unit, you should have learned about the different classes into which Nigerian settlements are categorized.
Though you are dealing with rural settings, it was better you have an idea of the nature of other settlements.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Rural areas include farm camp, small farming village, medium size farming village • Semi-urban is made up of large farming village, medium urban • The urban areas are large urban centres and metropolitan cities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
With the aid of a diagram, locate the large farming village on the rural-urban continuum.
2.
List three features of a metropolitan city.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong, E. E. (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Publishers.
15 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE MODULE 2 URBAN SETTLEMENTS Unit 1 Characteristics of Urban Areas I Unit 2 Characteristics of Urban Areas II Unit 3 Differences between Rural and Urban Settlements Unit 4 Differences between Rural and Urban Settlements Unit 5 Interdependence of the Rural and Urban Settlements UNIT 1 CHARACTERISTICS OF URBAN AREAS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Educational Institutions 3.2 Hospitality Facilities 3.3 Market Facility 3.4 Water Supply 3.5 Electricity Supply 3.6 Industrial Establishments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You can still recollect that, in the last module an effort was made analyzing the characteristics of rural areas.
In this unit, you will also learn about how the urban area is characterized.
Subsequently you will be able to differentiate the urban from the rural.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the levels at which some basic and social infrastructure are available.
16 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Characteristics of Urban Areas Apart from the fact that urban areas have more people living in it, they also have higher level of availability of educational institutions, hospitality facilities, market facility, water supply, electricity and industrial establishments.
3.1 Educational Institutions Urban areas host a large number of primary, secondary and technical schools.
These schools are either owned by governments or private individuals.
In addition, some urban areas host tertiary institutions which may also be private or public-owned.
Often, it is these available educational institutions that attract the youth and other able bodied men and women from the rural areas.
3.2 Hospitality Facilities Urban areas have hospitality facilities such as hotels or guest houses.
In addition, there are other attractions which often result in increase in the population of the dwellers.
3.3 Market Facility Market facilities in the urban areas are more modern than those in the rural areas.
For instance, there could be lock-up shops, open air markets, supermarkets with all kinds of trading.
Some markets facilities in the urban areas provide for daily transaction unlike in the rural areas where buying and selling take place at certain interval of time.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List ten products that can be found in rural markets.
3.4 Water Supply Urban areas are characterized by the supply of portable water which may be borehole or pipe-borne.
Rural areas mostly depend on harvested rain and streams for their water supply.
3.5 Electricity Supply Electricity supply is associated with urban areas.
One of the reasons migration occurs from rural area to urban area is the search for better 17 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE living standard in which electricity plays a vital role.
This is because most of the trades in the urban areas require electricity to function just as most of the electronic gadgets that make life pleasurable equally depend on electricity.
3.6 Industrial Establishments Urban areas play host to one or more industrial and other establishments each employing not less than fifty people who may not be indigenes of the community.
Can you think of why more industries are sited in the urban areas than in the rural areas?
Of course, the issues of electricity supply, market, labour force and communication could be strong reasons why there are more industries in the urban than rural areas.
4.0 CONCLUSION You would have observed in this unit that, urban areas are characterized by the presence of educational institutions, hospitality facilities, market facilities, water and electricity supply and industrial establishments.
Where all the above mentioned facilities are found in a greater measure can be regarded as urban area.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that, urban areas have: • Ten or more primary schools, many secondary, and technical schools and may have tertiary institutions • One or more hotels/guest houses • Markets with lock-up shops in addition to open air markets • Water and electricity supply • One or more industries that could employ up to fifty non- indegenes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give two reasons why electricity supply is vital for the urban economy.
2.
Mention three forms into which markets can be classified 18 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Jibowo Gboyega (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd. 19 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 2 CHARACTERISTICS OF URBAN AREA II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Banks and other Financial Institutions 3.2 Security Services 3.3 Recreational Facilities 3.4 Petrol Stations 3.5 Heath Care Facilities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit explains the characteristics of urban areas.
Specifically it: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mentions five more characteristics of urban areas • discusses how each of the characteristics differs from what is found in the rural area.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Presence of Banks and other Financial Institutions Urban areas have two or more branches of commercial banks and some other financial institutions, such as insurance companies and mortgage institutions.
Banks operating in urban areas obviously enjoy greater patronage than those in the rural areas.
3.2 Presence of the Police and Fire Services Urban area witness more security agencies like the police and fire services than what is obtained in rural areas.
This is because, since urban areas have large number of inhabitants, crimes and fire outbreaks are more pronounced than what is obtained in the rural area.
20 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.3 Entertainment and Recreational Facilities Urban areas enjoy higher level of entertainment and recreational facilities.
Studio and public centres are located in urban areas.
Amusement parks, cinema houses and night clubs are located in urban areas.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention 5 recreational activities in urban and rural areas.
3.4 Presence of Petrol Stations In urban areas, there are petrol stations and vehicle servicing facilities.
3.5 Health Care Facilities Urban areas have two or more private clinics besides government dispensaries or mission hospitals.
They also have laboratory diagnostic services.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has afforded us additional urban characteristics mainly the presence of banks, police and fire services, entertainment and recreational facilities, petrol stations and health care facilities.
5.0 SUMMARY By now you should be able to: • List additional five characteristics of the urban areas.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss five characteristics of the urban area.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Jibowo Gboyega (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd. 21 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 3 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN RURAL AND URBAN SETTLEMENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Size of Area 3.2 Population Density and Composition 3.3 Closeness to Nature 3.4 Varieties of Occupation 3.5 Social Mobility 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You recollect that many of the differences between the urban area and rural area have been discussed in the previous units.
So, there is no doubt that it is now easier for you to identify a rural area or urban area.
However, this unit further reiterates the specific differences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the specific differences between the rural and urban areas • discuss social mobility in both urban and rural areas.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Differences between Rural and Urban Areas The differences being considered include size of area, population density and composition, closeness to nature, varieties of occupation and social mobility.
3.1 Size of Area The first attribute you can easily observe between rural and urban areas is that the urban area is larger in size than the rural area.
This may be attributed to the fact that more people live in the urban area than in the rural area.
Individuals migrate from rural areas to urban areas in search of better paid jobs or apprenticeship in vocations.
Can you adduce 22 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE reasons for your not remaining in your local area?
Those same reasons can be said to be true for most migrants.
3.2 Population Density and Composition What is population density?
Jibowo (2000) defined population density as the number of inhabitants per square kilometer of land.
If population density has to do with the proportion of people occupying a space, then it is lower in rural area than in the urban area.
Low population density makes it possible for the local farmers to have access to land for their farming and so brings them closer to their farms unlike those in the urban areas who have to travel long distances before getting to their farms.
3.3 Closeness to Nature Natural environment can be classified into physical, biological and socio-cultural environments.
The physical environment may include soils, rocks, hills, mountains, streams and other topographic features while biological environment is made up of all living organisms such as the vegetation cover, birds, animals and other plants, generally.
The socio-cultural environment is the cultural aspect of the society which includes the native tools, weapons, machines, ideas, values of the people, customs, folkways, mores and language.
From what has been defined above, it is obvious that the rural people are closer to nature than the urban people.
The rural people on a daily basis have interaction with their environment from where these elements of nature are found.
3.4 Varieties of Occupation The predominant occupation in rural areas is farming.
That is, crop production, livestock rearing, fish production and processing of farm products.
In urban areas however, there are varieties of occupation ranging from artisans, marketing, clerks, office work, teaching, nursing, administration, driving and a lot more.
Can you mention other occupations found in the urban area?
Definitely, there are more varieties of occupation in urban areas than rural areas.
While occupation in rural areas is homogenous that of urban areas is heterogeneous.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List ten occupations available in urban areas and five in the rural areas.
23 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.5 Social Mobility The society exists in social classes.
Social class is the position occupied by an individual in the society.
Upper class Middle class Lower-class Fig.3.1 Example of Social Class The movement of an individual from one social class or group to another is referred to as social mobility.
In Figure 3.1 above, social mobility may take vertical movement upwards or downwards or may take horizontal movement, that is within the same social ladder.
There are fewer social classes in rural areas than in urban areas because of the homogeneity of occupation, economic level and social status.
Vertical social mobility is more frequent in urban than rural areas.
The reason is that, the urban areas offer more opportunities for personal development which translates to growth, promotion and change of occupation, marriage and residence.
4.0 CONCLUSION By now you must have realized that various factors differentiate the urban from rural areas.
These include size of areas, population density and occupation.
5.0 SUMMARY You have studied in this unit that: • urban area is larger in size than the rural area • population density is lower in the rural area • population composition in the rural area is homogenous while it is heterogeneous in the urban area 24 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE • Rural dwellers are closer to nature than urban dwellers • Vertical movement along the social ladder is slower in rural areas than urban areas.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain homogenous population composition.
2.
Discuss why vertical social mobility is faster in the urban area than the rural area.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Jibowo Gboyega (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd. 25 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 4 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN RURAL AND URBAN SETTLEMENTS II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Social Interaction 3.2 Social Control 3.3 Levels of Living 3.4 Social Solidarity 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit concludes the specific differences between urban and rural areas which was started in the previous unit.
Differences between Rural and Urban Settlements In this unit, you will learn how urban areas differ from rural areas in terms of social interaction, social control, levels of living and social solidarity.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • compare the social interaction of both urban and rural areas • explain the mode of social control in rural and urban areas • discuss level of living between rural and urban settlement • define social solidarity and how it is operates in both rural and urban areas.
3.0 MAN CONTENT 3.1 Social Interaction Social interaction in the rural area is mainly through primary group contacts such as the family, the neighbourhood or the entire village.
Such interaction is mainly face-to-face and it takes place on the farms 26 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE and in places of worship.
More interactions also take place during the use of common facilities such as the village square, village streams, other sources of water, village market and during village development meetings.
Whereas, in urban areas, social interaction is through secondary contacts mainly.
This is achieved through the use of newspapers, radio, television, and magazines which provide news and information to the urbanities more than through family members or neighbours.
Urban dwellers may also meet at sports centers, business contacts and other recreational points.
3.2 Social Control Could you imagine what life would look like if everybody is free to do what she/he likes at all times?
Chaotic you would say.
Yes some measures have been put in place to ensure that people live their lives in conformity with the societal acceptable norms and values.
In the rural areas, the behaviour of individuals tend to be guided more by internalisation of societal norms and values.
The device is through informal means such as gossips and ostracism to effect control of folkways violation while instant justice is demanded in cases on the violation of mores.
Urban areas however tend to rely more on formal institutions such as the police, traffic warden, immigration officers and customs officers for the maintenance of law and order generally.
3.3 Levels of Living You would remember that, we have learnt earlier that able bodied people migrate from rural areas in search of befitting living.
This portrays that there is a difference between the levels of living of both settlements.
Levels of living are used to describe the quantity of goods and services actually consumed by an individual and his/her family.
This includes possessing some items such as radio, television, refrigerator, cooker, good nutrition, good dressing and occupying decent houses and environment.
Using the parameters above, it is obvious that rural dwellers enjoy lower level of living than the urban dwellers.
3.4 Social Solidarity Have you ever queried some people when they refer to themselves as brothers even when they are not in anyway related by blood, but just because they hail from the same place or speak the same language?
That phenomenon is what is referred to as social solidarity or the degree of togetherness among people.
According to Jibowo (2000), there is a greater degree of social solidarity among rural than urban dwellers.
This 27 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE is because members of a given rural society are often from related kinsmen and have similar occupation, education, income and other attributes.
In urban areas, social solidarity is based on people of common trade or business contact relationship.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learned in this unit that rural people interact in common place of contact while urban dwellers relate with one another through the media or business contact.
You also learn that social control in rural areas is informal while it is formal in the urban areas.
Also level of living is lower in rural areas.
However, social solidarity is greater in rural areas than urban areas.
5.0 SUMMARY By now it is expected that you should be able to understand that: • Social interaction in rural and urban areas occurs at common places and in the media respectively • Social control is formal in urban areas while it is informal in rural areas • The level of living is lower in rural areas than in urban areas • There is greater solidarity among people in the rural areas than urban areas.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention the agencies involved in formal control.
2.
Explain the term social solidarity.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press.
28 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 5 INTERDEPENDENCE OF THE RURAL AND URBAN SETTLEMENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Provision of Food 3.2 Festivities 3.3 Provision of Raw Materials 3.4 Traditional Services and Obligations 3.5 Social Services 3.6 Resting Place 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous two units you were acquainted with the ways in which urban areas differ from rural areas.
However, the two settlements are not independent of one another.
There is a symbiotic relationship between the two.
In this unit, therefore efforts will be made to let you have on insight into how the two are interdependent.
Social Interaction Patterns Both rural and the urban settings are components of the same larger society.
They are, therefore, interdependent in many ways: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the ways through which urban and rural areas are interrelated 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Provision of Food About seventy percent of Nigeria’s population live in rural areas and are responsible for about 75 percent of Nigerian’s food production.
Urban dwellers, most of whom are engaged in some professions other than 29 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE farming, depend on the food produced by the ruralites for survival.
Urban dwellers, however, produce the modern farm tools, agro- chemicals and storage facilities required to sustain viable production in rural areas.
3.2 Celebration of Festivities Do you know why most cities like Lagos, Abuja, Kano and Enugu have their population drastically reduced during celebrations such as Christmas, Easter, Eid-el Fitri and Id-el-kabir?
It is because people enjoy those festivities more in their local areas.
The seasonal exodus from urban to rural areas could also be in favour of traditional festivals, such as New Yam festival or other forms of traditional worship.
So, while the rural dwellers make the preparation for the celebration, they rely on urban dwellers to sustain the institutions particularly, financially.
3.3 Provision of Raw Materials In addition to the provision of the bulk of food that urban dwellers depend upon by the ruralites, some of the farm products are raw materials for the agro-based industries located in the urban areas.
On the other hand, while the urban dwellers serve as markets for the products of rural farmers, industrial products are also sold to ruralites.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List five agro-based industries located in your State capital and the raw materials they utilize from rural areas.
3.4 Traditional Services and Obligations Urban-rural symbiotic relationship also takes the form of provision of traditional services.
These services include sharing of properties of the dead, installation as chiefs in the urban area and similar functions which cannot be performed directly by the rural dwellers.
In return, the urban dweller receives gratification for those services.
3.5 Social Services Social services that rural dwellers require for better ways of living, such as electricity supply, pipe-borne water, health facilities, banking facilities, educational facilities, are often provided by the urban setting.
This is because the State administration is based in urban areas.
Can you still mention other services so extended to rural areas from urban settings?
30 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.6 Resting Place While the ruralites find it a thing of pleasure to go to the urban area to rest and enjoy infrastructural facilities in the urban setting, the urbanites also create opportunities to go and rest in the rural area after the hustle and bustle hours in urban areas.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit has intimated you with the fact that neither the urban nor rural area is an island of its own.
The ways through which they depend on each other have been elucidated.
5.0 SUMMARY Having gone through this unit, you learned that: • While the bulk of the food required by the urbanites is produced by the ruralites, the urban areas provides the modern farm tools and agro-chemicals • While the urbanites go to celebrate festivals in the rural area, the ruralites depend on the urbanites for the sponsorship of those institutions • While the urbanites receive raw materials for agro-based industries from the rural area, the final products from the industries are sold to the ruralites • Rural dwellers depend on the urbanites for traditional services and in return give gratifications • Rural areas depend on urban areas for social services • Dwellers of both settlements exchange visits when they need to rest.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss two ways in which urban and rural areas are symbiotically related.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press.
31 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE MODULE 3 ECONOMIC LIFE OF THE RURAL PEOPLE Unit 1 Economic Communities I Unit 2 Economic Communities II Unit 3 Sources of Credit in Rural Areas Unit 4 Sources of Information for Economic Development UNIT 1 ECONOMIC COMMUNITIES I CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Farming Communities 3.2 Hunting Communities 3.3 Lumbering Communities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will learn about the livelihood of rural communities.
To sustain the survival and perpetuity of rural people, the people are engaged in economic activities, largely, depending on the prevailing climatic and ecological variables.
Types of Economic Communities Certain communities are more engaged in one livelihood activity than some other communities.
This trend is mainly dictated by the vagaries of weather and other ecological factors.
The activities such communities are engaged in are passed from one generation to the other.
Those communities are called by such economic activities.
For instance, there are Farming Communities, Hunting Communities and Lumbering Communities.
32 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain the farming communities • discuss hunting in rural communities • state the processes involved in lumbering.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Farming Communities In almost everywhere in the world, farming communities are present.
Farming is the main occupation of rural communities as over seventy percent of the ruralites are engaged in agriculture for survival.
Farmers depend on the exploitation of the land for their production.
Their level of production, therefore, dominantly relies on the vagaries of nature within the soil, the unpredictable weather and the caprices of plant and animal life.
Farming communities in the developing countries such as Nigeria, still largely, depend on the use of crude farm tools such as hoes and cutlasses, traditional processing methods, rainfall, available nutrients in the soil, head portage for conveyance and shifting cultivation farm practice.
Land clearing for instance, usually entails the slash and burn techniques while planting is done on mounds, heaps and ridges made manually.
Farming in several parts of the country, is a seasonal occupation since at off-seasons, the farmers get engaged in some activities other than farming.
Private savings remains largely the source of financing farming enterprise in Nigeria.
Farmers cannot raise loans readily from banks or obtain credit for lack of security.
However, efforts by governments and research institutes to improve farming through guaranteed loans, supply of improved farm inputs and processing technologies are being witnessed in Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List five farming communities in your own Local Government Area.
3.2 Hunting Communities Hunting is one of the earliest general economic activities in the world.
Can you relate the story of the early men?
You would have heard it 33 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE repeatedly said particularly at the elementary school.
Hunting therefore remains one of the important occupations in the rural areas.
In Nigeria hunting is supplemented with crop production and craft making.
Hunting is mostly done at nights, while the hunters are engaged in farming in the day time.
Hunting is still being done with the aid of primitive weapons such as, bows and arrows, Dane guns, traps, cutlasses or dogs.
Some modern weapons being used today include double barreled guns and pistols and rifles.
In some communities, hunting expeditions with dogs and sometimes forest fires have become seasonal activities.
3.3 Lumbering Communities Lumbering communities exist where large areas are covered with forests where big trees such as iroko and obeche and some other useful trees are found.
Nigeria, as you know has about 360,000 square kilometres of forests predominantly existing in states such as Ogun, Oyo, Ondo, Edo and Delta.
Can you mention five things that are made from the product of lumbering?
The operations involved in lumbering are: 1.
Felling: This has to do with the harvesting or cutting down of the trees.
2.
Buckling: The felled trees are cut into logs for easier haulage.
3.
Skidding: This is the other term used for the haulage of the logs using a vehicle known in the south west as “Agbegilodo”.
4.
Landings: This is concerned with the assembling of the logs at the sawmills where they are sawn into lumber using mechanized saws.
4.0 CONCLUSION You would have learnt that community survival is dependent on being engaged in livelihood activities which are passed from generation to generation.
You should also remember that, it is the vagaries of weather and ecological factors that dictate what a particular community engage in.
34 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt, in this unit, that: • Farming communities till the soil to produce crops • Farming have still depends on the use of primitive tools • Hunting is one of the oldest occupations of the world • Hunting is supplemented with farming • Lumbering takes place more in the South West and part of South South geopolitical zones because of the available forests there • Lumbering entails several processes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention three problems of farming in rural areas.
2.
Define the steps involved in lumbering.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alfred, S.D.Y.
and S.S. Akintade (2003).
Journal of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Volume 3 & 4, 2002 & 2003.
Ekong, E.E.
(1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Publishers Ltd. 35 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 2 ECONOMIC COMMUNITIES II 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Pastoral Farming Communities 3.2 Fishing Communities 3.3 Craft Communities 3.4 Other Occupations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit further economic activities will be discussed.
Types of Economic Activities In addition to the economic activities you have learnt in the previous unit, you will be acquainted with the activities of the pastoral, fishing and craft communities of rural Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss pastoral farming communities • explain the activities of fishing communities • state at least five different crafts that are carried out by craft communities.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Pastoral Communities In Nigeria, the most important ethnic groups who are skilled pastoralists according to Jibowo (2000), are the Fulanis, Kanuris and Shua Arabs.
Pastoral communities consist of nomadic-stock-raising people, the semi- nomadic and the sedentary ranchers.
The pastoralists trade in cattle, sheep and goats.
They move from one place to another with the animals in search of food and water.
During the rainy season, the pastoralists move northwards to escape from the prevailing tsetse flies in the south 36 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE and southwards during the dry season, to enjoy water supplies and vegetation (grasses).
The semi-nomadic and sedentary pastoralists supplement their livestock rearing with farming.
The nomadic people sometimes settle in favourable areas.
The sedentary groups usually develop their stock- raising-activities into ranching.
3.2 Fishing Communities The communities found along the rivers or along the coastal regions of Nigeria take to fishing as their livelihood activity.
The people harvest fish from the fresh waters using nets and hooks.
They also engage in harmful practices such as the use of Gammalin 20 and other poisonous chemicals.
While the men are occupied with the actual harvesting of the fish, their female counterparts are occupied with the processing and marketing of the fish.
The common method of processing is smoking and drying.
Some fishers also add farming enterprise to their activities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention five fishing communities, if any, in your State.
3.3 Craft Communities Just as the name implies, it refers to those communities having livelihood activities the hinge on crafts.
Some communities become famously identified with the craft that is predominantly practised by the dwellers.
Rural crafts include pottery, calabash making, mat making, dyeing, smithery, basketery and brass metal casting etc.
The Egbas of Abeokuta are noted for dyeing, the Nupes for brass work, Sokoto and Kano for leather work and the Oyos for cloth weaving.
Other recognized communities tied to their crafts also include, the mat making of Ijesha, wood carving of Benin and pot making of Isheagu area.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention the States in Nigeria where we can locate the Ijeshas, Nupes and Isheagu.
3.4 Other Rural Occupations In addition to the identified and discussed economic activities in the rural areas, others worth mention are milling, carpentry, bicycle repairing, weaving, dress making, knitting, retailed trading, barbing or hair dressing, native doctoring, midwifery, bricklaying and preaching.
37 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 4.0 CONCLUSION You have been acquainted with the various livelihood activities in rural areas and you are equally knowledgeable as regards the factors that dictate the activity that a community gets engaged.
You have also been told that though communities have predominant livelihood activities, they also engage in some other supplementary activities.
For instance, a craft community may also practise farming, hunting or fishing as supplementary activities.
5.0 SUMMARY Having gone through this unit, you are expected, by now, to be able to state that: • Pastoral communities move from one place to another in search of food and water • The Fulanis, Kanuris and Shua-Arabs are the most notable ethnic groups in pastoral farming • Fishing communities are found along riverine areas • Craft communities practise one craft or the other by the majority of the communities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention three methods used by fishing communities in their fishery enterprise.
2.
List the three types of pastoral practices.
3.
Mention five craft communities.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press.
38 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 3 SOURCES OF CREDIT IN RURAL AREAS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Individual Savings 3.2 Cooperative Savings Group 3.3 Donor Agencies and Non-Governmental Agencies 3.4 Agricultural and Cooperative Banks 3.5 Governments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units, you learnt that, over sixty percent of Nigerians live in the rural areas (FAO, 1993), and are mainly engaged in crop production.
Crop production, like any other enterprise, requires effective funding, not only in the area of input acquisition but in processing, transportation and marketing of products.
Rural dwellers have certain strategies with which they fund their farming and other economic activities.
In this unit such options open to the ruralites will be discussed.
Sources of Credit Enterprises require funds to function.
However, level of funding differs from one enterprise to the other.
Sources of these funds also vary.
Rural dwellers fund their activities from sources such as their individual savings, cooperative savings groups, NGOs and donor agencies, agricultural banks and government assistance.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the alternatives available to rural dwellers for funding of their economic activities • discuss the roles of donor and Non-Governmental Agencies (NGOs) in credit supplies to the rural dwellers • explain the role of governments in the funding of economic activities in the rural areas.
39 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Individual Savings Rural dwellers depend largely on the savings from the sale of their farm products for carrying out their various activities (Alfred, 2001).
The individual savings may also include gifts from relations or from money realized as hired labour or from non-farm activities such as crafts, hunting or livestock raising.
However, individual savings is grossly inadequate for meaningful farming.
It depends grossly on household size.
A household that has large size would hardly have much to save, since, the household consumption and welfare take a great toll on the income of such household.
3.2 Cooperative Savings Group (Thrift Society) When people come together to form a group and in the process pool their resources together from where loans are granted to members.
It is referred to as cooperative savings group.
In some parts of Nigeria, it is known as “Ajo” or “Esusu”.
Cooperative savings group is a non- institutional source of credit and it thrives more in rural areas than institutional sources (Adegeye, et.
al.
1985).
This is attributed to the inability of rural dwellers to satisfy the collateral security required by the institutional sources.
Alfred (2001) has reported that of the 83 percent of those who fund their farming activities through personal savings, 33 percent subscribe to cooperative savings group.
3.3 Donor Agencies and Non-Governmental Organisation Agencies (NGOs) Another means of funding agricultural activities by rural dwellers is through the aid of some donor agencies and NGOs who give loans and credit to farmers at low interest or interest free rates.
A typical example of NGOs that get involved in assisting rural dwellers particularly, the women group, is Country Women Association of Nigeria (COWAN).
3.4 Nigerian Agricultural, Rural Development and Cooperative Bank (NARDCB) The bank was established for the purpose of giving loans to farmers to enable them accomplish their farming activities.
However, lack of record keeping by the farmers often makes it difficult for them to be aided with such loans.
40 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.5 Governments Farmers, in some States of the Federation, are assisted by their various governments, sometimes in forms of subsidy, direct cash or inputs.
The Federal Government of Nigeria, for instance made 50 billion Naira available in banks for farmers to access in 2006.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has informed you that rural farmers require financial aid to fund their activities.
This is accomplished through personal savings, cooperative savings groups, donor agencies, agricultural banks and governments.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: • Rural farmers require financial assistance • Majority of the rural farmers fund their activities through personal savings • Also donor agencies and NGOs assist rural farmers to fund their activities • Lack of record keeping and collateral security make it difficult for farmers to access bank loans • Governments assist farmers in form of subsidy or direct cash loans.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give two reasons why rural farmers find it difficult to access bank loans.
2.
Define subsidy.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adegeye, A.J.
and J.S.
Dittoh (1985).
Essentials of Agricultural Economics.
Ibadan: Impact Pub.
Ltd. pp.
183-189.
Alfred, S.D.Y.
and F.O.
Peke (2001).
Effects of Informal Savings Group on Women’s Agricultural Activities in Akure North Local Government Area, Ondo State.
Journal of Economics and Social Studies.
Volume 1 No.
1.
41 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 4 SOURCES OF INFORMATION FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Individuals/Relations 3.2 Radio/Television 3.3 Newspapers 3.4 Agricultural Extension Service/Social Worker 3.5 Model Farmer 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You have learnt that rural dwellers fund their economic activities mainly through personal savings and from other forms of assistance.
You should also know that rural people require information as an aid for their economic development activities.
This unit therefore aims to identify the channels of information available to the people.
Sources of Information If rural people must be in touch with modern methods of improving their economic activities, particularly on new technologies for farming, linkage with information is sine-qua-non.
Information provides the opportunity to learn about new things while they also provide feedback from the receivers of such information.
There are several channels through which information is disseminated and received by rural people.
They include individuals/relations, radio/television, newspapers/ newsletters and Agricultural Extension Services.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the information channels available or used by rural dwellers • explain the advantages and disadvantages of each identified channel.
42 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Individuals/Relations Information gets to rural people through individuals or relations who may come in contact with the information first and in the process share it with others.
Sometimes, informal contacts with individuals can take place on the street, in the market or at local celebrations.
These meetings often take place by chance and are casual in nature.
3.2 Radio/Television Radio or television are very power and catchy organs of information dissemination to rural people.
The two organs have a very wide and quick coverage.
One of the disadvantages of the use of television for information gathering is irregular power supply.
However, radio becomes more useful, since, it can be battery operated.
3.3 Newspapers/Newsletter Rural dwellers receive new information from newspapers, newsletters, leaflets and pamphlets.
Information that can be obtained from newspapers includes advance events such as approaching extension meetings, follow-up events about recent meetings, market location and current prices of farm products.
Newsletters that are in local dialect receives greater patronage from the rural people.
3.4 Agricultural Extension Services In extension services, extension workers generally have basic knowledge of subject matter like crop production, fishery, forestry and animal production.
With this knowledge, rural people are guided and trained in improved agricultural methods.
Extension agents, by the reason of being “farmers’ friends” pass information obtained from research findings to the farmers.
Some of the methods often adopted by extension workers to meet the needs of the rural people include, farm and home visits, office calls and inquiries, field flag method and result demonstrations and field trips.
Other methods include; field day, contests and lectures.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify the extension methods that can be used for training a group of farmers.
43 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.5 The Model Farmer The model farmer is another source of information for rural people.
A model farmer is the one whose farming methods and personal attitudes are so superior that his or her operations can serve as a model for others to follow.
Model farmers are deliberately identified for the purpose of serving as examples to others in order to persuade the clientele (rural farmers) to adopt better farming practices.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt that, rural people require new information to better their economic activities.
This information can be obtained from individuals or relations, from radio or television, newspapers and newsletters and also from agricultural extension service, sometimes, using the model farmer.
5.0 SUMMARY Having gone through this unit, it is expected that you have learnt that: • Rural people can obtain information from individuals or relations • Radio and television have quick and wide area coverage • Newspaper or newsletter printed in the local dialect receives much patronage • Agricultural Extension Services, using several methods, pass information to the rural people • Model farmers can serve as examples to other ruralites.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the kinds of information that can be obtained from newspapers or newsletters.
2.
Mention ten methods with which an extension worker reaches the rural people.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Taiwo, S. K. T.; Fenley and Williams, E. E. (1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria, Les Shyrader, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Swanson, B. E. (1984).
Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual.
FAO: Rome.
44 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE MODULE 4 QUALITY OF RURAL LIFE Unit 1 Factors Determining the Quality of Life Unit 2 Characteristics of the Communities I Unit 3 Characteristics of the Communities II UNIT 1 FACTORS DETERMINING THE QUALITY OF LIFE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Rural or Urban Nature 3.2 Types of People 3.3 Employment Opportunities 3.4 Nature of Family Life 3.5 Community’s Attitudes and Sentiments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION So far, you can delineate a rural settlement from an urban settlement.
You also know that urban and rural settlements are interdependent and that the survival of any rural community is dependent on its economic activities.
In this unit, however, you will learn about what makes a community habitable and satisfying.
You will also know salient factors that determine the quality of life in rural areas.
Quality of Rural Life Quality of community life has to do with the sum total of the qualities of the community environment which tend to induce in the citizen or dweller the feeling of well being and satisfaction.
You might have heard that people do often move from one community to live in the other.
One of the reasons that may be adduced is the level of ease one enjoys or the level of habitability of the community.
A community may, therefore, be said to be living a good quality of life, when a large percentage of the community’s characteristics engender 45 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE habitability of the localities and aids economic production and human relationships.
Some factors that may be considered as regards community habitability include the rural or urban nature of the area, the type of people living in it, the employment opportunities available, the facilities available, the nature of family life and the prevailing community attitudes and sentiments.
We shall now discuss each of these factors.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define quality of community life • explain the factors that determine quality of rural life.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Rural or Urban Nature Generally, the more urban a community is, the more likely the provision of the infrastructure that would make for good welfare of the inhabitants and also, the more the inhabitants would have opportunities for making progress in life.
Such communities attract more people into them.
3.2 Type of People The type of people living in a community, to an extent, also determines the quality of life the people could enjoy.
For example, communities, where the inhabitants are industrious, progressive and innovative are more likely to make happier and better inhabitants than those who are not.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention five factors that make you to continue to live in the community you now live.
3.3 Employment Opportunities Employment opportunity is another factor that determines the quality of life of a community.
A community that can provide large opportunities for employment for the various categories of people living in it, would have peaceful and satisfied people.
Joblessness on the other hand can produce a group of people who may constitute nuisance to the community.
46 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.4 Nature of Family Life Another determiner of quality of life, is the nature of family life.
Rural communities spend a large proportion of their income on consumption.
Therefore, communities where households are not too large would have the means of providing adequately for the households.
It is also expected that, more peaceful homes would exist where communities are more of monogamous families than polygamous ones.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State the characteristics of a polygamous family in rural Nigerian communities.
3.5 Community Attitudes and Sentiments Where inhabitants of communities have bad feelings or hatred towards strangers, particularly, where there are sentiments towards others’ religion or tradition or where diabolical tendencies are prevalent, progress can be hindered and such communities tend to be underdeveloped.
In underdeveloped communities where opportunities for self expression, initiative and creativity are limited, satisfaction would likely elude the inhabitants.
4.0 CONCLUSION You would have been enlightened on why some communities are satisfactorily habitable while others are not.
Rural dwellers are expected to enjoy living in their different communities but for the factors that have been discussed in the unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learned that: • Quality of life in the community’s environment induces a feeling of well being • The more urban a place is, the more habitable it is • The more progressive the people are the more satisfying their living together would be • A community that provides employment opportunities would be regarded as fulfilling 47 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE • A community that is predominantly monogamous is likely to be more peaceful than the polygamous one • Where communities members have bad feelings towards strangers, good quality of life would be denied.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define quality of life.
2.
Discuss two factors that influence quality of life.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong, E. E. (1988).
Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Publishers Ltd. Swanson, B. E. (1984).
Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual.
FAO: Rome.
48 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE COMMUNITIES I CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Shared Territory 3.2 Shared Belief 3.3 Shared Bonds of Fellowship 3.4 Set Standards 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Rural communities can be habitable depending on, at what level or to what degree, the influencing factors, as we learnt in the previous unit, prevail.
The communities, however, have some inherent characteristics which aid the survival and co-existence of the communities.
Some of these characteristics are; shared territory, shared beliefs, shared bonds of fellowship and set standards or pattern of behaviour.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain shared territory as a community’s characteristic • discuss shared bonds of fellowship and shared beliefs as other characteristics • define set standard.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Characteristics of Communities In other to measure the standards and assess the qualities of a community, as a habitable locality, the major characteristics to be considered are: 3.1 Shared Territory Every community occupies a common locality that has defined boundaries.
These boundaries separate the community from others, often 49 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE with marked objects, such as trees, oil palm, hills, rivers, valleys, rocks or some other features.
Unique features tend to make individual community identities easily recognizable.
No matter how closely related communities are, their individual identities cannot be compromised.
Every member of a community has as much equal right to the community natural or government-provided amenities.
People that live in a common locality tend to be more socially coherent and exercise more solidarity to each other and to their community than those who are “foreigners”.
3.2 Shared Beliefs This means that members of a community share common beliefs.
These beliefs are those which are often nurtured and cherished by the people in the development of their common ideas, objectives, attitudes and values.
By virtue of their belonging to a common social group, the people share common interests, sentiments, behaviour and objectives.
There are some communities, for instance, where certain habits are forbidden for the members whereas other close by communities might not see anything wrong in such habits.
For example, the people of Ondo, a town in the south west of Nigeria forbid the eating of big rat locally known as “Okete”, whereas, the neighbouring communities have it as a delicacy.
Through the sharing of common beliefs, people grow to develop a feeling of belonging together while their common living promotes the awareness of their sharing a uniqueness of life.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention three kinds of beliefs in your local community.
3.3 Shared Bonds of Fellowship By this bond, people unite into a community for their comfortable, safe and peaceable living one amongst another in a secured enjoyment of their properties and a greater security against any that are not of it (Jibowo, 2000).
People who are from the same community see each other as brother or sister, particularly when they are in a “strange land”, even when they are not blood relations.
The bond of fellowship makes them be responsible for one another’s aspiration and needs.
The existence of shared bonds of fellowship promotes a common base of operation around which members of a community may unite to pursue common objectives, coordinate community services, facilitates and improve relations among themselves.
50 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.4 Set Standards Performing mutual actions and reactions by people upon one another, is the psychological situation that emanates from the idea behind the living together of human beings in a community.
Living together creates a relationship that evolves common values or norms by which the community maybe identified.
These norms or values bring the people to become intimately related and in the process are able to solve common problems.
Members of a community are expected to adhere to the behavioural norms set within the community.
Deviants from such norms are usually sanctioned; from the less serious sanctions to serious ones such as banishment from the community, depending on the kind of norm violated.
Therefore, set standards or pattern of behaviour is a characteristic of a community.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has enabled you to learn about communities’ characteristics.
These characteristics are what make individual communities recognizable.
It is also the characteristics that promote the co-existence of the people.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit is to enable you learn that: • Communities occupy a common locality that has defined boundaries • Community members share common beliefs • Dwellers of a community are bound by a bond of fellowship which promotes a common base of operation around which members are united • Members of a community are expected to behave according to a set standard and pattern.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain “shared bond of fellowship” as a characteristic of a community.
2.
Discuss the implication of “shared belief” on a community.
51 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adedoyin, S. F. (1997).
A Manual of Rural Extension Service.
Lagos: SAMFAD FARM FOUNDATION.
Swanson, B.E.
(1984).
Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual.
FAO: Rome.
Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta, Nigeria: Gbemi Sodipo Press.
.
52 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 3 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE COMMUNITIES II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Common Culture 3.2 Common Administration 3.3 Name Bearing 3.4 Communication Patterns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In furtherance of what was done in unit 2 of this module, characteristics of communities were explained.
In this unit, more of the characteristics will be discussed.
Characteristics of Communities The common characteristics to be learnt in this unit are common culture, common administration, name bearing and communication pattern.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain common culture as a characteristic of communities • discuss common administration as a characteristic of communities • explain how name bearing is a community characteristics • discuss communication patterns and proverbial sayings as a common phenomenon in communities.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Common Culture Culture is the total way of life of a people.
Culture is socially learned, socially shared and socially transmitted from generation to generation.
It includes ideas, traditions, customs, usages, institutions, associations, 53 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE dressing, feeding habits and some other material objects of the community.
Culture according to Jibowo (2000), provides the cognitive blueprint (model or pattern) which governs the actions and reactions of members of every society.
The culture of a community enables its citizens to appreciate the standards by which their community would have them live and thus helps them to play their part successfully in the community.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention three features that distinguish an Hausa man, Ibo man and a Yoruba man.
3.2 Common Administration Each community is led by a common administration for the running of the affairs of the community.
Leadership is very important in local administration.
The leadership is put in place by the people themselves through election or selection.
When the leadership is put in place, every member is expected to be subject to it.
Common leadership helps people in maintaining their customs, purposes and attitudes in a manner that there are not damaged by the recalcitrant member of the community.
Common administration, either selected by the people such as Obas, Obis or Emirs or by government such as Local Government Council, ensures that rules and regulations are made and enforced for orderly development of the community.
3.3 Name Bearing Rural communities give cognizance to name bearing among their members.
Name bearing, among Nigerian community members often reflect some certain attributes in the communities, such as the occupation, the community’s good, family background and circumstance of birth.
There are some names that when they are called or mentioned, one may ask “Are you from so town”?
This is because such names are identified with such communities.
Names that start with “Akin” such as Akingbala, Akinyosoye or Akinsetan are common names of the Ondos in Ondo State of the South West of Nigeria.
Others that start with “Ogun” such as Ogunbowale, Ogunwale or Ogunsakin indicate that the bearers have the background of Ogun worship.
Ogun worship is the worship of the “god of iron”.
54 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE Such names are not limited to the South West of Nigeria alone.
Names, such as Chukwumerije, Chukwuemeka or Chukwudi have their affinity with particular communities in the Eastern part of the country while, names such as Danfulani, Danmusa and Danladi are familiar with northern Nigerian communities.
3.4 Common Communication Patterns Communication, though universal, has patterns and uses words that are community or ethnic-group specific.
Communication systems among the rural communities is interesting.
It is interesting in the sense that, most thoughts can be put into proverbs and yet they would be understood by the addressee(s).
The use of proverbs varies in meaning and concepts from one ethnic group to the other.
It could therefore be said to be uniquely based on the situation at hand.
Whereas, there are few English proverbs known and used, among the rural Yorubas and Ibos, the use of proverbs is prevalent.
Today, however, only the old people use and understand proverbs, as the younger ones have been cut-off from their use due to the influence of western education and civilisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Write ten proverbs from your ethnic group and interprete them.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit is the conclusion of the study on the characteristics of the communities.
Hopefully you have learnt the other four characteristics by which communities are identified.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that: • culture is the way of life of the people and is common with the communities • communities are governed by a common administration • communities are identified by common familiar names • communication pattern is community specific.
55 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State five proverbs in your locality and explain their interpretation.
2.
List five cultural items in your locality.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong, E. E. (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Publishers Ltd. Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta, Nigeria: Gbemi Sodipo Press.
56 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE MODULE 5 PROBLEMS AND DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL AREAS Unit 1 Problems of Rural Areas Unit 2 Poverty Unit 3 Roles of Agriculture in Rural Community Life Unit 4 Formation of Development Associations Unit 5 Beliefs in Deified Beings UNIT 1 PROBLEMS OF RURAL AREAS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Social Infrastructure 3.2 Physical Infrastructure 3.3 Institutional Infrastructure 3.4 Level of Living 3.5 Illiteracy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Community, as you have learnt, is made up of people living together in a defined bounded locality.
The people’s co-existence is being promoted by a common territory, beliefs, values, administration and set standards or pattern of behaviour to mention but a few Rural communities are, however, not without their problems.
In this unit, the common problems of the rural communities will be discussed.
Problems and Development of Rural Areas The factors that engender habitability are very germane in the quality of life of the rural people.
Communities in rural areas are worth living in, but some perennial problems prevail, and they aggravate the rate of migration from rural areas to the urban areas.
Some of the problems are social, physical and institutional infrastructure.
Others are level of living and illiteracy.
57 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to • differentiate between social, physical and institutional infrastructure • discuss the problems of living standard • explain how illiteracy is a problem amongst the rural people.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Social Infrastructure One of the problems that still “drives” people from rural areas to urban areas is lack of or inadequate social infrastructure.
Most rural communities are still deficient in the areas of health care facilities, educational facilities, portable water supply, employment opportunities and electricity supply.
Where some of the above are available, they may be in short supply, dysfunctional or moribund.
As a result, rural communities are prone to outbreak of diseases and unemployment.
3.2 Physical Infrastructure The problem of inadequate physical infrastructure is also worth mentioning.
Poor road network does not allow rural people to convey their farm products to the market as at when due.
Hence, spoilage, waste and reduction in marketability of products are perennial problems being witnessed by the rural dwellers.
Also, where markets are available, lock-up stores are not provided.
Due to lack of electricity in some communities, cottage industries cannot be provided and this makes processing of some farm products impossible.
3.3 Institutional Infrastructure The institutional infrastructure is made up of the police, fire services, postal services, extension services and telephone services.
Rural communities, in most parts of Nigeria lack institutional services.
You must not forget that some of the institutions like the police and fire services are concerned about the people’s security, others with communication services while others are for information on improved farming technologies.
The absence of these institutions, therefore poses much difficulties to the dwellers of these communities.
58 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.4 Level of Living As earlier defined in this course, level of living is generally used to describe the quantity of goods and services actually consumed by an individual and his/her family.
This includes the ownership and use of such items as radio, television, refrigerator, cooker, eating of balanced regular meals, being well clothed, living in a decent house and surrounding, owning some means of transportation and good income for children’s education.
Based on this description, it is obvious that the standard is lacking in rural communities.
This is because rural dwellers are generally poor since a large percentage of the people live on peasant farming.
It is lack of satisfaction in the level of living that is mostly responsible for the high level of migration from rural areas to urban areas.
3.5 Illiteracy Studies (Alfred 2001, Okunlola, et.
al.
1998) have shown that a large percentage of illiterate Nigerians are in rural areas.
Illiteracy in the rural areas encourages fatalistic tendencies among the people.
Unwillingness to adopt improved methods of doing things makes the people to use old and non-productive practices.
Therefore production has remained abysmally low and thereby affecting their income.
Illiterate rural dwellers are prone to misinterpreting good government policies that affect their lives, it also affects information dissemination among the people.
Efforts of the government to encourage adult education in rural areas is a right step in the right direction.
If the people become literate it will create in them the awareness and consciousness of government policies and so become politically active and enfranchised.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has enabled us to identify the prevalent problems in rural area and the ways they after the communities.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit points out that: • Social, physical and institutional infrastructure are problems in rural communities 59 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE • Level of living in rural area is very low • Illiteracy among rural dwellers inhibits rural development.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State three problems posed by illiteracy in rural areas.
2.
Mention two examples each of social and institutional infrastructure.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alfred, S.D.Y.
(2001).
Effects of Socio-Psychological Factors on the Adoption of Agricultural Innovations by Rural Households in Kogi State.
A Ph.D. Thesis, The Federal University of Technology, Akure.
Okunlola, J.O.
and S.D.Y.
Alfred (1998).
Socio-Economic Factors Affecting the Production and Utilization of Soybean in Ondo State.
Applied Tropical Agriculture, Vol.
II.
60 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 2 POVERTY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Poverty 3.2 Causes of Poverty 3.3 Effects of Poverty 3.4 Strategies for Poverty Reduction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The previous unit dealt with the problems confronting development in rural communities.
In this unit, one of the inherent and perennial problems among rural dwellers, which is poverty is discussed.
Poverty Poverty is a living condition in which an entity is faced with economic, social, political, cultural and environmental deprivations (Ajakaiye et.
al., 1989).
Poor people are those who fall below the income poverty line.
According to World Bank, any person who is earning less than one dollar a day is poor.
Are you poor?
Poverty affects many aspects of human condition.
These include physical, emotional and psychological aspects.
There are different types of poverty.
It is caused and it has effects on people.
Efforts are, however, being made to reduce it as it is difficult to be totally alleviated.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to • define poverty • list and explain the types of poverty • state the causes of poverty • discuss the effects of poverty • describe the strategies for poverty reduction.
61 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Poverty Poverty, according to World Bank (1996), can be classified into four categories: 1.
Chronic Poor: These are individuals who remain in poverty over a long period of time as a result of deep-rooted structural problems notably lack of access to basic education, health and nutrition.
2.
Transitory Poor: These are individuals who find themselves in poverty for a brief period of time.
3.
Borderline Poor: These are individuals who are vulnerable to shocks and are frequently below the poverty line.
4.
Poorest-of-the-Poor: These are individuals who are usually disabled, who contribute little and benefit only very slowly from growth process.
The World Bank (1996) and Anyawu (1997) explained that poverty could be absolute or relative: (i) Absolute Poverty: This arises when the consumption of an individual or household is below a minimum acceptable level which has been fixed over time as a global standard for meaningful human existence known as poverty line.
(ii) Relative Poverty: This refers to the position of the individual or household compared with the average income in the country.
It is a condition of want in one situation as compared with another.
3.2 Causes of Poverty Poverty does not just happen but is caused.
World Bank (1996) identifies the causes of poverty in developing countries as follows: (i) Decay of the educational system as a result of neglecting human capital formation (ii) Less attention paid to social welfare programmes (iii) Less access to employment opportunities 62 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE (iv) Lack of access to physical assets such as land and credit (v) Poor development of rural areas (vi) Wasteful life style of leaders (vii) Non-involvement of the ‘poor in programmes’ design and implementation, that concern them (viii) Skewed income distribution (ix) Subsistence orientation of agricultural production (x) High growth rate of population (xi) Political instability, and (xii) Market rigidities and imperfections 3.3 Effects of Poverty on Rural People Poverty generally affects rural people in the following ways: (i) Inadequate provision of goods and services (ii) Deprivation and lack of rights (iii) Insufficient capability as well as social and economic exclusion mechanisms (iv) An individual is not able to cater adequately for his basic needs of food, clothing and shelter (v) Cannot meet social and economic obligations (vi) Lacks gainful employment (vii) Limited access to social and economic infrastructure (viii) Limited chance for advancement (ix) Exposure to risk (x) Lack of purchasing power 63 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.4 Strategies for Poverty Reduction Poverty is a social malady and recognising this fact, the government at various levels has introduced various programmes and measures to reduce it.
Some of these strategies include: (i) Directorate of Food, Roads and Rural Infrastructure (DFFRI) (ii) National Directorate of Employment (NDE) (iii) Better Life for Rural Women (BLRW) (iv) Family Support Programme (FSP) (v) National Agricultural Land Development Authority (NALDA) (vi) National Primary Health Care Scheme (NPHCS) (vii) National Poverty Alleviation Programme (NAPEP) 4.0 CONCLUSION We have found in this unit that poverty is very endemic among rural Nigerians and its effects on the lives of the people is pathetic.
We have also learnt that there were efforts to reduce poverty though, their success insignificant.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that: • Poverty is the inability to satisfy one’s needs • Poverty can be classified into four categories • Poverty is caused by some factors • Poverty brings untold hardship on the rural people • There were efforts towards poverty reduction.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is poverty?
2.
Mention five strategies for poverty reduction.
64 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajakaye, D.O.
and A.S. Olomola (1999).
“Conceptual and Methodological Issues in Poverty Alleviation” Bullion, Vol.
23, No.
4, October/December pp.
3-5.
Anyawu, J.C. (1997).
“Poverty in Nigeria: Concepts and Measurement”.
In poverty Alleviation in Nigeria.
A Selected Paper for the Annual Conference of the Nigerian Economic Society pp.
93- 120.
World Bank (1996).
Nigeria Poverty in the Midst of Plenty: The Challenge of Growth with Inclusion.
Report No.
14733.
65 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 3 ROLES OF AGRICULTURE IN RURAL COMMUNITY LIFE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Provision of Food 3.2 Provision of Income 3.3 Sustainable Market 3.4 Occupation 3.5 Celebration of Festivals 3.6 Healthy Competition 3.7 Social Grouping 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You have learnt that agriculture engages over 60 percent of the rural populace and their livelihood is dependent on.
In this unit you will learn the roles played by agriculture in rural communities.
Roles of Agriculture in Rural Community Life The roles played by agriculture in rural areas and the national economy are synonymous.
In national life for instance, agriculture provides food for the populace, raw materials for agro-industries, income for the farmers and the nation.
Agriculture also engages a large percentage of the people and serves as foreign exchange earner, in addition to the provision of materials for housing.
We shall now discuss the individual roles they play in rural areas.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain eight roles agriculture play in that rural communities.
66 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Provision of Food Efforts of agriculture is geared towards food production.
Common food crops produced by rural dwellers include yam, grains, cassava, fruits and vegetables.
These crops are produced in most parts of Nigeria except that more grains are produced in the savannah while most root crops are produced in the rainforest region while vegetables are grown in various parts.
The rural dwellers produce food to feed their families and the excess earns them income.
3.2 Provision of Income Since the rural dwellers are largely farmers, with only a small percentage being engaged in other enterprises, a lion share of their income is therefore from farming.
The people, apart from growing crops also raise livestock and poultry from where they also generate income.
3.3 Sustainable Market Have you ever gone to a rural market to transact business?
If yes what did you observe.
If you were very observant, you would have found that, over eighty percent (80%) of the goods in demands and supplies in the market are agricultural products.
Mainly, these products are yam, plantain, banana, cassava, vegetables, fruits, fowls, goats and bush meat.
Can you just imagine what may happen in such markets, if all the farmers are on “strike”.
That is, they refuse to bring their products?
The market would nearly be empty.
It is therefore obvious that, local markets are sustained by agricultural products.
Such markets therefore, often invite the urbanites who come to rural areas to transact business.
3.4 Occupation Most times, we have stated that farming is the predominant occupation in rural communities.
If not for agriculture what would have been the job of the people?
If they live by the river side, then may be fishing.
Fishing itself is a branch of agriculture.
Olajide (1980) stated that, rural areas are mainly agrarian communities where about seventy percent of Nigerian population live and engage in agriculture as their main livelihood.
Those who are not even farmers are equally engaged indirectly in agriculture, if for instance they engage in processing of agricultural products or marketing.
67 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.5 Celebration of Festivals Agriculture plays important roles in the social life of the rural community, especially in the observance of certain festivals.
Agriculture often provides materials for some celebrations.
Such festivals include, New Yam festivals, which often coincide with the arrival of the seasonal new yams.
Some other festivals also and marriages are usually scheduled for when “food” would be in more abundant supply.
3.6 Healthy Competition Agriculture provides some fora for competitive activities.
These activities include, farm product contest, in which the best farmer is usually selected using certain criteria when the farmers assemble with their best farm products and field days which take the form of trade fair, where people come to showcase their farm products and farm implement.
This competition sometimes, serves as motivation for improved farm practices, since farmers interact and in the process gain one thing or the other from one another.
3.7 Social Grouping Grouping is part of social life of rural community.
Agriculture encourages groupings which can often be used for community development projects.
For instance, people come together, sometimes based on age-grade, to form cooperative labour for assisting one another on the farm known in the South West as “Egbe Aro” or “Egbe owe” (Cooperative labour).
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have learnt that agriculture plays important roles in the lives of rural communities.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has enabled you to: • Discover that agriculture plays the roles of providing food, income and occupation to rural dwellers • Enumerate the agricultural products by which local markets are sustained 68 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE • Know that agriculture provides the items for the celebration of some cultural festivals • Understand how agriculture provides fora for social grouping.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention five roles played by agriculture in the life of a rural community.
2.
Mention ten agricultural products you can find in a local market.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olajide, S.O.
(1980).
Nigerian Small Farmers: Problems and Prospects in Integrated Rural Development.
CARD University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
69 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 4 FORMATION OF DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 4.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Associations in Rural Areas 3.2 Characteristics of Associations 3.3 Membership of Associations 3.4 Importance of Associations 4 Conclusion 5 Summary 6 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We shall learn, in this unit one of the strategies adopted by rural dwellers to confront some of their serious problems.
This strategy is the formation of associations.
Formation of Development Associations People become members of associations in rural areas and over the years, these associations have become instruments for community developments.
Association, like a social group, is the coming together of people to forge towards a common goal.
Membership is voluntary, and the individual member is also free to opt out at will.
Members are usually people of similar interests and aspirations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what associations exist among rural people • state the characteristics of associations • explain how rural people join associations • enumerate the importance of associations.
70 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Associations in Rural Areas Most of the associations in rural areas of Nigeria can be classified as expressive association because they are formed to satisfy the individual interests of members (Jibowo, 2000).
Some associations existing in the rural Nigeria include: 1.
The Thrift Society known in the South West as “Esusu”.
It is a contributory association aimed at pooling resources together for individual economic development.
2.
The Mutual Aid Societies: This is the coming together of people to cooperatively provide labour for members.
Members enjoy the combined labour force for their farming activities.
It is known as “Egbe Aaro” or “Egbe owe” in the south west of Nigeria.
3.
Age Grade Associations: These are associations formed by people of relatively the same age bracket.
This association can be of tremendous benefit to community development, particularly in the area of project execution.
4.
Gender Associations: These refer to the associations that are gender-biased.
Examples are young men’s club and young ladies’ club.
5.
Religious Associations: These are associations that are formed to satisfy some religious obligations.
6.
Secret Societies or Cults: These associations are formed, but, as the name implies, their activities are not open but in the secret and so it becomes very difficult to be able to identify those who are members.
An example is Ogboni Confraternity also known as “Egbe Awo”.
7.
Professional Associations: These are formed with professional bias.
Such association is intended for people in the same profession, such as, Hunters Association, Bricklayer Association and the like.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention five associations in your own Community.
71 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 3.2 Characteristics of Rural Associations The characteristics that are common with the rural associations are; 1.
They have names by which they could be identified, for example Young Christian or Young Muslim Association 2.
They have no written Constitution 3.
Election of officers is often by nomination and open balloting by showing of hands 4.
They have regular meeting places but sometimes, it could be by rotation to members’ residents 5.
Sanctions may be imposed on absentees from meetings, and 6.
Duration of membership is voluntary 3.3 Membership of Associations Members could be recruited through consultation with people of like- mind.
In some associations, membership is made compulsory.
For example, in professional associations, if one is not a member, she/he may not be allowed to practise the profession.
Some membership recruitment is through deceit and intimidation such as in secret society.
At times people join ignorantly and are later coerced to remain.
3.4 Importance of Associations Members of associations derive some benefits.
These benefits include: 1.
Moral and financial support to members of thrift societies 2.
They provide specific services to members such as farm labour supply 3.
They provide social services to members as in naming ceremony, marriages and burial ceremony 4.
They satisfy members’ need for interaction and relaxation 5.
Scarce commodities could be purchased by members at cheaper prices 6.
They serve as a means of improving the economic activities in rural areas 72 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 4.0 CONCLUSION We have learnt in this unit that associations are formed in rural areas to achieve some specific purposes which could either be open or secret.
Associations are also of importance to the members and the communities where they are formed.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have learnt that, • Associations are formed by people of common interest • There are several types of associations in the rural areas • Associations have some characteristics • Associations are of importance to the members 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State five characteristics of Associations, and 2.
Explain five types of associations in the rural areas 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong, E. E. (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Pub.
Ltd. Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta, Nigeria: Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd. 73 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE UNIT 5 BELIEFS IN DEIFIED BEINGS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Deified Ancestors 3.2 Personification of Natural Forces 3.3 Belief in Mysterious Powers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Don’t forget that in this module we have been treating problems of rural development.
In this unit, an attempt will be made to explain rural Nigerians beliefs in certain deities, and how this belief system has hampered agricultural development.
Beliefs in Deified Beings In Nigeria, as in most other African societies, life itself is regarded as a continuous interaction between the sacred and the profane (Ekong, 1988).
Beliefs, according to Ekong (1988), refers to those propositions, perceptions, creeds, tenets and so on which an individual or a group hold to be true.
Some rural Nigerians hold the belief, according to Awolalu (1979), that as the Supreme Being created heaven and earth and all the inhabitants, so also did He bring into being the divinities and spirits to serve His theocratic world.
The divinities and the spirits are both divine and are in the spirit world.
These divine beings (Awolalu, 1979) are of complex nature.
Some of them are believed to have been with the Supreme Being long before the creation of the earth and human beings and can aptly be called “primordial Divinities”.
Others are historical figures such as Kings, culture heroes and heroines, war champions, founders of cities and so on, who have been deified, and yet others represent personification of natural forces and phenomena.
74 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain deified ancestors • mention personified objects • discuss beliefs in mysterious powers.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Deified Ancestors These were the heroes or heroines of the past that the rural people have turned into objects of worship and adoration.
According to the people, their belief is in the Supreme Being but which they cannot have a direct dealing with except through a medium.
As a result the people chose their ancestors as a medium of getting to the supreme being who the Yorubas in the south west regards as the “Olodumare”.
“Olodumare” is interpreted as the one who has the fullness or superlative greatness, the everlasting majesty upon whom man can depend.
Some of the primordial divinities and deified ancestors in the rural areas of the South West Nigeria are “Obatala”, “Orunmila”, “Oduduwa”, “Esu” and “Ogun” while others are “Sango”, “Orisa Oke” and “Ayelala” to mention but a few.
Sacrifices are made to these deities either to appease them in times of trouble or in form of worship.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention three deified ancestors in your locality.
3.2 Personification of Natural Forces and Phenomena Personification is when some objects usually non-living, are referenced as if they are living.
Among rural Nigerians, some objects, such as, the earth, rivers, lagoon and the sea and others such as mountain and hills, trees, wind have become the focus of worship by those who believe in them as such.
The believers think that the natural phenomena could offer them protection because they believe that they once did it, particularly, during their tribal wars.
They make sacrifices to them when in need of a particular thing such as children.
Consequently, children that are given in the process are often named after the phenomena.
For example the goddess of Osun River in Osun state is believed to be able to reward a barren womb with children and such children are later dedicated to the 75 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE goddess.
So, such names as Osunbiyi, Osundeyi, Osungbayi, Osundele, Osundaisi are specific examples from such beliefs.
3.3 Belief in Mysterious Powers The rural people in Nigeria also believe in some mysterious powers.
These mystical, supernatural and esoteric powers (Awolalu, 1979) are virtually inexplicable, but cannot escape notice when they are manipulated by those who have access to them.
Some of these mysterious powers are: (i) Incantations: This involves chanting or uttering of words purporting to have marginal power.
It is known in the south west of Nigeria as “Ofo” or “Ogede”.
(ii) Medicine: This refers to substances that are used in treating or preventing disease or illness.
The herbalist (the medicine man) can use plants, herbs, leaves, roots, barks, animals, birds, skin, shells, snakes’ head and so on as raw materials for the “medicine” depending on the problem at hand.
Some “medicines” are prepared to harm other people, some to treat ailments, others to checkmate a problem while some could be to attract favour and so on.
(iii) Magic: This is a ritual performance or activity believed to influence human or natural events through access to an external mystical force beyond the ordinary human sphere.
With magic, rural people believe rain can be made or stopped; one can disappear from a troubled spot while long distances can be shortened.
(iv) Witchcraft: There is this general notion that witches are more abundant in rural areas.
Due to that imagination some urban dwellers spend several months or years without being at their rural home town.
This belief is for the use of supernatural means for harmful and evil ends.
Witches are human beings of very strong determined wills with diabolical bent.
They are believed to be veritably wicked ones who derive sadistic satisfaction from bringing misfortune upon other people.
Hence, witches are seen as the personification of evil, as innately wicked people who work harm against others.
They are capable of their nefarious deeds through their possession of mysterious powers unknown and unavailable to ordinary people.
76 AEM311 INTRODUCTION TO RURAL LIFE The essential elements of witchcraft are its secrecy; you may have a friend who is a witch and you may not know.
Regular nocturnal meetings are another while another is the possession of a kind of bird.
To the rural people, nothing evil is accidentally caused.
It is the handiwork of witches.
4.0 CONCLUSION All these beliefs among the rural people pose them not to accept improved methods of farming practices or rural development as they often believe that favour and increased farm production can be manipulated using magic and medicine.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have leant that: • Rural people have belief in deified ancestors • Rural people have personified some natural phenomenon to whom they offer worship • The belief in mysterious powers is rampant among rural dwellers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain three kinds of mysterious powers in rural areas.
2.
Mention ten phenomena personified by rural people.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Awolalu, J.O.
(1979).
Yoruba Beliefs and Sacrificial Rites.
London: Longman Group.
Ekong, E.E.
(1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Pub.
77
