 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE: CHM 301 COURSE TITLE: PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY III 1 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja CHM 301 – PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY III ( 3 Units ) Dr H.D Aliyu Department of Chemistry University of Abuja 2CONTENTS PAGE Introduction…………………………………………………… 3 What You will Learn in this Course………………………… 3 Course Aims…………………………………………………… 3 Course Objectives………………………………………………… 3 Working though this Course…………………………………….. 3 The Course Material……………………………………………… 4 Study Unit……………………………………………………….. 4 Presentation Schedule…………………………………………….
4 Assessment……………………………………………………….. 4 Tutor Marked Assignment……………………………………….. 4 Final Examination and Grading………………………………… 5 Course Marking Scheme………………………………………….
5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials………………………………….
6 3Introduction The physical chemistry course (CHM 301) unlike the other aspect of Chemistry deals with physical measureable constants of a reaction system.
In this course we will look at the driving force upon which reactions proceeds.
Many of the reaction you are familiarity are the same phase with the media, mostly liquid.
Some reactions take place on different media, for example on solid surface.
Their mode of actions and theories developed in explaining them will be discoursed.
What You will Learn in this Course This course CHM 301, physical chemistry III, is a core course for students of the Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry.
The course is made of four units.
The course starts with the definition of terminologies that will be encounter in the course of this course and then goes on into the discussions on the laws of thermodynamics.
A study of the chemical equilibrium of reactions, as it relates to properties such as fugacity, chemical potential and phase rule, are explained.
Course Aims This course is aim at providing the students with the knowledge of simple concepts and theories of thermodynamic, chemical potential and phase rule of degree of freedom of chemical system.
Course Objectives After studying this course you will be able to -define and explain all the laws of thermodynamics -relates fugacity to chemical potentials of an equilibrium system -understand the concept of colligative properties of solutes -explain the degree of freedom for chemical components in a reaction system.
Working through this Course In order to be able to successfully complete this course, you are required to carefully study each unit along with recommended textbooks and other materials that may be provided by the National Open University.
You may also need to exploit other e-reading such internet for further useful information on the course.
Each unit contains self assessment exercise and at certain points in the course you would be required to submit assignment for grading and recording purposes.
You are also to participate in the final examination at the end of the course.
It is recommended that you devote an abundant time for reading and comprehension.
It is highly necessary that you avail yourselves the opportunity of attending the tutorial sessions where you will be able to compare your understanding of the course contents with your colleagues.
4The Course Materials The main components of this course are: 1.
The Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Self Assessment Exercise 4.
Tutor Marked Assignments 5.
Further Readings Study Units Module 1 Thermodynamics, Types of process, Heat change and Enthalpy of Reactions Unit 1 Law of Thermodynamic Unit 2 Types of processes Unit 3 Heat Change Unit 4 Enthalpies of Reactions Module 2 Reversible and Irreversible Reactions, Entropy of Change Unit 1 Reversible, Irreversible and Cyclic Process Unit 2 Entropy of Change Unit 3 Entropy of Mixing Module 3 Spontaneous and Non-spontaneous Processes, Unit 1 Changes in A and G Unit 2 Maxwell, Gibbs-Helmhotz and Calusius-Clapeyron Equation Unit 3 Criteria for Spontaneity In Module 1 we define the various thermodynamics concepts and explain the Zeroth and first laws of thermodynamic, Module 2 deals with the second law of thermodynamic and the principle of Carnot engine.
The third law of thermodynamic system was also discussed.
Module 3 discusses the equilibrium system and fugacity as it relates to chemical potential of ideal system, Colligative properties of solute and degree of freedom of a chemical substance Each of the unit is made up of one or two weeks’ work consisting of introduction, objectives, reading materials, self assessment exercise, conclusion, summary and Tutor marked Assignment (TMA), suggestion for further reading and source materials.
The unit directs you to work on exercises related to the required reading.
Together with the TMAs, they are meant to test your basic understanding 5and comprehension of the course materials, which is a prerequisite for the achieving the stated aims and objectives of the course.
Presentation Schedule The course materials have important dates for the timely completion and submission of your TMAs and tutorial lessons.
You are vividly reminded of the need to promptly submit answers to tutorials and assignments as at when due.
Assessment The course assessment consists of three aspects namely the self assessment exercise, the tutor marked assignment and the written examination/end of course examination.
It is essential that you attempt all exercises and assignments and submit appropriately to the course facilitator for grading.
Let your answers be concise and as accurate as possible.
You are expected to consult other material course in addition to your course materials in order to be able to present accurate answers to the questions.
Kindly note that the tutor marked assignment covers only 30% of the total marked for the course.
Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) The TMA is a continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You will be given a number of TMAs to answer.
Nearly all of them must be answered before you are allowed to sit for the end of the course examination.
The TMAs will be given to you by your facilitator and returned after you have done the assignment.
Note that these assignments are already contained in the assignment file to be given to you.
You may do yourself good by reading and researching well before you attempt to answer the questions.
You are warned to submit these assignments to the facilitator at the stipulated time as could be seen in the assignment file.
However, if for any reason you are unable to meet the deadline, you are highly required to intimate the facilitator of your problem before the due date and seek for an extension which may be granted or not.
Final Examination and Grading The end of the course examination for Physical Chemistry III will be for about 3 hours with maximum score value of 70% of the total course work.
The examination will be made up of questions which normally reflect on what you have learnt in the course materials/further reading.
In addition, they may be 6prototype of the self assessment exercises and the TMAs.
The end of the course examination is intended to cover information from all parts of the course.
Avail yourself the opportunity of the time-lag between the completion of the course content and the beginning of the examination to revise as much as possible the whole course materials, the exercise and assignments.
Course Marking Scheme Assignment Marks Assignments The best three marks of the submitted assignments count at 10% each i.e.
30% of the course marks End of course Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of the course materials Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are few hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be informed appropriately of the name, telephone number and e-mail address of your facilitator.
In addition, the time, dates and location of the tutorial lessons will be communicated beforehand.
You are required to mail or submit your Tutor Marked Assignment to your facilitator, at least two working days, before the schedule date.
Note that all the submitted assignments will be duly marked by the facilitator with further comments that can improve on your performances.
The facilitator will from time to time takes track record of your comprehension, progress and difficulty in the course.
Be kind enough to attend tutorial lessons at the fixed appointment.
It is probably the only avenue to meet face to face and discuss with you facilitator.
There, you will be able to ask question or seek clarification on seemingly grey area in the course material.
You may as well have prepared questions and comments for your facilitator before the due date.
An active participation during the tutorial lessons will be an added advantage to boost confidence level.
In case any of the situations listed below arises, do not hesitate to intimate your facilitator using his or her telephone number or via e-mail address; .
You do not understand any part of the study or the assigned readings .
You are not skill enough to attempt the self assessment exercise .
The questions in the TMAs are not clearly understood Accept my best wishes in the course and I do hope that you benefit considerably from its application.
7Module 1: Thermodynamics, Types of process, Heat change and Enthalpy of Reactions Unit 1 Law of Thermodynamic 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Thermodynamic Terminology 4.0 State variables 5.0 The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics 6.0 Extensive and Intensive Variables 7.0 Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall introduce you to some of the terms used in thermodynamics.
The definitions of work, heat and heat capacity will be stated.
The first law of thermodynamics will be explained with particular reference to isothermal and, adiabatic processes.
The calculation pf work, internal energy change and heat absorbed or evolved in reversible and irreversible processes wil1 be outlined.
The significance of enthalpy and enthalpy change of a system will be stated.
Towards the end of this unit, you will study the importance of Joule - Thomson effect.
In the next unit, we shall study the second law of thermodynamics.
2.0 Objectives After studying this unit, you should be able to  explain the terms - system, surroundings and thermodynamic variables,  state the zeroth law of thermodynamics,  differentiate between extensive and intensive variables, 8 3.0.
THERMODYNAMIC TERMINOLOGY In this section, a number of commonly used terms in thermodynamics are defined and explained.
These terms should be understood clearly before you proceed further.
System Any part of the universe which is under study is called a system.
It can be as simple as a gas contained in a closed vessel or as complicated as a rocket shooting towards moon.
A system may be homogeneous or heterogeneous depending on its contents and conditions.
A system is homogeneous if physical properties and chemical composition are identical throughout the system.
Such a system is also called a single phase system A heterogeneous system consists of two or more than two phases separated by mechanical boundaries.
Surroundings The rest of the universe around the system is considered its surroundings.
A system and its surroundings are always separated by boundaries across which matter and energy may be exchanged.
The boundaries can be real (fixed or moveable) or imaginary.
Based on the exchange of matter and energy between the system and the surroundings, a system can be classified into the following three types: (i) Isolated system Isolated system is one which exchanges neither energy nor matter with its surroundings.
There is no perfectly isolated system; but, a system which is thermally well insulated (i.e., does not allow heat flow) and is sealed to inflow or outflow of matter can be considered as an isolated system.
A sealed thermos flask having-some matter thus approximates to art isolated system.
(ii) Closed system Closed system allows exchange of energy (heat or work) with the surroundings but, matter is not allowed to enter or leave it.
A properly scaled system (to prevent the passage of matter across its boundary) can be considered as a closed system.
(iii)Open system Open system allows exchange of both matter and energy with its surroundings.
This the most common type oil system encountered in our daily life.
All living things are examples of open system since these are capable of freely exchanging energy and matter with their 9surroundings.
Reaction vessels with permeable membranes are examples of open system.
4.0 State Variables A thermodynamic system has to be macroscopic (i.e.
of sufficiently large size); this facilitates measurement of its properties such as pressure, volume, temperature, composition and density.
Such properties are therefore called macroscopic or bulk s. These are also called state or thermodynamic variables.
These do not depend on the past history of the system.
A state variable which depends on other variables is called a dependent variable; others, on which it is dependent, are called independent variables.
For example, an ideal gas equation is written as nRT V = P then, V is the dependent variable, whereas n, T and p are independent variables.
We know that R is the gas constant.
On the other hand, if you write this equation as, V = nRT P then p is the dependent variable, whereas n, T arid V are independent variables.
The choice of dependent and independent variables is a matter of convenience.
State of a System The state of a system is defined when the state variables have definite values.
It is necessary to specify all the state variables since these are interdependent.
For exam if the system is an ideal gas, then its pressure, volume, temperature, and the amount of the gas (number of moles) are related by the gas equation.
Thus, if we specify three of these; the fourth variable is automatically fixed.
Similarly many of its other properties like density, heat capacity etc.
is also fixed although through more complicated relations.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Identify the type of system in each of the following cases: i) A beaker covered with a lid ii) A Closed thermos flask iii) A beaker without lid.
105.0 THE ZEROTH LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS The zeroth law of thermodynamics is based on the concept of thermal equilibrium.
It helps us in defining temperature.
If two closed systems are brought together so that these are in thermal contact, changes take place in the properties of both the systems, but, eventually a state is reached when there is no further change in any pf the systems.
This is the state of thermal equilibrium.
Both the systems are at the same temperature.
In order to find whether two systems are at the same temperature, the two can be brought into thermal contact; then the changes in the properties of either of these are to be observed.
If no change occurs, they are at the same temperature.
The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that if a system A is in thermal equilibrium with system C and, system B is also in thermal equilibrium with C, then A and B are also in thermal equilibrium with each other.
This is an experimental fact.
This may be illustrated by assuming that systems A and B are two vessels containing different liquids, and C is an ordinary mercury thermometer.
If A is in thermal equilibrium with C, then mercury level in the thermometer will show a constant reading.
This indicates the temperature of system A as well as that of C. Now if A is also in thermal equilibrium with B, then the height of mercury level in the thermometer (in contact with B) is the same as before; B also has the same temperature as A.
There is thermal equilibrium in both A and B or these are at the same temperature.
Here we have only explained the concept temperature; the temperature scale will be discussed in unit 8.
The zeroth law of thermodynamics can he stated as follows: Two objects that are in thermal equilibrium with a third object are in thermal equilibrium with each other.
6.0 EXTENSIVE AND INTENSIVE VARIABLES We have defined homogeneous and heterogeneous systems in Sec 1.2.
Let us now discuss the difference between the two with respect to the value of some variables.
In this connection, we must first define extensive and intensive variables.
An extensive property pf a homogeneous system is one which is dependent on the amount of a phase in the system.
For a heterogeneous system made up pf several phases, the total value of an extensive property is equal to the sum of the contributions from various phases.
Mass, volume and energy are examples of extensive properties.
Thus, if a system, at equilibrium consists of 0.100 kg of ice and 0.100 kg of liquid water at 273.15 K, the total volume of the system is the sum of the two volumes, each of which is directly proportional to its mass.
11 Mass of ice 0.100kg Volume of 0.100 kg of ice = = Density of ice 917 kgm-3 = 1.09 × 10-4m3 Mass of water Similarly, the volume 0.100 kg of water = Density of water 0.100 kg = = 1.00 × 10-4m3 1.00 × 103 kgm-3 Total volume = (1.09 + 1.00) 10-4m3 = 2.09 × 10-4 An intensive property of a phase is independent of the amount of the phase.
Thus refractive index, density and pressure are intensive properties.
However if a system consists of several phase's, then some of the intensive properties may be different.
For example, density is an intensive property but its value is different for ice and liquid water in equilibrium at 273.15 K. For thermal equilibrium, the intensive property, temperature, has to be some throughout the system.
Otherwise heat will flow from one point of the system to another.
Similarly, for mechanical equilibrium, the intensive property, pressure, has to be the same throughout the system.
An extensive property when divided by mass or molar mass of the system becomes an intensive property.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Identify the extensive or intensive variables from among those indicated below: i) Energy required to cook your meals.
ii) Volume per unit mass of milk.
iii) Your body temperature.
7.0.
FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 12Module 1: Thermodynamics, Types of process, Heat change and Enthalpy of Reactions Unit 2: Types of processes 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Definition 4.0 Types of Processes Work, Heat and Heat Capacity 5.0 The First Law of Thermodynamics 6.0 Isothermal Expansion 1.0.
Introduction When the state of a system changes, it is said to have undergone a process.
Thus a process means change in at least one of the state variables of the system.
The process may be accompanied by an exchange of matter and energy between the system and the surroundings.
There are certain processes in which a particular state variable (thermodynamic property of the system) remain unchanged.
Such processes are of the following types: 2.0.
Objectives At the end of the unit, students should be able to  define isothermal, adiabatic and cyclic processes,  explain the terms - work, heat and heat capacity,  state the first law of thermodynamics, 3.0 Definition In an isothermal process, the temperature of the system remains constant.
When a system undergoes an isothermal process, it is in thermal contact with a large constant temperature bath, known as thermostat.
The system maintains its temperature by exchange of heat with the thermostat.
In an adiabatic process, no heat is allowed to enter or leave the system.
Systems in which such processes occur are thermally insulated from the surroundings.
An 13adiabatic; process may involve increase or decrease in the temperature of the system.
We shall discuss these two processes in detail in Sees.
6.8 and 6.12.
An isobaric process is one in which the pressure of the system remains unchanged.
A reaction taking place in an open beaker is always at atmospheric pressure and hence, the process is isobaric.
In an isochoric process, volume of the system remains constant.
Thus, a chemical of constant volume is an isochoric process.
A process is cyclic if the system (after any number of intermediate changes) returns to its original state.
The initial and final value of each thermodynamic variable is identical after the completion of a cyclic process.
Based on the value of the driving force applied we can classify the processes into two types, namely, reversible and irreversible.
A reversible process is on in which at any time, the driving force exceeds the opposing force only very slightly, and hence, the direction of the process can be reversed by merely a small change in a variable like temperature and pressure.
The idea of a reversible process will become clear by considering the following example.
Consider a gas at pressure p in a cylinder fitted with an air-tight piston.
If the external pressure on the gas is equal to the pressure of the gas, then there is neither expansion nor compression and the piston remains at its position.
However, on increasing the external pressure (p ) infinitesimally, the gas can be ext compressed.
On the other hand by slightly decreasing the external pressure, the gas may be expanded.
Thus A tiny change in a property is called an infinitesimal change.
Note that "if" is common to all the three statements.
p = p the system is static and ext piston does not move If p = p + dp the gas is compressed and the ext piston moves downwards infinitesimally slowly P = p — dp the gas expands and the ext piston moves outwards infinitesimally slowly 14Hence, you can see that in a reversible process, the direction of a process is changed by changing the magnitude of the driving force by a small amount.
You will in future studies learn about how reversible condition is used in constructing electrochemical cells.
Any process which is not reversible is termed as irreversible.
All natural processes are irreversible.
The flow of heat from a high temperature body to a low temperature body is a natural process and hence, irreversible.
So is the expansion of a gas against vacuum, known as free expansion.
Irreversible processes are also called spontaneous processes.
We will be studying reversible and irreversible processes in detail later.
4.0 WORK, HEAT AND HEAT CAPACITY Work, heat and energy have the same units, namely Joule (J).
Energy is thermodynamic property of a system, whereas work and heat are not.
The latter two are meaningful only when a process takes place.
Let us first define heat.
Heat is a form of energy.
Heat is not the property of a system but is exchanged between a system and the surroundings during a process, when there is a temperature difference between the two.
Let us now explain the term, work, and its different kinds.
Work (W) is defined as the product of the force applied (F) and the distance (X) moved along the direction of the force.
W = F. X …(1.1) Forces have different physical origin, and work can be done in a variety of ways  Gravitational Work: When a body of mass m s moved through a height h gravity, then force is equal to mg and the gravitational work done is mgh  Electrical work: If an electric potential E is applied across a resistance R so that current i flows through it, then work done per second is Ei and in t seconds it is equal to Eit.
 Pressure-volume work: This is a type of mechanical work performed when a system changes its volume against an opposing pressure.
This also is expansion or compression.
We will study this in detail in late sections.
The energy gained or lost during heat exchange between the system and the surroundings can be stated in terms of heat capacity values.
Let us now define the term, heat capacity.
Heat capacity is the heat required to raise the temperature of a body by IK.
If, during the process, the volume of the system remains constant, then it is called 15heat capacity at constant volume (C ); if the pressure remains unchanged, it is v called heal capacity at constant pressure (C ).
For one mole of a pure substance, p - these are called molar heat capacity at constant pressure, C and at constant - p volume, C .
Heat capacities per unit mass are called specific heats.
The heat v capacities change with temperature.
This means that, the heat required to change the temperature by 1 K is different at different temperatures.
However, over small ranges of temperature, these are usually taken as constant.
The molar heat capacity and specific heat are intensive properties whereas heat capacity is an extensive property (guess the reason).
For charging the temperature of a particular system by dT, if the heat required is dq (at constant volume) or dq (at constant pressure), then we have v p - C = nC = dq ...(1.2) v v v dT - C = nC = dq ....(1.3) p p p dT where n is the amount (i.e.
number of moles) of the substance constituting the system.
From these equations, it is possible to determine the heat required for a process, by integration over the temperature range T1 and T2.
Hence, T T 2 2 ∫ ∫ - qv = CvdT = nCvdT …1.4 T T 1 1 T T 2 2 ∫ ∫ - qv = CpdT = nCvdT …1.5 T T 1 1 In later sections, we will be studying the use of C and C in the calculation of p v energy changes.
Let us give an example here for the calculation of q , if n, C ,T , p p 1 and T are given.
2 Example 1 The equation for the molar heat capacity of butane is C = (19.41 + 0.233 T) J mol-1 K-1.
p Molar heat capacity = Specific heat × molar mass 16Calculate the heat necessary to raise the temperature of 3.00 mol of butane from 298 K to 573 at constant pressure.
We have to calculate d as per Eq.
1.5. p T 2 T = 298 K ∫ 1 q = C dT T = 573 K t p 2 T n = 3.00 mol 1 C = (19.41 + 0.233 T) J mol-1 K-1 p See the box below for understanding the simplification of the terms 1 and II.
573 ∫ 3.00(19.41 + 0.233 T)dT = 298 573 573 ∫ ∫ = 3.00 × 19.41 dT + 3.00 × 0.233 TdT 298 298 I II = [3.00 × 19.41 (573 – 298) + 3.00 × 0.233 (5732 – 2982)] J 2 = 9.97 × 104 J = 99.7 KJ Hence heat required to raise the temperature of 3.00 mol of butane from 298 K to 573 K is 99.7 KJ.
We give below two general formulae for integration; (these two formulae will be useful throughout this course in working out numerical.
Formula 1 is used in this unit in Example l and Formula 2 in Example 3.
Formula 1 If m is not requires to -1 x x x 2 2 2 ∫ axmdx = a ∫ xmdx = m a+ 1 x m + 1 = ( m a + 1 ) (x2m+1 – x1m+1) x x x 1 1 1 Where, a is a constant.
This formula is used in the term marked II in.
Example 1, where a = 3.00 × 0.233, x = T, m = 1, x = 298 and x = 573.
1 2 Note that I term in Example 1 is also a special case of formula 1.
If m = 0, then xm = 1 and formula 1 becomes ∫ 17 x 2 a adx = (x2 – x1) = a(x2 – x1) (0 + 1) x1 In I term of Example 1, a = 300 × 19.41, x = T, x = 298 and x = 573 1 2 Formula 2 If m is equal to -1 Formula 2 finds use throughout our course (although not in this example).
x 2 ∫ dx x2 a = a 1n x x1 x 1 Again, a is a constant.
Note that ‘ln’ stands for logarithm to the base e. Since we use natural logarithm (i.e., logarithm to the base 10) in our calculations, it is better to modify formula 2 as follows: x 2 ∫ dx x2 a = 2.303 a log x x1 x 1 Note that ln x = 2.303 log x We are now familiar with various terms used in the study of thermodynamics.
In the next section, we shall discuss the first law of thermodynamics.
Before proceeding to the next section, answer the following SAQ.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 The molar heat capacity of ethane at constant pressure is 52.6 J K-1 mol-1.
Calculate the energy required to heat 3.00 mol of ethane from 305 K to 405 K at constant pressure.
Hints: i) Use Eq.
1.5 ii) Integration is to be done as per formula 1 and I term in Example 1.
18 Logarithmic representation helps in denoting a very large or a small number which is of convenient magnitude.
Eg (i) Avogadro number = N = 6.022 × 1023 log N/A = 23.78 (to four digits) A (ii) Dissociation constant of acetic acid K a -log K = 4.74 (to three digits) a ‘log’ representation depicts a number in powers of 10.
Similarly ‘1n’ representation depicts a number in power of ‘e’ 1 1 .
1 .
e = 1 + + + +....... 1!
2!
3!
= 2.718 (to four digits) For representing population of energy levels, radioactive decay etc., ‘In’ is quite useful.
4.0 THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS The first law of thermodynamics was first stated by Mayer and Helmholtz in 1840 in Germany, Joule in England, and Colding in Denmark.
This law is also known as the law of conservation of energy.
The first law of thermodynamics can be stated in any one of the following ways: • The energy of an isolated system remains constant.
• Energy can neither be created nor destroyed although it can be changed from one form to another • It is not possible to construct a perpetual motion machine which can work endlessly without the expenditure of energy.
(Such a machine is known as perpetual motion machine of the first kind.)
All the above statements are equivalent to the principle of conservation of energy.
These statements point out that energy of a system will remain constant if it is left undisturbed.
If, on the other hand, the system interacts with the surroundings, then its energy may change; but then, there will also be equal and opposite change in the energy of the surroundings.
Since Work is a form of energy, it is not possible for a machine to keep on doing work indefinitely.
As soon as its own energy is exhausted it will require a source of energy to continue doing work.
The first law of thermodynamics; has no theoretical proof.
It is a law based on observation.
Since the law has never been contradicted, its truth is taken for granted.
Einstein in 1905 showed that matter and energy are interconvertible according to the equation, 19 E=mc2 …..(1.6) This means that if mass m is destroyed, then energy E is produced; c is the velocity light.
This is not a contradiction since mass can also be considered as a form of energy.
We shall shortly arrive at the mathematical forms of the first law of thermodynamics.
Before that let us first introduce the term, internal energy.
Internal Energy The internal energy U of a system is the entire energy of its constituent atoms or molecules including all forms of kinetic energy (due to translation, vibration and rotation) as well as energy due to all types of interactions between the molecules and subparticles.
It is a state variable and an extensive property and its absolute value cannot be determined.
However, in thermodynamics we are interested, in the changes in internal energy which accompany any process, but not in the absolute value of U.
These changes in internal energy can be brought about only by interaction of the system with its surroundings.
The change in internal energy (∆U) depends only on the initial and final states and is Independent of the path adopted.
The total energy of a system is the sum of the internal energy and some| energy due to the motion or position of the system as a whole.
For example, the total energy of water on the ground floor is different from its energy on the top of the building.
The difference in total energy is mgh (m is the mass of water, h the height of the building and g the acceleration due gravity) whereas the internal energy is the same; in both cases.
Similarly for a moving bullet, the total energy is the sum of the internal energy and its kinetic energy, ½ mv2 (where m is the mass of the bullet and v its velocity).
The heat change, dq, and the work done, dw, contribute towards the change in the internal energy of the system] We adopt the convention that the change in the internal energy is equal to the sum of the heat absorbed by the system and the work done on it.
If dq is positive (heat absorbed by the system is positive), this leads to an increase in the internal energy of the system.
A negative dq implies loss of heat from the system and % denotes a decrease in internal energy.
If the work done on the system (dw) is positive, this increases the internal energy of the system.
A negative value of dw implies that work has been done by the system at the expense of its internal energy.
20Let us now derive the mathematical forms of the first law of thermodynamics.
Mathematical Forms of the First Law of Thermodynamics As mentioned earlier, work and heat bring about changes in the internal energy of the system.
If the system absorbs a certain amount of heat, dq, then its internal energy increases by this amount; further if dw is work done on the system, then the internal energy again increases.
Hence, the net change in the internal energy is given by dU=dq+dw ….
(1.7) This equation is for infinitesimal changes.
If, however, a system is taken from its initial state to another state by a process in which the heat absorbed is q and work done on the system is w, then the net change in internal energy will be given by ∆ U = U – U = q + w ….
(1.8) f i where U and U are the initial and final internal energies of the system, and ∆U, i f the net change.
It is obvious that ∆U can have either negative or positive value depending on q and w. But once the initial and final states of a system are fixed, ∆ U is automatically fixed, no matter what path is adopted in carrying out the process.
In other words, internal energy is a state function while heat and work are not.
As an example consider a system being taken from the initial state where it has energy U to the final state having energy U along different paths I, II and III i f (Fig.1.1).
Then in all these cases, ∆U is same.
If this were not so, then it w auld have been possible to construct a perpetual motion machine by reaching the final state via a high energy change path (say, III) and coming back via a low-energy change path (IV) thereby releasing the energy difference for work.
Eqs.
1.7 and 1.8 are mathematical expressions of the first law of thermodynamics.
U f III I II IV U i Fig.
1.1 Energy change through different onward paths.
I, II and III and return path, IV.
21Self Assessment Exercise 2 Suggest a statement for the first law of thermodynamics such that the law of conservation of mass is not violated.
5.0 ISOTHERMAL EXPANSION 6.0 In this section, we are going to calculate the work done on the gas in an isothermal process.
For this we must first arrive at a general expression for pressure – volume work done in an air tight piston of area A.
Assume that pressure of the gas is p and the external pressure is p which is slightly less than ext the gas pressure.
The gas will, hence, expand against an opposing force which is given by F = P A ….
(1.9) ext If during expansion, the piston moves through a distance dx, then this small amount of work dw’ done by the system is given by, dw’ = fdx = P Adx ....(1.10) ext But Adx is the change in volume of the gas, dV.
Hence dw’ = P dV …(1.11) ext Thus the work done by the system (i.e., by the gas) is dw'.
Therefore, the work done on the gas is — dw' which we shall denote by dw.
Hence, work dw done on the system is dw’ = -p dV …(1.12) ext Eq.
1.12 is a general expression useful in calculating pressure – volume work whether it is isothermal or adiabatic process.
It can be seen that dw is negative when the gas expands and it is positive when the gas contracts, [dv = + ve in expansion and dv = – ve in compression].
Note that the value of the work (dw) done on the gas is obtained by reversing the sign of work (dw’) done by the gas: or dw = -dw’ We shall now calculate the work of expansion (as also of compression) under isothermal conditions.
First let us take up the work done under isothermal irreversible conditions.
Isothermal Irreversible Process Let us assume that the gas kept in a cylinder expands isothermally and irreversibly against a constant process.
22This means that: (i) the gas expands against a constant External pressure (p , = constant) ex (ii) there is considerable difference between the gas pressure (inside the cylinder) and the external pressure (iii) that the temperature does not change during the process.
Let the initial and final volumes be V , and V , respectively.
The total work, W, 1 2 done on the system is obtained by integrating Eq.
1.12.
W = – ∫ V 2P extdV = – Pext ∫ V 2d V V1 V 1 … (1.13) = –P (V – V ) = –Pext ∆V ext 2 1 The symbol, ∆V, denotes the total change in volume during the process.
Let us work out an example to illustrate the use of Eq.
1.13 Example 2 A gas expands from 10 m3 to 12 m3 against a constant [pressure of 1 bar at 298 K. What is the work done on the gas?
We have to calculate work done under constant pressure using Eq.
1.13 Hence, W = –P (V – V ) = –1 x 105 Pa x (12m3 – 10m3) ext 2 1 = –2×105 Pa m3 because 1 bar = 1 × 105 Pa = –2 ×105 J and 1 Pa m3 = 1 J It can be seen that the work done on the system is negative, this means, actually system has done work equal to 2 × 105 J during expansion.
It is also possible to calculate the work done under irreversible isothermal conditions, when the external pressure changes continuously.
But then, the concerned equation is more complex than Eq.
1.13.
Let us now calculate the work done under isothermal reversible process.
Isothermal Reversible Process We have already mentioned that a reversible process can be carried out when external pressure (p ) is only infinitesimally different from the gas pressure ext inside a cylinder (p) 23In such a case, p , ≈ p and hence, Eq.
1.12 can be written as, ext dw = -pdV ….
(1.14) Note that the pressure of the gas inside the cylinder and the external pressure are very much different in an irreversible process.
The integration procedure used in Eq.
1.13 is similar to that of part I discussed in Example 1.
Again, this is an application of formula 1 discussed in Sec.
1.6.
Note that dx and ∆x refer to infinitesimal and finite (considerable or even large) changes in x, respectively.
If dx or ∆x is i) +ve, then x increases; ii) -ve, then x decreases and iii) zero, then x does not change or x remains a constant.
The total work done, W, as the gas expands isothermally and reversibly from V to 1 a volume V is then given by integrating Eq.
1.14 within limits V , and V .
2 1 2 V2 W = – ∫ pdV ….
(1.15) V Let us assume that the gas behaves ideally.
Hence, p = nRT V Using this in Eq.
1.15 V 2 ∫ nRT W = – dV V V 1 V 2 ∫ dV …(1.16) = nRT– V V 1 V V = – nRT 1n 2 = nRT 1n 1 … (1.17) V V 1 2 V V Hence, W= – 2.303nRT log 2 = 2.303 nRT log 1 …(1.18) V V 1 2 24 It can be seen that if V is less than V , then the gas has been compressed and, W 2 1 is positive.
Also, the value of W then happens to be the minimum work required for compressing the gas from (volume) V to V .
1 2 Similarly, if V is greater than V then the gas undergoes expansion and W is 2 1 negative.
Note that the difference between Eqs.
1.13 and 1.15 is that p depends on volume in the latter; whereas, p , in Eq.1.13 is constant throughout.
As a result of this, p is taken out of ext ext integration sign in Eq.
1.13 whereas p in Eq.
1.15 is to be expressed as a function of volume.
Note that n, R and T are constants and are taken out of the integration sign in Eq.
1.16.
Note that formula 2 of Sec.
1.6 is used here.
As compared to formula 2, a = nRT x = V 1 1 x = V 2 2 x = V Note that Eqs 1.18 and 1.21 are applicable only for an ideal gas undergoing isothermal reversible expansion or compression.
If the gas does not have ideal behavior, suitable equation o£ state must be used.
25Note that - log p1 = log P ; 2 p p 2 1 this follows from the mathematical principle that the numerator and denominator inside the "log" term can be interchanged by reversing the sign outside.
Step (i): Note that this step contains logarithmic term, log 6.00 × 106 Pa 3.00x105Pa When you come across a logarithmic term, first see whether the number inside the log term is greater than or less than one.
In the present case, 6.00 × 106 3.00 ×105 is greater than one.
Hence, do the following steps: Step (ii): From the logarithm of the numerator, subtract the logarithm of the denominator.
In Example 3, this step gives (6.7782-5.4771).
Step (iii): The answer to step (ii) is written (in Example 3, it is 1.3011); the multiplication is carried out in the usual way.
This means, work is done by the gas; —W represents the maximum work available through expansion.
Eq.
1.18 can also be given in terms of initial and final pressures (p and p ) of the 1 2 ideal gas.
For an ideal gas at constant temperature, p V = p V …(1.19) 1 1 2 2 V2 = p1 ….
(1.20) V V 1 2 W = -2.303 nRT log p 1 p 2 = 2.303 nRT log p ….
(1.21) 2 p 1 26Let us illustrate the use of Eq 1.21 Example 3 An ideal gas initially at 3.00 × 102 K and 3.00 × 105 Pa pressure occupies 0.831 m3 space.
What is the minimum amount of work required to compress the gas isothermally and reversibly so that the final pressure is 6.00 × l06 Pa?
p =3.00 × 105 Pa; p = 6.00 × 106 Pa 1 2 R = 8.314 J mol k-1; T =3.00 × l02 K We have to calculate the value of n (the amount of the gas) in order to use Eq 1.21; the value of n can be found out from the initial conditions using ideal gas equation.
n = PV = 300 × 105 Pa × n 831 m3 RT 8.314 J mol-1 K-1 3.00 × 102k n = 1.00 × l02 mol Substituting the values in Eq.
1.21 6.00 × l06 Pa W = 2.303.
× 1.00 × 102 mol × 8.314 J mol-1 K-1 × 3.00 × 102 K log 3.00 × 105 Pa Step (i) = 2.303 × 1.00 × 102 × 8.314 × 3.00 × 102 × (61.7782 - 5.4771) J Step (ii) = 2.303 × 1.00 × 102× 8.314 × 3.00 × 102 × 1.3011 J Step (iii) W = 7.47×105J Using the principles studied above, answer the following SAQ.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 A gas expands against vacuum.
What is the work done on it?
FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 27Module 1: Thermodynamics, Types of process, Heat change and Enthalpy of Reactions Unit 3: Heat Change 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Definitions 4.0 Heat Change under Constant Volume 5.0 Enthalpy and Enthalpy Changes - - 6.0 Relation between C and C of an Ideal Gas p v 2.0.
At the end of the unit, students are expected to  explain the term, internal energy of a system,  calculate the work done on an ideal gas in isothermal and adiabatic processes,  state the significance of enthalpy and enthalpy change pf a system, - -  derive the relationship between C and C of an ideal gas, and p v 3.0.
HEAT CHANGE UNDER CONSTANT VOLUME The reactions are carried out under constant volume or under constant pressure conditions.
Let us now arrive at an expression useful in calculating the heat change in a system under constant volume conditions.
In the next section, we shall discuss heat change under constant pressure conditions.
Let us examine Eq.
1.7.
Let us assume that the work done on the system is only pressure-volume work, whereas electrical, magnetic or other types of work are not involved.
Then from Eqs.
1.9 and 1.14 dU = dq – pdV ….
(1.22) or dq = dU + pdV ….
(1.23) If the process is carried out at constant volume, theft, 28 dV – pdV = 0 Hence, dqv — dU ….
(1,24) For finite changes in internal energy Eq.1.24 becomes, q = ∆U ….
(1.25) v That is, heat absorbed by a system at constant volume is exactly equal to its internal energy change.
Let us try to correlate internal energy change with heat capacity at constant volume assuming that there is no phase change or chemical reaction.
From Eqs 1.24 and 1.26 dU = CvdT= nC dT ...(1.26) v This holds good for n mol of an ideal gas.
can be rewritten as, ( ∂U ) C = v ∂ T ….
(1.27) i.e heat capacity at constant volume is equal to change in internal energy per 1 K rise in temperature at constant volume.
( ) ∂U ∂T V is called the partial differential of internal energy with respect to temperature at constant volume.
It means the value U of a gas depends on V and T, but only the variation in U with respect to T is measured at constant volume .
Interestingly for an ideal gas, U depends, only on T but not on V. i.e ( ) ∂U = 0 ∂T T In order to obtain ∆U when an ideal gas is heated from temperature T to T at 1 2 constant volume, the integrated form of Eq.
1.26 is to be used.
T T 2 ∫ 2 ∫ - i.e ∆U = CvdT = CvdT ….
(1.28) T 1 T 1 29Hence, by knowing C over the temperatures T , to T , it is possible to obtain the - v 1 2 value of ∆U.
We have defined Cv through Eq.
1.27 What about C ?
Is there some p thermodynamic property to which C can be related in a similar way?
For this p purpose, we define the term, enthalpy, in the next section.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Calculate the i) change in internal energy of an ideal gas undergoing isothermal reversible compression as discussed in Example 3. ii) What is the value of q for the same case?
5.0 ENTHALPY AND ENTHALPY CHANGES Enthalpy of a system is defined by the relation, H=U + pV …(1.29) where U, p, and V, are the internal energy, pressure and volume of the system.
Since U, p and V are state variables, H also is a state function.
That is, the enthalpy of a system in a particular state is completely independent of the manner in which that state has been achieved, If H , and H are the enthalpies of the initial 1 2 and final states of a system, then the enthalpy change accompanying the process is given by, ∆H=H + H ...(1.30) 2 = (U +p V ) - (U + pV) 2 2 2 l l l = ∆U + (p V - pV) ….
(1.31) 2 2 l l In case of a constant pressure process (p = p =p), Eq.
1.31 can be written as, l 2 ∆H =∆U + p(V – V ) 2 1 ∆H =∆U+ p∆V ….
(1.32) Rewriting Eq.1.23 for a finite change, we get q = ∆U+ p∆V ….
(1.33) p 30 this means, the heat capacity at constant pressure is equal to the partial differential of H with respect to temperature at constant pressure.
Interestingly for an ideal gas.
H depends on 7" only and not on p; Using this equation in Eq 1.32, q = ∆H ....(1.34) p The subscript p in q stands for the constant pressure condition.
p In other words, the enthalpy change is equal to the heat absorbed by the system at constant pressure.
For a small change in enthalpy, we can write dq = dH ….
(1.35) p Using Eq.
1.3 and assuming that there is no phase change or chemical reaction we have.
- dH = C dT = nC dT …(1.36) p p In order to obtain ∆H value when an ideal gas is hated from temperature T to T , 1 2 at constant pressure, the integrated form of Eq.
1.36 is to be used.
T T 2 2 ∫ ∫ - ∆H = CvdT = nC dT ….c(1.37) T1 T1 P Since many laboratory processes are carried out at constant pressure (atmospheric pressure), the enthalpy change of a system is of great significance.
It may be noted that since the absolute value of the internal energy of a system is not known, it is also impossible to know the absolute enthalpy of the system.
Fortunately, for most processes we are only concerned with the changes in enthalpy which may be measured by taking any suitable reference states of elements.
( ) ∂H Using Eq.
1.36 C can be defined as C = this means, the heat capacity p p ∂T T at constant pressure is equal to the parti al differential of H with respect to temperature at constant pressure.
Interesting for an ideal gas, H depends on T only and not on P; ( ) ∂H i.e = 0 for an ideal gas.
∂T T Those processes in which neat is supplied to the system ire called endothermic and, ∆H is given a positive sign; in exothermic processes (in which heat is evolved), ∆H is negative.
31 Enthalpy changes connected with certain typical processes are given special names.
For example, enthalpy of vaporization or evaporation is the enthalpy change accompanying the conversion of one mole of a liquid to its vapour.
Similarly, enthalpy of fusion and sublimation are the enthalpy changes accompanying fusion or sublimation of one mole of a substance.
For a chemical reaction, the 'enthalpy of reaction is the difference in the enthalpies of the products and the reactants as per the stoichiometry given in the chemical equation.
We shall study enthalpy changes in detail in the next section, we shall - - study the relationship between C and C values of an ideal gas.
p v - - 6.0 RELATION BETWEEN C and C OF AN IDEAL GAS p v The internal energy of an ideal gas depends only on its temperature and is independent of pressure or volume.
This is quite understandable because in an ideal gas, there are no intermolecular interactions; no attractive or repulsive forces have to be overcome during expansion.
However, the enthalpy of the gas changes considerably when a gas expands or contracts.
For one mole of an ideal gas, H = U + pV = U + RT …(1.38) On differentiating we get, dH = dU + RdT [because R is a constant] Using Eqs 1.26 and 1.36 one mole of an ideal gas) - - C dT = C dT + RdT …(1.39) p - -v C = C + R - p- v and hence, C – Cv = R …(1.40) - p - Also, for n mol, C – Cv = nR …(1.41) p - - This means that C is always greater than C for an ideal gas.
This is because p v when the temperature of a gas is raised at a constant pressure, there will be expansion of the gas.
This will require some extra amount of heat (as compared to heating an ideal gas under constant volume conditions).
Hence, more heat will be required in raising the temperature- of the gas through 1 K under constant pressure conditions than under constant volume.
FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 32 Module 1 Thermodynamics, Types of process, Heat change and Enthalpy of Reactions Unit 4 Enthalpy of Reactions 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Definition 4.0 Adiabatic expansion 5.0 Joule-Thomson Effect 6.0 Kirchoff’s equation 2.0.
Objectives  explain Joule-Thomson effect.
 derive kirchhoffs equation and state its significance  derive Kirchhoffs equation and state its significance,  define bond enthalpy, and   calculate enthalpies of reactions from bond enthalpies.
3.0.
Adiabatic Expansion We have previously discussed the work done in an isothermal process.
Let us now study how the work is calculated in an adiabatic process, In an adiabatic process, heat absorbed is zero, i.e., dq = 0 Hence, from Eq.
1.7 dU = 0+dw = dw ...(1.42) But for one mole of an ideal gas, dU is given by Eq.
1-26 as, - dU=C dT v 33During expansion, dw and hence, dU are negative.
That is, as the system does expansion work, its internal energy decreases.
This, again, according to Eq1.26 means that dT is negative; i.e., temperature decreases.
In other words during adiabatic expansion, temperature of the system decreases.
This principle is used in Claude's method of liquefaction of gases.
Let us now study the temperature-volume relation in a reversible adiabatic process.
This could help us in determining the final temperature of a system undergoing adiabatic expansion or compression.
Temperature-Volume Relationship in a Reversible Adiabatic Process According to Eq.
6.42, dU = dw Substituting for dw and dU from Eqs.
1.14 and 1.26, we get for one mole of an ideal gas, - C dT = -pdV v For one mole of an ideal gas, P = RT V Using this relationship in Eq, 1.43 we get - C dT = -RTdV v V ….
(1.44) Rearranging we get, - dT dV C = - R …(1.45) v T V Integrating Eq.
1.43 between temperature limits T and T and volume limits V 1 2 1 and V , we get 2 T2 V2 - ∫ dT ∫ dT Cv = -R T T …..(1.46) T1 V1 - dT V V C v ln = -R ln 2 = R l n 1 T V V 1 1 2 - - V = (C – C ) ln 1 p p V 2 (Using Eq.
1.40) ( - ) T C V 2 p 1 ln = - – 1 ln T C V 1 p 2 34 V 1 = (γ – 1) ln V 2 The integrals on the left and right sides of Eq.
1.46 are solved using formula 2 given in Sec.
- 1.6.
Note that C is considered a constant in the temperature range, T to T .
Of course, R is a v 1 2 constant.
The change of numerator and denominator inside the 'ln' term with a reversal of the sign outside it has already been explained in Sec.1.8.
Rearrangement of Eq.
1.47 is done using the general formula, m ln x = ln xm or m log x = log xm.
You can verify this formula using logarithmic tables in the following cases.
You look for the logarithm of 10, 100, 2 and 8; see whether the following are true.
2 log 10 = logl02 = log 10.0 3 1og 2 = Iog23 = Iog8 Where γ is the ratio of the molar heat capacities, C /C .
- p -v Rearranging Eq.
1.47 we get, ( )γ - 1 ln T 2 = ln V1 T1 V2 Taking antilogarithms both the sides T 2 = ln ( V1 )γ - 1 …(1.48) T1 V2 γ – 1 γ – 1 γ - 1 or T V = T V or TV = Constant 2 2 1 1 This equation gives the volume — temperature relationship in a reversible adiabatic process.
Also we can get pressure temperature relationship knowing that, for an ideal g P1V1 = P2V2 T T 1 2 V1 = P2T1 …(1.49) V P T 2 1 2 substituting this in Eq.
1.48 ( ) γ - 1 T2 = P2T1 T P T 1 1 2 35γ - 1 T (P T ) = T (p T ) 2 2 2 1 2 1 γ γ - 1 γ γ - 1 i.e T P + T p 2 1 1 2 or ( T 2 ) γ ( P 2 )γ - 1 = T1 P1 …(1.50) For any reversible adiabatic expansion, T can be determined using Eq.
1.48 or 2 1.50 For an ideal gas undergoing isothermal reversible expansion (or contraction), the pressure- volume relationship is, p V , = p V whereas in an adiabatic reversible process, it is p V = 1 1 2 2 1 1 p V γ.
Here subscripts 1 and 2 stand for initial and final conditions.
2 2 Also it is possible to get pressure-volume relationship in a reversible adiabatic process using the rearranged form of Eq.
1.49, T2 = P2V2 T P V 2 1 1 In E.q 1.48 as follows: P2V2 = ( T 2) P V T 1 1 2 Cross multiplying the terms, γ - 1 P V V = p V V 2 2 2 1 1 1 or p V γ = p V 1 1 2 2 γ or pV = Constant …(1.51) Eq.
1.51 describes pressure-volume relationship for an ideal gas undergoing reversible adiabatic expansion (or compression).
∆U and W in a Reversible Adiabatic Process The quantities dU and dw for an adiabatic process are related through Eq.
1.42 Using this equation and Eq.
1.26 get for 1 mol of an ideal gas, - dU=dw= C dT v In case of n mol of an ideal gas, - 36dU = dw = nC dT …(1.52) v The work done on the gas during an adiabatic expansion (W) as also the change in internal energy (∆U) can be calculated by integrating Eq.
1.52 within temperature limit T and T 1 2 T - ∫ 2 ∆U = W = nC = dT v T 1 - - = nC (T – T ) = nCv∆T …(1.53) V 2 1 Note that C is assumed to be a constant in Eq 1.53 in the temperature range T and T v 1 2 Hence, ∆U and W can be calculated when n, C , T , and T are known.
V 1 2 Irreversible Adiabatic Expansion If the work is done irreversibly and adiabatically, then the work done on the system is given by Eq.
1.48, W = - p ∆V …(1.54) ext as in the case of irreversible isothermal process.
We can arrive at the temperature-volume relationship for an adiabatic irreversible process as follows: - Using Eq.
1.54 in Eq.
1.53 –p ∆V = nC ∆T ext v –P ∆V Hence, ∆V = (T – T ) = ex t- ….
(1.55) 2 1 nC V Eq.
1.55 is useful in calculating the final temperature of an ideal gas undergoing adiabatic irreversible expansion while Eq.
1.48 or 1.50 is of help in an adiabatic reversible process.
Answer the following SAQ using Eq.
1.55 Self Assessment Exercise 1 Show that against zero external pressure, the expansion is simultaneously adiabatic and isothermal.
37 4.0 JOULE-THOMSON EFFECT Our discussion so far centered around ideal gases.
It was mentioned earlier that internal energy of an ideal gas is independent of pressure or volume.
This, however, is not true for real gases since intermolecular forces exist among their molecules.
So when a real gas is expanded, work has to be done in overcoming these forces.
If no energy is supplied from an external source, then the internal energy of the gas is used up in doing this work.
This results in a fall in the temperature of the gas.
However, some gases show rise in temperature.
This phenomenon of change in temperature when a gas is made to expand adiabatically from a high pressure region to a low pressure region is known as the Joule- Thomson effect.
The phenomenon can be understood if we consider the apparatus shown in Fig.
1.2.
It consists of an insulated tube fitted with a porous plug and two airtight pistons one on either side of the plug.
The gas is kept under pressure?
p and p in the two compartments.
Note that p is greater than p .
The left hand 1 2 1 2 side piston is then slowly pushed inwards so that, without changing the value of p , a volume V gas is introduced through the plug into the other compartment.
1 1 of This results in the outward movement of the other piston and also in the volume increase.
Let the final volume be V .
Accurate temperature measurements are 2 made: in both compartments.
The net work done on the system is given by: W = – (p V – p V ) = p V – p V 2 2 1 1 1 1 2 2 It should be remembered that p V is the work done by the system and p V the 2 2 1 1 work on it.
The conditions are adiabatic and so q = 0.
For a finite process, Eqs.
1.12 and 1.56 can be combined and written as, ∆U = W= (p V –p V ) 1 1 2 2 Or ∆U + (p V – p V ,) = 0 2 2 1 1 Using Eq.
1.31, ∆U + (p V –p V ) = ∆H 2 2 1 1 From Eqs.
1.31 and 1.58 we note that ∆H =0 Hence in the Joule-Thompson experiment, ∆H= 0 or enthalpy is constant.
A detailed discussion of intermolecular forces and their effects on liquefaction, vaporization and fusion is available in Unit 3 of this course.
A porous plug has small holes which permit the flow of the gas from one side to another.
38 Fig.
1.2: Joule-Thomson Experiment Since, in the Joule-Thomson experiment, we measure the temperature change with change in pressure at constant enthalpy, we define Joule-Thomson coefficient, μJT, as ( ∂ T) …..(1.60) μ = JT ∂P H If μ is positive, expansion causes cooling and if μ is negative, expansion JT JT causes heating.
But if μ is equal to zero, there is neither coaling nor heating due JT to Joule-Thomson expansion.
The temperature at which μ = 0 is called the JT inversion temperature (T) of the gas.
If a gas is expanded above its inversion i temperature, it is heated; if it is expanded below its inversion temperature, it is cooled.
In order to decrease the temperature of a gas and then to liquefy by Joule- Thomson process, it is essential to bring its temperature below its inversion temperature.
The inversion temperature of hydrogen gas is much below room temperature.
Therefore, it is dangerous to open a compressed hydrogen gas cylinder under atmospheric conditions.
As hydrogen gas is released from the cylinder, it expands, gets headed and also combines with oxygen present in the air; the latter reaction causes an explosion.
5.0 KIRCHHOFF’S EQUATION For A given reaction, ∆H and ∆U generally vary with temperature.
It is of great r r importance to study these variations quantitatively so that these may be calculated for any temperature from the known values of ∆H and ∆U at any other r r temperature.
The variation of ∆H and ∆U with temperature is described by r r Kirchhoff's equation.
Let us derive this equation.
If C is the heat capacity of a substance, then for a temperature rise dT, the p increase in enthalpy is given by Eq 1.36 as dH = C dT …(1.61) p In the case of enthalpy of a reaction (∆H), we can rewrite Eq.
1.61 as, r d (∆H) = ∆C dT r p 39Where ∆C = (sum of C values of products) – p p (sum of C values of reactants) p Also, d(∆H) is the change in enthalpy of reaction due to change in temperature, r dT .
Eq.
1.62 on integration gives, T2 ∫ ∆ H - ∆ H = ∆C dT …..(1.63) r 2 r 1 p T1 where ∆H and ∆H are the enthalpies of reaction at temperatures T and T , r 2 r 1 2 1 respectively.
Eq.1.63 is called Kirchhoff's equation.
Similarly we can also obtain the expression, 1.63.
T2 ∫ ∆U - ∆U = ∆C d T …..(1.64) r 2 r 1 v T1 Where ∆U and ∆U are the changes in internal energy of the reaction at r 1 r 2 temperatures T and T , and ∆C is the difference in heat capacities between 1 2 V products and reactants at constant volume.
Let us now consider three of the special cases of Eq.
1.63 i) If ∆C = 0, then ∆H - ∆H implying thereby that the enthalpy of reaction P r 2 r 1 does not change.
ii) If ∆C is constant i.e.
it does not vary with temperature, then p ∆H = ∆H + ∆C (T – T ) …(1.65) r 2 r 1 p 2 1 i.e ∆H either deceases or increases regularly with temperature.
For most r reactions Eq.
1.65 is valid for small range of temperatures.
iii) If ∆C changes with temperature, then Eq.
1.63 has to be integrated by p - expressing Cp as a function of temperature.
The variation in C is usually p expressed in the following way: - Cp = a + bT + cT2 + …… the coefficients a,b,c, ……etc., are characteristic of a particular substance.
Let us work out an example to show the use of Eq.
1.65 Example 4: ∆H for the reaction, r C (graphite) + H O (g) → CO(g) + H (g); 2 2 - 40at 298 K is l31.2 kJ.
The C values are given below in the temperature p range, 298 to 348 K. - Substance C /J mor-1 K-1 p Graphite 15.93 H 0 (g) 30.04 2 CO (g) 26.51 H (g) 29.04 2 Calculate ∆H at 348 K. r - The C values given above are independent of temperature; hence, we can find p ∆H at 348 K using Eq.
1.65 r Let us first calculate ∆C p - - - - ∆C = 1 × C (CO) + 1 × C (H ) - 1 × C (graphite) + l × C (H O) J K-1 p p p 2 p p 2 (Since one mole of each component appears in the thermochemical equation) = (26.51+29.04) -(15.93+30.04) J K-1 = 9.58 J K-1 = 9.
58×10-3 kJ K-1 (Remember 1J=10-3 kJ) ∆C is express in kJ K-1, since ∆H at 298 K is given in kJ.
P r Using Eq.
1.65, ∆H at 348 K = ∆H at 298 K + ∆C (348-298) r r P = (131.2 + 9.58 x 10-3 × 50) kJ = 131.7 kJ - C is usually given in J mol-1 K-1 units.
You should remember to convert it into kJ mol-1 K-1 (by p division by 1000), if ∆H is in kJ mol-1 units.
Using the ideas developed above, work out the following SAQ.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 For the reaction, C (graphite) + H O (g) → CO (g) + H (g) 2 2 Calculate ∆C, if the molar heat capacities at constant pressure for various species - - vary as per the equation, C = a + bT + cT2 where Cp is in J mol-1 K-1.
The a. b. p and c. value of each of the substances are given below: 41 a b × 103 C × 107 Graphite 15.93 6.52 0.0 H O (g) 30.04 9.920 8.71 2 CO (g) 26.51 7.68 11.71 H (g) 29.04 –0.836 20.09 2 6.0.
BOND ENTHALPIES AND ESTIMATION OF ENTHALPIES OF FORMATION Bond enthalpy is a useful concept in thermochemistry.
It finds application in the calculation of standard enthalpy of formation and standard enthalpy of reaction of many compounds.
In a molecule, atoms are linked through chemical bonds.
When a molecule decomposes into atoms, the bonds are broken and the enthalpy increases.
This is also defined as the enthalpy of atomization, ∆H , and is always positive.
For atom example, the enthalpy of the following reaction is the enthalpy of atomization of ethane gas: C H → 2C +6H ∆H = - 2828.38 KJ mol-1 2 6(g) (g) (g) atom Enthalpy of atomization is the enthalpy change accompanying a reaction in which a molecule is shattered into its component atoms.
Enthalpy of atomization of graphite is useful in the calculation of standard enthalpy of formation of organic compounds.
The significance of bond enthalpy in deciding the bond strength has been discussed in Unit 3 of Atoms and Molecules course.
On analysis of ∆H for a large number of such reactions, it has been found that atom specific values of bond enthalpies may be assigned to different types of bonds (Table).
These bond enthalpies correspond to the decomposition of a molecule in the gaseous state to atoms in the gaseous state.
Certain substances in the solid state when sublimed are converted into gaseous atoms.
Thus, graphite when heated is converted into gaseous atoms, and the heat required for one mole can be called the molar enthalpy of atomization of graphite which is equal to.
717 kJ 42mol-1.
If graphite is considered the reference state for carbon, then the atomization can be written as follows: C → C ∆H = 717 KJ mol-1 (graphite) (g) atom Table 1.1 Bond Enthalpies B B B .
Bond Bond Bond KJ mol-1 KJ mol-1 KJ mol-1 H – H 436 C – F 484 C = C 813 O – H 463 C – Cl 338 N – N 163 C – H 412 C – Br 276 N = N 409 F – F 155 C – I 238 N = N 945 Cl – Cl 242 C – C 348 O – O 146 Br – Br 193 C = Ca 612 O = O 497 I – I 151 C = Cb 518 F – H 565 C – O 358 Cl – H 431 C = O 745 Br – H 366 1 – H 299 a – in alkenes b – in aromatic compounds The enthalpies of atomization of, some more elements which become atomized on sublimation are given: in Table 1.2 Table.
1.2: Standard enthalpies of Atomization at 298.15 K ∆Ho Substance atom KJ mol-1 C (graphite) 717 Na (s) 108 K (s) 90 Cu (s) 339 It should be made clear that bond enthalpy is not bond dissociation energy.
This could be understood if we consider bond dissociation energy of water: H O → OH +H D =501.9 kJ mol-1 2 (g) (g) (g) 1 OH → O + H D = 423.4 kJ mol-1 (g) (g) (g) 2 43Bond enthalpy is the average amount of energy required to break one mole of similar bonds present in different gaseous compounds into gaseous atoms.
Note that in the place of bond enthalpy, the enthalpy of atomization is used for carbon (graphite) and other elements in the solid state.
The quantities D , and D are the first and second bond dissociation energies and 1 2 are different from the bond enthalpy given for O — H in Table 1.1.
Again, bond enthalpy is some kind of average of a large amount of experimental data.
These are of immense value in estimating the standard enthalpy of formation of a large number of Compounds being synthesized and also for estimating the standard enthalpy of reactions involving these new molecules.
The following steps will help you in the calculation of standard enthalpy of formation from the bond enthalpies and enthalpies of atomization of elements: i) First write the stoichiometric equation; theft writ£ (the most acceptable) Lewis structure of each of the reactants and the product.
ii) Use bond enthalpies from Table 1.1 and enthalpies of atomization from Table 1.2 to calculate the heat required to break all the bonds in the reactants and the heat released when the atoms form the product.
The bond enthalpy of X-X bond can be denoted as B(X-X) in arithmetic expressions.
iii) The standard enthalpy of formation = (Heat required to break all the bonds in the reactants) — (heat released when …(1.66) the atoms forth the product) iv) Bond enthalpy value can be applied to compounds only if these are in gaseous state; if the compounds are in solid or liquid state, molar enthalpies of sublimation or vaporization also must be considered.
Example 4: Estimate the standard enthalpy of formation of acetone vapour and acetone liquid.
(Enthalpy of vaporization of liquid acetone = 29 kJ mol-1) Step (i) : The stoichiometric equation for the formation of acetone vapour is 3H (g) + 3C(graphite) + ½O (g) → C H CO (g) …(1.67) 2 2 2 6 In terms of Lewis structures, the equation is given below: 44 H O H 3H- H + 3C + ½O = O → H-C-C-C-H H H Step (ii): The heat required to atomize the reactants = 3B(H – H ) + 3∆ H(graphite) + ½B (O = O) atom = [(3 × 346) + (3 ×717) + ½ (497)]KJ = 3708 KJ The heat released when the atoms form the product = 6B(C – H) + 2B (C – C) + B (C = O) = [(6 × 412) + (2 × 348) + 745]kJ = 3913 kJ Step (iii): ∆H°(acetone(g)) = (3708-3913) kJ mol-1 f = – 205kJ mol-1 Hence; the standard enthalpy of formation of acetone vapour is – 205 kJ mol-1 and, the actual value is – 216 kJ mol-1.
Step (v): Let us now calculate the standard enthalpy of formation of liquid acetone.
The condensation of acetone (l), from acetone (g) can be represented by Eq.
7.29.
Note that for condensation of acetone (g), the enthalpy change = – ∆Ho (acetone) = –29 kJmol-1 …(1.68) vap C H CO (g) → C H CO (l) 2 6 2 6 Adding Eqs.
1.67 and 1.68 3H (g) + 3C(graphite) + ½O (g) → C H CO (l) 2 2 2 6 Hence, ∆H°(acetone) (l) = ∆H° (acetone (g)) – ∆H° (acetone).
So, the standard f f vap enthalpy of formation of liquid acetone is – 234 kJ mol-1.
Using the above principles, answer the following SAQ.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Calculate the standard enthalpy of formation of hydrogen chloride gas.
Use Table 1.1 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been introduced to the first law of thermodynamics.
The main aspects of these units are given below: • The zeroth law of thermodynamics and the first law of thermodynamics have been stated.
45• The extensive and intensive variables are explained with examples.
• The terms heat capacity, internal energy and enthalpy have been defined and discussed.
• The formulae for the calculation of work, heat exchange .and internal energy change in isothermal and adiabatic processes are derived.
Examples are also world out to explain the use of these formulae.
• Joule-Thomson effect is explained and its importance in the liquefaction of gases is indicated.
• Kirchhoff's equation his been derived and used in the calculation of ∆H at r a given temperature knowing its value at any other temperature.
• Bond enthalpy values have been used in the calculation of standard enthalpies of formation.
FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 46Module 2 Reversible, Irreversible Reactions and Entropy of Change UNIT 1 Reversible and Irreversible Reactions 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives: 3.0 Reversible and Irreversible Reactions 4.0 The Carnot Cycle 5.0 Thermodynamic temperature scale 1.0 INTRODUCTION As described in previous modules it is seen that the transfer of energy between a system and its surroundings takes place through heat and work.
This is governed by the first law of thermodynamics which says that increase in the energy of a system must be accompanied by an equal decrease in the energy of the Surroundings and vice versa.
However, it does not tell us anything about the feasibility and direction of flow of energy.
According to the first law of thermodynamics, all processes in which energy is conserved are possible.
For example, if a cup of hot tea is left on a table then according to the first law it may be cooled by transferring energy to the Surroundings or be heated by absorbing energy from the surroundings.
But we all know from daily experience that the cup of tea will always cool till it acquires the temperature of the surroundings.
Similarly, if a bottle of perfume is opened in a room, the perfume spreads throughout the room.
The reverse process in which all the perfume vapours are collected in the bottle does not take place.
These are examples of what are known as spontaneous processes which are irreversible and proceed only in one direction.
Again, according to the first law, their is a direct relationship between heat and work.
But it does not tell us whether heat can be completely transformed into work and if so, what is the effect on the system and the surroundings.
These aspects are discussed in this Unit We shall start this unit with the description of Carnot cycle and calculate the efficiency of Carnot engine.
This discussion helps us in arriving at the concept of entropy and thermodynamic scale of temperature.
We will also show how entropy changes can be used to distinguish between reversible and irreversible cyclic processes.
Based on this discussion, the statements of the second law of thermodynamics will be given.
The expressions useful in calculating the entropy changes under different conditions will then be derived.
We shall finally discuss the physical meaning of entropy.
Based on this unit, we can conclude that all spontaneous changes must be accompanied by entropy increase.
In the next unit, we shall examine this aspect in a more detailed way.
2.0 Objectives 47 After studying this unit, you should be able to ; • differentiate between reversible and irreversible processes based on the value of q • describe Carnot cycle and derive an expression useful in calculating the efficiency of a Carnot engine, 3.0 REVERSIBLE, IRREVERSIBLE AND CYCLIC PROCESSES As already mentioned in Unit 1, all thermodynamic properties are state functions and, are independent of the path adopted by the system.
Also, the internal energy change of a system is given by Eq.
6.
8 as ∆U= q + w. Here ∆U is independent of the path chosen but q and w certainly depend upon it.
Thus for the same ∆U, different values of q and w are possible by bringing about the process in different ways.
It was also mentioned that the work done by a system is maximum if a reversible path is adopted and this maximum work can be determined from the initial and final states of the system.
Let us consider a reversible and an irreversible process in which ∆U is same.
No matter how we carry out the process (reversible or irreversible), ∆U depends only upon the initial and final states of the system.
Thus ∆U = q + w for reversible process rev rev and ∆U = q + w for irreversible process rev irrev and so q + w = q + w rev rev rev irrev We know that the work done by a system under reversible conditions (- w ) is rev larger than the work done by a system under irreversible conditions (-w ).
irrev i.e., -w > -w rev irrev Hence, w < w rev irrev This is true when we compare the work done on the system under reversible and irreversible conditions.
Let us assume that the driving forces under the two conditions mentioned above are fairly different.
Also, let us assume that the processes are not adiabatic so that q or q is not equal to zero.
Using Eqs.
2.3 rev irrev and 2.5, we can write, q > q rev irrev This means that in a nonadiabatic process, heat absorbed by a system from the surroundings is more under reversible conditions than under irreversible 48conditions.
This relationship will be used by us in Sec.
8.6 while calculating the entropy changes of isolated systems.
Now let us consider ∆U, q and w values of a system in a cyclic process.
As defined in Unit 1, a cyclic process is one in which the system after under going any number of processes return to its initial state.
This means that ∆U = 0; hence, the work system during all these processes should be equal to the heat absorbed by the system.
i.e., q = q + q + ….
= -(w + w + …) = -w 1 2 1 2 Where q any w are the heat absorbed and work done on the system in the entire cyclic processes consisting of several processes; in the individual processes, q , q 1 2 ....
etc., are the heat absorbed by the system and, w , w ....
etc., are the work done 1 2 on the system.
Using Example 1 discussed below, you can understand the validity of Eqs.
2.5 and 2.6.
Example 1 l.00 × 102 mol of an ideal gas at 3.00 × 102 K temperature and 6.00 x 106 Pa pressure occupies 4.16 × 10-2 m3 space initially.
Calculate the work done on the gas and the heat absorbed by the gas if it undergoes expansion under the following conditions such that the final volume and pressure are 0.832 m3 and 3.00 × 105 Pa: (a) Isothermal reversible conditions (b) isothermal irreversible conditions.
Solution In an isothermal process, for an ideal gas, ∆U = 0 Hence j using Eq.
1.8, q = - w i.e., Heat absorbed by j the gas = - (work done on the gas) This equation is applied for both the processes discussed below.
The work done on the system is given the symbol, w. Since work done by the system is obtained by reversing the sign of the work done on the system, work done by the system = - w Work done by the system under reversible conditions = - wrev Work done by the system under irreversible conditions = - w irrev The transformation of Eq.2.4 to Eq.
2.5 becomes clear, once we understand the following relationship between numbers: 49 -3 > -4 and 3 < 4 (a) Let us first calculate q and w using Eq.
1.18 for the isothermal rev rev reversible expansion.
V q = -w = –2.303 nRT log 1 rev rev V 2 V = 2.303 nRT log 2 V 1 = 2.303 ×l.00 × l02 mol × 8.314 Jmol-1K-1 × 3.00 × l02 K log 0.832 m3 .
4.16 × 10-2 m3 = 7.47xl05J Hence, the heat absorbed by the gas during isothermal reversible = 7.47 × l05J expansion (q ) rev and the work done on the gas (w ) = -7.47 × l05 J rev (b) Let us calculate q and w for the isothermal irreversible process using irrev irrev Eq.
1.13; in this process, the final pressure of the gas is equal to the external pressure (p ).
ext Hence, using Eq.
1.13, q = -w = p (V – V ) irrev irrev ext 2 1 = 3.00 × 105 Pa (0.832 m3 – 0.0416 m3) = 3.00 × 105 × 0.7904 J = 2.37 × 105 J You can compare q and w values in the above two cases to verify the validity of Eqs.
2.5 and 2.6. w = -7.47 × 105 J; w = -2.37 × 105 J rev irrev Hence, w < w as per Eq.
8.5 rev irrev q = 7.47 × 105 J; q = 2.37 × 105 J rev irrev Hence, q > q as per Eq.
2.6 rev irrev 4.0 THE CARNOT CYCLE Carnot analysed the functioning of an engine with the following features:  The engine works in cycles  It absorbs heat from a reservoir known as source.
:  It does some work out of the heat absorbed.
 It returns the unused part of the heat to another reservoir, known as sink.
 Finally it returns to its original state.
50 Such an engine is known as Carnot engine.
The temperature of the source (T ) is H higher than that of the sink (T ).
The source and the sink are assumed to be of C infinite heat capacity; that is, the temperatures of the source and' the sink are not affected by small amounts of heat exchange.
Carnot showed that the entire amount of the heat absorbed cannot be converted into work in a cyclic process, no matter how ideal the heat engine is.
He deduced that only a fraction of the total heat absorbed is converted into work and this fraction is known as the efficiency of the Carnot engine.
Let us now derive an equation useful in calculating its efficiency.
For the sake of simplicity, let us assume that the engine consists of a cylinder and a piston containing lone mole of an ideal gas in between the two.
The cylinder has perfectly insulated; walls and a perfectly conducting base; the piston is frictionless.
It is only for the sake of convenience that we have considered that the engine has ideal gas actually there can be any suitable fluid.
We make use of the following expressions from Unit 1 (for one mole of the gas) in this section.
wisothermal = RT In V initial …..(Eq.
1.17) V final - w = C (T – T ) …..(Eq.
1.53) adiabatic V final initial - where w is the work done on the system and C is the molar heat capacity of the v gas.
The plot of the pressure-volume data is shown in Fig.2.1 Fig: 2.1 Carnot cycle 51The Carnot cycle operation can be described by the following four steps: (1) Isothermal Expansion (2) Adiabatic expansion (3) lsothermal compression and (4).Adiabatic compression.
Let us discuss them one by one.
Step I: Isothermal Expansion Initially the gas has pressure p and volume V .
The cylinder is placed on a heat 1 1 source maintained at the temperature T .
The gas is isothermally and reversibly H expanded to a volume V and pressure p .
Let the work done on the gas be w and 2 2 1 the heat absorbed from the source be q .
In an isothermal process, ∆U = 0.
H Hence, using Eqs.1.8 and 1.17 V w = q = RT In 1 …(2.8) 1 H H V 2 V or q = RT In 2 …(2.9) H H V 1 Step II: Adiabatic Expansion The cylinder is now placed on a thermally insulated stand and the gas is adiabatically and reversibly expanded till it attains a pressure p , volume V and 3 3 temperature T .
During this period, no heat is absorbed by the system.
The work c done on the gas, w2, as the gas gets cooled from TH to TC is given by using Eq 1.53 as, - w = C (T – T ) …(2.10) 2 v C H Step III: Isothermal Compression The cylinder is now placed on a sink at temperature T and the gas is isothermally C and reversibly compressed to a volume V at pressure p .
During the process the 4 4 work done on the gas is w and the heat evolved to the sink is q (or q is the heat 3 c c absorbed from the sink).
Using Eqs.
1.8 and 1.17, w = -q = RT In V /V ….
(2.11) 3 c C 3 4 V or q = RTC In 4 ….
(2.12) c V 3 Step IV: Adiabatic Compression In the last step, the cylinder is again placed on an insulating stand and the gas is adiabatically and reversibly compressed until it reaches its initial state of volume - 52V , and temperature T .
Hence the work done on the gas, w is given by Eq.
1.53 1 H 4 as, w = C (T – T ) …(2.13) 4 v H C The net work done on the system w = w + w + w + w …(2.14) 1 2 3 4 - - or w = RT ln V /V + C (T – T ) + RT In V /V + C (T – T ) …(2.15) H 1 2 v C H C 3 4 v H C i.e.
w = RT ln V /V +RT In V /V … (2.16) H 1 2 C 3 4 Eq.
1.48 of Unit 1 can be applied to relate the initial and final values of volume and temperature of the two adiabatic processes described in steps II and IV.
Applying Eq.
1.48 to Step II we get, γ - 1 ( ) TC = V2 T V H 3 Similarly applying Eq.
1.48 to Step IV, we get, γ - 1 ( ) γ - 1 ( ) T V T V H 4 C 1 = or = T V T V C 1 H 4 ( ) γ – 1 ( ) γ - 1 V V Hence 2 = 1 V V 3 4 …(2.17) i.e V V 2 1 = V V 3 4 or V V 3 2 = V V 4 1 V V Using this in Eq.
8.16, w = RT In 1 + R T In 2 H V C V 2 1 Hence, total work done on the system = w = R (T - T ) In V /V …(2.18) H C 1 2 or total work done by the system, = w’ = -w = R (T -Tc) In V /V ….
(2.19) H 2 1 since work done by the system = — (work done on the system) 53We know that the heat exchange between the gas and the source or sink takes place only in isothermal processes (steps 1 and 3); in adiabatic processes (steps 2 and 4), there is no heat exchange.
Again, q is the heat absorbed from the source H in step 1 and q is the heat absorbed from the sink in step 3. c The total heat absorbed by the system is, q = q + q …(2.20) H C As expected, q turns out to be equal to — w or w' since for the overall cyclic process, ∆U = 0 Hence, q= q + q = w' = -w = R (T - T ) In V /V ….
(2.21) H c H C 2 1 It may however be noted that out of the heat q , (=RT In V /V as per Eq.
H H 2 l absorbed from the source, only some of it is converted into useful work and the rest is lost to the sink.
Let us now calculate w'/q , i.e., the ratio between the total H work done by the system during one cycle and the heat absorbed in the first step.
This quantity is called the efficiency 'η' of a Carnot engine.
Total work done by the system w' …(2.22) Efficiency (η) = = (Heat Absorbed from the source q H at higher temperature) Using Eqs 2.9 and 2.21 q + q R (T – T ) In V /V …(2.23) H c H C 2 1 (η) = = q RT In V /V H H 2 1 q + q (T – T ) …(2.24) H c H C (η) = = q T H H Since T and T are always positive and T /T is less than one, Eq.
2.24 can be C H C H rearranged as follows: T q …(2.25) C C (η) = 1 = 1 + = < 1 T q H H q q Since q is negative and q is positive, C is a negative quantity; 1 + C is also C H q q less than one.
H H This means that efficiency is always less than one, i.e., all the heat absorbed at a higher temperature is not converted into work.
It is also clear that efficiency will be more if the ratio T /T is small.
Thus, for efficient working of the engine, it C H should absorb heat at as high a temperature as possible and reject it at as low a temperature as possible.
It should also be noted that efficiency is independent of the nature of the fluid.
This is called Carnot theorem which can also be stated as: In all cyclic engines working between the same temperatures of the source and the sink, the efficiency is same.
54It must be pointed out that in the Carnot cycle, all processes have been carried out reversibly.
Hence, maximum and minimum amount of work are involved in expansion and compression, respectively; this implies that there cannot be any engine more efficient than Carnot engine.
In actual engines, there is irreversibility due to sudden expansion and compression and also due to the friction of the piston.
Let us work out an example to show the use of Eq.
2.24 Example 2 A Carnot engine works between 3.00 × 102 K and 4.00 × 102 K. Calculate its efficiency.
Solution T = 4.00 × 102 K T = 3.00 ×102 K H C T – T (4.00 × 102 - 3.00 × 102) K H C Using Eq.
8.24 η, = T = 4.00 × 102 K H = 0.250 Using the data given in this example, answer the following SAQ.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 If the Carnot engine mentioned in Example 2 absorbs 8.00 × 102 J heat from the source, calculate the work done by the engine and the heat rejected to the sink.
5.0 THERMODYNAMIC TEMPERATURE SCALE For an engine of the type discussed above, both the efficiency and the ratio q q C/ H can be easily calculated by measurement of the work and heat changes involved.
The ratio, q /q , as shown above, depends only on the temperatures T and T and C H C H is completely independent of the properties of any particular substance.
Thus, it is possible to establish a scale of temperature — the absolute or thermodynamic scale — which is not dependent on any particular substance.
We can see from Eq.
2.25, that if T = 0, η = l. We can now define absolute zero C as that temperature of the sink at which the efficiency of a Carnot engine will be unity.
The size of the degree on this scale is the same as that on the centigrade scale.
The Kelvin unit is named in honour of Lord Kelvin, who arrived at the thermodynamic scale of temperature based on the properties of reversible heat engines.
FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 55Module 2 Reversible, Irreversible Reactions and Entropy of Change Unit 2 Entropy of Change 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Entropy 4.0 Entropy changes in isolated system 5.0 Second law of Thermodynamics 6.0 Entropy changes during expansion and compression 2.0.
Objectives At the end of the lesson, students should be able to; define the term entropy • State the second law of thermodynamics, • calculate the entropy changes for isothermal and non isothermal processes, 3.0 ENTROPY The efficiency of an engine working on the principle of Carnot cycle is of immense use to engineers; but, its major use in physics and chemistry is in the discussion and understanding of the second law of thermodynamics.
It leads to the definition of an, important thermodynamic function called entropy.
The following comparison may help you in understanding the transformation of Eq.
2.24 into Eq.
Eq.
2.24 Eq.
2.26 q q H 2 qC q1 T T H 2 T T C 1 ( ) q + q T – T q + q T – T ( H C ) ( H C) ( 2 1) 2 1 q = T q T H H 2 = 2 If in a Carnot engine, heat q is absorbed at the higher temperature T and q is 2 2 l absorbed at the lower temperature T (actually q will be a negative quantity since l 1 heat is rejected) then, according to Eq.
8.24, 56 …(2.26) q + q T – T 2 1 2 2 = q T 2 2 or 1 +q /q =T/T ...(2.27) 1 2 l 2 i.e., q /T = 1 l Hence, q q ...(2.28) 1 2 + = 0 T T 1 2 Thus, the sum of such quantities as obtained by dividing the heat absorbed reversibly by the temperature is zero over a complete Carnot Cycle.
Any reversible cyclic process can be broken into a large number of infinitesimal Carnot cycles (as in Fig.
2.7).
If in each such small Carnot cycle, heat dq is 1 absorbed at temperature T ’ and dq absorbed at T ’ , then for each small Carnot 1 2 2 cycle, dq /T ’+ dq /T ' = 0 ...(2.30) 1 1 2 2 Summing these over all the cycles we can write in general, sum of terms dq i T over all the cycles = 0 i ...(2.31) where 'i' stands for an individual process of expansion or contraction 'm, each cycle.
Since the summation is continuous, we can replace the summation by integration and have, O∫ dq /T = 0 ….
(2.32) rev where dq is the heat absorbed reversibly at a temperature in an infinitesimal rev ∫ step in the cyclic process and O is the integral over a whole cycle.
Fig.
2.2 Infinitesimal; Carnot cycles.
57Now consider a system going in a reversible manner from an initial state A to an intermediate state B and then back to A via another path (Fig.
2.3) This cyclic Fig.
2.3 The cyclic change ABA.
process can be broken up into a large number of Carnot cycles.
Startling from A and following all these cycles we may reach A once again.
The paths inside the figure cancel out each other and only a zigzag path is left) The larger the number of Carnot cycles, the closer will be the resemblance between this zigzag path and the overall path ABA.
Hence, in the entire cycle, Σ sum of dq /T terms = dq /T = 0 …(2.33) rev rev where once again dq is the heat absorbed reversibly at temperature T in an rev infinitesimal process.
We can break this up into two parts, i.e., one in which we go from A to B and the other in which we go from B to A.
Thus, Σ Σ Σ dq /T = dq /T = dq /T = 0 ….
(2.34) rev rev rev Cycle A → B B → A or in terms of integrals, B A ∫ dq /T = ∫ dq /T + ∫ dq /T = 0 …(2.35) rev rev rev A B and so B A ∫ dq /T = – ∫ dq /T …(2.36) rev rev A B The symbol Σ dq , means rev Cycle T Summation of dq terms over rev T the entire circle.
Σ The term dq /T means rev A→B Summation of the dqrev term for The change from A to B.
58B ∫ Thus, the quantity dq /T is not dependent on the path chosen arid is only rev A dependent on the initial and final states of the system.
This means that it represents a change in some thermodynamic property.
This property is called entropy (S), and we write, dq /T = dS …(2.37) rev Thus, ∫ dS = 0 …(2.38) Also if we represent the entropy of the initial state A as S and that of the final A state B as S , then B B ∫ ∆S = S - S = dq /T …(2.39) B A rev A Let us relate the changes in internal energy and enthalpy to entropy change.
If we now put dq = TdS (from Eq, 8.37), dU = nC dT (from Eq 6.26) and v ; dw = -pdV (from Eq.
6.12) in Eq 6.J7, we get Eq.
8.40.
…(1.7) dU = dq + dw Hence - dU = nC dT = TdS – pdV ...(2.40) v AS per Eq.
1.29 of Unit 1 H = U + pV Differentiation of this gives, dH = dU + pdV + Vdp using Eq.
8.40, dH = TdS - pdV + pdV + Vdp = TdS + VdP …(2.41) Eqs.
2.40 and 2.41 are the combined mathematical statements of the first and second Jaws of thermodynamics.
The first law of thermodynamics is concerned with the conservation of energy and the second; law of thermodynamics introduces the concept of entropy.
It is worth mentioning that the entropy change in a system is given by, dq dS = rev T 59This means that the entropy change in a system is to be calculated assuming the process to be reversible, irrespective; of the fact that the process is reversible or not.
This fact will be highlighted in the next section.
On the basis of the above ideas, answer the following SAQ.
Self Assessment 2 Calculate the change of entropy when 2.40 ×104 J of heat is transferred reversibly and isothermally to a system at 3.00 × 102 K. 4.0 ENTROPY CHANGES IN ISOLATED SYSTEMS We are now interested in estimating the entropy change in an isolated system where cyclic processes of isothermal expansion and compression take place.
Such cyclic processes can occur in two ways; one in which both expansion and compression are reversible and another, in which one is irreversible while the other is reversible.
Let us consider an isolated system consisting of a cylinder which contains a gas between it and a smooth air tight piston and is placed in a heat reservoir.
Isothermal Reversible Expansion and Reversible Compression Let the gas (system) undergo isothermal reversible expansion from volume V to 1 V at a temperature T. In this reversible process, the gas absorbs heat, q , from 2 rev the reservoir; the entropy change of the system, ∆S , is given by, 1 q ∆S , = r e v …(2.43) 1 T Since the reservoir also loses heat q in a reversible way, the entropy change, rev ∆S , of the reservoir is given by, 2 –q rev ∆S , = …(2.44) 2 T The total entropy change of the isolated system, ∆S , in this reversible expansion a process is, given by, q q ∆S = ∆S + ∆S = r e v - r e v = 0 …(2.45) a 1 2 T T T Let the gas undergo isothermal reversible compression back to its original state.
Assume that during this compression, heat lost from the system and the heat gained by the reservoir are both reversible.
Then, the total entropy change (∆S ) b of the isolated system mentioned above, during reversible compression, is also equal to zero.
∆S = 0 …(2.46) b 60 Hence, ∆S in this cyclic process = ∆S + ∆S = 0 …(2.47) a b The entropy change in a process is calculated by dividing the heal change under reversible condition by temperature, whether or not the process is reversible.
This means that the total entropy change in a Reversible cycle is zero.
Let us now see how the entropy changes in a cyclic process involving an irreversible stage.
Isothermal Irreversible Expansion and Reversible Compression Let the gas undergo isothermal irreversible expansion from a volume V , to V at a 1 2 temperature T. In this process, let us assume that the gas absorbs heat q irreversibly whereas the reservoir loses the same heat reversely.
However, the entropy change of the system (∆S ) is still given by Eq.
2.43 per definition.
1 q ∆S = rev …(2.48) 1 T But since the reservoir loses heat q reversibly, the entropy change of the reservoir, ∆S , is given by, 2 - q ∆S = …(2.49) 2 T Hence the total entropy change of the isolated system, ∆S , in this irreversible a expansion process is given by, q q ∆S = ∆S + ∆S = r e v - > 0 …(2.50) a 1 2 T T T Since q > q as per Eq.
2.6 rev Let the gas now undergo isothermal reversible compression such that the heat loss by the system and the heat gain by the surroundings are both reversible.
The total entropy change of the isolated system, ∆S , in this reversible compression process b is given by, ∆S = 0 …(2.51) b Hence, the total entropy change of the isolated system over the whole cycle = ∆S + ∆S > 0 …(2.52) a b Hence for any reversible process or cycle ∆S = 0 …(2.53) total For any irreversible process or cycle ∆S > 0 …(2.54) total 61In other words, the second law of thermodynamics suggests that the entropy must increase in an irreversible or a spontaneous process.
Since all natural processes are irreversible, the entropy of the Universe is continuously increasing.
The first and the second laws of thermodynamics can be summed up as follows: The first law : Energy of the universe is constant.
The second law : Entropy of the universe is tending to a maximum.
The fact that the entropy of an isolated system increases in an irreversible process can be illustrated using Example 3.
Example 3 Assume than an ideal gas undergoes isothermal irreversible expansion and is in contact with a heat reservoir inside an isolated system.
Using the data given in Example 1, calculate the entropy change of (a) the gas, (b) the heat reservoir and (c) the isolated system as a whole.
Solution It is true that the gas expands irreversibly and absorbs heat irreversibly from the heat reservoir.
But the heat reservoir (or as a rule, the surroundings always) would lose (or gain) the heat reversibly As per Example 1 (b), the heat Absorbed by the gas under isothermal irreversible conditions = 2.37 × 105 J.
That is, the gas absorbs 2.37 × 105 J irreversibly from the heat reservoir.
But the heat reservoir loses 2.37 ×105 J reversibly.
It is to be remembered that the entropy is a state function and its value is given by dividing the heat change under reversible conditions by temperature.
a) To calculate the entropy Change of the gas, we have to consider the heat absorbed if the gas were to expand reversibly.
Hence, from Example 1, for q value of the gas, we should use 7.47 × 105 J, which is the heat absorbed under reversible conditions but not 2.37 × 105 J.
The temperature of the gas is 3.00 × 102K Heat change under reversible conditions Using Eq.
2.43, the entropy change = Temperature 7.47 × 105 J = 3.00 × 102 K = 2490 J K-1 b) The heat reservoir loses 2.37 × 105 J heat reversibly, 62Using Eq.
2.37, the entropy change -2.37 × 105 J = of the heat reservoir (∆S ) 3.00 × 102 K reservoir = -790 J K-1 The negative sign is due to loss of heat from the heat reservoir.
c) The total entropy change of the isolated system = ∆S + ∆S gas reservoir = [(2490) + (-790)] J K-1 = 1700 J K-1 Hence the entropy of the isolated system increases by 1700 J K-1 in this irreversible expansion .
To calculate the entropy change in the universe for a particular process, we should know the entropy change of the system and of the surroundings.
We shall study in Sees.
2.8 to 2.11 the ways of calculating the entropy changes in the system.
Let us now see how to calculate the entropy change of the surroundings in any particular process.
The surroundings of a system constitute a huge heat reservoir.
Hence, the heat loss or gain from the surroundings (qsurr) is always (ponsidereo1 reversible; this is true whether the system behaves reversibly or irreversibly.
Let the temperature of the surroundings be Tsurr.
Hence, the entropy change of the qsurr surroundings = Tsurr This is true for all types of processes.
If a chemical reaction takes place at constant, pressure with an enthalpy change, ∆H, then qsurr = - ∆H Hence, the entropy change of the q surr -∆H surroundings = T s u r r = T surr Self Assessment Exercise 3 Calculate the entropy change in the surroundings in the formation of one mole of water from its elements in their standard state at 298.15 K. the standard enthalpy of formation of water is -285.8 kJ mol-1 (Caution: This entropy change in the surroundings is not related to the entropy of water or entropy of formation of water; see Example 7 in this unit.)
635.0 STATEMENTS OF THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS What we have studied so far in this unit can be generalised to obtain the statements of the second law of thermodynamics.
Three such statements are given below: 1.
The entropy of ah isolated system tends to increase and reaches a maximum.
This implies that the most stable state pf an isolated system is the state of maximum entropy.
Since the universe may be considered as^ an isolated system, it follows that the entropy of the universe always increases.
2.
It is impossible to transfer heat from a could body to a hotter body without doing some work.
This was postulated by Clausius.
3.
According to Kelvin, it is not possible to take heat from a source (i.e., a hot reservoir) and convert all of it into work by a cyclic process without losing some of it to a colder reservoir.
6.0 ENTROPY CHANGES DURING EXPANSION AND COMPRESSION In general, the entropy change of the system is defined by the entropy of the final state (B) minus the entropy of the initial state (A).
This is equivalent to A A ∫ dqrev/T which at constant temperature can be: written as 1 ∫ dqrev = qrev/T, B T B where q is the total amount of the heat absorbed reversibly in the process.
rev Entropy Change in the Isothermal Expansion of an Ideal Gas If n mol of an ideal gas is isothermally and reversibly expanded from an initial state in which it has pressure p and volume V to the final state of volume V and 1 1 2 pressure p ., then as shown earlier, 2 q = w = nRT ln V /V = nRT In p /lp …(2.55) rev 2 1 1 2 and hence, ∆S = q /T = nR ln V /V = nR In .p /p rev 2 1 1 2 = 2.303 nR log V /V =2.303 nR log P/p …(2.56) 2 1 l 2 Hence, to calculate the entropy change of an ideal gas during isothermal expansion or compression, n, V and V or p and p must be known.
1 2 1 2 Example 4 1.00 mol of an ideal gas is compressed isothermally and reversibly from 1.00 × 10-2 m3 to 1.00 × 10-3 m3.
Calculate the entropy change.
64 Solution The numerator and denominator in Eq.
2.56 are interchanged along with a sign change, since V < V 2 1, Using Eq.
8.56, ∆S = -2.303 nR log V ,/V 1 2 1.00 × 10-2m3 = -2.303 x l.00 mol × 8.314 J mol K-1 log l.00 × 10-3nr3 = -19.2 J K-1 Entropy Change During Adiabatic Expansion An adiabatic expansion involves no heat change which means ∆S = 0 for the system.
Entropy Change of an Idea Gas when it is Expanded Under Conditions which are not Isothermal Let n mol of an ideal gas be expanded from an initial state of V and T to a final 1 1 state of V and T .
Then according to the first law of thermodynamics (Eq.1.22), 2 2 dq = dU + pdV ...(2.57) rev - Using Eq.
1.26, dU = nC dT v - Where C is the molar heat capacity of the gas under constant volume conditions.
v nRT According to ideal gas equation, p = V Using the above two expressions in Eq.
2.57, - dq = nC dT+ nRT dV/V …(2.58) rev v- or TdS = nC dT + nRTV/V v - dV Hence, dS = 1/T [ nC dT + nRT ] ...(2.59) v V - = nC dT/T + nRdV/V …(2.60) v On integration between the limits T → T , V → V and S → S 1 2 1 2 1 2 S2 T2 V2 ∫ dS = ∫ nC- dT/T + ∫ nRdV/V …(2.61 ) v S1 T1 V1 - Assuming that C is independent of temperature, we have v - T V 2 2 S – S = ∆S = nC In + nR In 2 1 v T V 1 1 ….
(2.62) - T V = 2.303 n (Cv log 2 + R l o g 2 ) T V 1 1 65This is the case when we take T and V to be the variable quantities.
Since for an ideal gas p, y and T are related by the ideal gas equation, only two of these are independent Variables.
Now suppose we consider T and p as the variables.
Let them change from T to T l 2 and p1 to p2 during the process.
Then these are related to the initial and final volumes V and V as 1 2 V /V = T P /T p …(2.63) 2 1 2 1 1 2 Hence, from Eq.
8.62, we have - ∆S = nC In T /T + nR In T P /T p …(2.64) - v 2 1 2 1 1 2 ∆S = nCV In T2/T1 + nR In T2T1+ nR In = p1/p2 …(2.65) - = (Cv + R)n In T2/T1 + nR In p1/p2 …(2.66) - - - - Since C - C = R, C = R + Cv …(2.67) p v p - ΔS = nCp In T /T + nR In p /p 2 1 1 2 - = 2.303 n(C log T /T + R log p /p …(2.68) p 2 1 1 2 Hence, using Eq.
2.62 or 2.68, we can calculate the entropy change of an ideal gas when its pressure or volume changes due to temperature change.
Let us work out an example.
Example 5 1.00 mol of a monoatomic gas initially at 3.00 × 102 K and occupying 2.00 ×10-3 m3 is heated to 3.25 × 102 K and the final volume is 4.00 × 10-3 m3.
Assuming ideal behaviour, calculate the entropy change for the process.
Solution - For a monoatomic gas C = 3/2 R = 3/2 × 8.314 J mol-1 K-1 v = 12.47 J mol-1 K-1 - Using Eq.
2.62, ΔS = 2.303 n(C log T /T + K log V /V ) v 2 t 2 1 = 2.303 1.00 (12.47 log 3 .
2 5 × 1 0 2 + 8 .
3 1 4 l o g 4 .
0 0 × 1 0 - 3 ) J K-1 3.00 × 102 2.00 × 10-3 = 6.76 J K-1 Self Assessment Exercise 4 Show that under isothermal conditions, Eqs.
2.62 and 2.68 reduce to the form of Eq.
8.56 FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 66Module 2 Reversible, Irreversible Reactions and Entropy of Change Unit 3 Entropy of Mixing 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Entropy of Mixing 4.0 Entropy change in phase transitions 5.0 Entropy change in chemical reactions 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to; derive an expression useful in calculating entropy of mixing, • calculate the entropy changes in phase transitions and chemical reactions, 3.0 ENTROPY OF MIXING Suppose that n mol of an ideal gas initially present at pressure p and n mol of 1 2 another ideal gas also at the same initial pressure p are mixed at £ constant temperature so that the total pressure is also p. This is possible by using a vessel of suitable volume.
Let the partial pressure of the first gas in the mixture be p and 1 the partial pressure of the other gas be p .
Then the change in entropy for the first 2 gas from Eq.
2.56 is ΔS = n R in p/p …(2.69) 1 1 1 Similarly for the other gas, ΔS = n R in p/p …(2.70) 2 2 2 The total entropy of mixing, ΔS is hence mix’ ΔS = ΔS +ΔS =n R In p/p + n R In p/p …(2.71) mix 1 2 1 1 2 2 If the mole fractions of the gases in the mixture are x and x respectively, then 1 2 according to Dalton's law of partial pressures, ΔS = n R In p/x p + n R In p/x p …(2.72) mix 1 1 2 2 ΔS = n R In p/x p + n R In 1/x …(2.73) mix 1 1 2 2 67l l = 2.303 n R log /x + 2.303n R log /x 1 1 2 2 1 Hence, ΔS = 2.303 R (n , log l/x + n log /x ) …(2.74) mix 1 1 2 2 = -2.303 R (n , log x +n log x ) 1 1 2 2 If we know n , and n , ΔS can be calculated.
The mole fractions x and x are 1 2 mix 1 2 less than one, since x +x = 1; as a result of this, log 1/x and log l/x are positive.
1 2 1 2 Hence, ΔS is positive.
mix Partial pressure of a gas = Total pressure x mole fraction of the gas Hence, p = px and p =p x 1 2 2 2 Example 6 Calculate the entropy of mixing of 1.00 mol of H with 2.00 mol of Q assuming 2 2 that no chemical reaction occurs.
Solution n = 1.00 mol; n = 2.00 mol H2 O2 n 1.00 mol H2 x = = = 0.333 H2 n + n 3.00 mol H2 O2 Similarly, 2.00 mol x = = 0.667 O2 3.00 mol Using Eq.
2.74 ΔS = 2.303 R (n log 1 + n l o g 1 .)
mix H2 H2 xH2 xO2 = 2.303 × 8.314 (1.00 log 1 + 2 .
0 0 l o g 1 . )
J K-1 0.333 0.667 = 15.88 J K.-1 On the basis of what you have studied in this section, answer the following SAQ.
Self Assessment Exercise 5 Does the entropy of mixing of ideal gases depend on temperature?
(Hint: Examine Eq.
2.74) 4.0 ENTROPY CHANGES IN PHASE TRANSITIONS The change of matter from one phase (solid, liquid, gas, allotropic form) into another is called phase transition.
Such changes take place at definite 68temperatures called transition temperatures (melting points, boiling points etc.)
at a given pressure.
These transitions are accompanied by absorption or evolution of heat (called latent heat).
Since absorption or evolution of heat at constant temperature leads to an entropy change, the entropy of transition is given as, ΔS = q /T = ∆H /T …(2.75) trans rev trans Eq.
2.75 is valid only when the transition takes place in a reversible manner, i.e., when the two phases are in equilibrium.
Thus, when one mole of a solid melts to the liquid phase, the entropy of fusion is given by ∆H fus ΔSfus = …(2.76) T f where T is the melting point land ∆H is the molar enthalpy of fusion.
Similarly, f fus ∆H ΔS = vap …(2.77) vap T B where T is the boiling point and ∆H is the molar enthalpy of vaporization.
B vap It is obvious that the entropy of freezing and condensation (vapour into liquid) will be equal to – ΔS and – ΔS , respectively.
, fus vap In a similar manner, we can define the entropy change accompanying the transition of a substance from an allotropic form to another.
If such a transition takes place at a temperature T and, ∆H is the molar enthalpy of transition, trans trans then the entropy change accompany the transition is, ∆H trans ΔS = …(2.78) trans T trans Thus, in phase transitions, ∆S values can be calculated from the corresponding ∆H values.
Using the material given above, answer the following SAQ.
Self Assessment Exercise 6 Calculate the entropy of fusion of benzene solid, if its melting point is 279 K and its enthalpy of fusion is 10.6: k J mol-1 5.0 ENTROPY CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS Let us now calculate the entropy change accompanying a general chemical reaction of the type, aA + bB+....→+ cC + dD + … …(2.79) 69 We define the entropy change for a reaction (∆S) as the difference between the r total entropy of the products and the total entropy of the reactants.
Thus, if S , A SB....are the entropies of one mole of reactants, A, B, etc., and S , S ...., of the C D products, C, D, etc., then; Δ = (cS + dS + ….)
– (aS + bS + …..) …(2.80) rS C D A B where c, d, a, b...etc., are the stoichiometric coefficients in Eq.
8.79.
The variation of entropy change for a reaction with temperature can be readily deduced from Eq.
2.80 by differentiating with respect to temperature at constant pressure.
Hence, ( ) ( ) ∂(∆rS) ∂SC ∂SD = c + d + … ∂T ∂T ∂T p p p ( ) ( ) ∂SA ∂SA …(2.81) – a + b + … ∂T ∂T p p According to Eq.
2.41 dH = TdS + Vdp - or C dT = TdS + Vdp p At constant pressure (dp = 0), - C dT = TdS p p - or dS C p p = dT T ( ) - or ∂S C p = ∂T T - C is the molar heat capacity of a substance at; constant pressure.
p Using the above result in Eq.
2.81, - - - ∂(∆S) …(2.82) r [cCp(C) + dC (D) +….]
– [aC (A) + bC (B)…] p p p ∂T = T p ∂(∆rS) = ∆ C p /T …(2.83) 70 ∂T p where ∆C is the difference between the heat capacities of the products and P reactants at constant pressure.
dT or d(∆S) = ∆C …(2.84) r P T Assume that ∆S , and ∆S are the entropy change at temperatures T and T and r 1 r 2 1 2 ∆C is independent of temperature.
Then Eq.
2.84 on integration gives, p ∆S T ∫ r 2 ∫ 2 dT d(∆S) = ∆C r p T ∆S T …(2.85) r 1 1 or ∆S - ∆S = C In T /T …(2.86) r 2 _ r 1 p 2 1 Eq.
2.86 is useful in determining ∆S value of a reaction at any particular r temperature, if it is known at any other temperature along with C values.
p Entropy values of substances can be determined using the third law of thermodynamics; we shall study this in the next unit.
The entropy values of some of the substances in their standard states at 298.15 K are given in Table 8.1.
These are known as standard entropy (S°) values.
Similar to the Calculation of AJS as per Eq.
2.&0, we can calculate ∆S° from the standard entropy values of the r reactants and the products.
The standard states of the substances will be defined in the next unit.
Table 2.1: Standard Entropy (S°) values at 298.15 K Substance S ° /J K -1 mol-1 Substance So/J K-1 mol-1 C (graphite) 5.7 C H (l) 173.3 6 6 C (diamond) 2.4 He (g) 126.2 AgCl(S) 96.2 H (g) 130.7 2 AgBr(s) 107.1 Cl (g) 223.1 2: Ag(s) 42.6 CO (g) 213.7 2 Hg(l) 76.0 O (g) 205.1 2 71Br ( l) 152.2 CH (g) 186.3 2 4 H 0(l ) 69.9 2 Example 7 Calculate the standard entropy of formation of H O(l) at 298.15 K using Table 2 2.18.
Solution H (g) + 1 O (g) → H O(l) 2 2 2 2 The standard entropy of formation of water (∆S° (H O) can be calculated using f 2 Eq.
2.80.
Note that the substances are in their standard states at 298.15 K; hence S° values are used instead of S. ∆S°(H 0) = So (H O) – (So (H ) + 1 So (O )) f 2 2 2 2 2 = [69.9 - (130.7 + ( 1 × 205.1))]J K-1 2 Since one mole of water is formed, ∆S°(H O) = - 163.4 J mol-1 K-1 f 2 Self Assessment Exercise 7 i) Calculate the entropy change of the system for the combustion of one mole of methane gas at 298.15 K; use Table 8.1. ii) Calculate the entropy change; of the surroundings for the combustion of one mole of methane gas at 298.15 K, if the molar enthalpy; of combustion of methane is -8.90 × 105 J mol-1.
2.12 SUMMARY In this unit, we described the second law of thermodynamics and the concept of entropy.
We started the unit indicating the main aspects of reversible, irreversible and cyclic processes.
We then described Carnot cycle and derived an equation for calculating its efficiency.
Using this equation, the concept of entropy was arrived at.
The expressions were derived for calculating the {entropy changes in different physical processes.
The {method of calculation of entropy changes in chemical reactions was indicated towards the end of the unit.
FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 72Module 3 Spontaneous and Nonspontaneous Processes UNIT 1 FREE ENERGY FUNCTIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Spontaneous and Nonspontaneous Processes 4.0 Helmholtz Free Energy and Gibbs Free Energy 5.0 Changes in A and G 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Units 1 and 2, we studied the application of the first law of thermodynamics in calculating the enthalpy and internal energy changes of the reactions.
Such energy calculations do not tell us whether a given reaction is feasible or not.
In Unit 2 the concept of entropy was introduced through the second law of thermodynamics; we studied that the total entropy value of the system and the surroundings can help us in deciding the spontaneity of a reaction.
But the main difficulty is that it is not always possible to estimate the entropy change of: the Surroundings.
In this unit, we will introduce two more thermodynamic quantities known as Gibbs free energy (G) and Helmholtz free energy (A).
We shall also discuss the importance of the Gibbs free energy change (∆G) in predicting whether a given process (physical or chemical) will occur spontaneously or not.
We snail derive Maxwell relations and state their applications.
We shall then arrive at Gibbs-Helmholtz and Clausius-Clapeyron equation.
We shall also explain the applications of these two equations.
We shall then examine the criteria for spontaneity.
We shall illustrate the utility of the Gibbs free energy of formation of substances in calculating the reaction free energies.
Finally we shall explain the third law of thermodynamics and discuss its application in calculating the entropies of the substances.
Objectives After studying this unit, you should be able to: • distinguish between spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes, • define Helmholtz free energy (∆) and Gibbs free energy (G), • Calculate ∆ A and ∆G for different processes, 3.0 SPONTANEOUS AND NONSPONTANEOUS PROCESSES In this section, we will explain how spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes 73differ.
Let us try to understand what a spontaneous process is.
We know that i) water flows down the hill spontaneously ; ii) a gas expands spontaneously into vacuum iii) heat is conducted spontaneously from the hot end of a metal bar to the colder end until the temperature of the bar is same throughout iv) a gas diffuses spontaneously into another gas.
But the reverse of the above changes does not occur spontaneously.
All natural processes occur spontaneously.
Thus we can define that a spontaneous or a natural process occurs in a system by itself.
No external force is requited to make the process continue.
On the other hand a nonspontaneous process will not occur unless some external force is continuously applied.
A chemist is always interested in knowing whether, under a given set of conditions, a reaction or a process is dq feasible or not.
According to the second law of thermodynamics, dS > in T which the equality refers to a system undergoing a reversible process and the inequality refers to an irreversible process.
For an isolated system for which dq = 0, the above equation is reduced to dS > 0.
In an isolated system, an irreversible change is always spontaneous.
This is because in such systems, no external force can interact with the system.
Thus, the tendency of entropy of an isolated system to increase can be used as a criterion for a spontaneous change.
Is this always true?
Let us examine this question.
Water freezes to crystalline ice spontaneously at 263 K. Ice is in a more ordered state than water and the entropy decreases in freezing.
How do we explain the above process?
The answer to this question lies in the fact that we must always consider the total entropy change, i.e., the entropy change of the universe.
This entropy change is equal to the sum of the entropy changes of the system and the surroundings.
∆S = ∆S = ∆S + ∆S .... (3.1) Total Universe System surroundings Eq.
9.1 is very difficult to apply for testing the spontaneity of a process.
This is so since for evaluating the total entropy change, we have to evaluate ∆S for the surroundings also.
In many cases, such calculations are extremely difficult and sometimes not eyen practical.
Therefore, it will be advantageous if we can redevelop the criteria for spontaneity in such a manner that only changes in the properties of the system are considered.
For this purpose, we define two energy functions called Helmholtz free energy and Gibbs free energy in the next section.
Any process which can take place without the application external force is a spontaneous process.
All natural processes are spontaneous.
Thermodynamic definition of a spontaneous process is given in Sec.
9.8 Self Assessment Exercise 1 74 Explain why the change in entropy in a system is not always a suitable criterion for spontaneous change?
4.0 HELMHOLTZ FREE ENERGY AND GIBBS FREE ENERGY Helmholtz free energy (A) and Gibbs free energy (G) are defined by the expressions, A = U — TS .... (3.2) And G = H – TS .... (3.3) since H = U + pV G= U + pV-TS .... (3.4) A (denoting Helmohltz free energy) comes from the German word.
Arbeit, which means work Since U, H, p, S, V and T are state functions, A and G are also dependent only on the state of the system.
In simpler words, a system in a given state has definite values of A and G. In the next section we shall derive equations useful in calculating changes in A and G at constant temperature.
Physical significance of A and G Differentiating Eq.
3.2, we obtain …(3.5) dA = dU - TdS – SdT At constant temperature (dT = 0), we have dA = dU – TdS …(3.6) We know (from Unit 8, Eq.
8.37) that for a reversible process TdS = dq rev Also Eq.
6.7 for a reversible process gives dU = dq + dw nv rev Substituting the values for TdS and dU in Eq.
3.6, we obtain, dA = (dq + dwrev) – d rev qrev 75or dA = dw .... (3.7) rev or – dA = –dw .... (3.8) rev Since the process is carried out reversibly, – dw represents the maximum work rev done by the system.
This is an important conclusion which states that the change in Helmholtz; free energy is equal to the amount of reversible work done on the system; or decrease in Helmholtz free energy (– dA) is the maximum amount of work that can be obtained front the system (–dw ) during the given change.
As a rev result, the function A is sometimes also referred to as the work function.
In a similar way, the differentiation of Eq.
3.4 yields, dG = dU + pdV+ Vdp –SdT– TdS .... (3.9) At constant temperature (dT = 0) and pressure (dp = 0), Eq.
3.9 is reduced to dG = dU + pdV – TdS …(3.10) Once again if the process is carried out reversibly, using Eq 1.7 (dU = dq + dw ) and TdS = dq , we obtain from Eq.
3.10 rev rev rev dG = dq + dw + pdV - dq rev rev rev or dG = dw + pdV .... (3.11) rev Now dw consists of expansion work (- pdV) and some; other kind of work rev called the useful or the net work dw done on the system.
Replacing dw by net rev - pdV + dw in Eq.
3.11, we obtain, net dG = - pdV + dw + pdV net or dG = dw ...(3.12 ) net or - dG = -dw net Thus decrease in Gibbs free energy (-dG) is a measure of the maximum useful work that can be obtained from the system at constant temperature and pressure.
Most experiments in the laboratory are carried out under such conditions.
So the property G or the change associated with it (∆G) is very important.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 What is the physical significance of decrease in Gibbs free energy?
4.0 CHANGES IN A AND G 76 When a system goes from state 1 to state 2 at constant temperature, the change in A can be obtained from Eq.
9.6 by integration between the limits A →A , U → U and 1 2 1 2 S →S .
1 2 A2 U2 S2 ∫ ∫ ∫ dA = dU - T dS A1 U1 S1 or A – A = U –U – T (S – S ) 2 1 2 1 2 1 or ∆A = ∆U - T∆S .... (3.14) The change in G when a system goes from a state 1 to state 2 can be obtained by 2 integrating Eq.
3.10 at constant temperature and pressure between the limits G → G , U → U , V → V and S → S .
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 G U V S 2 2 2 2 ∫ ∫ ∫ ∫ dG = dU + P dV – T dS G U V S 1 1 1 1 or G –G , = U – U + p(V – V ) – T(S – S ) 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 or ∆G = ∆U + p∆V - T∆S We know that at constant pressure, ∆U + p∆V = ∆H (Eq.
6.32) Hence, ∆G = ∆H - T∆S .... (3.15) Example 1 For the reaction, 2NO(g) + O (g) → 2NO (g) 2 2 Calculate ∆G at 7.00 × 102 K. The entropy and enthalpy changes at 7.00 × 102 K are respectively, -1.45 × 102 J mol-1 K-1 and -1.J13 x 102 kJ mol-1 Solution ∆H = -1.13 × l02 k J mol-1 ∆S = -1.45 × 102 J K-1 mol-1 = 1.45 × 102 × l0 kJ K-1 mol-1 = -1.45 × 10-1 kJ K-1 mol-1 T = 7.00 × 102 K ∆G = ∆H - T∆S or ∆G = (-1.l3 × l02 kJ mor-1) -7.00 × l02 K (-l.45 × l0-1 kJK-1 mor-l) = -1.13 × 102 kJ mor-1 + 1.015 × 102 kJ mol-1 = -0.115 × 102 kJ mol-1 = = -11.5 kJ mol-1 77 Variation of A and G with Temperature From Eq.
3.5 dA = dU – TdS – SdT Since TdS = dq dA = dU – SdT – dq .... (3.16) Substituting from the first law of thermodynamics, dU = dq – pdV in Eq 3.16, we have dA = dq – pdV – SdT – dq or dA = – pdV – SdT .... (3.17) From Eq.
3.17 at constant volume (dV = 0), we have (∂A) = – S (∂T) V V ∂A or = – S .... (3.18) ∂T V At constant temperature (dT = 0), Eq.
3.17is reduced to (∂A) = – p(∂V) T T or ∂A = – p .... (3.19) ∂V V Equations similar to Eqs.
3.18 and 3.19 can be obtained in the case of Gibbs free energy.
From Eq.3.9 we have dG = dU + pdV + Vdp - SdT - TdS Since dq = TdS from Second law of thermodynamics and dU = dq — pdV from first law of thermodynamics, dG = dq - pdV + pdV + Vdp - SdT – dq or dG = Vdp – SdT .... (3.20) At constant pressure (dp = 0), Eq.
3.20 is reduced to 78(∂G) = -S(∂T) p p or ∂ G = - S .... (3.21) ∂T P At constant temperature (dT = 0), we have from Eq.
3.20 (∂G) = V(∂p) .... (3.22) T T ∂G or = V .... (3.23) ∂P P If G 1, and G2 are the free energies of the system in the initial and the final states, respectively, then it constant temperature, the free energy change (∆G) is given by integrating Eq.
3.22.
G P 2 2 ∫ ∫ ∆G = dG = Vdp G P 1 1 Where p and p are the initial and the final pressures, respectively.
1 2 For n mol of an ideal gas nRT pV = nRT or V = P G P .
2 2 ∆G = ∫ nRT d p = n R T ∫ dp .
.
G p P p 1 1 = nRT In = 2.303 nRT log P P 2 2 P P 1 1 Since pressure is inversely proportional to volume for an ideal gas at constant temperature, we have, P V ∆ G = 2.303 nRT log 2 = 2 .
3 0 3 n R T l o g 1 ... (3.25) P V 1 2 Example 2 Calculate the free energy change which occurs when l.00 mol of an ideal gas expands reversibly and isothermally at 3.10 × 102 K from an initial volume of 5.00 × 10-2 m3 to 1.00 m3.
79Solution n = 1.00 mol R = 8.314.
J K-1 mol-1 V = 5.00 × l0-2m3 1 V ∆G = 2.303 nRT log 1 V 2 = 2.303 × 1.00 mol 8.314 J mol-1 K-1 × 3.10 x l02 K log 5.00 x 102m3 1.00 m3 = (5.94 × 103 log 1 . )
J 20 = (5.94 × 103 log 20) J = - 7.72 KJ A state function depends only on the state of the system.
It does not depend on that history of the system or how that state has been achieved.
dU = dq – pdV For a reversible process.
dq = TdS Hence, dU = TdS – pdV Self Assessment Exercise 3 From the first and second laws of thermodynamics drive the following relations: ∂A i) = - S ∂T v ∂G ii) = V ∂P T FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 80Module 3 Spontaneous and Nonspontaneous Processes Unit 2 Maxwell and Clausius-Clapeyron equation 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Maxwell relations, 4.0 Clausius-Clapeyron equation 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to; derive Maxwell relations, • derive Gibbs-Helmholtz equation, • explain the significance of Clausius-Clapeyron equation, 3.0 THE MAXWELL RELATIONS So far we have learnt about the five functions U, H, S, A and G which are state functions and extensive variables.
The various expressions useful in estimating the changes in the above functions in a closed system in terms of temperature, pressure, volume and entropy may be written as: dU = TdS-pdV ....(2.40) dH = TdS + Vdp ....(2.41) dA = -SdT – pdV from Eq ....3.17 dG = -SdT + Vdp from Eq.
3.20 At constant volume (dV = 0), Eq.
2.40 becomes (∂U) = T (∂S) V V ∂U or = V ∂S V and at constant entropy (dS = 0), Eq.
2.40 becomes (∂U) = P (∂V) S S ∂U or = -P .... (3.27) ∂V V Differentiating Eq.
3.26 with respect to volume at constant entropy and Eq.
3.27 81with respect to entropy at constant volume, we get ∂2U ∂T = ∂V∂S ∂V S ∂2U ∂P or = - ∂S∂V ∂S V Since U is a State function, it follows that ∂2U ∂2U = ∂V∂S ∂V S ∂T ∂P or = - .... (3.28) ∂V ∂S S V Following the same mathematical procedure as described above, the following expressions can be easily derived: ∂T ∂V From Eq.
2.41, = …(3.29) ∂P ∂V S S ∂S ∂V From Eq.
3.17, = …(3.30) ∂V ∂T T V ∂S ∂V From Eq.
3.20, = - …(3.31) ∂P ∂T T P Eqs.
3.28 to 3.31 are known as Maxwell relation.
The Maxwell relations are important because they equate the rate of change of a particular quantity (which cannot be determined experimentally) with the rate of change of volume, pressure or temperature (which can be determined experimentally).
3.1 GIBBS-HELMHOLTZ EQUATION The dependence of Gibbs free energy no temperature can be expressed in several ways.
Starting from the definition (Eq.
2.3) G = H – TS 82 G – H or -S = T Substituting the expression for —S in Eq.
3.21, we obtain, ∂G G – H ….
(3.32) = ∂T T P Sometimes it is important to know the variation of G/T on temperature.
By differentiating G/T with temperature at constant pressure, we obtain ∂ (G/T) 1 ∂G 1 .
= - G … (3.33) ∂T T ∂T T2 P P H = U + pV dH = dU + pdV + Vdp But dU + pdV = dq = TdS Hence, dH = TdS + Vdp U is a thermodynamic function and dU is a totals differential (see the Appendix for the explanation).
The change in U with respect to both V and S is same whether we change U with respect to V first, keeping S, constant and then with respect to S. keeping V constant, or vice versa.
Also see Eqs.
9.77 and 9.78 in sec.
9.
10.
∂G Substituting the value of from Eq.
3.32 into Eq.
3.33, we get ∂T p ∂ (G/T) G – H 1 .
= - G ∂T T2 T2 P ∂ (G/T) G – H – G .
Hence, = ∂T T2 P ∂ (G/T) H .
or = …(3.34) ∂T T2 P Eq.
3.34 is known as Gibbs-Helmholtz equation and it can be put in another form 1 .
by remembering that d(I/T) – ( ) dT; so on replacing ∂T in Eq 3.34 by T2 1 .
T2 83-T2 ∂( ), we have ∂ (G/T) H .
= - -T2(1/T) T2 P ∂ (G/T) .
or = H …(3.35) ∂(1/T) P Similar equation for Helmholtz free energy can also be derived in the form ∂ (A/T) U .
= - …(3.36) ∂T T2 V ∂ (A/T) = U …(3.37) ∂ (1/T) V The dependence of Gibbs free energy on temperature can be expressed in another way also.
Suppose the G is the Gibbs free energy for a system in the initial state 1 and at temperature T. Let the temperature change to T + dT and the corresponding value of free energy to G + dG .
1 1 Similar for the final state of the system, let the Gibbs free energies be G and G + 1 2 dG at temperature T and T + dT, respectively.
At constant pressure, Eq.
3.20 to 2 reduces to (∂G) = -S(∂T) .... (3.38) p p and so (∂G ) = -S (∂T) .... (3.39) 1 p 1 p (∂G ) = -S (∂T) .... (3.40) 2 p 2 p Where S and S are the entropies of the system in the initial and the final states, 1 2 respectively.
Subtraction of Eq.
3.40 gives (∂G - ∂G ) = - S (∂T) – (-S (∂T) ) 2 1 p 2 p 1 p or [∂(G - G )] = - (S - S ) (∂T) ) 2 1 p 2 2 p or [∂∆G)] = - ∆S (∂T) .... (3.41) p p ∂ (∆G) ∂ T i.e., V = - ∆S …(3.42) As per Eq.
3.15 ∆G = ∆H – T∆S = ∆H + T (- ∆S) …(3.43) Substituting Eq.
3.42 in Eq.
3.15 we have ∂ (∆G) ∂ T V 84 ∆G = ∆H + T 85 The term ∂(∆G) and ∂(∆A) are the temperature coefficients of ∆G and ∆A at constant ∂T p ∂T p pressure and volume, respectively.
The temperature coefficient of a particular parameter tells us how that parameter varies with respect to temperature.
If ∂(∆G) for example is ∂T p (i) Positive, it means ∆G increase with increasing temperature: and (ii) negative, it means ∆G decrease with increasing temperature Also, ∂(∆G) ∂T p Eq.
3.43 is also known as Gibbs-Helmholtz equation and is applicable for any = ∆G - ∆G process, reve2rsible1 or irreversible, since the values of G and H depend only T – T 2 1 on the initial and final states of the system.
For a reaction at constant volume, siwmhielarer ∆eGqu aantido ∆nG fo arr He tehlem frheoe letnze rfgrey ec heannegregs ya tc taemn pbeer adtuerreisv, eTd ainnd t The.
form.
2 1 2 1 ∆A = ∆U + T ∂ (∆A) ∂T …(3.44) V The Gibbs-Helmholtz equation permits the calculation of ∆U or ∆H provided ∆A or ∆G and their respective temperature coefficients, ∂ (∆A) o r ∂ ( ∆G) are known ∂T ∂T V p Example 3 The free energy change ∆G for a particular process is -121.00 kJ mol-1 at 298 K and -117.00 kJ mol-1 at 308 K. Calculate the enthalpy change for the process at 303 K. Solution ∆G at 298 K = -121.00 kJ mol-1 ∆G at 308 K = -117.00 kJ mol-1 ∂ (∆G) (∆G – ∆G ) [(1-117.00 KJ mol-1) – (–121.00 KJ mol-1)] = 3 0 8 2 9 8 = ∂T (303 – 298) K (308 – 298) K p = 4.00 × 10-1 KJ mol - 1 = 4.00 × 10-1 KJ mol-1 K-1 10 k 86At 303 K, the value of ∆G may be taken as the average of at 298 K and 308 K. Hence, ∆G at 303 K = -117.00 KJ mol-1 – 121.00 mol-1 2 = - 119.00 kJ mol-1 Substituting the values in the Gibbs-Helmholtz equation ∆G = ∆H + T ∂(∆G) ∂T p -119.00 kJ mol-1 = ∆H + 303 K × 4.00 × 10-1 kJ mol-1 K-1 = ∆H + 121.20 kJ mol-1 ∆H = - 121.20 KJ mol-1 -119.00 kJ mol-1 = -240.20 kJ mol-1 When applied to chemical reactions, the Gibbs-Helmholtz equation will take the following form: Initial static (Reactants) → Final state (Products) Free energy G G i f Eq.
3.34 applies to both the initial and final states, i.e.
∂ (G/T) H ∂G H .
i = - i and = - f ∂T T2 ∂T T2 P P Subtracting we get, ( ) ( ) ∂ G G H H .
fi - i = - f - i ∂T T T T2 T2 P ∂ (∆G/T) ∆H or = - ∂T T2 …(3.45) p The above equation is important because from the knowledge of enthalpy of reactions we can predict whether increase in temperature will favour the reaction in one direction or other.
874.0 CLAUSIUS-CLAPEYRON EQUATION From Eq.
3.30 we have ( ) ( ) ∂p ∂S = ∂T ∂V V T The above equation can be applied to any closed system consisting of two phases of the same substance in equilibrium with each other.
Let us consider a closed system in which a: pure liquid and its vapour are in equilibrium with each other.
A (liquid) A (vapour) The vapour pressure of the liquid (A) depends upon the temperature but is independent of the volume of the liquid and the vapour.
Hence, ( ) ∂p = dp …(3.46) ∂T V dT When one mole of the liquid is vaporized isothermally and reversibly in such a way that during the process, the liquid and the vapour remain in equilibrium, the increase in enthalpy is equal to the molar enthalpy of vaporization (∆H ).
Since vap the process is reversible, it follows from Eq.
2.77, ∆H vap ∆S = …(3.47) T where T is temperature.
Let the increase in volume and entropy during the vaporization of one mole of liquid be AV and AS, respectively.
Then we have at constant temperature (using Eq.
3.47.
( ) ∂S ∆S ∆H vap = = ∂V ∆V T∆V T …(3.46) Comparing Eqs.
3.30, 3.46 and 3.48, we have dp ∆H vap …(3.47) = dT T∆V 88 Eq.
3.49 was first deduced by Clapeyron (1834) and is know as Clapeyron equation.
It was later extended by Clausius (1850).
Eq.
3.49 was derived for a system consisting of liquid and vapour in equilibrium.
The same equation can, however, be derived for equilibrium between any two phases such as, solid and liquid, solid and vapour, two crystalline forms of the same Substance etc.
For a system consisting of water in the two phases, liquid and vapour, in equilibrium with each other, Water (liquid) Water (vapour) Eq.
3.49 can be written as, dp ∆H vap = dT T(V – V) g l Where ∆H = Molar enthalpy of vaporization of water fus V = Molar volume of water vapour at temperature T g V = Molar volume of liquid water at temperature T 1 For a system consisting of ice at its melting point, the two phases in equilibrium are ice and liquid water.
Water (ice) Water (liquid) Eq.
3.49 may be written as dp ∆H fus …(3.50) dT T(V – V ) l s Where ∆H = Molar enthalpy of fusion of ice fus V = Molar volume of water in the solid (ice) state s V = Molar volume of water in the liquid state l In the liquid vapour equilibrium, Clausius assumed that the molar volume of a liquid is much less than the molar volume of its vapour; hence V —V can be g l taken approximately as V .
Eq.
3.50 may be written as, g dp ∆H vap dT TV …(3.52) g Assuming that the vapour behaves ideally, V = RT/p …(3.53) g Substituting for the volume V in Eq.
3.52, we have g 89 dp ∆H p ∆H p …(3.54) vap vap dT = T × R T = RT2 Eq.
3.54 is known as Clausius-Clapeyron equation and can be rewritten as, dp ∆H dT …(3.55) vap dT = R × T 2 Eq 3.55 can be integrated between limits p → p and T →T assuming that ∆H 1 2 1 2 vap remains constant over a small range of temperature.
p2 T2 ∫ dp ∆H ∫ dT p = R v a p T 2 ….
(3.56) p 1 T 1 p - ∆H 1 1 or In p2 = R v a p T - T …(3.57) 1 1 2 p ∆H 1 1 or 2.303 log 2 = vap - …(3.58) p R T T 1 1 2 p ∆H T – T 2 vap 2 1 or log p = 2 .303 R T T …(3.59) 1 1 2 This is integrated form of Clausius-clapeyron equation The left hand side of Eq.
9.56 is integrated using formula 2 of Sec.
1.6 of Unit1.
The right hand side of Eq.
3.5 is integrated using formula 1 of Sec.
1.6.
Substitute x1 = T1, x2 = T2, x = T, m = -2 and a = H in that formula vap R T T 1 1 Hvap ∫ dT =  H v a p ∫ T -2 dT R T R T T 2 2 T 1 =  RH vap - T -1 T 2 = - H vap R 1 .
1 .
T T 2 1 = - H vap R 90 The applications of Clausius-Clapeyron equation are given below: 1.
If the vapour pressure of a liquid at a different temperatures are know then its molar enthalpy of vaporization can be calculated using Eq.3.59 2.
If the vapour pressure of a liquid at any one temperature is known then that at another temperature can be calculated using Eq.
3.59.
3.
Eq.
3.59 can also be used for calculating the effect of pressure on the boiling point of a liquid.
Example 4 T 1 1T .
T 2 1 .
– 1 .
T T 2 2 Calculating the vapour pressure of water at 298 K. Molar enthalpy of vaporization of water is its normal boiling point is 4.10 × 104 J mol-1 Solution The standard pressure is 100 × 102 pa and the boiling point of water at this pressure (known as its normal boiling point) is 373 K P = ?
1 T = 298 K P2 = 1.00 × 102 pa 1 R = 8.314 J mol-1 K-1 T2 = 373 K ∆H = 4.10 × 104 J mol-1 vap Substituting these values in Clausius-Clapeyron equation (eq.
3.59).
p ∆H T – T 2 vap 2 1 log = p 2.303 R T T 1 1 2 log 1 .
0 0 × 1 0 5 P a 4.10 × 104 J mol-1 (373 K – 298 K) = × p 2.303 × 8.314 J mol-1 K-1 373 K × 298K 1 =1.445 or log 1.00 × 105 – log P = 1.445 1 91 or 5.00 – log p = 1.445 1 or log p = 5.00 – 1.455 = 3.555 1 or p = Antilog of 3.555 = 3.59 × 103 Pa 1 92Self Assessment Exercise 4 Either boils at 306 K at 1.00 × 105 Pa pressure.
At what temperature will it boil at a pressure of 9.85 × 103 Pa?
Given that the molar enthalpy of vaporization of either is 2.74 × 104 J mol-1 FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 93Module 3 Spontaneous and Nonspontaneous Processes Unit 3 CRITERIA FOR SPONTANEITY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Criteria if or spontaneity 4.0 Gibbs Free Energy 5.0 Third law of thermodynamics 6.0 Summary 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to; explain the criteria if or spontaneity, state and explain the third law of thermodynamics.
3.0 Criteria for Spontaneity We have seen that entropy can be used as a criterion for determining the spontaneity of a process.
We can also express the criteria for spontaneity in terms of other thermodynamic properties, namely U, H, A and G. Internal Energy Change as a Criterion for Spontaneity From the first law of thermodynamics, we know dq = dU – dw (true for irreversible or reversible process) and since dq =TdS (as per Eq.
2.37) rev TdS = dU – dw (for a reversible process) For an irreversible process, dq < dq irrev rev Hence, dq < TdS.
irrev So, for an irreversible process, dU – dw < TdS or TdS > dU – dw Thus for any process: TdS > dU – dw or TdS > dU+ (-dw) If we consider only the pressure-volume work (dw = pdV), then TdS > dU + pdV Subtracting TdS from both sieves, 0 > dU + pdV – TdS 94or dU+pdV – TdS < 0 ….
(3.60) ...i.e., for a process to be, feasible, the condition given in Eq.
3.60 must hold good.
At constant volume (dV=0) and entropy (dS = 0), Eq.
3.60 thus reduces to (∂U) < 0 …(3.61) V.S According to Eq.
3.61 when the volume and entropy remain constant, the internal energy of a system remains constant in a reversible process [(∂U) 0] V.S = whereas in an irreversible process the internal energy decreases [(∂U) < 0].
V.S Enthalpy Change as a Criterion for Spontaneity We know that H = U + pV Differentiating the above expression, we get dH = dU+pdV + Vdp Since from first law, dU = dq + dw dH = dq + dw + pdV + Vdp Considering only pressure-volume work done on the system, we can write as per Eq.1.14 dw = - pdV ; we then have dH = dq – pdV + pdV + Vdp or dH = dq + Vdp or dH – Vdp =dq (true for both reversible and irreversible processes).
For a reversible process dq = TdS and, for an irreversible process dq < TdS.
rev irrev Thus we have for any process dH-Vdp < TdS …(3.62) At constant pressure (dp = 0) and constant entropy (dS = 0) Eq.
3.62 reduces to (∂H) < 0 …(3.63) p.S According to Eq.
3.63, when the pressure and entropy remain constant, the entropy of a system remains constant in a reversible process [(∂H) < 0], whereas p.S in an irreversible process the enthalpy decreases [(∂H) < 0].
p.S Helmholtz Free Energy change as a Criterion for Spontaneity From A = U – TS we have 95dA = d U – TdS –SdT Since dU = dq + dw dA = dq + dw – TdS – SdT dA-dw+TdS+SdT=dq (true for both eversible and irreversible processes) Since dq = TdS and dq <TdS rev irrev dA – dw+TdS+SdT < TdS or dA – dw +SdT < 0 (cancelling TdS from both the sides) Considering only pressure-volume work done on the system, (dw= – pdV), we have or dA+pdV+SdT < 0 At constant volume (dV = 0) and constant temperature (dT = 0), the above form reduces to, (∂A) , < 0 ...(3.64) T v According to Eq.
9.64, when the temperature and volume remain constant, the Helmholtz free energy of a system remains constant in a reversible process [(∂A) = 0], whereas in an irreversible process the Helmholtz free energy T V decreases [(∂A) < 0] T V Gibbs Free Energy change as a Criterion for Spontaneity G=H-TS=U+pV-TS or dG=dU+pdV+Vdp-TdS-SdT Since dU = dq+dw dG =dq+dw+pdV+Vdp-TdS-SdT or dG-dw-pdV-Vdp+TdS+SdT=dq (true for reversible and irreversible processes) Since, dq =TdS and dq <TdS rev irrev dG-dw–pdV–Vdp+TdS+SdT< TdS 96or dG – dw – pdV – Vdp + SdT < 0 (cancelling TdS terms both sides) If only pressure-volume work is done (dw = -pdV ), we have dG + pdV – pdV – Vdp + SdT < 0 or dG-Vdp+SdT < 0 At constant temperature (dT = 0) and constant pressure (dp = 0), the above equation reduces to (∂G) , < 0 ...(3.65) T p According to Eq.
9.65, when the pressure and temperature remain constant, the Gibbs free energy of a system remains constant in a reversible process [(∂G) = p T 0], whereas in an irreversible process, Gibbs free energy decreases [(∂G) < 0].
p,T Thus the criterion for spontaneity in terms of Gibbs free energy is that the process would be feasible if ∆G is negative.
By combining Eqs.
9.15 and 9.65, we can draw some useful conclusions.
From Eq.
9.15 we have ∆G=∆H – T∆S It can be seen from Eqs.
9.15 and 9.65 that 1.
If ∆H is negative and ∆S is positive, ∆G will be negative at all temperatures; hence, the process would be spontaneous at all temperatures.
2.
If ∆H is positive and ∆S is negative, ∆G will be positive at all temperatures; hence, the process would not be feasible at any temperature.
3.
If ∆H and ∆S are both positive or negative, ∆G will be positive or negative depending upon the temperature.
There are four possibilities for ΔG based on the signs of ΔH and ΔS.
These are outlined in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1: Criterion for Spontaneous Change Case ∆H ∆S ∆G Result _ _ 1 + spontaneous at all temperatures 97_ spontaneous at low temperatures _ _ 2 + nonspontaneous at high temperatures + nonspontaneous at low temperatures _ 3 + + spontaneous at high temperatures _ 4 + + nonspontaneous at all temperatures Self Assessment 5 Under what conditions, would you expect the following reactions to occur spontaneously a) N + 3H → 2NH (The reaction is exothermic) 2(g) 2(g) 3(g) b) O → 2O (The reaction is endothermic) 2(g) (g) 4.0 THE GIBBS FREE ENERGY OF FORMATION It is obvious from the definition of Gibbs free energy (Eqs.
9.3 and 9.4) that the absolute value of G is not determinable since the absolute values of U and H are unknown.
However, in most cases, this is not a handicap as we require only changes in Gibbs free energy for a given process.
In this section, we are interested in showing the method of calculation of standard Gibbs free energy of a reaction.
Before that, let us define the standard states of the substances The term fugacity comes from the Latin word for “fleetness” (meaning to move rapidly) The fugacity is a measure of the molar Gibbs energy of a real gas.
The fugacity has the same units as pressure and approaches the pressure (value) as pressure approaches zero The standard states of solids and liquids correspond to their most stable form at 1 bar pressure and the specified temperature.
For a gas, the standard state is pure gas at unit fugacity.
For ideal gas, fugacity is unity when pressure is 1 bar at a specified temperature.
In all these cases, the most stable form has the lowest free energy.
The standard state convention may be summarized as given below: Ideal solution will be defines in Unit 10 of this course.
For a solid : The pure substance at 1 bar external pressure and at a specified temperature.
For a liquid : The pure substance at 1 bar external pressure and at a specified temperature.
98 For a gas : An ideal gas at 1 bar partial pressure and at a specified temperature.
For a solute : An ideal solution at one molar concentration and at a specified temperature.
The standard Gibbs free energy of formation, ∆G°, of a substance is defined as f the change in the Gibbs free energy that accompanies the formation of one mole of the substance in its standard state from the elements in their standard states.
Just like ∆Ho, the standard Gibbs free energy of formation of all elements by f definition-is zero.
Thus ∆Ho (CO ) is the Gibbs free energy for the reaction, f 2 C (graphite) + O (g) → CO (g) AG°= -394.4 kJ mol-1 2 2 r It may be mentioned that ∆G° can be defined at any temperature but generally f these values are tabulated at 298.15 K. The values of ∆G° for some selected f substances at 298.15 K are given in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Standard Gibbs Free Energies of Formation at 298.15 K of some Selected Substances Substance ∆G°/(kJ mol-1) Substance ∆G°/(kJ mol-1) f f H(g) 203.3 NH (g) – 16.5 3 O(g) 230.1 CH (g) – 50.8 4 Cl (g) 105.4 C H (g) – 32.9 2 6 Br(g) 82.4 C H (g) 68.1 2 4 Br (g) 3.1 C H (g) 209.2 2 2 4 I (g) 70.3 Benzene (l) 124.3 I (g) 19.3 Methanol (l) – 166.4 2 H O (g) – 228.6 Ethanol (l) – 174.1 2 H O(g) – 237.2 2 HF(g) – 273.2 HC1 (g) – 95.3 99 HBr (g) – 53.4 HI (g) 1.7 CO (g) – 137.2 CO (g) – 394.4 2 The table of standard Gibbs free energies of formation can be very useful for calculating the standard Gibbs free energy of a reaction.
This is defined as the change in Gibbs free energy that accompanies the conversion of reactants in their standard states to products in their standard states.
In other words, Standard Gibbs free = ∆G° = (sum of ∆G° values of products) – …(3.66) f f energy for a reaction (sum of ∆G° values of reactants) f Example 5 Using the data in Table 3.2 calculate the standard Gibbs free energy for the reaction.
H(g) + Br (g) → HBr(g) + Br(g) 2 Solution ∆G° = [∆G°(HBr) + ∆G° (Br)] - [∆G° (H)+ ∆G° (Br )] r f f f f 2 = {[-53.4+82.4]-[203.3+3.l]} kJ mol-1 = -177.4 kJmol-1 Hence, hydrogen atom can spontaneously react with bromine gas to give hydrogen bromide.
Self Assessment Exercise 6 Why are the values of ∆G° of some of the elements given in Table 3.2 different f from zero?
In the next section, we study the third law of thermodynamics and its application in calculating the entropy of substances.
5.0 THE THIRD LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS The second law of thermodynamics has been used to calculate entropy changes in various chemical and physical processes.
However, the absolute values of entropy 100have so far remained uncalculable.
We now try to devise a scale of standard entropies so that we can associate definite entropies with different states of a given system.
The Nernst Heat Theorem We start with Gibbs-Helmholtz equation (Eq.
3.43) ∆G = ∆H + T ∂(∆G) ∂T …(3.43) p In Sec.
3.6 we mentioned that it is possible to calculate AH by knowing AG at two different temperatures.
A question which remained unanswered was whether we can calculate ∆G from ∆H data.
One thing which is clear from Eq.
9.43 is that as we approach the absolute zero of temperature, ∆G and ∆H must be equal unless ∂(∆G) assumes an infinite value.
Richards, however, found, during his ∂T p ∂(∆G) studies on the electromotive force values of cells, that the quantity ∂T p actually decreases as temperature is lowered.
This observation prompted Nernst to ∂(∆G) conclude that decreases in such a way that it reaches zero value ∂T p gradually at absolute zero.
This implies that ∆G and ∆H not only approach each other near absolute zero, but do so assymptotically (i.e.
in such a manner that their curves overlap at this point as in Fig.
3.1 Fig.
3.1 G and H variation with temperature.
Mathematically this statement is equivalent to 101 Lt d(G) Lt d(H) T → 0 = = T → 0 = 0 …(3.86) dT dT This is known as Nernst Heat Theorem and it is strictly applicable only to pure solids and not to liquids and gases which are not capable of existence at absolute zero.
As per Eq.
1.62 of Unit 1 ∂(∆G) = ∆C ∂T p and again, accordping to Eq.
3.42 ∂(∆G) = –∆S ∂T p Here ∆S represents the change in entropy accompanying a reaction and ∆C is the P difference between the total heat capacities of the products and those of the reactants at constant pressure.
We can put Eq.3.86 in the form, Lt Lt T → 0 = S = T → 0 C = 0 …(3.87) p In other words, at absolute zero, there is no difference between the heat capacities of the reactants and the products at constant pressure; this implies that the C p values of all substances at 0 K are same.
Later studies have shown that at the absolute zero of temperature, the heat capacity of a solid should be zero.
i.e., at 0 K, Cp = 0 ... (3.88) A similar argument for the entropy change accompanying a reaction leads to the conclusion that all solids have the same entropy at absolute zero and, according to Max Planck, this value of entropy is zero.
The results so far discussed can be stated as the Third Law of Thermodynamics: "The entropy of a pure, perfectly crystalline solid approaches zero, as temperature approaches absolute zero.
The zero entropy of such solids can be readily understood since a perfectly crystalline solid implies a perfectly ordered arrangement of atoms, molecules and ions; or at absolute zero of temperature, number of microscopic states (Ω) of Eq.
2.87 (of Unit 2) is equal to unity and the entropy of the substance is zero.
S = k In Ω = k In 1 = 0 …(3.87) 102In Eq.
2.87, Ω stands for the number of microscopic states on modes of arrangement of the species.
At absolute zero, for a perfectly crystalline substance, there is only one mode of arrangement.
In case, the solid is not perfectly crystalline in nature, then its absolute entropy at 0 K is not zero, This has been discussed in Sec.
2.12 of Unit 2.
Applications of The Third Law of Thermodynamics A lower limit on entropy enables us to determine the absolute value of the entropy of a system, if we can deduce an expression for the variation of entropy with temperature.
Let us begin with the familiar relations, TdS = dq (Eq.
2.37 of Unit 2) and dq =C dT (Eq.
1.3 of Unit 1) p p Hence at constant pressure, TdS=C dT p dT i.e., dS = C p T …(3.89) If we integrate Eq.
3.89 between the temperature limits 0 and T and entropy limits O and S, we have, S T ∫ dS = ∫ C dT p T …(3.90) 0 0 Where S is the entropy at temperature T and by the third law, entropy at 0 K (S ) o is zero.
T T ∫ dT ∫ C = C dIn T Hence, S – S = S = p p …(3.91) T o T T 0 0 To calculate the value of S , the heat capacity of the substance should be known T from 0 K to the temperature at which the entropy is to be calculated.
The heat capacities of solids are known up to about 10 K to 15 K. Below this temperature.
the heat capacities of solids are determined using the Debye equation, C ≈ C = aT3 ... (3.92) p V where a is constant; the value of a is determined from the value of C at some low p temperature.
This temperature is denoted as T ; it is the lowest temperature at; min which C of the solid can be measured conveniently.
Eq.
3.92 is valid for p crystalline solids at low temperatures near ok. Eq.
9.91 may be written as, 103Tmin T Tmin T ∫ C d T + ∫ C d T = ∫ a T 3 d T + ∫ C d In T S = p T p T T p …(3.93) T 0 Tmin 0 Tmin The first integral is evaluated using the Debye equation (Eq.
3.92).
The second integral is evaluated by plotting C vs In T (Fig.
3.2); the shaded area under the p curve is equal to the value of the second integral.
Eq.
3.93 can be simplified as follows: ∫ Tmin ∫ T S a T 3 d T + C dIn T T = T p 0 Tmin T T min ∫ ∫ ST = a a T 2 d T + C p dIn T (Since a is constant) 0 Tmin T T min T3 ∫ a T + Cp dIn T 0 Tmin T ∫ a .
Hence, S = T3 + C dIn T T min p T T min Fig.
3.2: C vs in T plot p While using this method, it must be remembered that any phase change taking place between the temperatures zero kelvin (0 K) and TK, also contributes 104towards the absolute entropy.
The entropy of phase change.
∆S is given by Eq.
trans 2.75 of Unit 2 ∆H ∆S = tran s (…3.75) trans T where ∆H and T are the enthalpy and transition temperature, respectively for trans the phase transition.
The phase transition includes changes such as solid to liquid, liquid to vapour and one allotropic form to another.
Let us now calculate the absolute molar entropy of a substance in the vapour phase at T K. This absolute molar entropy will be given by the sum of the entropy changes involved in various stages as given below: 105 a (entropy change for bringing S = T3 3 min the temperature of the solid from 0 K to Tmin) T f - (entropy change for heating the solid from + ∫ C (S) dIn T p T to its melting point) min T min ∆H (entropy change for the fusion of the solid\ fus + T into liquid) f T (entropy change for heating the substance B- + ∫ C (l) dIn T (in the liquid state) from its melting point to p T the boiling point) f (entropy change for the vaporization of the liquid) ∆H fus + T B T - (entropy change for heating the vapour from + ∫ C (g) dIn T p the boiling point to the temperature T) T B - - - where C (s), C (l) and C (g) are the molar heat capacities of the solid, liquid and p p p gaseous phases, respectively; T and T are the melting and boiling points and f B ∆H and ∆H are the molar enthalpies of fusion and vaporization, respectively.
fus vap Hence, by substituting in Eq.
3.95 the values of the molar heat capacities, the molar enthalpies and the temperatures, the absolute molar entropy of a substance can be calculated.
If a substance exists in different allotropic modifications, then S of the allotropic trans transition as given by Eq.
2.75 also must be added while calculating the absolute molar entropy of a substance.
6.0 SUMMARY For a spontaneous change, the total entropy of the system and the surroundings must increase.
If entropy is used as a criterion for spontaneity, it is necessary to determine the entropy change for both the system and the surroundings.
This is inconvenient as one has to consider the changes taking place both in the system and the surroundings.
Therefore, a criterion for spontaneity is developed in such a manner that only changes in the properties of the system are considered.
For this purpose, two more state functions called, Helmholtz free energy (A) and Gibbs free energy (G) are defined.
Decrease in Helmholtz free energy is equal to the maximum amount of work that can be obtained from the system during a given change.
The decrease in Gibbs free energy is a measure of maximum useful work that can be obtained from the system at constant temperature and pressure.
The Gibbs free energy change (given by the relation ∆G = ∆H – T∆S) of a physical or 106a chemical process is a criterion for spontaneity of a process.
AG has a negative value for a spontaneous process.
Maxwell relations equate the rate of change of a quantity (which cannot be determined experimentally) with the rate of change of volume, pressure or temperature.
Gibbs-Helmholtz equation permits the calculation of AU or AH provided ∆A or ∆G at two temperatures are known.
Clausius-Clapeyron equation is useful for calculating the molar enthalpy of vaporization of liquids if the values of vapour pressure at two different temperatures are known.
The standard free energy change, ∆G°, is based on the conversion of reactants in their standard r states to products in their standard states.
According to Nernst heat theorem, ∆G and ∆H not only become equal to each other at absolute zero but also approach each other gradually at temperatures near absolute zero.
At the absolute zero of temperature, the entropy of every substance may become zero and it does become zero in the case of a perfectly crystalline substance.
APPENDIX Total Differentials Let us consider a dependent variable, x, such that its value depends on the variables y and z only, i.e., x = f(y, z) ...(A.I) For any change in y and z, there will be a change in x also; also if the change in x (i.e., dx) so produced is irrespective of the path followed, then dx is called total differential.
The value of dx in terms of changes in y and z can be expressed as follows: ∂x ∂x dx = dy + dz ∂y ∂z z y … (A.2) The meaning of this equation is given below: change in x due to actual change in y by one × infinitesimal + unit when z remains change in y 107 constant Total change = In x change in x due to actual change in z by one × infinitesimal unit when y remains change in z constant By comparison you can recognise that Eqs.
A.1 and 3.67 as well as Eqs.
A.2 and 3.68 are similar.
The only difference is that x depends on two variables y and z only, whereas G depends on four variables T, P, n and n .
Consequently Eq.
3.68 2 contains four terms in the right hand side, each term depicting a change in G due to a given change in a particular variable: One of the characteristics of a total differential is that the second order differentials of a variable such as x given above are the same.
i.e., ∂2x ∂2x = ∂y∂z ∂z∂y ….
(A.3) This means that the change in x is same, whether it is varied with respect to z first and y next or vice versa FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 108Module 4 Colligative Properties UNIT 1 SYSTEM OF VARIOUS COMPARISON 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Partial molar quantities 4.0 Gibbs- Duhem Equation 5.0 Chemical potential of a perfect gas 6.0 Fugacity 7.0 Chemical potential of components of ideal gas 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit we shall be discoursing on the principles of fugacity and how it relates to chemical potential of an ideal system.
The colligative properties of solution and phase rule of component system will be treated.
Also a brief introduction on statistical thermodynamic will be undertaken.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, students should be able to; .
define the partial molar quantities Define fugacity Identify the components of an ideal gas 3.0 PARTIAL MOLAR QUANTITIES AND Chemical POTENTIAL The enthalpy change involved in the dissolution of a solute in a Solvent is very much dependent on the amounts of the solute and solvent present.
Similarly other thermodynamic properties like volume, internal energy, Helmholtz free energy and Gibbs free energy also depend on the composition of the system.
Until now however, we have considered only the closed system in which the amounts of the reactants and the products are fixed.
We shall now Consider open system in which the amounts of the components may vary.
Molar volume of water Molar mass of water Density of water 1.8 × l0-2 kg .
1.0 × l03 kg m-3 109 = 1.8 × 105 m3 = 18 cm3 (since 1 cm3 = l0-6 m3)  Eq.
4.1 is to be read as follows: G is a function of T, P, n and n .
1 2 This means that the free energy of a two component system depends on the pressure, temperature and the amounts of the components 1 and 2.
Eq.
is written from Eq.
since dG is a perfect or total differential.
The value of a total differential (such as dG) depends only on the values of the variables (such p, T, n and n ) and not on the type 1 2 of the process which the system may adopt.
For a better understanding of the total differential, see the Appendix at the end of unit 3.
If we consider a single homogeneous phase consisting of only one component, then the value of an extensive property divided by the amount of the substance becomes the molar property.
These molar properties are indicated by putting a bar above the symbols.
- V - H Thus, V = and H = , where n is the amount (the number of n n the single component.
V and H are the volume and the enthalpy of n mol of a - - substance.
V and H are the molar volume and the molar enthalpy of the substance.
However, if the system is a phase consisting of several components, then the addition of one mole of any pure substance in the mixture does not necessarily mean that it increases the value of the extensive property by the molar quantity.
Thus, in a mixture of water and alcohol, if one mole of water is added, then the increase in volume is not equal to 18 cm3 but depends on the composition of the mixture.
Thus we introduce the concept of partial molar quantities.
These are of particular use in the case of solutions of two or more components.
The partial molar quantity of a component is defined as the change in the extensive property of a mixture when one role of the pure component is added in such a way that there is no change in temperature (dT = 0), pressure (dp = 0) and composition (dN = 0).
This is possible if we consider the system to be very large.
When the composition of the system varies, then for a small change of temperature, pressure and the amounts of the constituents, the change in Gibbs free energy for a two component system is given by.
G = f(T,p,n ,n ) 1 2 110 …(4.1) dG = ∂ G dT + ∂G dT + ∂G dT + ∂G dn ….
(4.2) ∂T p.N ∂p T.N ∂n1 T.pn2 ∂p T.pn1 2 Where n and n are the number of moles of components 1 and 2 and 1 2 N=n +n =total number of moles of components.
1 2 The subscripts p and N in the first term of the right hand side denote the fact that the pressure and composition are kept constant while noting the change in G with respect to temperature.
Similarly the Subscripts T, N or T, p, n or T, p, n signify 2 1 the parameters kept Constant while G is varied with respect to a parameter not mentioned as a subscript outside the bracket.
∂G The partial derivative represents the rate of change in free energy per ∂n 1 T, p, n2 mole of component 1 added to the system, when temperature, pressure and the amount of component 2 are constant.
It is also called the partial molar free energy (G ) or simply chemical potential (μ ) of the component 1.
The chemical 1 1 potentials of the two components are defined as, ∂G ∂G = μ and = μ …(4.3) 1 2 ∂n1 T, p, n2 ∂n2 T, p, n1 At constant temperature (dT = 0) and constant pressure, (dp = 0), Eq.
3.68 may be written as, dG = μ ,dn + μ dn ….
(4.4) T, p 1 1 2 2 It is possible to define chemical potential in terms of other thermodynamic functions also; but we consider it in terms of Gibbs free energy only.
If a system has definite composition having n and n moles of the respective l 2 components, then on integrating Eq.
3.70, we have G = μ n + μ n …(4.5) T, p 1 1 2 2 Eq.
3.71 describes the free energy of a system of two components in terms of the partial molar free energies of the components.
Similar expressions can be written for other thermodynamic quantities of the system also in terms of the partial molar quantities.
The importance of partial molar quantities can be understood from the following example.
When one mole of Water is added to a sufficiently large volume of 111ethanol, it is found that the increase in volume is not equal to the molar volume of water (18 cm3) but only 14 cm3.
The quantity, 14 cm 3mol-1 is the partial molar volume of water in a large volume of ethanol.
Thus the partial molar volume of a substance in a mixture of defined composition is the increase in volume that occurs when a substance is added to a sufficiently large sample of the solution.
In general, when n mol of A is mixed with n mol of B, the total volume (V) of the A B mixture can be obtained from Eq.
4.6 which is written similar to Eq 4.5 - - V = n V + n V ...(4.6) A A B B - - Where V and V are the partial molar volumes of A and B, respectively.
A B The reason, as to why the increase in volume on the addition of one mole of water to a large volume of ethanol, is not equal to the molar volume of water will be seen in Unit 10 of this course.
Example 1 What is the total volume of the solution, when 3.80 mol of water is mixed with 0.500 mol of ethanol?
The partial molar volumes of water and ethanol at this composition are 1.80 × 105m3 mol-1 and 5.34 × 10-5m3mol-1, respectively.
Solution - n(H O) = 3.80 mol V(H O) = 1.80 ×10-5 m3 mol-1 2 - 2 n(C H OH) = 0.500 mol V(C H OH) = 5.34 × 10-5 m3 mol-1 2 5 2 5 Applying Eq.
4.6 V = (3.80 mol) × (1.80 × 10-5 m3 mol-1) + (0.500 mol) × (5.34 × 10-5 m3 mol-1) = 6.84 × 10-5 m3 + 2.67 × 10-5 m3 = 9.51 × 10-5 m3 Let us now see how Eq.
4.5 can be used to derive an important relationship (known as Gibbs-Duhem Equation) between the changes in the chemical potentials of the two components present in a solution.
4.0 Gibbs-Duhem Equation According to Eq.
4.5 at a given temperature and pressure, the total Gibbs free energy for a homogeneous phase is equal to the sum of the products of the chemical potentials and the number of moles of each component.
Hence, the Gibbs free energy of the system can change either by the change of chemical potential of a component or its amount in the system.
A general expression for 112change in G at the given temperature and pressure can be obtained by differentiating Eq.
4.5 dG = μ dn +n dμ +μ dn +n dμ …(4.7) T, p 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 Comparing this equation with 9.70 we obtain, n dμ +n dμ = 0 …(4.8) 1 1 2 2 This equation is known as Gibbs-Duhem or equation.
or dμ1 = -(n /n )dμ …(4.9) 2 1 2 this means that the chemical potentials for components 1 and 2 cannot be varied independently.
If μ2 increases, then μ will decrease by a definite equation finds 1 extensive applications in liquids-vapour, liquid-solid and liquid-liquid equilibrium of binary Mixtures.
Let us now see how the chemical potential varies with temperature and pressure.
Dependence of Comical Potential on Temperature and Pressure From Eq-.3.24, dG =Vdp-SdT ; ∂G Hence, = -S …(3.21) ∂T p ∂G and = -V …(3.23) ∂P T We know that the chemical potential of the component i (μ) is given by, i ∂G μ = …(4.10) i ∂n i T,p,nj where j = all the components except i.
Note that the subscript n means that the j amounts of all components except I are kept constant.
Differentiating μ (given in Eq.
4.10 with respect to temperature at constant i pressure and composition, we have, ∂μ ∂2G i = ∂T ∂T∂n p,N i 113Since G is a state function.
∂μ ∂2G ∂ ∂G i = = ∂T ∂T∂n ∂n ∂T p,N i i p,N T, p, nj ∂G From Eq 3.21, = -S ∂T p,N Hence, ∂μ ∂ ∂S - …(4.11) i = (-S) = - = - S ∂T ∂n ∂n i p, N i T, p, nj i T,p,nj - Where S is the partial molar entropy of the ilh component.
Simple the entropy of a i substance is always positive, its chemical potential or Gibbs free energy would decrease with increase in temperature.
Eq.
4.11 describes the dependence of μ on i temperature at constant pressure and composition.
Let us now derive an expression useful in describing the dependence of μ on pressure.
i Differentiating μ (given in Eq.
4.10) with respect to pressure at constant i temperature and composition, we have, ∂μ ∂2G i = ∂p ∂p∂n T,N i ∂ ∂G = ∂n ∂p i p,N T.N T, p, nj Eqs.
4.11 and 4.12 are obtained from Eq.
4.10 using one of the properties of total differentials.
Since dG is a total differential, the second order differentials of G with respect to T and n, taken in any order are the same.
i.e., ∂2G ∂2G = ∂T∂n ∂ni∂T i Also the second order differentials of G with respect to p and n, taken in any order are the same.
i Since G is a thermodynamics property, the change in G depends on the changes in the values of the variables such as T, ni or p, ni etc at any particular instant, but not on the way or the sequence by which such variables are changed.
∂G From Eq 3.21, = V ∂p T Hence, ∂μ ∂ ∂V - i = (V) = = - V ∂p ∂n ∂n i T, N i T, p, nj i T,p,nj 114 - where V is the, partial molar volume of the component i. Eq.
4.12 defines the i dependence of μ on pressure at constant temperature and composition.
i 5.0 CHEMICAL POTENTIAL OF A PERFECT GAS The standard state of a perfect gas as established at a pressure of exactly 1 bar, denoted as p and its Gibbs formation as G.
Thus the Gibbs value at any other pressure P is G(p) = G + NRT ℓn(P/P) ……..
I and the molar Gibbs function G/n will be Gm(P) = Gm + RT ℓn (P/P) ….
II For a pure substance, the chemical potential () is given as  = Gm(p) …………………… III Substituting equation III into II, we have  =  + RT ℓn (P/P) The origin of the name chemical potential, is analogy between mechanical systems, where particles tend to travel in the direction of decreasing potential, and the thermodynamic tendency of systems to shift in the direction of decreasing Gibbs function.
6.
0 Fugacity As the departures from ideality occur under quite common conditions, as in the case of real gases, the pressure (p) is replaced by some effective pressure, the fugacity (f) such that  =  + RT ℓn (f/p) 115Fugacity has the same dimension with the pressure of the gas.
Relating the fugacity to the pressure, and expressing it in terms of molar quantities gives p Vm dp (p)(p1)  RT n(f / f1) ……….. A p1 where f is the fugacity, when the pressure is p and f1 the fugacity the fugacity when the pressure is p1.
If the gas were perfect, we could write p Vmo dpo(p)o(p1) RT n(p/ p1) ……….. B p1 where the superscript o denotes quantities relating to a perfect gas.
The difference between equation A and B is p (VmVmo)dp  RT n(f / f1)RTn(p/ p1) or p1 p n(f / p)/(f1/ p1)  (1/RT)(VmVmo)dp p1 when f1/p1 approaches 1 as p1 approaches zero, we have p n(f / p)  (1/RT)(VmVmo)dp o The equation above is the definition of fugacity.
The standard value of the chemical potential can be calculated as given below  =  - RT ℓn(f/p) – RT ℓn (p/p) Measurement of Fugacity 116The expression for the fugacity corresponding to a pressure p, can be simplified as follows: Vm = RT/P – for perfect gas and Vm = RTZ/p – for real gas which rearranges to f = p and p  = exp [(21)/ p]dp o The factor  is called the fugacity coefficient.
This is the recipe for determining the fugacity of a gas at any pressure.
7.0 Chemical Potential of components in a mixture of Ideal Gases The chemical potential of the components in a mixture of ideal gases can be expressed in three possible ways.
First let us derive an expression for the chemical potential of a component in terms of its partial pressure.
For an ideal gas, pV = nRT …(4.13) Let us consider an ideal gas mixture at temperature T, total pressure p and volume V. Let the number of moles of each component be n , n , .. n..., and the partial 1 2 i pressure of each component be p , p ...... p......respectively, 1 2 i Then from Eq.
4.13, we have nRT RT RT V = = (n + n + …+ n + ….)
= n P 1 2 1 p t p Where n, is the total number of moles of all the components.
Differentiating V in t the above equation with respect to n at constant temperature and pressure, we i have, 117 - ∂V V RT .
= i = ∂n P i T,p, nj Note that the subscript n denotes that the amounts of all other components except j i ate kept constant.
But from Eq.
4.12 ∂μ i V = i ∂p T, N ( ) ∂μ RT Hence, i = …….
(4.14) ∂p P T, N or ∂μi = RTdp = RT dln P …… (4.15) p If p is the partial pressure of the component i and p is the total pressure of the i mixture of gases, then according to Dalton's law of partial pressures, n p = i p = x p, i i n t where x is the mole fraction of the component i.
Taking logarithms both sides, i ln P = ln x + ln P i i i If x is constant we can write on differentiation of In p i i d1in p = dln p i This means that in a gaseous mixture of constant composition, the partial pressure of a component varies as the total pressure.
Substituting for dln p In Eq.
4.15, we have dμ = RT dlin Pi Integrating between the limits μ(l) → μ (p) and 1 → p we have, i i i i ∫ μi (pi) ∫ Pi dμ = RT d1n p i i μ (1) i 1 μ (p) p i i i [μ] = RT [1n p] i i μ (1) 1 i 118 or μ (p) – μ (1) = RT ln p – RT ln 1 i i i i i.e μ (p) – μ (1) = RT ln p [issue 1n 1 = 0] i i i i or μ (p) = μ (l) – RT 1n p i i i i In Eq.4.16, μ (p) is the chemical potential of the i th component at temperature T i i when its partial pressure is pi, and μi (1) is the chemical potential at the same temperature but at a partial pressure of unity.
Hence, μi (1) is equal to μi (Pi) when P = l bar; i.e., μ (1) i?
the chemical potential under standard state at 1 bar.
Thus is i i in general, we may write Eq.
9.82 in the form, μ (p) = μo (P) – RT 1n p i i i i where μ (P) is the chemical potential of the ith component at a partial pressure p i i i and μ°(p) is its standard chemical potential.
Eq.
4.17 gives the chemical potential i of an ideal gas i in terms of its partial pressure in a mixture.
Let us now derive an expression for the chemical potential of an ideal gas in terms of its Concentration in a mixture.
In order to transform Eq.
4.17 in terms of concentration, we use the ideal gas law n and substitute p = i RT = cRT where c is the ^concentration of the ith i i i V component.
Let μ (c) be the chemical potential of the ith component when its i i concentration is c in the mixture of ideal gases.
i So, μ (c) = μ (P) = μo (p) + RT 1n p i i i i i i i = μo(p)+RT 1n c + RT 1n RT i i or μ (c) = μ°(c)+RT In c i i i i Here μio(c) = μio(p)+RT In R T and is equal to the chemical potential component of the ith component under standard state (when c is unity).
i A similar expression can be derived in terms of the mole fraction (x) of the ith i component.
For this purpose, we make use of Dalton's law of partial pressures, p = x p where p is the partial pressure of the ith component and p is the total i i i pressure of the mixture of idea gases.
Let us assume that μi (x) is the chemical potential of the ith component in terms of i its mole fraction in the mixture.
Using Eq.
4.17, μi (x) = μi (p) = μo (p) + RT 1n p i i i i = μio (p) = RT 1n x + RT 1n p i Hence, μ (x) = μo(x) + RT x i i i i 119where μ°(x) = μ°(p)+RT ln p and is equal to the chemical potential of the i i component i under standard state (when x = l).
Eqs.
4.17, 4.18 and 4.17 are i applicable to ideal systems only.
When a system exhibits deviation from ideal behaviour, modified forms of these equations are to be used.
FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 120Module 4 Colligative Properties Unit 2 DERIVATION OF GENERAL EXPRESSION FOR CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Expression for Chemical Equilibrium 4.0 Ideal gas mixtures 5.0 Equilibrium constant in term of concentration 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to; - explain the chemical equilibrium constant - identify expression for an ideal gas mixture - correlation between equilibrium constant and concentration 3.0 DERIVATION OF GENERAL EXPRESSION FOR CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM Even before derivation of equilibrium expression is attempted, we must recapitulate the following conventions in thermodynamics.
1) Any system, to which substances are added or from which they are taken away or in which a chemical reaction takes place, is called an open system.
2) A chemical reaction involving a number of substances is represented by ΣvA = 0 i i i i Where A represents a chemical substance at the temperature and pressure of the i reaction, and v is called the stoichiometric coefficient of A. i i v values are positive for the products and negative for the reactants.
This relationship can be explained using the following example : 1 H (g) + O (g) ==H O(l) 2 2 2 2 can be written as ( ) 1 (1) H O – (1) H – O = 0 2 2 2 2 121and the values of vs are : 1 = 1, = -1, and = VH2O VH2 VO2 2 Again, note that v is positive for the products, and .negative for the reactants.
Let us now consider an open system represented by a general reaction : aA + bB + cC … pP + qQ + rR… The change in Gibb's free energy, dG, for the reaction is given by Eqs.
3.21, 3.32, 4.2 and 4.3 dG = Vdp – SdT + Σμdn i i i where dn = change in the amount of any particular substance, 'i' and μ = chemical i i potential of that substance; all other symbols carry their usual meaning.
At constant temperature and pressure, Eq.
6 reduces to: dG = Σμdn T.P i i i The symbol Σ stands for summation of terms; the terms are obtained by giving different values to i.
As per Eq.
9.68 given in Sec.
9.10 of Unit 9 of this course, ( ∂ G ) ( ∂ G ) dG = ∂ T d T + ∂ T dp p.N T.N ( ∂ G ) + ∂ n 1 p .T ,p d2 n 1 (∂ G ) + ∂ n d n 2 p.T,p2 2 Using Eqs., 9.21, 9.23 and 9.69, this expression can be written as, dG = - Sat + Vdp + μdn + μ dn Eq.
i i 2 2 14.2 is a generalised form of the above equation.
The change in the amount of any substance 'dn' can be more conveniently i i expressed in terms of another quantity ξ (pronounced as "xi") which is a measure i of the extent of the reaction.
For example, ξ = 0 for a substance 'i' means that it has not reacted at all; ξ = 1 means whole amount of 'i' has reacted and so on.
For any reversible reaction the value of ξ should be between zero and unity.
Let us now derive an expression to specify the variation of free energy with respect to the extent of reaction.
The number of moles (ni) of a particular 122substance i present at different times, as a reaction proceeds, can be expressed by the relation: n = no + vξ i i i where, n is the number of moles of the substance i present before the reaction i starts, v is the stoichiometric coefficient of the same substance in the balanced i chemical equation (with a proper sign) and ξ is the extent of the reaction.
Note that no and v are constants for a substance while n varies as ξ changes.
The i i i change in n can be obtained by differentiating Eq.
4.23 i dn = vdξ i i (since no and v, are constants) i Combining Eqs.
4.22 and 4.24, we get, n dG = Σμvdξ T,p (i i i) dG Hence, =Σμ v i i ∂ξ T, p i Eq.
4.25 represents Gibb's free energy change of the reaction (∆G ) at constant r T,p temperature and pressure.
In Unit 3 you have studied that ∆G is equal to the sum of the Gibb's free energy r T,p of the products minus the sum of the Gibb's free energy of the reactants.
( ) dG i.e., =Σμi v = ∆G ∂ξ T, p i i r T,p Let us apply Eq.
4.26 two reactions.
First, let us consider the formation of water discussed in this section.
1 H (g) + O (g) H O(l) 2 2 2 2 ∆G for the formation of water is given by r T,p 1 ∆G = μ – μ – μ r T,p H2O H2 O2 2 1 The v values of H O, H and O are 1, - 1 and - - , respectively.
i 2 2 2 2 As a second example, let us consider the formation of ammonia.
N (g) + 3H (g) 2NH (g) 2 2 3 123 For this reaction, ∆G = 2 - - 3 r T,p μNH3 μN2 μH2 Again, note that the v, values of NH , N and H are 2, - 1 and - 3, respectively.
i 3 2 2 From sec.3.8 of Unit 3, we know that the Gibb's free energy of the system will be minimum at equilibrium at constant temperature and pressure (see Fig.
4.1).
Hence, the derivative of the Gibb's free energy function with respect to the extent of the reaction, which is the slope of the curve in Fig.
4.1, is equal to zero at equilibrium at constant temperature and pressure.
In other words, ( ) dG ∂ ξ T , p .
e q = Σμi vi = ∆rGT,p = 0 i where ‘eq’ stands for equilibrium condition.
A chemical reaction will tend lo proceed in a direction of decreasing free energy.
At equilibrium, the reaction does not proceed in either direction, implying thereby that there would be an increase in Gibb's free energy of the system if the reaction proceeds in either direction.
Hence, the Gibb's free energy of the system will be minimum at equilibrium.
Fig.
4.1: Change of Gibb's Free Energy and the extent of chemical reaction.
Equation 4.27 is a general expression which is applicable to any reversible chemical reaction under equilibrium conditions at constant temperature and pressure.
The equation simply means that the sum of the chemical potentials of the products and reactants is equal to zero at equilibrium.
Equation 4.27 would be most useful if we could express the chemical potential in terms of some experimentally determinable or known quantities.
There are a number of ways to express chemical potentials.
The next section discusses the 124substitution for chemical potential in terms of partial pressure, mole fraction and concentration for ideal gas mixtures at equilibrium.
Try the following SAQ which is based on the above discussion.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 For the formation reaction of nitric oxide from nitrogen and oxygen gases, find the value of v for each of the reactants and products.
4.0 CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM IN IDEAL GAS MIXTURES Let us derive an expression for the equilibrium constant in terms of partial pressures for a reaction between ideal gases.
4.1 Equilibrium Constant Expression in Terms of Partial Pressure Consider a general reaction aA + bB +... lL + mM +... …(4.28) At constant temperature (dT = 0) and pressure (dp = 0) the free energy change for the above reaction (AG ) is obtained by using Eq.
4.26. r T,p AG = (lμ + mμ +…) – (aμ + bμB + ….)
…(4.29) r T,p L M A where μ , μ , μ , μ , ..., etc., are the chemical potentials of the products and L M A B reactants; and l, m, (- a), (- b), ..., etc., are v values.
Remember that the products i (such as L and M) have positive v values and the reactants (such as A and B) i have negative v values; because of this, there is a negative sign between the two i terms on the right hand side of Eq.
4.29 The chemical potential μ1, of an idea gas ‘i' in a gaseous mixture is given by Eq.
4.17 It is quite interesting to note that Eq.
4.36 relates equilibrium constant of a reaction to the change in standard free energy that takes place during a reaction.
In Unit 3 you have studied the method of calculation of ∆G° from the free energies of formation of the reactants and r products once AG° is known at a particular temperature.
K can be calculated using Eq.
r P (4.36) μ(p) = μ (p) + RT 1n p …(4.30) i i i o where μo (p) is the chemical potential of i in the standard state and p, is its partial i pressure.
125Using Eq.
4.30in Eq.
14.10, ∆rGr,p = [(μoL ( p ) + R T 1 n p L ) + m ( μ Mo (p) + RT 1n pM) + …] – [ a( μo ( p ) + R T 1 n p ) + b ( μ o ) + RT 1n p )…] …(4.31) A A B B ∆Gr,p = [(lμo ( p ) + m μ o ( p ) + … ) – ( a μ o ( p ) + b μ o (p) + …)] RT 1n l m …(4.32) r L M A B p p aL b M….
p p A B … Note that in the transformation of Eq.
4.31 to Eq.
4.32, we have used the relation: IRT ln p = RT 1n p1 ; i.e., a coefficient (l) of a logarithmic term (RT In p ) is L L L taken inside the logarithmic term as a power, o o o o o But (lμ (p) + mμ (p) + …) – (aμ (p) + bμ (p) + …) = ∆G …(4.33) L M A B r T,p o where ∆G is the standard free energy change of the reaction at constant r T,p temperature and pressure.
Using Eqs.
4.32 and 4.33 we can write l m p p o L M….
∆rGT,p = ∆rGT,p + RT 1n a b p p A B … …(4.34) Let us now assume that the above system is under equilibrium.
Using Eqs.
4.27 arid 4.34, we can write that at equilibrium, l m p p o L M….
∆rGT,p = ∆rGT,p + RT 1n a b = 0 p p eq A B … The subscript 'eq' stands for equilibrium values of partial pressures.
l m p p i.e., ∆rGT,op = - RT 1n aL bM ….
…(4.35) pApB … eq or ∆G =- RT 1n K = -2.303 RT log K …(4.36) r T,p p p where K is called the equilibrium constant in terms of partial pressures.
The p relationship is known as van't Hoff isotherm.
K is given by the relationship, p l m p p L M….
kp = a b at equilibrium …(4.37) p p A B … 126 Multiplication of (p)vi terms of the products i = M u l t i p l i c a t i o n o f ( p ) – v i t e r m s o f t h e r e a c t i o n at equilibrium i Note that v, written as power is positive for the product, NH , whereas it is negative for N ; 3 2 and H , these two being reactants.
2 where p , p , p , p ,..., etc., are the partial pressures of L, M, A, B,..., etc., at L M A B equilibrium.
In subsequent sections, we leave out the subscript 'eq' while referring to equilibrium partial pressures.
Eq.
14.18 can also be written as, l m -a -b K = p ,.
p p , .
p ….
…(4.38) p L M… A B where p , p , p , p ...
etc., are the equilibrium partial pressures and l, m, (- a), L M A B (- b)..., etc., are the respective ci values of L, M, A, B,..., etc.
Eq.
14.19 can also be represented as, vi K =ПP …(4.39) p i i vi where the symbol П represents the multiplication of different p terms given in i Eq.
4.38.
Again, from Eqs.
4.27 to 4.39, we can see that the dimensions of K will p depend upon the v values of the reactants and products.
This particular aspect will i be clear when you study the examples worked out in this unit.
Some authors prefer to give K as a dimensionless quantity by dividing p by p° p i where p° = 1 bar = 105 Pa. To represent K as a dimensionless quantity, Eq.
14.20 p is modified as, v i ( ) P K =П i …(4.40) p i po Let us apply Eq.
4.38 to ammonia synthesis reaction.
N (g) + 3H (g) 2NH (g) 2 2 3 Kp = (p )2 (p )-1.
(p )-3 NH3 N2 H2 p2 NH3 or K = p 2 p p N2 H2 Since the partial pressure are expressed in Pa unit, K for ammonia synthesis has p the unit P-2.
If K for ammonia synthesis is to be dimensionless, then K p p expression is to be written following 4.40 as, or Kp = p2 (po)2 NH3 p p3 N2 H2 127 Let us illustrate the use of Eq.
14.19 with an example.
Example 2 Suppose that, in an experiment at 1000 k, it is found that P = 3.42 × 104 Pa, p = 3.31 x 104 Pa and SO2 o2 P = 3.58 × 104 Pa for the reaction, so3 2SO (g), + O (g) 2SO (g) 2 2 3 Calculate the value for the equilibrium constant, K p Solution At he given temperature, K is given by the expression p 2 -2 -1 K = p .p .
p p SO3 SO2 O2 2 P (3.58 × 104 Pa)2 or Kp = S O 3 = PS2O 2 .PO2 (3.42 × 104 Pa)2 × (3.13 × 104 Pa) = 3.50 × 10-4 Pa-1 Note that the unit of K as per E.q 4.58 is given by (Pa)Σv.
In the reation discussed in Example p 1, Σv = 2 –2 – 1 = –1.
Hence, the unit K is Pa-1 i p Try the following SAQ now.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Suppose that we write the ammonia synthesis reaction in two different ways: i) 1 N (g) + H (g) NH (g) 2 2 3 2 ii) N (g) + 3H (g) 2NH (g) 2 2 3 Would you express any difference in the expression for K in the two cases?
p (Usually, K values are calculated using equations of the type (ii) which have p integral stoichimetric coefficients) 4.2 Equilibrium Constant Expression in Terms of Mole Fraction Since Dalton’s law tells us that partial pressure of a gas is equal to the mole fraction times the total pressure, Eq.
4.48 can be written as, 128K = (x P)l (x P)m …(x P)-a (x P)-b p L t M t A t B t K = П (xP)n …(4.41) p i t i According to Dalton’s law of partial pressure, partial pressure (pi) of an ideal gas, I, is given by, Pi = Pt .xi Where Pt is the total pressure, and xi is the mile fraction of the gas in a gaseous mixture.
Where, xi = mole fraction of the species , and p = total pressure.
i t Example 3 Consider the reaction N O (g) 2NO (g) 2 4 2 If a mixture of NO , and N O at equilibrium has a total pressure of 1.5 × 105 Pa, 2 2 4 calculate the fraction of N O that has dissociated at 303 K. K for the reaction is 2 4 p 1.4 × 104 Pa at 303 K. Solution Suppose that ξ is the fraction of the amount of N O which has dissociated at 2 4 equilibrium or it represents the extent of the reaction.
Then 1-ξ is the fraction of the amount of N O remaining at equilibrium and is proportional to the actual 2 4 number of moles of N O present at equilibrium.
2 4 From the balanced reaction, it is seen that for each mole of N O decomposed, 2 4 there are two moles.
of NO produced.
Therefore, at equilibrium, 2ξ will be 2 proportional to the actual number of moles of NO produced.
2 The total number of moles at equilibrium would then be proportional to 1 – ξ + 2ξ or 1 + ξ The mole fractions of the two gases at equilibrium can be written as, 1 – ξ 2ξ x = and x = where x denotes mole fraction.
NO2 NO2 1 + ξ 1 + ξ Using Eq.
4.41 = Kp = (x .P)2 .
(x .P)-1 NO2 t N2O4 t i.e., Kp = (xNO2 .Pt)2 (xN2O4 .Pt) Substituting for x and x we get, NO2 N2O4 ( ) 2ξ 2 .p t 1 + ξ 1 – ξ 1 + ξ 129 .p t or Kp = 4ξ2 .
p t = 4ξ2 .p (1 - ξ) (1+ξ) 1 - ξ2 t Substituting the given values, we get, 4ξ2 .
1.4 × 104 Pa = ×1.5 × 105 Pa. 1 – ξ2 or 1.5 × 4 1 – ξ = 0.14 ξ2 1 1.5 × 4 or = ξ2 0.14 or ξ2 = 0.023 ξ = 0.15 The fraction of N O dissociated is thus calculated to be 0.15.
2 4 Example 4 Consider the reaction, CO(g) + 2H (g) CH OH(g) 2 3 where initially 1 mol of CO and 2 mol of H were mixed together.
Derive an 2 expression for the equilibrium constant, K , in terms of the extent of the reaction, p ξ and the total pressure, P t. Solution If the extent, of the reaction at equilibrium is represented by ξ then we have, CO(g) + 2H2(g) CH OH(g) 3 Moles at 1 – ξ 2 – 2ξ ξ equilibrium Mole fraction 1 – ξ 2 – 2ξ ξ at equilibrium 3 – 2 ξ 3 – 2 ξ 3 – 2 ξ Using Eq.
14.22, K = (x .p) .
(x .P)-1 .
(x .p)-2 P CH3OH t CO t H2 t i.e., K = (x .p) p CH3OH t (x .P) (x .p)-2 CO t H2 t Hence ( ) 130 ξ .p t 3 - 2ξ K = p (1 – ξ )( 2 – 2ξ ) 2 .p .p t t 3 – 2ξ 3 – 2ξ = (3 – 2ξ)2 ξ .
(1-ξ) (2 – 2ξ)2 .pt2 You should be able to do the following SAQ, if you have understood the above examples.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 Express equilibrium constant K for the reaction, p 2NO(g) + O (g) 2NO (g) 2 2 in terms of (i) partial pressures and (ii) mole fractions of the gaseous species.
5.0 Equilibrium Constant Expression in Terms of Concentration We know that for an ideal gas, nRT p = i = RT i Ci V where c represents molar concentration of a gaseous substance ‘i’; other symbols i have their usual meaning.
Hence we can express Eq.
4.38 in terms of concentrations.
K = (c RT)l (c RT)m ... (c RT)-a (c RT)-b p L M A B (c RT)l (c RT)m….. L M = (c RT)a (c RT)b… .. …(4.42) A B i.e., K = П( RT)pi …(4.43) p Ci i Where v represents the stoichiometric coefficient (along with proper sign) in the i chemical equation., Eq.
4.42 cam be written as, l m Kp = CL CM….
(RT)(l + m + …) –(a + b + …) a b CACB … (RT)Σvi 131l m CL CM….
= a b CACB … i.e., K = K (RT) Σvi …(4.44) p c where K is defined by, c l m Multi plicatio n of (c, )vi terms of the product s …(4.45) = C La C bM ….
= Multiplication of (ci,i)- vi terms of the reactants CACB … i.e., K = П (c) vi …(4.47) p i The dimensions of K , depend of the v values of the reactants and the products.
In c i case K is to be expressed as a dimensionless quantity, c, in Eq.
4.46 is to be c replaced by c/c where c is the standard concentration and is equal to 1 mol dm-3.
i o o It is important to note that K and K are functions of temperature; (Unit 1) p c Eqs 14.18 and 14.26 are the mathematical expressions of the law of mass action.
Eq.
4.44 holds good for reactions between ideal gases.
Let us study an application of Eq.
4.45 Example 5 Calculate the equilibrium concentrations of all the species at 613 K for the reaction, PCl (g) PCl (g) + Cl (g) 3 3 2 if the initial concentrations of the three gases is 0.15 M each and K = 0.800 M at c 613 K. The volume of the vessel is 1 dm3.
Solution Suppose that x mol of PC1 has decomposed at equilibrium.
Since volume is 1 3 dm3, the concentration expressed in molarity is equal to the number of moles of a particular substance.
132PCl PCl C1 5 3 2 Equilibrium concentration/M 0.15 – x 0.15 + x 0.15 + x Using Eq.
4.45, we get Kc = C .C PCl3 Cl2 C PCl3 Substituting the given values, we get, (0.15 + x) .
(015 + x) 0.800 M = M (0.15 – x) or 0.800 (0.15 – x) = (015.
– x)2 or x2 + 1.1 x – 0.0975 = 0 Using the principle of solution of standard quadratic equation, we get x = 0.082 M or or – 1.183 M The unit, mol dm-3, is for denoting molarity and is represented by the letter M. Note that concentration in Molarity = Number of moles Volume in dm3 The unit of K, as per Eq.
4.45 is given by (M)Σv In Example 4.
Σv = 1 + 1 – 1 = 1 i Hence, the unit of K in this example is M. c The solution of a quadratic equation of the form ax + bx Square brackets are used to denote the concentration of a 2 + C = 0 is given by.
species.
For example, [PCl ] is to he read as: 5 Concentration of PCl5 x = -b ± b2 – 4ac 2a We take x = 0.082 M, since second root of the quadratic equation gives the concentrations of PCl and Cl as 3 3 (o.15 M – 183 M=) – 1.033 M which is impossible.
Hence, the equilibrium concentration: [PCl ] = (0.15 – 0.082) M = 0.068 M 3 and [PCl ] = [Cl ] = 0.15 + 0.082 = 0.323 M 3 2 We can verify the answer by substituting the values for concentrations in evaluating K .
c 133Based on the above discussion, answer the following SAQ.
Self Assessment Exercise 4 How are Kp related to each other for a reaction between ideal gases?
5.1 EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM The equilibrium constant, K, of a reversible chemical reaction is a constant at a given temperature; but it varies with temperature.
Let us derive an expression useful in bringing out the relationship between the equilibrium constant and temperature.
From Eq.
4.36, we get, ∆rGo = -RT 1n K p -∆Go or 1n K = r p RT Differentiating this expression with respect to temperature, d In K 1 1 ( ∆ G o ) …(4.48) or P = r dT R dT T Using Eq.
3.45 we can write: ( ) d ∆Go ∆Ho …(4.49) r = - r dT T T2 Combining Eqs.
4.48 and 4.49, we get, d 1n K ∆Ho …(4.50) p r = dT RT2 Eq.
4.50 tells us that equilibrium constant varies with temperature and depends on the standard enthalpy of the reaction.
Assuming that the standard enthalpy change (∆H°) of the reaction remains r constant over a small range of temperature, the above equation on integration between limits K , K and T , T gives, p1 p2 1 2 T K 2 ∫ p2 ∫ ∆H° dμ = K = r dT i p RT2 T K 1 P1 ( ) K ∆H° 1 1 .
or 1n P 2 = r - 134 K R T T P1 1 2 ( ) K ∆H° 1 1 .
or 1n P 2 = r - K 2.303 R T T P1 1 2 ∆Ho(T – T ) r 2 1 …(4.51) = 2.303 RT T 1 2 Eq.
4.51 correlates the equilibrium constant values K and K (expressed in P1 P2 terms of partial pressures) at two different temperatures T and T to the standard 1 2 enthalpy of reaction.
According to Eq.
14.25. this is applicable for ideal gases, K = K,(RT)Σv p Using this equation and Eq.
14.33, it is possible relate K values to the respective temperatures as.
Log K = ΔU0(T – T ) 2 2 1 K 2.303 RT RT 1 1 2 where K and K are the equilibrium constants (in terms of concentrations) at temperatures T and T and ∆Uo is the 1 2 1 2 r standard internal energy change of the reaction.
Since reactions are generally .carried out at constant pressure, Eq.
14.34 is of greater importance for us.
Eq.
14.35 is known as van't Huffs isochore.
Example 6 The equilibrium constant for the reaction H (g) + S(s) H S(g) 2 2 is 18.5 at 925 K and 925 at 1000 K, respectively.
Calculate the standard enthalpy of the reaction.
Also calculate ∆G° and ∆S° at 925 K. r r Solution Substituting the given values in Eq.
4.51, we get, ( ) K ∆H° 1 1 1000 r log = - K (2.303 × 8.314) 925 1000 925 ( ) or log 9 .
2 5 = ∆rH° 75 K (2.303 × 8.314) 925 ×1000 925 hence ∆H° = -71.1 KJ mol-1 r 135 Using Eq.
4.36, ∆G° = -2.303 × 8.314 × 925 log 18.5 = -22.4 KJ mol-1 r ∆Ho – ∆Go (-71100 + 22400) J Rearranging Eq.
3.15 of Unit 9, ∆So = r r = r T 925 K Self Assessment Exercise 5 For the dissociation of mercuric oxide, K , values are 0.0196 and 0.1794 at 693 K p and 723 K respectively.
Calculate the standard enthalpy of the reaction.
FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 136Module 4 Colligative Properties Unit 3 Thermodynamic Quantities from emf Values 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Thermodynamic quantities from emf values 4.0 Colligative properties 5.0 Colligative Properties of Electrolytes 6.0 Phase rule 7.0 Statistical Thermodynamics 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to; - State the colligative properties - Define phase rule and component - Explain the term configuration 3.0 Thermodynamic Quantities from emf Values We shall now study how ∆H, ∆S, and ∆G for the cell reaction can be calculated using modified forms of Nernst equation gives the relationship between ∆G and E values.
Hence, if E value is known, ∆G, for the cell reaction can be calculated.
cell - ∆G = nFE …(4.52) Similarly, the change in entropy accompanying the cell-reaction can also be determined.
In Unit 3 we have derived Eq.
3.92 which relates the temperature coefficient of the free energy change at constant pressure, ∂ (∆G) to the decrease in entropy (- ∆S).
∂T p ∂ (∆G) = -∆S …(4.53) ∂T p By differentiating ∆G and E appearing in Eq.
4.52 with respect to temperature cell at constant pressure we can write ( ) ∂ (∆G) ∂E = -nF …(4.54) ∂T ∂T p p since n and F are constants.
137 Since Eqs.
3.42 and 4.54 we get.
( ) ∂E ∆S = nF …(4.55) ∂T p (E – E ) ∆S = nF 2 1 …(4.56) (T – T ) 2 1 p In case E and E (the emfs of the cell at temperatures T and T ) are known, ∆S 2 1 2 1 ( ) ∂E can be calculated is known as the temperature coefficient of emf at ∂T p constant pressure.
Again Eq.
9.15 states, ∆G = ∆H - T∆S or ∆H = ∆G + T∆S …(4.57) Using Eqs.
4.25 and 4.57 ( ) ∂E ∆H = nFE + TnF …(4.58) ∂T p ( ) ∂E Hence if E. T and are known, then the enthalpy change ∂T p accompanying the cell reaction can be calculated.
In the light of above discussion, answer the following SAQs.
Self Assessment Exercise 6 ( ) Write down the equation relating ∆Ho, ∆So and ∆Go to ∆Eo and ∂Eo ∂T p 4.0 Application of chemical potential to phase equilibrium Here we consider the particles in an unreactive mixture, such as binary mixture.
4.1 Colligative Properties 138Certain properties of solutions of non-volatile solutes have been observed to be dependent solely on the total number of solute particles in a given quantity of the solvent rather than on the kind of species present, such properties are known as colligiative properties.
There are four of them, namely:  the depression of the vapour pressure of solvent  the elevation of the boiling point of a solvent  the depression of the freezing point of a solvent  the osmotic pressure exerted by a solution of a non-volatile solute These changes in the properties of the solvent brought about by dissolving non-volatile solutes does depends on how much of the solute there is and not on the nature and kind of the solute.
For example one mole of sodium ion would depress the freezing point of a given quantity of water to the same extent as mole of sucrose or aluminum ion.
Depression in Vapour Pressure Consider a homogenous solution of a solute A in a solvent B.
Provided the solution is an ideal one the total vapour pressure of the solution is given by the equation P = X P o + X P o ………… (I) T A A B B Where PAo and PBo are the vapour pressure of the pure solvent and pure solute respectively.
XA and XB are the mole fractions of A and B respectively in solution.
If the solute B is non-volatile, it may be assumed that its partial pressure compared to that of the pure solvent is essentially negligible.
Hence the equation becomes 139 P = X P o …………….
(II) T A A Therefore the depression or decrease in the vapour pressure of the liquid is P = P o – P = P o – X P o = P o (1 – X ) A T A A A A A But (1 – X ) = X A B Therefore P = X PAo …………….. (III) B At a particular temperature, P o is a constant and the change in the vapour A pressure is thus proportional to the mole fraction of the solute, that is PX .
B n Since X  B B n n B B The equation (III) becomes  n  P  PA  B  …………… (IV) o n n    A B Example: Calculate the molecular mass of 9.21g non-volatile organic compound, dissolved in 50g of pure water at 25oC, which depresses the vapour pressure of the water from 3.16 x 103 to 3.10 x 103 Nm-2.
Solution P = 3.16 x 103 – 3.10 x 103 Nm-2 = 0.06 x 103 Nm-2 Po = 3.16 x 103 Nm-2 Molecular weight of H O = 2 + 16 = 18 2 Mole fraction of solute X is B 9.21/M X  W B 50 9.21/M 18 W Where M is the molecular weight of solute W 140Therefore 0.06 x 103 = 3.16 x 103 x 9.21 2.78M + 9.21 W M = 171 W Elevation of Boiling Points presence of a non-volatile solute in a volatile liquid causes a decrease on the vapour pressure of the solvent.
That is the solution will require a lot more heat, compared to the pure liquid, to raise its vapour pressure to be equal to the external pressure.
The result of this is that the solution will boil at a higher temperature than the original solvent, and the more concentrated the solution, the higher the boiling point, as shown in figure 4.7.1 A F E 1.013x103 Solvent C 1 B D Solvent C  2 -2) C m N P ( V. T T I T II b b b Temperature  Figure 4.7.1 variation of vapour pressure with concentration T , T I and T II are the boiling points of the pure liquid and solutions containing b b b C and C moles of a non-volatile solute per kilogram of the liquid respectively.
If 1 2 the solutions are fairly dilute the graphs for the pure liquid and the solutions are 141not only parallel, they may be regarded to be fairly linear over narrow temperature ranges.
Thus lines BF and CE on the graph may be regarded as straight lines.
Thus triangle ACE and ABF are similar triangles.
AE AF Hence  = constant AC AB Both AC and AB represent depressions in the vapour pressure of the liquid due to the presence of the solute in the two solutions.
AE and AF represent boiling point charges.
It can be concluded that T = constant or P T is proportional to P But it has been shown that P is proportional to the mole fraction of the solute.
Therefore T  X B and T = K X B where K is the proportionally constant if the amount of solute in solution is expressed in moles per kilogramme of solvents then the equation becomes T = K m b where m is the molal concentration.
The molal concentration m, can be written in terms of the weight of the solute (W) of molecular weight (M)s dissolved in weight of solvent (Ws).
Thus the equation becomes K xW x1000 T  b b M xWs 142K is known as the ebullioscopic constant or molal bonding point evaporation b constant.
Boiling point elevation measurement can be used to determine the molecular weight of a non-volatile solute if a solvent that shows a measurable increase in boiling point is used.
Example An 0.25g compound of an unknown substance is dissolved in 25g of a solvent while K is 29K molal-1 and boils at 0.14oC higher than the pure solvent.
What is b the formula mass of the solute?
Solution: K xW x1000 T  b b M xWs K xW x1000 M  b T xWs 2.9 x 0.25 x1000   2.1x102 0.14 x 25 Depression of Freezing Point When a cooling bath is required for temperature below the freezing point of ice, a salt-ice mixture is used, the salt depresses the freezing point of water.
Thus, in an example of a general phenomenon in which added non-volatile solutes depress the freezing point of solvents on which they are contained.
The greater the quantity of the solute added the greater the depression, Considering the vapour pressure temperature curve for a pure liquid and solutions of a non-volatile solute in the liquids as shown in figure 4.7.2 below.
143 F D T II T I T F F FB E A Solution (M ) Solution (M2 ) 1 Temperature  Figure 4,7.2 Vapour pressure curve of non volatile solute in the liquid AB represents the vapour pressure of the solid at temperatures below the freezing point BC or the vapour pressure of the liquid as temperature increases.
The point B where the solid and the liquid are in equilibrium in the freezing point.
The temperatures T I and T II are the freezing points of the solutions containing M F F 1 and M mole concentrations respectively.
If we make the previous assumptions 2 that the vapour pressure curves are parallel and that over short temperature ranges the vapour pressure curves are linear, then triangles ABE and FBD becomes similar triangles.
AE FD Hence  = constant BE BD But DE and BE are DT II and DPII respectively and FD and BD are DTI and DPI F respectively.
Thus ΔT = Kgm f Kf xW x1000 and ΔDT  f M xWs Where Kf is known as the molal freezing point depression constant or cryoscopic constant.
It is numerically equal to the freezing point depression when the concentration is one molal.
Comparatively K values are much bigger than K values.
f b 144 Osmotic Pressure The process of diffusion of solvent molecules from a high concentration region to a lower concentration through a membrane is known as osmosis.
The pressure that must be applied in order to prevent osmosis is referred to as osmotic pressure.
Experimental work reveals that the osmotic pressure exerted by a solution is proportional to the concentration of solute (C) and absolute temperature (T).
Then Π is proportionate to CT and hence Π = KCT The constant of proportionality is of the same magnitude as the gas constant.
Hence Π = CRT If Π is measured in Nm-2, the concentration unit has to be mole m-3.
In principle, osmosis pressure measurements can be used to determine the molecular weight (w) of a given solute, since C can be wirtten as W 1 C  M V where W is the weight of the solute dissolvent in volume V. The advantage of the method is that the presure exerted by very dilute solutions are relatively large and can therefore be measured fairly accurately.
Example What is the molecular weight of a 15.0g of a non-volatile compound dissolved in 100cm3 of water which extends on osmotic pressure of 2.06 x 106 Nm-2 at 298k.
Solution Π= CRT 145V 1 150 C   x103mol m3 M v M 150 2.06 x106  x103 x8.31x 298 M = 180 5.0 Colligative Properties of Electrolytes Colligative properties of solutions of electrolytes are observed to be greater than those of solutions of non-electrolytes of the same molal concentration.
For instance, whereas a molal solution of urea depresses the freezing point of water by about 1.86oC, one molal solutions of hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, ammonium chloride and sulphuric acid depresses the freezing point of water by 3.94, 3.58, 3.33 and 4.04oC respectively.
To explain these values, Van’t Hoff suggested that they are obtained by multiplying 1.86 by some correcting factor referred to as the Van’t Hoff factor, i.
The factor i the ratio of the observed and predicted colligative property of the electrolyte.
5.1 Phase Equilibria When a solid such as ice, changes to liquid, solid, is in equilibrium with liquid, at any given moment during this change of state.
At any given moment during the evaporation, liquid is in equilibrium with vapour.
These changes of state from solid to liquid phase, and from liquid to vapour phase, may be expressed as solid liquid vapour 146The equilibrium conditions for such changes, and for other changes of state such as dissolving salt in water, may be studied using fundamental principles of thermodynamics.
Phase A change from one physical state to another is called a phase change.
A phase may be defined as any homogeneous macroscopic portion of a system.
A system is said to be homogeneous, or to consist of one phase if it is uniform throughout, both in chemical as well as physical composition.
Since all gases are completely misable, they will always exist in a homogenous state, that is in a single phase e.g.
a solution of sodium chloride in water.
A system which is made up of more than one physical distinguishable phase, is said to be heterogonous e.g.
water, which has ice cubes, on it is a homogenous system made up of two distinct phases.
Components The composition of the system is described by using the smallest number of chemically distinct and independently variable constituents which together make up the various phases of the system.
The chosen constituents are known as the components of the system.
In the system ice  water  water vapour, the composition of all the phases can be expressed in terms of water.
Water is thus described as a one-component system.
Consider the system in which solid CaCO , solid CaO and gaseous CO are in 3 2 equilibrium.
This represents a three phase system constituting of two solid and 147one gaseous phases.
The number of components, however, is two and not three since each of the three substances is not independent.
CaO (s) CaCO(s) + CO (g) 3 2 Hence for the calcium carbonate system, the number of components is C = 3 – 1 = 2 Degrees of Freedom One very important aspect of phase equilibrium is that the equilibrium state is independent of the actual amounts of the phases present provided variations in surface area are ignored.
The smallest number of independent intensive thermodynamic variables that must be specified in order to describe completely the state of a system is known as the number of degree of freedom or the variance of the system.
It is denoted by the symbol f. For example, 10dm3 of pure CO2 gas may be completely described by specifying any two of the variables; pressure, temperature and density.
If any two of these variables are known, the third can be calculated such a system therefore has two degrees of freedom, or is bivariant.
The water vapour system will have only one degree of freedom because of any given temperature, the pressure of vapour in equilibrium with liquid is fixed, and therefore only one variable needs to be specified to determine the state of the system.
6.0 Phase Rule This rule was proposed by Willard Gibbs (1875 and 1876).
It provides a general relationship between the number of phases, the number of components, and the degrees of freedom in a system at equilibrium.
It states that for a system at 148equilibrium having C components, and P phases, and in which equilibrium is only affected by the variables, pressure, temperature and concentration, the degree of freedom are given by the equation: f = c – p + 2 The quantity two arises from the intensive variables, pressure and temperature.
Note that the phase rule only applies to systems at equilibrium.
Example Find the number of degrees of freedom for a closed one component system , for a fixed amount of material, when.
a. only one phase exist b. two phases are at equilibrium Solution: f = c – p + 2 a. p = 1 therefore f = 1 – 1 + 2 = (bivariant) b. p = 2 therefore f = 1 – 2 + 2 = 1 (univariant) 6.1 One-Component Systems In one-component system, the smallest number of independently variable constituent substances required to form the phase is one.
Examples of one- component systems are water, carbon, chloride, sulphur and bismuth.
149The relationship between the vapour pressure and temperature of a substance in the solid, liquid and vapour (gaseous) phases can be represented by a phase diagram.
D C Liquid Solid 5.06 x 105 Nm-2  O Vapour B 1.013 x 105 Nm-2  A 195k 216.6k Figure 4.8.1 phase diagram for CO system 2 O is the triple point, where solid, liquid and vapour are in equilibrium.
In point B, at 195k (sublimitation temperature) and 1.013 x 105 Nm-2 pressure, a given quantity of solid CO would change to the vapour without rise in 2 temperature.
CO can therefore not be liquefied at ordinary atmosphere pressure.
2 The minimum pressure at which CO will exist in liquid form is 5.06 x 105 Nm-2.
2 This corresponds to part of the triple point, where solid CO will change to liquid 2 (melt)s at a constant temperature of 216.6k water system.
D C Solid 1.013 x 105 Nm-2 Liquid 6.10 x 102 Nm-2 O B E Vapour 273.16k 373k 150Figure 4.8.2 Phase diagram for H O system 2 The phase diagram of water is shown in figure 4.8.2.
It will be seen from the diagram that at any given temperature.
There is only one pressure at which liquid water and water vapour will be in equilibrium.
The system is therefore univariant, with one degree of freedom.
C is the critical point.
AB represents the sublimation – curve for ice.
Below 6.10 x 102 Nm-2 ice will form directly to vapour.
B is the triple point.
The curve EB represents the measurable region, along which water may be cooled below its freezing point without its solidifying.
Sulphur System A one-component system could have more than one triple point if the solid express in more than one crystalline, or allotropic form.
For example, sulphur can exist as rhombic or monoclinic sulphur, under different conditions.
The transformations involved are known as solid-solid transformations.
The sulphur phase diagram is as shown in figure 4.8.3.
At low temperatures sulphur exists in the rhombic form.
B is the triple point where rhombic sulphur, monoclinic sulphur, and sulphur vapour exist in equilibrium.
E 109 D ) 103 Rhombic Liquid 2 -m N ( re 101 F u C s s e Pr 10-1 Vapour B A 313 353 393 433 473 K Figure 4.8.3 Phase diagram for sulphur system.
151AB is thus the vapour pressure curve for rhombic sulphur.
BC represents the vapour pressure curve for monoclinic sulphur.
BC represents the vapour curve for monoclinic sulphur.
from BO to OC, all rhombic sulphur changes to monoclinic sulphur.
The point C is the triple point for monoclinic sulphur, liquid and sulphur vapour.
O represents a third triple point, where rhombic, monoclinic and sulphur vapour, all exist in equilibrium.
It must be pointed out here that at point B where rhombic, monoclinic and vapour sulphur exists, we have three phases.
But the system is made up of only one component.
From the phase rule, the number of degree of freedom is given as f = c – p + 2 = 1 – 3 + 2 = 0 that is, B is an invariant point.
6.2 Two Components System In a two component system, the smallest number of independently variable constituent substances required to form the phase is two.
Examples of compounds that can be used to show such a system are those that can form alloys or form solid solutions.
For example, copper and nickel, camphor and napthalene, and bismuth and cadmium.
The type of diagrams, here are for binary system, consisting of liquid solid phases and are therefore referred to as condensed system.
In this, one of the variables, pressure, is kept constant.
Hence the phase rule becomes f = c – p + 1 or f = 3 – p Since pressure is kept constant the only intensive variables remaining are those of concentration and temperature.
A phase diagram for a considered binary system will consist of a plot of temperature versus concentration.
The concentration is most frequently expressed as mole fraction or weight percent, as shown in figure 1524.8.4 for Bismuth – cadmium system.
C 323 – A 273 – C o p m 200 – Bi+ Cd+ e T liquid liquid 140 – Bi+Cd 100 | | | | 60 0 20 40 80 100 Weigth % of cadmium Figure 4.8.4 phase diagram for the Bi-Cd system The degree of freedom or variance at the various areas on the phase diagram can be calculated.
In the area above, ABC, there is one liquid phase and f = 2 – 1 + 1 = 2 (bivarant).
Below AB and BC but above 140oC, there are two phases (liquid and solid) and f = 2 – 2 + 1 = (univariant).
At the eutectic point B where there are three phases – solid bismuth, solid cadmium and liquid solution containing 40% cadmium.
Here f = 2 – 3+ 1which is O, and so it is the non-variant.
There is only one temperature and one composition of solution at which these three phases can exist together at equilibrium at a given constant pressure.
7.0 Statistical Thermodynamics This is based on the principle that thermodynamics observables are averages of molecular properties, and it sets about calculating these averages.
7.1 Molecular Energy Levels and the Boltzman Distribution Consider a system composed of N particles.
Although the total energy can be specified, it is not possible to define about how that energy is distributed.
153Collision, take place, and result in the ceaseless redistribution of energy not only between the particles but also among their different model of motion.
Thus, on average there may be n particles in a state of energy E, and in an 2 i equilibrium system, this average population remain constant even though there may be small momentary fluctuation around it and the identities of the particles on that state may change at every collision.
7.2 Configuration and Weights Any individual particle may exist in states with energies E , E , E , E , … etc.
o 1 2 3 with E = 0 and all other energies are related to it.
In the sample as a whole, there o will be n particles in the state with energy E , n with E and so on.
The o o 1 1 specification of the set of population n , n , n , etc.
is referred to as the o 1 2 configuration of the system.
The instantaneous configuration of the system fluctuates with time because the instantaneous populations change.
For example, one might be n = N, n , n , n = o 1 o 2 0 or (N, O, O), corresponding to every molecules being in its ground state.
Another might be (N – 2, 2, O) in which two particles are in a higher state.
This can be achieved in ½N(N-1) different ways.
If the system were free to fluctuate between the configurations, (as a result of collusion), it would almost, always be found in the second.
A general configuration can be achieved in W different wall, as given below W = N!/n !
n !
n !
Etc.
o 1 2 where W is called the weight of the configurations and o!
= 1 154In looking for the configuration with the great weight, we have to ensure that it also satisfies the total energy criterion.
E n e i i i and is also subject to the total number criterion E n i i where E is the total energy of the system.
7.3 Most Probable Configuration The maximum value W* of W for a set of numbers n *, n *, n * can be arrived at, o 1 2 when ℓn W is a maximum.
When a configuration changes, so that n changes to n + dn and ℓn W changes to i i i ℓn W + d (ℓn W) where d(ℓnW) = (nW /ni)dni ……..
I i At a maximum, the change d(ℓnW) vanishes, but the presence of the two equations involving E and N means that when ni changes they do so subject to the constraints Eidni 0 and dni 0 i i Multiplying the two constraints by the constants  and  respectively and then added to the equation I, gives d(nW) (nW /ni)dnidniEidni i i i  d(nW)  (nW /ni)dni dni  Eidni i i i 155All the dni are now treated as independent.
This means that the only way of satisfying d(ℓnw) = 0 is to require that for each i (dℓnW/ni) +  -Ei = 0 Where ni have their most probable values ni*.
In order to solve this equation, we use starlings approximation in the form given below ℓnX!
= XℓnX – X In introduction of the approximation unit the expression W = N!/n !n !n !, we o 1 2 have ℓnW = ℓn(N!/n !n !...)
= ℓnN!
- ℓn(n !n !...)
o 1 o 1 = ℓn N!
n ni!(Nn N N)(nin nini) i i = NnN ninni i because the sum of the ni is equal to N since N is a constant, differentiation with respect to ni gives (ℓnW/ni) = ninm/ni) i [(ni/ni)n nini(nni/nj)][nni1] i because j  i, thus - ℓnni +  - Ei = 0 when ni = ni*.
The most probable population of the state of energy Ei is therefore Ni* ℓ( - Ei) Since N = nj*  eαets i j It follows that e = N/j e – Ej 156which leads to the boltzman distribution as given below n* = Ne -nEi/EieEj j j The  is equal to 1/KT, where T is the thermodynamic temperature SUMMARY The chemical potential of a given substance is the change in free energy of the system that results on the addition of one mole of that particular substance at a constant temperature and pressure to such a large quantity of the system that there is no appreciable change in the overall composition of the system.
Gibbs-Duhem equation shows that variation in chemical potential of one of the components in a binary system affects the value of the chemical potential for another component.
In this we discussed chemical equilibrium.
A general expression for the equilibrium constant was derived from the basic principles of thermodynamics.
Different forms of the general expression were then utilized in understanding the equilibra of homogeneous and heterogeneous system.
Colligative properties of solute and an introduction to statistical thermodynamic were also discussed FURTHER READING Advanced Chemistry (Physical and Industrial) Philip Mathews Cambridge University Press 2003 Physical Chemistry PW Atkins 3rd Edition Oxford University Press 1986 157 158 159
