 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: ESM 308 COURSE CODE: RURAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES 1 ESM 308 RURAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES COURSE DEVELOPER AND UNIT WRITER: PROF. JULIUS.A.B.
OLUJIMI, FEDERAL UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY (FUTA) AKURE 2  ESM 308 RURAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES Course synopsis: Policy and policy thrusts for Rural Development in Nigeria 1900 to present day, Development needs of rural societies, Community Development and roles of NGOs, Rural- Urban migration.
Urbanization of Rural Societies.
Table of Content Page Module 1: Policy and Policy thrusts for Rural Development in Nigeria 1900 to date Module 2: Development Needs of Rural Societies Module 3: Community Development and Roles of NGOs Module 4: Rural – Urban Migration Module 5: Urbanization of Rural Societies MODULE 1: POLICY AND POLICY THRUSTS FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT IN NIGERIA 1900 TO DATE Unit 1: Fundamentals of Policy formulation Unit 2: Rural Development Policies in Nigeria Unit 3 Rural Development Programmes in Nigeria Unit 4: Evaluation of Rural Development programme in Nigeria Unit 5: Rural Development Policy Direction in Nigeria UNIT 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF POLICY FORMULATION IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3 3.1 What is Policy 3.2 Stages involved in the formulation of policy 3.3 Relationship between [government] policy and programmes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn the definition of policy and stages involved in the formulation of policy.
The relationships between policy and programmes that emerged from government policy with relevance to rural development in Nigeria are also highlighted.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define policy.
• Know the stages involved in the formulation of policy.
• Know the relationships between policy and programmes.
.
3.0 Main Body 3.1 What is a policy?
Oxford Advanced Learners dictionary (7th edition) defines policy as a plan of action agreed or chosen by a political party, a business etc.
it also sees policy as a written statement of a contract of insurance.
A policy can best be described as a framework or strategy, giving a broad outline of the direction and overall strategy for the development of a particular sector.
It can also be defined as a high-level overall plan embracing the general goals and acceptable procedures, especially of a government body (Westerinen, 2003).
Many factors contribute to the development of policy, such as public debates in various fora, the demands of different political constituencies, reports from commissions and task forces appointed to enquire into perceived problem areas, evaluations of previous policies, and so on.
Policies are often enunciated in such documents as government white papers, though not necessarily.
A public policy is a deliberate and (usually) careful decision that provides guidance for addressing selected public concerns.
In short, any given policy represents the end result of a decision as to how best to achieve a specific objective.
Most people actually apply a similar 4 process in the decisions they make in their everyday lives – even around fairly inconsequential choices.
3.2 Stages involved in Policy Formulation The formulation of policy involves the identification and analysis of a range of actions that respond to these concerns.
Each possible solution is assessed against a number of factors such as probable effectiveness, potential cost, resources required for implementation, political context and community support.
It would be unrealistic and even incorrect to say that the formulation of policy follows a clear and consistent pathway or route.
Policy development is actually an involved and sometimes haphazard process that differs widely depending upon the concern being addressed.
Sometimes it is a long and winding road with lots of detours and stops along the way.
For instance, rural problems can be addressed through the formulation of rural development policy which are implemented through different rural development programmes.
A clear goal or destination – an objective to be achieved – must first be set.
The various ways to attain that goal are then identified and assessed.
Despite the variation in policy process, there are some general stages that are common to its development.
These are: • Selection of the desired objective • Identification of the target of the objective • Determination of the pathway to reach that objective • Design of the specific programes or measures in respect of the goal • Approval of the draft policy document a.
Selection of the desired objective The first stage in policy formulation is to determine the desired objective.
Policy directives can be understood as an expression of commonly accepted societal value e.g.
‘Better life for Rural Dwellers’ etc.
Public policy is basically shaped by and must be consistent with these values.
Within this context, the selection of objectives typically derives 5 from priorities and imperatives set at the political level.
The desired objective may be rooted in the platform of a political party or approved at its policy conference.
A policy direction may be announced, for example, in the Speech from the Throne that opens a new Parliamentary session or in the federal Budget.
It may be signaled in a ministerial or departmental announcement regarding the government’s intended agenda in a certain area, such as ‘free health care for rural women’, Caring Heart Health, etc.
Policy objectives can also arise from negotiations with provinces/territories and subsequent intergovernmental agreements that effectively incorporate an explicit or implicit agenda.
The determination of the objective in the policy formulation may be difficult even in the presence of clear political intent.
Some observers would argue that identifying the right question(s) is the most challenging part of the policy process.
This is where the engagement of citizens becomes particularly relevant.
While governments are the primary formulators of policy, there is growing recognition of the need to engage the potential targets of any measure and citizens, more generally, in discussion of the options.
Citizens certainly are keen to ensure that their voices are heard in the formulation of public policy.
One of the functions of the policy dialogue earlier described is to ensure that community members are involved in the Vibrant Communities and Action for Neighborhood Change initiatives the opportunity to talk directly with government representatives about the issues of concern to communities and how governments can help address them.
In Nigeria, it is common to see the Legislative Committee in-charge of issues which policy is intended to address organizing public debates to gather views of the target population for possible consideration and inclusion in the draft policy.
The essence of the debate is to ensure that the public are adequately involved (citizen participation).
Often times, only the privileged individuals that are present at the forum participates in the debate e.g.
the on-going debate on removal of fuel subsidy in Nigeria.
b.
Identification of the appropriate target The next stage in the policy formulation process is to identify the appropriate targets toward which the policy should be directed – the entire population or designated households or group that meet certain criteria.
The selected target is linked to the overall objective, which embodies within it either a direct or indirect statement of who will or should be affected by the proposed measure.
For example, in the formulation of policy that would address rural problems, the rural dwellers are the main target.
Experience in the past has shown that this target group is often ignored and the policy so formulated has failed to achieve its intention.
6 c. Determination the pathway A third stage in the policy formulation process is to determine from a range of options how best to reach the specified objectives.
This stage is often difficult and contentious.
Nonetheless, substantial debate can arise when it comes to selecting the most appropriate route to achieve this goal and the end may be clear but the means may be hotly contested.
Considerable thought, discussion, consultation (some would say not sufficient or genuine) and research typically precede any major public decision.
In contrast to the usual way in which actions are rationalized, the means – when it comes to public policy – must justify the ends.
d. Designing the intervention Policy formulation does not end once a preferred route to the desired outcome has been selected.
There is typically considerable design work to be done after the approach has been identified.
In fact, it is at this point that the detailed work and tough decisions actually begin.
Draft copy of the policy would now be put on paper containing submissions of various interest groups.
At this stage the technocrats would be involved in putting together and fine turning the policy draft document.
e. Approval of the draft policy document The finally stage in the policy formulation process is the approval of the policy document.
The draft policy document submitted to the Executive Council is properly scrutinized and further debated in the Council meeting.
At this stage, additional suggestions might be made that may lead to few modifications after which final approval would be granted by the Executive Council of the state if it is a state policy; or Federal Executive Council of the country if it is a Federal Government policy.
2.2 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GOVERNMENT POLICY AND PROGRAMMES A policy can best be described as a framework or strategy, giving a broad outline of the direction and overall strategy for the development of a particular sector.
It can also be defined as a high-level overall plan embracing the general goals and acceptable procedures, especially of a government body (Westerinen, 2003).
A programme is a planned and 7 organised series of events that seeks to address a particular problem or to promote development.
Programmes demand a clear statement of objectives linked to national or higher level policies.
They are made up of a number of projects which, when linked together, achieve the programme objective.
From the definition of policy and programmes; policy can be regarded as the bedrock upon which programmes can come into reality.
Without a policy put in place there cannot be a programme.
Policy is an action plan on which master plan has been conceived after careful and painstaking brainstorming on the pros and cons of different steps and then a conclusion is reached after passing through the various stages.
The decision reached is to be implemented through programmes.
Example of the rural development policy during the Babagida Administration in Nigeria led to the establishment of the defunct Directorate of Food, Roads, and Rural Infrastructure (DFRRI) in 1986.
Different programmes through which the policy was implemented include rural road construction and rehabilitation, rural water scheme, provision and maintenance, rural housing, rural banking, etc.
Policy remains a paper work unless programmes are designed on it to ensure the reality of the policy.
Therefore, policy should be backed up with a good implementable programmes to make the series of statement in the policy document realizable..
They must be well worked out to solve problems.
3.0 Conclusion Policies are best described as a high-level overall plan embracing the general goals and acceptable procedures, especially of a government body and they are frameworks or strategies, giving a broad outline of the direction and overall strategy for the development of a particular sector.
This unit presents the fundamental of policy formulation with a view to presenting sound knowledge required for the understanding of rural development policy formulation in Nigeria.
4.0 Summary You have just concluded unit one.
You have learnt the definition of policy and the stages involved in the formulation of policy.
It is necessary to note that in the formulation of policy, the target population needs to be adequately involved by their direct participation.
You have equally learnt that policy is implemented through programmes.
Thus, you have 8 learnt the relationships between policy and programmes.
The essence of this unit is to provide you with the general background knowledge to understand the next unit which focuses on rural development policy formulation and design of realistic programmes that can achieve sustainable development in the rural areas of Nigeria.
REFERENCES Olujimi, J.A.B (1998).
‘The Role of the Public in the Implementation of Master Plan in Nigeria’.
In Ilesanmi, F.A.
(ed) Master Planning Approach to Physical Development: The Nigerian Experience (Book of Readings), Federal University of Technology, Yola, Paracetal Publishers, Yola, 178-184.
Hornby, A.S. ( 1998) Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary.
Oxford University Press, London.
Westerinen.
A.
(2003) what is Policy and What can it be?
( Document retrived from www.dmtf.org on 5TH July, 2011).. 9  UNIT 2: RURAL DEVELOPMENT POLICIES IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 What is Rural Development?
3.2 Problems of the Rural Areas in Nigeria 3.3 Government Policies formulated to address the problems of rural area in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will build on the general knowledge acquired in the previous unit that provides the meaning and stages involved in the formulation of policy.
In this unit therefore, you will learn the definition of rural development, identify various problems confronting the rural areas and the rural dwellers in Nigeria.
You will also examine the various policies formulated by government to address the problems of rural areas in Nigeria.
OBJECTIVES: By the end of this unit, you should be able to: * define rural development * know that rural development is more than mere agricultural development * identify the problems of rural areas * examine policies formulated to address rural problems in Nigeria a view to promoting rural development.
2.0 MAIN BODY 2.1 WHAT IS RURAL DEVELOPMENT?
10  The predominant occupation of the rural dwellers is agriculture, and this brings in the conception that to develop the rural area, one needs to develop the agricultural sector.
This may not be unconnected with the reason why Williams (1981) sees rural development as activities undertaken by governments and international, public and private agencies that take a number of forms; many of which are combined with one another.
These include irrigation schemes, Farm Settlement Scheme, extension services, provision of chemical fertilizer, herbicides and pesticides and high-yielding varieties of seeds.
The central purpose of these activities as implied in the different programmes evidently point to an increase in agricultural production with not much emphasis on living standard.
However, studies conducted by Odumosu et al (1998) and FMARD (2001) have differently confirmed that agriculture is by no means the only possible occupation for the rural people.
Therefore, it is erroneous to equate agriculture development with rural development.
Rural development is wider than mere agricultural development and it implies a broad-based reorganization and mobilization of masses so as to enhance their capacity to effectively with their daily tasks.
According to Lele (1975), rural development is a process which involves improving the living standard of the mass of the low-income people residing in rural areas and making this process of their development self-sustaining.
Diejomah (1972) equally sees rural development as a process of not only increasing the level of per capital income in the rural sector, but also the standard of living of the rural population.
Rather than an activity (Williams, 1981); these two scholars (Lele 1975, and Diejomah 1972) have conceived rural development as a process towards improving living standard of the rural poor by eradicating poverty and this does not centre solely on increasing per capital income, but equally embraces the provision of infrastructural facilities to promote good quality of life.
For any programme to achieve meaningful (rural) development; it must see Man as its centre-piece and as a matter of objective; it must attain improvement in the standard of living of the rural dwellers as well as ensuring higher productivity and improve the Man/Land/Capital ratio.
Furthermore, it must create employment opportunities for the rural dwellers by the adoption of appropriate technologies and adequately involve the rural people in the process.
Basically therefore, rural development is concerned with raising the quality of life of the low-income population living in rural areas on a self-sustaining basis through a fundamental transformation of the rural mode of production (Gana, 1986).
Central to this 11 transformation, is the provision of rural infrastructure that are required to facilitate the production, distribution, and consumption activities as well as enhance the quality of rural life.
Since the daily tasks of the rural people are carried out on space, land is therefore basic to the viability of rural life, and a comprehensive spatial reorganization of rural land through rural planning is of paramount importance for the attainment of rural development objectives.s 2.2 PROBLEMS OF THE RURAL AREAS IN NIGERIA UNIT 3: RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES IN NIGERIA CONTENTS • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Rural Development programme 3.1.1 Agricultural Development (a) Farm settlement scheme (b) River Basin Development Scheme/Agricultural Development Project (ADP) (c) Operation Feed the Nation (d) Green Revolution 3.1.2Village Regrouping Scheme 3.1.3Directorate of Food, Roads and Rural Infrastructure (DFRRI) • Conclusion • Summary • References/further readings UNIT 4: EVALUATION OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT UNDER DIFFERENT ADMINISTRATION PROGRAMMES IN NIGERIA CONTENTS: • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Evaluation of Rural Development programmes under different administration • Pre-colonial period • During the colonial period 12 • Post-colonial periods • 1960 – 1965 (First Republic) • 1966 – 1979 (Military Administration) • 1979 – 1983 (Second Republic) • 1984 – 1999 (Another military administration) • 1999 – to Date (Third Republic) • Conclusion • Summary • References/further readings UNIT 5: RURAL DEVELOPMENT POLICY DIRECTION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Rural Development policy to address agriculture & food security Rural economy - industrialisation • Rural Development policy to address rural governance and democratic status • Rural development policy to address rural-urban migration and welfare/well- being • Conclusion • Summary • References/further readings 13  MODULE 2 Unit 1 Rural Dwellers and their characteristics Unit 2 Problems of the Rural Areas Unit 3 Needs of the Rural Dwellers Unit 4 Rural Infrastructure UNIT 1: RURAL DWELLERS AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 Who are the rural dwellers?
3.2 Characteristics of rural dwellers in Nigeria 3.3 Rural families in Nigeria 3.4 Improvement of living conditions of rural dwellers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, attempt is made to present the basic idea about the Rural Dwellers.
This includes the definition of rural dwellers, their characteristics, their living condition especially in Nigeria and how this condition can be improved on.
You will need to understand these to be able to appreciate the specific issues you will follow in subsequent units.
These issues here are actually background issues.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to know the following: 14 • Differentiate between an urban inhabitant and a rural dweller.
• The various characteristics of a rural dweller especially in Nigeria.
• The various ways through which the living standard of the rural dwellers can be improved.
3.0 MAIN BODY A sense of charm and nostalgia is associated with rural living—at least as it is characterized in literature and lore--which tends to perpetrate the myth that ―rural‖ is one-dimensional and associated with open spaces, fresh air, bucolic life style, and healthy people.
While it is true that the rural lifestyle has many positive characteristics, it is no longer, if it ever was, one-dimensional or homogeneous.
It is a vast and varied tapestry, populated with communities rich in historic, cultural, economic, geographic, occupational, and demographic diversity.
It is often presumed that rural dwellers are healthy and robust.
In reality, they are burdened with a vast array of health needs associated with chronic health conditions, limited access to health care services, poverty, social issues such as drug abuse, suicide, domestic violence, alcoholism, smoking, and the likelihood of employment in hazardous occupations that expose workers to chemicals and dangerous machinery.
3.1 Who are the rural dwellers?
The rural dwellers are majorly low income people whose main occupation is Agriculture.
They are socio-economically handicapped people.
The people lack the technology and know-how to improve and manage effectively the world around them.
Majority of the rural dwellers are children and elderly people.
They are backward people, who live in areas that are not urbanized, and with low population density, and typically much of the land is devoted to agriculture.
3.2 Characteristics of rural dwellers in Nigeria The rural dwellers are majorly low income people whose main occupation is Agriculture; they are socio-economically handicapped people.
The people lack the technology and know-how to improve and manage effectively the world around them.
Majority of the rural dwellers are children and elderly people.
Rural dwellers are associated with Housing stress (lack of modern amenities, poor quality housing, etc.)
Lower educational background, Lower employment rates, Persistent poverty, Population loss due to urbanization and migration to urban areas, Insufficient policing, fire rescue, and healthcare services, Reduced access to information and technology, and Reduced access to resources and supplies such as lack of electricity, portable water supply, and health education among others.
Migrant and seasonal farm workers represent a substantial group of people who live in or outside the rural periphery and have compounded vulnerabilities during a disaster or emergency.
3.3 The Rural Families in Nigeria.
Everyone deserves equal access to social amenities and good living condition.
But how true is the situation in Nigeria?
This is a million-dollar question begging for an 15 answer.
Today in Nigeria, many families living in rural areas are certified poor people.
Many struggle to survive with less access to poverty support systems that are often based in the urban areas.
Unfortunately, one of the most significant challenges these families often face is access to affordable health care.
Most rural families get no medical attention when needed.
There are just few chemist shops around most of which sell cheap but expired drugs.
A new report by the United State Department of Health and Human Services notes that 12 per cent of those in urban areas live in poverty, while 15 per cent of rural dwellers live below the poverty line.
Most Rural families don’t have access to electricity and pipe borne water.
No good education for their children and in most cases their children don’t go to school.
3.4 Improvement of Living Conditions of Rural Dwellers 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY From the above we have seen who the rural dwellers are; we have known their characteristics and what the Nigerian rural families are facing and their daily activities.
6.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 16  UNIT 2 PROBLEMS OF RURAL AREAS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 Definition and description of rural settlements and rural areas in Nigeria 3.2 Characteristics of rural settlements in Nigeria e.g.
in the North, West and East 3.3 Problems of the rural settlements 3.4 Potentials for development in rural areas 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The rural area is majorly associated with low income people whose main occupation is Agriculture.
Rural areas are backward areas; the inhabitants are socio-economically handicapped.
The people lack the technology and know-how to improve and manage effectively the world around them.
Rural settlements are characterized by lack of electricity, portable water supply, and health education among others.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definition and Description of Rural Settlements in Nigeria.
Rural areas or the country or countryside are areas that are not urbanized, though when large areas are described country towns and smaller cities will be included.
They have a low population density, and typically much of the land is devoted to agriculture.
The degree to which areas of wilderness are included in the term varies; very large wilderness areas are not likely to be described by the term in most contexts.
In most parts of the world rural areas have been declining since the 19th century or earlier, both as a proportion of land area, and in terms of the proportion of the population living in them.
Urbanization encroaches on rural land, and the mechanization of agriculture has reduced the number of workers needed to work the land, while alternative employment is 17 typically easier to obtain in cities.
In parts of the developed world urban sprawl has greatly reduced the areas that can be called rural, and land use planning measures are used to protect the character of rural areas in various ways.
3.2 Characteristics of Rural Settlements in Nigeria.
While it is difficult to summarize the varied rural settlement patterns of a country as large as Nigeria, a few key points can be made.
First, the household is the main social unit of the rural village or town.
This is etched in the landscape through the formation of compounds.
Compounds are typically composed of three to ten buildings and often have an earthen wall that marks off the collective space of a single compound.
Compounds range in size based on the size of the household unit.
This is determined by the number of children and extended family residing in the compound and by the number of wives that a man has.
Polygamy is much more common in the North where most men are allowed by Muslim law to have as many as four wives.
Hence, in households where polygamy is practiced, each wife will typically have her own hut within the compound.
In terms of building materials, building walls are composed of earthen bricks in much of the country, while roofs are constructed with thatch or corrugated metal.
Corrugated metal is much more common in southern Nigeria and generally represents greater social status.
Since thatch must typically be replaced every one to two years, metal is much easier to maintain.
Another important point to note about rural villages is that they serve commercial functions.
Depending on the size of the settlement, most rural towns and villages have markets that serve as a place of exchange for the settlement and its surrounding trade area.
The size of the market is also typically related to the frequency with which it meets.
The smallest rural markets in Nigeria may only meet once every two weeks, while the largest meet daily.
In the market one can find all kinds of daily and specialized goods for sale: meats, grains, oils, nuts, and fruits.
Most towns also serve as service centers.
Here one is likely to find a health clinic, a "barbing salon" (i.e.
hair stylists), a car mechanic, or a police station.
Another area of major importance to rural settlements is infrastructure.
This includes transportation, communications, and utilities infrastructure.
While there is some variance in rural communities’ access to these types of collective infrastructure, most rural areas lag behind cities in the development of these services.
It is not uncommon, for example, to see a rural village with electric lines passing through it.
But that it is literally all the lines do.
There are often no connections to the rural town.
The lines are merely carrying power from a generating plant or a hydroelectric facility to urban areas.
While the lines are physically proximate to the villagers, they are economically distant from their day-to-day lives.
Another example of rural-urban disparities is in transportation infrastructure.
Many rural settlements are poorly connected to their surrounding region.
This is the case for at least two reasons.
First, construction and upkeep of roads has not been sufficient to afford all rural peoples easy access to an efficient, well-maintained highway network.
Second, many rural people have limited access to motor vehicles.
While taxis are abundant in the cities, those without cars in the countryside are severely constrained.
In northern Nigeria, many people substitute bicycles or motor-cycles for cars.
This allows them a break from the long hours of walking/trecking that regularly form part of their normal life.
3.3 Problems of the Rural Settlements There are so many problems associated with the Rural areas in Nigeria among them are:- poor quality housing, Lower educational background, Lower employment rates, Persistent poverty, Population loss due to urbanization and migration to urban areas, Insufficient 18 policing, fire rescue, and healthcare services, Reduced access to information and technology, and Reduced access to resources and supplies such as lack of electricity, portable water supply, and health education among others.
In Nigeria, successive governments in the past have introduced various programs to arrest problems militating against the development of rural Nigeria.
But these Programmes where centered majorly on Agriculture which was thought to be synonymous to rural development.
This of course is a misnomer as Agriculture is just a sectorial program under rural development.
This same mentality is still been peddled by some states of the federation for establishing Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
On the basis of this, this study tends to identify rural settlement problems from the perspective of the following; uses, spatial, social, and technological.
Spatial Problems: One of the major problems militating against the development of the rural areas is the scattered nature of communities, this serves as a form of set-back in the provision of common facilities like electricity, pipe-born water, bore holes, schools etc.
Due to the great distance between these settlements, a lot of problems are encountered in re- ordering or re-organizing these settlements.
Great challenges are encountered in bringing people of the same background, culture and language together as this will require persuasion.
Also settlements that are far away from major roads needs to be relocated close to the main roads in order to enhance their economic potentials.
Carrying out this also come with a lot of challenges as there will be need to educate the people on the importance of moving closer to the main routes.
Social Problems: Another problem militating against the development of rural areas is the socio-political problems; this tends to rub the rural agriculture of adequate labour.
The aspirations and life style of the youths are often conflicted with socio-political problems.
Politics which usually come with conflicts in the rural areas caused the youths in these rural areas to take refuge in urban centers, thus reducing the agricultural labour in the rural areas.
Urgent measures have to be put in place in other to create a conducive and relaxed political atmosphere in the rural areas in order to induce the youths to stay back in the villages and participate in the rural agricultural development.
Technological Problems: Technology is one aspect of rural development problem that cannot be ruled out, as far as agriculture is consigned in the rural settlement areas.
Traditional agriculture in Africa is characterized by low level of technology and extreme dependence on nature.
Farm implements consist of a great variety of hoes, machetes, sickles and the digging stick: much human labour is required for all farm operations and in consequence, output per man is very low.
Also the rainfall region determines the farming calendar and the size of the harvest are greatly influenced by its variability.
Prolonged droughts often result in disastrous crop failures, loss of livestock and severe farming such as the one that occurred in the sahelian region of West Africa from 1972-1974 (Strahler and Strahler 1977).
Rudimentary irrigation agriculture is practiced along the seasonal flood plains (fadamas in Hausa land and dambos in Zimbabwe).
Such flood land irrigation however depends on the natural flow of the rivers and flood heights both of which vary with the amount and regime of rainfall.
Due to the absence of technology in agriculture in the rural areas field shapes are irregular and farm sizes are relatively small by standards, they vary enormously from one ecological zone to another and also with the size of the family.
In the forest belt of West Africa only a few farms exceed 0.8 hectares [2 acres] although farm sizes of 2-4 hectares [5-10 acres] are 19 common in the open grassland areas.
Smaller fields of about 0.2 hectares are more usual in the very densely populated areas of the eastern states of Nigeria.
It is therefore not surprising that African farms are referred to as garden by some Europeans and American writers.
Lack of technology as also made it difficult in the southern part of Nigeria to cultivate large farms as a result of the difficulties encounter in cutting down forest tress as compared to the grass land in the north where it is set on fire.
There is no doubt if technology could be introduced in the rural area especially in the agricultural sector, a lot of changes will be encountered.
Problem of Uses: Another major problem confronting the rural settlement duelers is how to make use of modern farming equipments and improved farming techniques.
Most rural farmers still hold with great suspicion the application of fertilizers and insecticides in their farms as a result of the inability to apply them correctly.
Cases abound where the wrong application of fertilizer resulted in a wide spread of crop failure.
Also the problem of how the produced in the rural settlement can be put to use especially in a large scale.
They also lack the foresight on how to put to use the raw materials available in the rural area.
Many rural settlements have difficulties in deciding or putting to use the produce from their farms and also the natural resources available in their vicinity, this serve as a form of setback in the production of these goods in large quantity as they will be wasted if harnessed or produced in large quantity.
Example of this is the cassava that was cultivated in a large scale in recent years as a result of the campaign by the federal Government for the production of cassava in a large scale.
Most of these cassava lie in waste in the farm as the farmers could not evacuate them to the needed points nor use them locally.
3.4 POTENTIALS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN RURAL AREAS 4.0 CONCLUSION It is a common saying that before a problem can be solved, the root cause of such problem must first be detected.
On the basis of this the problems of rural settlements have been looked at and based on the various rural settlement problems discoursed above solutions to rural development problems can easily be pointed out.
5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinbode A.
(2002): Introductory Environmental Resource Management, Daybis Limited 10a Akinola Meja Avenue Jerico, U.I Ibadan.
Alan H. Strahler and Arthur N. Strahler:(1977): Geography and Man’s Environment, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Alao J.A (1987): Rural Development Program in Nigeria.
Paper Delivered at the Rural Delopment Policies in Nigeria, Held on the Kongo Conference.
Ahmandu Bello 20 University Zaria May 17th -20th Microsoft Encarta (2009): ©1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation.
All right reserved Microsoft Encarta Dictionary (2009):©1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation.
All right Reserved Yesuf A.O.
(2004): Poverty Eradication and Rural Development in Nigeria.
UNIT 3 THE NEEDS OF THE RURAL DWELLERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 Definition and description of needs 3.2 Classification of needs of rural dwellers into type – economic needs, social needs, cultural needs 3.3 Meeting the needs of the rural dwellers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit like the previous one will assist you to know what need is and the various classifications of needs of the rural dwellers, and the various ways through which the needs of the rural dwellers can be meet.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to know the following: What needs are?
The various needs of the rural dwellers.
The various ways through which the needs of the rural dwellers can be meet.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 DEFINITION OF NEED 21 A need is something that is necessary for organisms to live a healthy life.
Needs are distinguished from wants because a deficiency would cause a clear negative outcome, such as dysfunction or death.
Needs can be objective and physical, such as food, or they can be subjective and psychological, such as the need for self-esteem.
On a social level, needs are sometimes controversial.
Understanding needs and wants is an issue in the fields of politics, social science, and philosophy.
A condition or situation in which something is required or wanted: crops in need of water; a need for affection.
Something required or wanted; a requisite: "Those of us who led the charge for these women's issues ... shared a common vision in the needs of women" (Olympia Snow).
Necessity; obligation: There is no need for you to go.
A condition of poverty or misfortune: The family is in dire need.
3.2 CLASSIFICATION OF NEEDS OF RURAL DWELLERS INTO TYPES -ECONOMIC NEEDS, SOCIAL NEEDS AND CULTURAL NEEDS.
The diverse nature of rural communities indicates that their information needs are many and multidimensional.
It is very important to determine the totality of their information needs.
In Nigeria, there is no comprehensive document on the information needs of rural inhabitants.
This is a case of neglect.
Attempts have been made to explore the needs of individual rural communities for the purpose of research.
Alegbeleye and Aina (1985) have quoted Ogunsheye who provided information needs categories of Nigerian rural communities, which include: The neighborhood: information needs in the neighborhood include problems of water supply, electricity supply, Environmental sanitation, refuse disposal, road maintenance and drought.
Health information on how individuals can, prevent different diseases that affect them, and awareness of available healthcare delivery and what it costs.
Agriculture and allied occupations: the greatest area of information needs by rural Nigerians is in agriculture.
Such information needs include planting treated seeds, soil conservation, prevention of plants and animal disease, fertilizer application, farm machineries, recommended thinning practices, proper storage of farm products, marketing techniques, cooperative activities and other agro-cultural activities.
Education: information needs of the existing rural schools, needs of the illiterate's and semi- illiterates.
They need to have relevant information that will develop in their interest and support of teaching and learning processes.
Housing: rural public need information about where they can obtain loans to build houses and the type of materials to be used and where they can be easily obtained.
Employment: rural communities need information on employment opportunities on taxation, investment opportunities, banking and other financial activities.
Transportation: they need information on the cost of bicycles, motorcycles and vehicles and where to obtain them.
They need information about road construction and maintenance.
Religion, Recreation and Culture: information is required on religions, recreations and Cultural activities.
22 Welfare and Family matters: information is required on problems of marriage, childcare, juvenile delinquency etc.
Legal matters: information is needed on laws that affect the rural dwellers.
Such law ranges from marriage to land.
Crime and Safety: Information is required on how to prevent crimes, report crimes, role of the law enforcement agents etc.
Policies and Government: information is needed on political rights of the people and how they can exercise such right.
Land: information is needed on land tenure systems, acquisition and transfer of land etc.
Information is needed by rural inhabitants in almost all human endeavors.
As listed above development and transformation can only be possible, effective and relevant when information needs of the rural dwellers are met positively.
Information hunger is prevalent and biting hard on our rural communities, which has resulted in poor living conditions, illiteracy, and poverty.
Diso (1994) holds the view that "rural areas in Nigeria are generally characterized by poor living conditions - absolute poverty and absent of almost all amenities of life.
The literacy in Nigeria is about 35-40 percent, but is much lower among women and in rural communities.
Report of scarcity of learning facilities, including basic textbooks and journal, in school and libraries including academic libraries, show a critical situation".
The information needs of the teeming majority are not provided for, which constitutes the major reason for the underdevelopment.
Borcherdt (1977), in discussing the need for rural information services, remarked that "None of the thousand of projects in the developing countries can be executed without the fundamental conditions of the establishment of a literate and numerate (rural) society, and a system for continuous provision of exchange of ideas, thought and knowledge on which the (rural) society, and can feed and use with suitable modifications to constructions own cultural and industrial destiny".
Rural dwellers need relevant, efficient, and current information.
Camble (1994) commented that “the success of rural information programmes rest squarely on the availability and use of quality information by rural development workers and rural people and that many rural development programmes have failed in developing countries because they were planned with insufficient relevant information".
3.3 MEETING THE NEEDS OF THE RURAL DWELLERS No serious, active, conscious, sensitive, and organized government would want to neglect rural communities.
Lack of development has a positive correlation with the neglect of rural areas.
Rural neglects brings negative consequences such as exodus of rural dwellers to urban areas, with resulting problems of unemployment, crimes, prostitution, child labour, insecurity, money laundering, bribery, poverty, proliferation of shanty living areas, spread of diseases, and overstretching of the facilities and infrastructures in the urban areas.
Any nation that neglects the development and empowerment of the rural communities should not expect meaningful development.
Alegbeleye and Aina (1985) reiterated state that "the third world countries have recently come to realize that unless the rural areas are well developed, hardly would any meaningful development occur in these countries."
Development can only be effective if rural dwellers have access to the relevant, diverse information for their activities.
Efforts must be made to give access to knowledge and information by non-literates who constitute the majority of rural dwellers.
Okiy (2003) says 23 that, “Rural development is a basis for economic development and information is an important ingredient in development process.
People in rural areas whether literate or not should have access to any kind of information which will help them to become capable and productive in their social and political obligations, to become better informed citizens generally.
The developed countries undertake rural projects to reduce the gap between the urban and the rural communities to the barest level.
Nigeria has been an independent nation for the past 50 years with policies on development of rural communities, but rural areas are still not developed and the quality of life of people in the rural areas continues to deteriorate throughout all tiers of government of both politicians and the military regimes.
Diso (2005) added that "Nigerian people are still dominantly peasant farmers, petty traders, middle men or commission agents".
The country has the potentials to develop all sectors of human endeavour.
The rural communities in Nigeria are the majority in terms of population, and yet the most neglected.
4.0 CONCLUSION Success and progress in developing countries lies with the development of their rural communities.
Effective information service delivery and coordination is the essential ingredient for development.
Information service in Nigeria's rural communities must be recognized and empowered.
The policy implementers have succeeded in misinforming rural inhabitants on so many issues that have no relationship with their daily activities and are consistently making this community an "information hunger community", with hostile illiterates and poverty-stricken citizens.
This has led to crime, rural-urban migration, and general insecurity in the country.
Enhancement of services will form a solid base for development of the entire rural setting in Nigeria.
The Nigerian government must implement its rural development policies.
The government should create a program to eradicate illiteracy in rural communities.
Many nations have waged a successful war against illiteracy.
Albert (1970) comments that "Russia tackled the problem (of illiteracy) in 1919 after the Bolshevik Revolution which gave education priority and Lenin referred to illiteracy as ‘enemy number one.
'” In Cuba after the 1959 Revolution, Fidel Castro declared war on illiteracy, which accounted for about 70 percent of the population.
Sri-Lanka also tackled these problems at the early stage in a project reported in1959 at a UNESCO seminar in 1959.
The objective of the scheme was to take "to the people in the rural areas the knowledge which they need for a successful life in the place where they are".
Extra efforts should be made to implement effective information services in rural areas, which would serve as a major solution to the unwarranted influx of rural dwellers into urban centers.
5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS.
Abissat, M.K.
(2008) Taking ICTs to rural people in Ghana.
Available: http://www.ginks.org/cms pages/Get Biz Form File.access ed, 7th august, 2008.
Albert U.
(1970) the role of Libraries in the functional library programmes: Unesco Bulletin for Libraries.
24.
24  Alegbeleye, G.O.
and Aina, L.O (1985) Library services and rural community in Nigeria: An introduction Ibadan.
13.
Bell, D. (1979).
Communication technology: For better, for worse.
Harvard Business Review 57 (95) 4.
Bordchart, D.H. (1977).
Aspects of work of library and information services in the framework of social planning.
International Library Review 4 (4) 403 Camble, E. (1994).
The Information environment workers in Borno State, Nigeria.
African Journal of Library, Archives and Information Science 4 (2) 105.
Delivering for older people in rural areas: A good practice guide.
Available: http://ageconcern.org.uk/Age concern/Documents/Older Rural People.pdf Diso, L.I.
(1994).
Information policies and government guidance in Nigeria: What hope for communities?
Resource Sharing and Information Networks 9 (2):141–151 Diso, L.I (2005) Information, production, transfer, and delivery: Mass information work and television journalisms dilemma in Nigeria.
The International Information and Library Review 37: 285-294 25  UNIT 4 RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 Definition and types of rural infrastructure 3.2 Relevance of rural infrastructure to the development of rural dwellers 3.3 Activities of Defunct Directorate of Food, Roads, and Rural Infrastructure (DFRRI) 3.4 Proposal (suggestions) for the provision and management of rural infrastructure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit like the previous one will assist you to know what rural infrastructure is and the defunct Directorate of Food, Roads, and Rural Infrastructure (DFRRI) with their various activities including the relevance of the rural infrastructure to the rural inhabitants.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to know the following: • What infrastructure is • The various types of rural infrastructure • The various relevance of infrastructure to Development of Rural dwellers • The various activities of the defunct Directorate of Food, Roads, and Rural Infrastructure (DFRRI) 26 • The various ways through which rural infrastructure can be managed 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 DEFINITION OF AND TYPES OF RURAL INFRASTEUTURE Infrastructure is the basic physical and organizational structures needed for the operation of a society or enterprise, (Oxford English Dictionary 2009), or the services and facilities necessary for an economy to function.
According to Sullivan et all (2003) the term Infrastructure refers to the technical structures that support a society, such as roads, water supply, sewers, power grids, telecommunications, and so forth.
Viewed functionally, infrastructure facilitates the production of goods and services; for example, roads enable the transport of raw materials to a factory, and also for the distribution of finished products to markets.
In some contexts, the term may also include basic social services such as schools and hospitals.
In military parlance, the term refers to the buildings and permanent installations necessary for the support, redeployment, and operation of military forces, (American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 2009).
3.2 RELEVANCE OF RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL DWELLERS The importance of developing infrastructure in the rural areas has long been recognized as central in promoting economic growth.
In rural areas it has wide ranging impacts on individuals, households and communities both in terms of income and other quality of life indicators.
There are both direct and indirect benefits from infrastructure development and it is important to consider the indirect benefits in decision-making about infrastructure projects.
Education, for example, can affect income and health both of that in turn affect quality of life.
There are also strong social benefits from infrastructure that need to be taken into account.
Economic benefits such as increased income, employment, productivity gain, better income distribution and opportunity for diversification are obvious.
Social benefits such as time savings, school enrolment levels, access to health services, environmental improvement, skill development, capacity building, improved information and gender impacts are less transparent, but in the longer term may be as or more effective in poverty reduction because they lead to sustained improvements in quality of life independent of income sources.
3.2 ACTIVITIES OF DEFUNCT DIRECTORATE OF FOOD, ROADS, AND RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE (DFRRI) The Directorate of Food, Roads, and Rural Infrastructure (DFRRI)came into beig through the budget speech of the then Military President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, General Ibrahim Badamosi Babagida on 31ST December, 1985.
The 8- man Board of the National Directorate was formally inaugurated by the Chief of General Staff Navy Commodore Augustine Aikhomu on Feburary 7TH 1986.The Directorate was legally established by Decree No 4 of 1987.
The National Directorate was directly attached to the office of the President and headed by then AFRC member, Air Vice-Marshall Larry Koiyan (Rtd) while the State Directorate offices were correspondingly attached to the State Governor’s offices.
The Directorate took-off in 1986, with almost half of the expected savings of N900 million naira accrued to the federal government due to the partial removal 27 of subsidy on petroleum products.
The main objective of the Directorate was to improve the quality of life and the standard of living of the rural dwellers in Nigeria through sustainable provision of rural infrastucture and effective mobilisation of the rural dwellers to use their resources to develop their areas and their people.
In view of the legal status given to the Directorate and its statutory functions, the activities of the Directorate both at the National and State levels were fraught with frauds.
Thus, DFFRI was disbanded before the institution of the civilian government of 1999.
3.4 PROPOSAL (SUGGESTIONS) FOR THE PROVISION AND MANAGEMENT OF RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE.
Rural infrastructure comprises rural roads, rural housing and rural electrification.
Rural road connectivity is an extremely important aspect of rural development and it should be handled with utmost seriousness.
A centrally sponsored scheme can be launched which will seek to provide and connect all unconnected habitations in rural areas with a population of more than 500 persons through good all-eather roads within a given period of time.
In respect of hill states and desert areas, the objective would be to connect habitations with population of 250 persons and above.
According to the 1991 Census around 3.1million households are without shelter and another 10.31 million households reside in unserviceable kutcha houses.
Considering the magnitude of the problem, a National Housing Habitat Policy should be formulated and announced and should aim at providing, Housing for All.
Annually a specific number of dwelling units should be built in the rural are with an emphasis on extending benefits to the poor and deprived.
Government should be committed to the goal of ensuring shelter for all.
In order to achieve these objectives a comprehensive action plan for rural housing should be prepared.
At present, there are about 80,000 villages which are yet to be electrified in Nigeria.
A lot of work has to be done in this regard as those living in the so called urban area still lives in perpetual darkness.
4.0.
Conclusion.
5.0 Summary 6.0 References/Further Readings REFERENCES 28  MODULE 3 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND ROLES OF NGOs Unit 1 Community Development Unit 2 Community Based Organization Unit 3 Non-Governmental Organizations Unit 4 Potentials of NGOs in the Development of Rural Communities UNIT 1 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 Definition and characteristics of a community 3.2 Community development and its relevance to rural area 3.3 Community development as a strategy for rural development 3.4 Agents of community development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/further readings 1.0 Introduction This unit of your study builds the foundation for your understanding of the roles that Non- Governmental Organisations (NGOs) play in the development of communities.
It helps to understand what a community implies and in what forms or ways such communities can be developed.
The relevance of community development to rural areas or the development of rural areas is equally highlighted.
Some of the various agents or agencies responsible for community development are also highlighted in this unit of the study.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define what a community is • Understand the import of community development • Know the relevance of community development in rural areas • Understand how community development helps to achieve rural development 29 • Identify some of the agents or agencies that contribute to community development 3.0 Main Body 3.1 What is a Community?
A community can be defined in several ways.
However, with focus on man or people, the definitions below are useful.
• All the people living in a particular (or same) area or place.
Example is a local community.
• A particular area or place considered together with its inhabitants.
Example is a rural community.
• A group of people who share the same nationality, religion, profession or other particular characteristic.
Example is a Japanese community or scientific community.
• Society in general Going by the definitions given above, it is very important to emphasize that the word “community” has to do with a people, a place, one or more common interests or characteristics.
This implies a geographical dimension coupled with a human presence and common interests.
Animals or plants have their communities according to the study of the ecosystem.
However, the focus here is on human communities.
The common interests involved in definition of communities could be highly varied to include economic, social, political, historical or some other interests.
3.2 Types of Communities These can be enumerated using the different components of the Community definition above as the classification criteria.
If the types are classified according to geographical dimensions, types such as rural or urban communities can be named.
Communities could be large enough in size to include nations or vast geographical regions (example is the Nigerian Community or the European Economic Community).
These will in essence include a combination of several rural and urban communities.
It also implies that communities could exist within a larger community.
It is also highly pertinent to say that the larger (or wider) the community (or geographical dimension) is, the varied the interests or characteristics; which implies increasing heterogeneity (Bartle, 2007).
When interest or characteristic is used as a criterion for listing of community types, such types as Christian community, Ibo community, scientific community or the academic community can be mentioned.
Such a list could be inexhaustive.
It may be necessary again to emphasize that considering that the Human Community is distinct from the Plant Community (also known photocoenosis) or the Animal Community, the definitions above focuses on people and not the other living components of the environment.
Also important is fact that the society at large could also be referred to as a community (Merriam-Webster, 2007).
3.3 Community Development and Relevance to Rural Areas 3.3.1 What is Community Development?
Community development involves efforts aimed at improving the socio-economic development of local communities.
It involves actions by different stakeholders towards improving the physical and economic well-being of members of a community and the community at large.
According to Wikipedia (2011a), community development has become 30 practices and academic disciplines of civic leaders; and involves citizens and professionals working to improve various aspects of local communities.
It also refers to what Community Development Challenge Report in UK, calls “a set of values and practices which plays a special role in overcoming poverty and disadvantage, knitting society together at the grassroots and deepening democracy”.
According to Community Development Exchange in Wikipedia (op.
cit), It has also been seen as a profession (such as the case of a community development worker in a local authority) and a way to working with communities.
Its key purpose is to build communities based on justice, equity and mutual respect.
It involves changing the relationship between people at the grassroots and those in power so that everyone can take part in issues that affect lives.
Community development involves identifying the human and natural resources in communities and harnessing them to move the communities forward.
It makes use of approaches such as skill development through training and the provision of infrastructure, loans, equipment, and other facilitators of development to aid the community.
There are different approaches or models of community development which include Community Economic Development (CED), and Local Economic Development (LED), Community- Driven Development (CDD), Community Capacity Building, Community Empowerment and Community-Based Planning (CBP) among others.
3.3.2 The Rural Areas As always being said, it is difficult to pin down a definition for rural areas due to several factors involved in defining what is rural and also the geographical divergence involved in the definitions.
Ilesanmi (2011) is of the opinion that rural areas can be defined using the following criteria to demarcate it from urban areas a. Demographical differences b. Infrastructural differences c. Differences in the nature of employment d. Sociological differences e. Administrative and political definitions However, international bodies have worked over the years to limit the defining criteria to three which include legal/administrative criterion, minimum population (size) figure, and functional definitions (Okafor and Onakerhoraye, 1980).
In general, a place that is “not declared urban” based on the above conditions is said to be a rural area.
The legal/administrative definition is such that the law of a country recognises a community as urban or not based on some identified characteristics.
In the case of functional definitions, issues of heterogeneity of population, occupational structure and economic base are used to declare urban centres.
On the last criterion, Population sizes are used to determine different types of urban centres with any less than 20,000 population being recognised as rural area since the United Nations recognises any settlement with more than such figure to be urban.
3.3.3 Relevance of Community Development in Rural Areas The rural areas until recently accommodates a greater percentage of the world population.
However, in some parts of the developing nations, a larger percentage still lives in the rural area.
Going by the various criteria for defining urbanity, it is glaring that what remains to be 31 called rural areas are overwhelmed with traits of underdevelopment, poverty, lack of education, lack of infrastructure, inexperienced homogeneous population, mainly agrarian population and poor service industry among others.
Since the rural community is a type of community in existence, it suffices to conclude that community development could be broadly classified into urban development and rural development.
Hence, rural development is a type of community development.
Due to the nature of needs in rural communities, the model of community development involved in urban areas will slightly vary in its application to the rural areas.
However such approaches of community development which were highlighted in section 3.3.1 will be relevant in the development of rural areas.
3.4 Community Development as a Strategy for Rural Development Community development in form of rural development is very germane in rural areas because it helps to sustain and improve the life of the rural dwellers while at the same time upgrading the communities gradually into an urban status.
It will in turn benefit the whole nation.
Community development in form of rural development will among others help to achieve: • Improved human welfare • Preservation of ecological integrity through maintenance of life support system • Aesthetically pleasing environment • Improved agricultural base • Efficient use of rural land and resources for the total benefit of the nation • Reduction in rural-urban migration • Infrastructural development in the rural areas • Development of small-scale industries to provide job for school leavers • Availability of loans and skill acquisition programmes 3.5 Agents of Community Development Several agents are involved in Community Development.
It is however important to say that some of these agents work together to aid community development.
Such partnerships are common between government and international organisations.
Dominant agents involved in community development are listed below.
• Local Government Authorities • Private Sector • Non-Profit Organisations • International Organisations • Philanthropists Governments at different levels are involved in community development.
However, the lowest level of governance which is also closest to the people at the grassroots in the society is the local government.
The local government is expected to embark on the provision of various small and medium scale infrastructure and loans for communities and individuals to achieve the aim of community development.
The higher levels of government embark on large scale infrastructure some of which link settlements, states or even regions but such things as community markets and some other facilities are provided by the local government.
The private sector comes in to donate certain infrastructure too.
The private sector includes companies or organisations which have become notable in the larger society.
Some of these are multi-national companies such as oil companies or Telecommunication Service providers.
Non-Profit Organisations (NPOs) are organisations independent of any government and funded through individual and corporate donations, levies imposed on members and grants 32 from international agencies and governments.
The three terms most commonly used in literature often interchangeably, are NGOs, CBOs and Private Voluntary Organisation.
There are different forms of NPOs.
These include Community-Based Organisations (CBOs) and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs).
CBOs are formed within communities to achieve community development and assist individuals to improve their economy.
Examples include Community Development Associations, Cooperative Societies, Professional Associations, Social groups, Residents associations, and youth organisations among others.
Non- Government Organisations are formed with same objectives and operate in similar manner with CBOs but are most time richer and transcends beyond single communities.
Some NGOs are international with diverse objectives.
Some NGOs are focused on community development while others have other objectives.
International Organisations such as the World Bank and various arms of the United Nations Organisations are major agents of community development.
These organisations are very useful especially in developing countries in the area of community development.
Projects are selected and executed at identified settlements in different regions of countries.
Philanthropists in the Society venture into community development by providing facilities or embarking on major physical development projects in local communities.
These philanthropists have been known to excel in their businesses or chosen endeavours in life.
Some of these are found within the country or in the Diaspora.
4.0 Conclusion Man’s existence in communities is a manifestation of the social life which followed the decision to live a settled life rather than remaining a wanderer.
Communities exist in various forms with diverse values and cultural inclinations.
There are large and complex communities and there are also small and undeveloped communities.
Whichever form is the case, there is need for communities to continue to develop in every ramification.
To achieve this development, several agents are needed to facilitate the development process.
The rural community due to its peculiar crude undeveloped nature with lack of various necessities of life really attracts the attention of these agents without totally neglecting the urban areas.
The need of the urban areas is divergent and the increasing population will continue to generate needs in these areas too.
5.0 Summary In this unit, what the Community entails has been highlighted to a great extent.
Also, the different types of community that exist have been identified while the essence of community development was highlighted.
The identification of natural and human resources in the process of community development in order to achieve its purpose through the different types of Community Development Approaches is also emphasized.
The various dimensions to the definition of rural areas were brought up while the importance of community development in the development of rural areas was identified.
Specific strategies for community development are listed while agents of community development were also briefly discussed before concluding this unit.
6.0 References/Further Readings Alao, K and Olujimi, J.A.B.
(1992) ‘Rural Development Efforts in Ondo State: Case Study of the Directorate of Food, Roads, and Rural Infrastructure (DFFRI) Activities’ 33 Unpublished Research Report, Department of Urban and Regional Planning, Ondo State Polytechnic, Owo.
Bartle, P. (2007).
What is Community?
A Sociological Perspective.
Community Empowerment Collective.
Retrieved July 2, 2011 from http://www.scn.org/cmp/whatcom.htm Ilesanmi, F.A.
(2011).
Rural Development Planning.
Monograph of the Department of Urban and Regional Planning.
Federal University of Technology, Akure, Nigeria.
Merriam-Webster (2007).
Community.
Merriam-Webster’s Online Dictionary.
Retrieved July 2, 2011 from http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/community Okafor, F.C and Onokerhoraye, A.G. (1980).
Rural System Planning Geography and Planning Series.
University of benin, Benin, Nigeria.
Wikipedia (2011a).
Community Development.
Wikipedia.
Retrieved July 2, 2011 from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_development 34  UNIT 2 COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANIZATION (CBO) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 Community based organization (CBOs) and their characteristics in Nigeria 3.2 Contributions of the community based organizations in the development of human settlements (cities, towns, villages) 3.3 The needs for the improvement of the performance of the CBOs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/further readings UNIT 2: COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANISATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction Having established in the previous unit that Community-Based Organisations (CBOs) are agents of community development, this unit discusses what CBOs are with their characteristics and roles in community development.
It exposes the types of CBOs and their activities in the area of community development.
The need to support the activities of CBOs due to the limitations encountered in the process of executing community development is also discussed in this unit.
2.0 Objectives This unit has the objectives to: • Explain what CBOs are • Mention the characteristics or nature of CBOs • Highlight the various contributions of CBOs in the development of settlements • Exposes the limitations encountered by CBOs with the intention of establishing basis for the need to support their activities 3.0 Main Body 3.1 CBOs and their Characteristics in Nigeria 35 CBOs are private, voluntary, organisations independent of any government and funded through individual and corporate donations, levies imposed on members and grants from international agencies and governments (Jegede, 2000).
They are community groups which are found in both rural and urban areas.
Though local-based, they can spread upwards and outwards to community groups or professional groups or trade unions (Ogbuozobe, 2000).
CBOs may come together to pool their labour, to obtain credit to buy goods in bulk, or to promote and develop more sustainable forms of agriculture.
Though CBOs are voluntary organisations, it is believed in certain quarters that they are somewhat compulsory as it is in the case of age-grades, community or clan associations and professional associations (Bratton, 1990).
In Nigeria, some of the expressions of CBOs listed below were identified by African Development Foundation questionnaire in one of its studies (Callahan, 2004).
• Residents Associations • Cooperative Societies • User Associations of basic services • Producer Associations • Professional/Occupational Organisations • Workers Unions • Community Development Associations • Youth Associations • Local Security Outfits • Faith-Based Community Organisations The forms of CBOs listed above exist in Nigeria as well as in many other countries across the globe.
The nature or characteristics of such organisations include the following: • Engaging in not-for-profit activities • Pursuance of community development • Education and enlightenment on multifarious issues • Pursuance of membership welfare • Provision of partnership with government and international organisations • Non-political affiliation • Serving as pressure groups towards attaining communal goals • Joint collateral bodies for obtaining financial aid 3.2 Contribution of the CBOs to the development of Settlements CBOs are involved in several ways in the development of settlements.
Some of their activities are revealed by the characteristics which they exhibit.
Some of the ways in which CBOs are relevant in the area of community development include: Contribution to the local industrial base - The provision of equipment and facilities which aid production of goods and services comes in part from CBOs.
Partly, this could be in form of donations to the community or members of the community or CBOs.
At times, such facilities could be leased out or sold out at cheap rates and on instalmental payment basis.
Farm lands have been leased out to members of communities in this wise while small factories have come to settlements in this form.
Front for projecting goals and intentions of various businesses or professional groups - Groups are better recognised by governments and international organisations as means of intervention in community development.
Such groups are put in charge of development projects to monitor or supervise.
Also, needs and aspirations of communities are projected through CBOs.
36 Provision infrastructure – with levies on members and communities, donations from different sources and small business activities, CBOs generate fund to prosecute various projects in communities.
The construction of markets, drainage channels, community halls and provision of facilities in some schools, and elsewhere are recognised to have come from Community Development Associations (CDAs).
Provision of loans - cooperative societies of different groups in communities make loans available to their members at low interest rate within comfortable payback period.
Opportunity for training and development – some of the CBOs create opportunities for training of members in specific skills towards business development.
They involve professional organisations that are relevant in the needed skill area.
At times, members within the community who are trained in such skills are invited to donate their knowledge in the process.
Access to necessary equipment and facilities – necessary equipment for business development are procured either through loans obtained from CBOs especially cooperative societies.
At times they are directly purchased in large number by the society and sold to members to take the advantage of low cost.
Also combined with this is the opportunity for warranty on purchased equipment for businesses.
Opportunities for bulk purchasing and joint collaterals – in order to obtain loans for from Banks, the CBOs act as organisations which can obtain huge amount and distribute such among members who are in need of small loans for various projects.
Also, the CBOs assist in purchasing perishable and non-perishable goods especially at festive periods and other times for their members and people of the community in order to take advantage of cheap rates.
Security Outfits – in cities or urban centres where security is an issue needing attention, CDAs have come to form “Vigilante” groups which help in keeping watch over communities and community projects or infrastructure.
Members of the community are at times organised by the CDAs to take turns in night watches over their communal properties and households.
Entertainment and Tourism – In modern times especially in cities, carnivals have been organised by youth organisations especially towards the end of the year to bring entertainment and fun to city dwellers.
This has become a way of developing the tourism industry in cities of Nigeria.
The very popular ones are the Calabar carnival and the Lagos carnival.
3.3 The Need for the Improvement of the Performance of CBOs Due to various limitations that CBOs have encountered until now, there is the need to assist their efforts towards community development.
Some of the constraints in the way of CBOs include.
Overdependence on Government for Financial and Material Support – according to the findings of Emmanuel (2010), 42% of investigated CBOs in rural coastland of Ilaje were expecting assistance from government alone compared with just 11% expecting assistance from government alone in the urban hinterland.
The need to diversify expectation and seek for further assistance in the rural areas was emphasized in this study.
Lack of Access or Affordability Problem in the area of good equipments in the Rural Areas – also the problem of non-affordability of good equipment in the rural areas to assist or support existing businesses to aid economic development has been perennial.
The cost of high quality and highly productive equipment is high and so members of such communities have had to make-do with what they could afford at any point in time.
This generates the 37 need for support in this area both for small businesses and for the general welfare of the rural communities.
Lack of General and Business Education in the Rural Areas – about 57% of the populace in Ilaje had at least secondary school education.
This seems to be an enlightened society but this seemed insufficient to increase the skills to reduce poverty and increase development level of the rural areas.
This consequently affects the operation of the CBOs in the rural areas (Emmanuel, op.
cit).
Overload on Infrastructural Backbone of Urban Communities – Most CBOs in urban communities are formed for the purpose of infrastructural development.
In most cities, the inward population surge has often led to overload on the existing facilities.
Consequently associations focus more on alleviating this problem but they are often limited in the area of road construction and electricity provision.
Hence, the need for further support for CBOs in the process of community development.
Insufficient Membership Contribution – In certain areas, the fact that members’ contribution has not been regular or sufficient has hindered the effectiveness of the CBOs in executing their objectives.
Since most CBOs depend on residents or members’ contribution, there is limit to what could be achieved within reasonable length of time.
4.0 Conclusion CBOs form a very vital part of communities.
Apart from the social expression which they reveal, they act as a means of pulling skills and resources together for moving forward the lives of individuals and whole communities.
CBOs’ existence in both rural and urban areas confirms the fact that they are highly useful in any community.
They have acted as middle- men between communities and government or international organisations in several cases.
They will continue to exist as partners in progress towards improving the life of the people and community at large.
5.0 Summary This unit has been able to expose what CBOs entail and equally reveal their characteristics.
The various forms in which they exist and the forms of contribution to the welfare of individuals and communities have equally been revealed.
Additionally, the limitations in the path of the CBOs are equally highlighted to emphasize the need for support for such CBOs.
6.0 References/Further Readings Bratton, M. (1990).
Review Articles: Beyond the State, Civil Society and Associational Life in Africa, World Politics, 41(3), 407-430.
In Ogbuozobe, J.E.
(2000).
Community- Based Organisations (CBOs) in the Provision of Social Services in The Ibadan Metropolitan Area.
Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research (NISER) Monograph Series No.1, Ibadan: NISER.
Callahan, B.
(2004).
Development Funding Assistance Programme.
African Development Foundation.
Retrieved January 30, 2005 from www.adf.gov/applicationenglish.pdf Emmanuel, A.A. (2010).
The Effects of Community-Based Organisations’ Activities on Local Economic Development in Geographically Contrasting Areas Of Ondo State, Nigeria.
PhD Thesis.
Department of Urban and Regional Planning, Federal University of Technology, Akure.
38 Jegede, A. O.
(2000).
Assessment of Selected Non-Governmental Organisations on Poverty Alleviation Strategies: A case study of Countrywomen Association of Nigeria (COWAN).
BTech.
Thesis.
Federal University of Technology, Akure.
Ogbuozobe, J.E.
(2000).
Community-Based Organisations (CBOs) in the Provision of Social Services in Ibadan Metropolitan Area.
Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research (NISER) Monograph Series No.1, Ibadan: NISER.
Olujimi, B and Egunjobi, L (1991) ‘Public Participation in a Village Regrouping Scheme’ Community Development Journal, (An International Forum, Oxford) Vol.
26 No 3 pp165-175.
Traynor, G.J.
(2004).
Funding And Certainty in Community-Based Organisations.
A Paper Presented at The AAACE Conference.
Louisville, Kentucky.
Retrieved November 5, 2005, from http://www.ala.asn.au/docs/2004-11-traynor.pdf 39  UNIT 3 NON-GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 Non-Governmental Organization and their characteristics in Nigeria 3.2 Activities of the non-governmental organization in Nigeria 3.3 Sources of funding the activities of the NGOs 3.4 Problems confronting the performance of the NGOs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/further readings UNIT 3: NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) are some of the organisations involved in Community Development and other various activities in the general society.
In this unit attempt is made at explaining what NGOs represent.
Their characteristics are revealed while the various activities which they are involved in especially in the Nigerian context are also highlighted.
This unit will equally provide information on some of the sources of funding for the NGOs in order to expose the financial base for such organisations.
Some of the problems generally faced by NGOs are brought to light before concluding this unit.
2.0 Objectives The objectives of this unit are to: • Explain what NGOs represent and the inception of NGOs • Expose some of the characteristics of NGOs particularly in Nigeria • Examine the activities of NGOs in Nigeria.
• Highlight the sources of funding for NGOs • Reveal some of the problems faced by NGOs 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and their Characteristics in Nigeria 40 Using the words of Willetts (2002), the term "Non-governmental organization" or NGO, came into currency in 1945 because of the need for the UN to differentiate in its Charter between participation rights for intergovernmental specialized agencies and those for international private organizations.
According to him, at the UN, virtually all types of private bodies can be recognized as NGOs.
They only have to be independent from government control, not seeking to challenge governments either as a political party or by a narrow focus on human rights, non-profit-making and non-criminal.
To affirm the above, Edwards and Hulme (1996), say that NGOs were the brainchild of Inter-governmental Organisations (IGOs) such as World Bank and United Nations (UN) which have identified them as magic wand for fostering development strategies.
Also, The World Bank according to Shah (2003) defines NGOs as "private organizations that pursue activities to relieve suffering, promote the interests of the poor, protect the environment, provide basic social services, or undertake community development".
The World Bank further says that "In wider usage, the term NGO can be applied to any non-profit organization which is independent of government.
Wikkipedia (2009) sees a NGO as a legally constituted organization created by private organizations or people with no participation or representation of any government.
In the cases in which NGOs are funded totally or partially by governments, the NGO maintains its non-governmental status insofar as it excludes government representatives from membership in the organization.
Types of NGOs vary according to the goals and objectives.
However some of the common types include: • Business-oriented NGOs • Technical NGOs • Environmental NGOs • Government-operated NGOs • International NGOs • Donor organised NGOs.
Although the NGO sector has become increasingly professionalized over the last two decades, basic characteristics within and outside Nigeria some of which have been highlighted above include; • Philanthropy • Volunteerism • National or international in form of global hierarchies (having central authority) or single-country based with transnational operation.
• Non-profit making • Independent of government control • Acts as pressure groups in some cases 3.2 Activities of Non-Governmental Organisations in Nigeria Activities of NGOs are multifarious.
In Nigeria, like in most other countries, NGOs are commonly involved in areas which include: • Provision of Relief and Aid • Developmental Projects • Women Development 41 • Micro-Enterprise and Poverty Reduction • HIV-AIDS Sensitization • Training, Seminar and Workshop • Environmental Safety • Youth Development 3.3 Sources of Funding for the Activities of NGOs Since NGOs are mainly Non-Profit Organisations with voluntary affiliations, funding become an issue beyond what economic investments could cater for.
As such financial sustenance of NGOs lies in various sources some of which are mentioned below.
International Organisations which are also called Inter-governmental Organisations (IGOs) mostly composed of sovereign state usually referred to as member states are helpful.
These are countries which have come together to achieve clear mission statements which are targeted as achievable goals.
Examples include the United Nations Organisations and the World Bank (Wikipedia 2011b).
Some NGOs in Nigeria are supported by these organisations.
Other IGOs include regional organisations or organisations with cultural, linguistic, historical, economic or other affiliations.
Examples of these include Commonwealth of Nations, Organisation of Islamic Countries (OIC), Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO).
Also government agencies such as United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID) and United States Agencies for International Development (USAID) also give support and grants to Nigerian NGOs.
Such agencies support social services, health, education, poverty, disaster relief, water and sanitation among others (Wikipedia 2011c and Wikipedia 2011d) At times, donations from corporate organisations are made to NGOs on regular on spontaneous basis.
In Nigerian, several companies are involved in such donations to small NGOs which are directed toward helping orphans, the disabled or physically challenged persons.
Some of the companies could be Telecommunication companies or manufacturers of consumable goods such as food and drinks.
In some situations, Fund-raising events are carried out to attract sponsorship for major projects by NGOs.
For such events, some of the existing companies and individuals are invited to contribute to the project of the NGOs.
In summary, NGOs in Nigeria obtain funding from the following sources: • Individual Donations • Corporate Donations • Levies imposed on Members • Grants from International Agencies or Inter-Governmental Organisations (Igos) • Fund-Raising Events • Foundations • Governments In conclusion, NGOs are typically value-based organizations which at times depend also on voluntary service either by members and non-members and also organisations in form of project execution, training and skill development.
3.4 Problems inhibiting the Performance of NGOs 42 Institutionalised funding Funds are targeted at some big NGOs while the small ones suffer because they are not able to indirectly advertise donors.
Limitation to ideas and innovations due to lack of proper funding Insufficient professionally trained people Non-professionalization Small size leading to poor focus and inability to achieve unrealistic goals No proper guiding rules or modalities for engaging with external assisting organisations and corporations.
4.0 Conclusion NGOs play a great role globally in impacting the lives of people in several ways.
They operate with different goals and objectives and act as avenues for Inter-governmental organisations to reach the people or partly achieve their goals.
The extent to which NGOs can operate is difficult to define.
This also makes a rigid definition of NGOs impossible; however, their characteristics and activities have been useful in explaining how they operate or function over time and space.
5.0 Summary This unit has helped to understand what Non-governmental organisations are, their inception, characteristics particularly in Nigeria and the activities engaged in by these NGOs.
Also the sources of funding for the NGOs have been exposed while some of the problems militating against proper functions of NGOs have also been enumerated in this unit.
6.0 References/Further Readings Edwards, M. and Hulme, D. (Eds).
(1996).
Beyond the Magic Bullet.
Connecticut: Kumarian Press.
Leyla, S. (2011)The New Actors of Women Movement: Women NGOs and their Potentials.
European Journal of Anthropology.
2(1): 1-14.
Retrieved July 7, 2011 from http://www.eurasianjournals.com/index.php/eja/article/viewFile/551/319 Olujimi, J.A.B.
(2003) ‘The Role of Women in Community-Based Organisation in Environmental Cleanliness in Ifedore Local Government Area, Ondo State, Nigeria’ in Adekunle, V (et al) Proceedings of Annual Conference of Environment and Behaviour Association of Nigeria (EBAN).
Environmental Sustainability in Democratic Government, pp 400-408.
Shar, A.
(2003).
Non-Governmental Organisations on Developmental Issues.
Retrieved January 31, 2005, from www.globalissues.org/TradeRelated/Poverty/NGOs.asp - 67k Wikipedia (2009).
Non-Governmental Organisation.
Retrieved January 5, 2009, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-governmental_organization Wikipedia (2011b).
Intergovernmental Organizations.
Retrieved July 7, 2011, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intergovernmental_organization#Examples_of_IGOs.
Wikipedia (2011c).
Department for International Development (DFID).
Retrieved July 7, 2011 from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DFID.
43  Wikipedia (2011d).
United States Agency for International Development.
Retrieved July 7, 2011 from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Agency_for_International_ Development Willetts, P. (2002).
What is a Non-Governmental Organisation.
Output from the Research Project on Civil Society Networks in Global Governance.
Centre for International Politics, School of Social Science, City University, Northampton Square, London.
Retrieved January 5, 2009, from http://www.globalpolicy.org/ngos/intro/general/2000/ anal00.htm UNIT 4 POTENTIALS OF NGO IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL COMMUNITIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 What is potential?
3.2 Identification and description of potentials of the NGO in community development 3.3 Suggestions/proposals for the enhancements of potentials of NGO for development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References/further readings 1.0 Introduction The Wiktionary (2011) defines Potential as “Currently unrealized ability”.
This implies an inherent or innate capacity of an object, individual, or a group.
There is the need to look at such attributes in NGOs with the ultimate intention to tap into the attributes.
This unit will attempt to achieve this purpose.
In the light of the above there will be need to set out some objectives in this unit as indicated in the next section.
2.0 Objectives Explanation of the term “Potential” Description of the potentials of NGOs towards achieving Community Development Attempt to suggest ways to harness the potentials of NGOs towards of Community Development Highlighting some agents of community development 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Definition of a Potential Potential refers to the inherent ability or capacity for growth, development or coming into being.
It also implies something possessing the capacity for growth or development (Free Dictionary, 2011).
One of the definitions of Longman (1995) says that potential is “a natural ability that could make you very good at something”.
It suffices to say from these definitions that the potential of an object, individual or group is that which it possesses and which can be 44 tapped or employed to achieve goals or objectives.
It is the latent thing which is existent in the subject matter.
The Longman’s definition makes it open such that this innate capability could be directed ultimately towards a negative or positive end.
The fact that a man is naturally good at running could be directed towards winning a race or escaping from been caught while stealing or engaging in robbery just as an individual skilled in computing could be a useful software developer or a hacker.
On the other hand, the earlier definitions see potential as something which could be harnessed in the positive direction (i.e towards growth and development.
In the context of NGOs, there are abilities within the organisations which could be channelled in the right direction towards achieving several defined goals.
Such goals include growth and development of communities.
3.2 Identification and Description of Potentials of the NGOs in Community Development The potentials identifiable in NGOs are as numerous as there are types of NGOs.
However, in the sense of community development, some of the potentials which could be easily identified include: • Ability to mobilise resources for community development • Ability for Infrastructural development • Being able to create of awareness and partnerships towards environmental protection in communities (Krieger and Rogers, 2008) • Connecting communities to government and intergovernmental organisations • Ability to aid poverty alleviation which will ultimately facilitate community development 3.3 Suggestions/proposals for the enhancement of potentials of NGOs for Development Various stakeholders in community development have different roles to play in enhancing the potentials of the NGOs within specific regions.
The stakeholders include the members of communities and NGOs, governments, community leaders and various organisations which provide services for and benefit from communities.
The suggestions below are made to assist the various stakeholders to enhance the potentials of the NGOs.
Governments need to develop clear policies for engaging NGOs Need for communities to link up with NGOs through the help of educated philanthropists in their communities Provision of land for execution of physical development projects Provision of Security in Communities to protect Infrastructure by NGOs.
Provision of grants to execute projects Proper monitoring of sponsored projects, programmes and activities by governments, private sector or intergovernmental organisations as the case may be.
4.0 Conclusion NGOs have great potentials towards aiding development of communities through several approaches and initiatives.
There is need to harness such potentials through follow up of relevant proposals.
Ability to connect to both governmental and intergovernmental organisations helps NGOs to directly and indirectly assist communities especially in the area of poverty alleviation and provision of infrastructural facilities.
There is no doubt that working towards providing a conducive environment by relevant individuals and 45 organisations within and outside communities will go a long way in helping to achieve the aim of community development.
5.0 Summary This section has been able to reveal the meaning of potentials as inherent capacity or capability within objects, individuals and organisations.
It has equally exposed the potentials found in NGOs and made suggestions towards harnessing such potentials with the hope that the path would be made smoother for NGOs to operate and aid community development.
6.0 References/Further Readings Wiktionary (2011).
Potential.
Retrieved July 7, 2011 from http://www.thefreedictionary.com/potential The Free Dictionary online (2011).
Potential.
Retrieved July 7, 2011 from http://www.thefreedictionary.com/potential Krieger, K & Rogers, B.
(2008).
NGO-Business-Partnerships - Exploring and Comparing the Potential of British Non-Governmental Organisations to Partner with Businesses of The Energy Sector.
Paper prepared for the “58th Political Studies Association Annual Conference”, Swansea, 1-3 April 2008.
Retrieved July 2, 2011 from http://www.psa.ac.uk/2008/pps/Krieger.pdf Lu, Y.
(2000).
The Limitations of NGOs: A Preliminary Study of Non-Governmental Social welfare Organisations in China.
CSC International Working Paper 13.
Retrieved July 7, 2011 from http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/29218/1/IWP13LuYiyi.pdf Karmayod.
(2008).
Limitations of NGOs.
Retrieved July 7, 2011 from http://www.karmayog.
org/karmayogmedia/karmayogmedia_19194.htm Burns, J.
(2010).
Facilitating Development: The Potential of NGOs, Corporations and the U.S. Government to Alleviate Poverty in Kenya.
Wesleyan University.
Bachelor of Arts Thesis.
Retrieved July 7, 2011 from http://wesscholar.wesleyan.edu/cgi/viewcontent .cgi?article=1543&context=etd_hon_theses Paul, J.A.
(2000).
NGOs and Global Policy Making.
Retrieved January 5, 2009, from www.globalpolicy.org/ngos/intro/general/2000/anal00.htm Neal, P. (1992).
Non-Governmental Organisations: Their Role in Environmental Education.
In W.I.
Filho and J.A.
Palmer (Eds.
), Key Issues in Environmental Education.
West Yorkshire: The Horton Print Group.
Okoko, E.E.
and Olanrewaju, D.O.
(2000).
The Involvement of Non-Government Organisations in Poverty Alleviation in Akure, Nigeria.
Nigerian Journal of Economic and Social Studies, 42(2), 201-212.
46 Global Policy Forum (2006).
Paper on NGO participation at the United Nations.
Retrieved January 5, 2009, from <<<http://www.globalpolicy.org/ngos/ngo-un/access/2006/0328 participation.htm>>> MODULE 4 RURAL URBAN MIGRATION Unit 1 Fundamentals of Migration Unit 2 Rural – Urban migration Unit 3 Implications of rural – urban migration Unit 4 Mitigation of rural urban migration MODULE 4 UNIT 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF MIGRATION CONTENTS • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Definition and types of migration and migrant • Description of ‘origin’ and ‘destination’ in migration process • Underpinning theory of migration • Conclusion • Summary • References/further readings UNIT 2 RURAL – URBAN MIGRATION CONTENTS • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Definition/description of rural-urban migration • Factors responsible for rural-urban migration in Nigeria 47 • Problems associated with rural-urban migration in Nigeria • Conclusion • Summary • References/further readings UNIT 3 IMPLICATIONS OF RURAL – URBAN MIGRATION CONTENTS • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Effects of rural-urban migration on the rural areas (origin) • Effects of rural-urban migration on the urban areas (destination) • Planning implications of rural-urban migration in Nigeria • Conclusion • Summary • References/further readings UNIT 4 MITIGATION OF RURAL – URBAN MIGRATION CONTENTS • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Ways of discouraging rural-urban migration at the point of origin • Ways of discouraging rural-urban migration at the point of distinction • Policy approach to the mitigation of rural-urban migration • Conclusion • Summary • References/further readings MODULE 5 – URBANISATION OF RURAL SOCIETIES Unit 1 - Fundamentals of urbanization Unit 2 - Problems of urbanization on rural societies Unit 3 - Benefits of urbanization of rural societies Unit 4 - Planning for the integration of rural societies in urban development MODULE 5 UNIT 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF URBANIZATION CONTENTS • Introduction 48 • Objectives • Main body • What is urbanization?
• Peculiarities of urbanization • Urbanization trend in Nigeria • Conclusion • Summary • References UNIT 2 PROBLEMS OF URBANIZATION ON RURAL SOCIETIES CONTENTS • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Encroachment on agricultural land • Ecological implications • Social implications (social vices) rural-urban migration • Cultural implications • Conclusion • Summary • References UNIT 3 BENEFITS OF URBANIZATION OF RURAL SOCIETIES CONTENTS • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Diversification of rural economy • Improvement in rural infrastructure provision – school, road, rural market • Improved participation in political activities • Change in perception of rural dwellers • Conclusion • Summary • References/further readings UNIT 4 PLANNING FOR THE INTEGRATION OF RURAL SOCIETIES CONTENTS • Introduction • Objectives • Main body • Urbanization as investable phenomenon • Strengthen the grassroots participation 49 • Local government council as an agency of rural development • Conclusion • Summary • References/further readings 50
