 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: ESM 301 COURSE TITLE: Introduction to Conflict Resolution 1 MODULE 1 CONCEPTUAL ISSUES UNIT 1 Concept of Conflict UNIT 2 Types of Conflict UNIT 3 Causes of Conflict UNIT 4 Concept of Peace 2 UNIT 1 CONCEPT OF CONFLICT Contents 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 THE CONSENSUS OR ORDER MODEL 3.2 THE COERCION MODEL 3.3 THE MARXIST MODEL 4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT REFRENCES 3 1.0 INTRODUCTION From the Latin word for ‘to clash or engage in a fight’, a confrontation between one or more parties aspiring towards incompatible or competitive means or ends.
Conflicts are largely an expression of opposing interests.
As a noun, it means a state of open, prolonged fighting, belligerency, confrontation, hostility, strife, struggle, war, warfare etc.
a state of disagreement and disharmony intra and interstate conflicts have become a common phenomenon in the contemporary world.
These conflicts do not confine themselves within the locus of their origin; rather, they spread across of other sovereign states thereby constituting threat to international peace and security.
However, bearing in mind that it is a proper conceptualisation of conflict that will enable a deep understanding of it, this lecture is therefore, concentrating on placing the conflict concept within theories of society over the ages.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The main objectives of this module are: a.
To familiarise the students with some exiting theories in the society b.
Introduce the students to the concept of conflict c. Raise the consciousness of the students to the broad definitions of conflict 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 The consensus or order model The social historian De Tocqueville seems to be the originator of the consensus theory.
This claim is grounded on his comment, later developed into the theory of consensus that: a society can only exist when a great number of men consider a great number of things from the same point of view, when they hold the same opinions upon many subjects, when the same occurrences suggest the same thoughts and impression to their minds.
In effect, consensus involves agreement about the rules which should govern the conduct of members of any system concerning the goals of the system, and the allocation of roles and rewards within the system.
It involves also a solidarity formed by a sense of common identity arising from ties of personal affection or primordial characteristics of shared relationship to 4 sacred things or to a membership in a common civil community.
But this does not entail a complete consensus embracing every member and governing every contingency which may arise within the system or in its environment.
In other words, complete consensus is impossible for the very element grounding consensus on the one hand can on the other hand become the focus of diverse parochial attachments, such as the social sub-systems of classes, ethnic groups, religious affiliations and local and regional communities, as well as the divergent interests of occupations, professions and classes.
All the same, most societies normally do enjoy consensus with respect to the centre of the system to enable them to continue for very extended periods without civil war and revolution.
The basic assumptions, therefore of the consensus or order model are that: • Rules are basic elements of social life • People must be committed to the society in which they live.
• Social life depends on group unity.
• Social life is based on occupation.
• Social systems rest on agreements on the rules.
• Society recognises the correctness of authority • Societies tend to continue over time.
Exercise 1 Outline the basic assumptions of the social historian De Tocqueville.
3.2 The coercion model The coercion or conflict model of society is grounded on the conflict theory developed by sociologists.
It involves a reflection, conscious or otherwise of the ideas that society is best understood as a contractual or in formal agreement made between equals to secure common goals as in social contract.
The conflict theory is founded on the argument that in human society, people typically seek to improve their outcome with regard to those things that they desire as worthwhile and desirable.
Where two groups of people both view themselves as having exclusive and legitimate claim to certain good things, so that each can realise what it defines as a rightful outcome only at the expense of the other, conflict results.
Here conflict entails a struggle over or claims to wealth, power, status or territory to neutralize, injure or eliminate their rivals.
5 Ralf Dahrendorf a German Sociologist credited with the delineation of the debate between the consensus and the conflict theories holds that society is characterised by both equilibrium (consensus) and conflict.
Therefore, he recommended that the former should examine value integration in human society while the later focuses on conflict of interest as well as the coercion that holds the society together in spite of strains.
For him conflict can only result from prior consensus (that is interaction).
In the same sense, conflict can ultimately generate consensus (aftermath) and even integration and both are often prerequisite for each other.
Very critical to Dahrendorfian conflict notion is the idea of authority.
Max Weber had earlier describes authority as legitimisation of power.
Apart form seeing conflict as the explanation of change in society; he sees society as held together by enforced constraint emanating from the structure of authority.
Therefore, very central to this idea of conflict is the premise that the differential distribution of authority in the society invariably becomes the determining factor of systematic social conflicts.
Even the popular Marxian notion of class is subjected to the prism of authority by Dahrendorf.
As a result, class can be defined as a category for the analysis of conflict oriented formations with systematic roots in the structure of society.
In his own submission, Georg Simmel starting from the basic premise that conflict is natural or unavoidable in human society.
According to him, conflicts and consensus are naturally complementary, i.e.
they are interdependent and often inter woven.
Therefore, in his own thinking while conflict can modify groups, it is itself a form of connection.
From this assumption, he argues that as much as dissociating factors generate conflicts such conflicts are imbued with relational qualities.
Apparently, this means that the resolution of conflict made possible by the dissociating nature of conflict is necessary for peace.
In other words, the idea of dissociation suggests that unlike the Marxian notion, conflicts do not build on each other and are not cumulative or connected as to make resolution impossible as the class notion argues.
Basically, Simmel’s notion tends to suggest that genuine peace or consensus without conflict is hardly possible.
He sees conflicts as naturally emanating from interactions among individuals and groups, and since social interaction is imbued with positive attributes, conflict cannot be totally negative.
Thus, “if every interaction among men is a sociation, conflict after all one of the most vivid interactions, which, furthermore, cannot possibly be carried on by one individual alone must certainly be considered association (Coser and Rosenberg, 1976:175).
The basic assumptions of the conflict or coercion model are that: 6 • Interests are basic elements of social life.
• Social life involves coercion.
• Social life involves groups with interests.
• Social life generates opposition, exclusion and hostility.
• Social life generates conflict.
• Social differences involve power, and • Social systems are not united or harmonious but tend to change.
The conflict theory and his underlying power thesis do not conclusively explain social structure and social actions.
According to Tam David West, in his essay ‘The Power of Power’, a model society based on conflict is necessarily a negative one.
Though advocates of the conflict theory in turn claim that the consensus theory is ‘the idealisation of coercion’, yet the history of conflict and consensus has been a dialogue between concepts seeking to explain the same phenomenon i.e.
human cooperation.
3.3 Marxist theory or class struggle model The theory of conflict is seen in ideological terms by Karl Marx and Frederich Engels in their Communist manifesto (1848) where they postulated that “the pivotal characteristic of social life is class struggles”.
Marx opined that in societies, people are grouped according to their economic interests.
These economically based groupings are called ‘classes’.
These classes have different objectives, for example, in the capitalist society the proletariat (working class) have the objective of improving their conditions and increasing their wages while the bourgeoisie (the class that owns the capital) have the objectives of maximizing their profits at the expense of the working class.
In simple terms, the advent of capitalism (defined not just by mechanisation of production or post industrial revolution organisation of work but more emphatically in Marxian mode the dominance of money which bestows on people powers and abilities that they do not really possess) creates a situation where society can be divided (or polarised –arising naturally and inevitably) in to two classes viz: those with access to or in control of the means of production (mainly capital) or the haves (bourgeoisie) and those without or the have-nots who submit their labour power to the former in order to earn a living in the new social order.
For Marx, it is in sowing of this seed of division and the exploitation that naturally comes from it that capitalism ironically sows the seed of its own destruction.
Eventually, the have-nots would 7 muster enough consciousness and courage to challenge the status quo and violently overthrow the haves in a revolution thereby creating the space for the emergence of socialism and eventual communism which represents in real terms both an utopia and extreme counter- narration of capitalism as a system.
The overriding concern of Marx is that social conflict is an imperative route to development in human society.
This view possibly made him to conclude that the history of all hitherto known or existing societies is the history of class or social conflict.
Thus, for him, ‘struggle rather than peaceful growth was the engine of progress; strife was the father of all things and social conflict the core of historical process’ (Coser, 1971:43).
Exercise 2 What are the various concepts of conflict in the theories of society?
4.0 SUMMARY In our interrogation of the various social theories and the place of conflicts we can conclude that the theories are a group of perspectives that presents reality differently.
For instance, Marx posited the elimination of conflict through the emergence of a classless or communist society, other theorists see conflict unavoidable, endless and often cyclical with each one yielding either a change outcome in society or dying out but new ones sprouting from various spheres of the society.
In spite of whatever differences one may make in the different conflict explanations, one overriding similarity is that conflict theories are usually viewed as radical and place emphasis on social change and the redistribution of societal resources.
To this end, the reality of conflict should be viewed as equally a confirmation of the opposing or contrasting view of society as marked by consensus, unity or equilibrium.
5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Analyse one of the various concepts of conflict in the theories of society.
6.0 REFRENCES 8  UNIT 2 TYPES OF CONFLICT Contents 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 POLITICAL CONFLICT 3.2 IDENTITY CONFLICT 3.3 ECONOMIC CONFLICT 3.4 URBAN VIOLENCE 4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 6.0 REFRENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the first lecture, attempt was made to examine the various theories of conflict to enable a deep understanding of the multipurpose nature of conflict for system maintenance and preservation.
In this unit, various types of conflict especially as applicable to Nigeria shall be discussed.
9 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this lecture, you should be able to a.
Outline the various types of conflicts.
b.
Mention the nature of the conflicts whether they were temporary or long-term.
c. State the difference between urban violence and conflict.
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 Political Conflict Politics, one of the unavoidable facts of human existence has been variously described by scholars.
Lasswell conceives it as who gets what, when and how.
It is the nerve-centre of human peaceful and organised co-existence.
It regulates other social systems so as to minimise and control conflicts.
Politics is an unavoidable process through which people interact and achieve their set goals in the area of their interest.
It is the attempt to achieve their set goals that often bring conflict into the political arena.
Political violence is the use of or threat of, physical acts carried out by an individual or group of individuals against another individual or individuals, or properties, with the intent to cause injury or death to persons and/or damage or cause destruction to properties; and whose objective, choice of targets or victims, surrounding circumstances, implementation, and effect have political significance and tend to modify the behaviour of others in the exiting arrangement of a power structure with some consequences for the political system (Anifowose1982:41).
The distinctive character of this definition is that the purpose, methods and resolution of the violent behaviour should be seen to have political underpinnings.
It can be described as all collective attacks within a political community against the political regime.
Political conflict include war between states, armed rebellion against states (ranging from small-scale low intensity conflicts to large scale civil wars), armed secessionist rebellion of various scales and coup d’etat.
Political conflict /violence can be caused by frustration-deprivation and aggression.
In the words of Dolland, “frustration produced by interrupting a person’s progress toward an expected goal will always elicit the motive to aggress; all aggression is caused by frustration…” Groups or even individuals rebel because they are frustrated by the gap between what they expected and what they can reasonably get from the political system.
10 There are several variations in the psychology-based analysis with different scholars emphasising some contexts.
There is the relative deprivation school which suggest that it is not absolute sate of deprivation that counts but perceptions of ones opportunities in relation to others.
The feeling of deprivation and ipso facto frustration is stronger when goods that appear elusive to one group are deemed to be readily available to another.
There is also the exceptional school which is closely linked to the relative deprivation explanation.
It posits that it is not utter lack but unfulfilled hopes and expectations that engender violent conflict.
Groups enter into violent conflicts as a result of feeling of dissatisfaction arising out of the compassion between what one currently enjoys and what one expects, what one thinks one ought to have or what one regards as ideal.
Exercise 1 Define political conflict in your own words 3.2 Identity Conflict The struggle for recognition is as old as history.
According to Fukuyama, it ‘is evident everywhere around us and underlines contemporary movements all over the world’.
It is certainly in man’s nature to desire food, shelter, security and life.
But he does not only desire these material things, he also desires recognition and acknowledgement.
Fukuyama accepts Hegel’s theory that ‘an individual could not become self-conscious, that is, become aware of himself as a separate human being, without being recognised by other human beings.
Thus, man, according to him, not only wants to be recognised by others but needs to be recognised as a man, his abilities, qualities and distinct identities as opposed to the other.
Identity therefore involves the self-conception and self-definition of an individual with respect to his/her membership in, and allegiance to, a particular community, which may be defined in social, political, economic or territorial terms.
The issue of identity determines the extent to which an individual sees himself or herself as being a member or non-member of a community.
The perception of identity also sets parameters to the extent of the sacrifice that individuals and groups are prepared to make for the benefit of the community.
With respect to the Nigerian experience, having at least 450 ethnic groups has made the issue of identity manifest itself along conflictual lines with respect to two aspects namely; ethnicity and religion.
11 Ethnicity is a complex phenomenon which has always been associated with political, religious, juridical and other social aspects of human existence.
Hence, the concept has been fully studied and has attracted a variety of interpretations.
For instance, Max Weber describes ethnic groups as “those human groups that entertain a subjective belief in their common descent because of similarities of physical type or of customs or both, or because of memories of colonisation and migration” (Weber, 1968:389).
Nnoli noted that ethnicity is ‘a socio-political phenomenon associated with interactions among members of a society, consisting of diverse ethnic groups, characteristics by cultural and linguistic similarities, values and consciousness”.
Sanda, in turn, defines it as “the active sense of identification with some ethnic unit whether or not this group has an institutional structure of its own, or whether it has any real existence in the pre-colonial epoch”.
In essence, ethnicity constitutes a way in which people think of themselves and others, and makes a sense of the world around them.
In multi-linguistic societies, ethnicity finds its way into a myriad of issues such as: a.
Control of state power.
b.
Development plans.
c. Educational controversies.
d. Resource control.
e. Religious intolerance.
f. Land disputes.
g. Indigene-settler syndrome.
The second dimension of identity is that of religion.
This is a very complex issue to tackle because religion deals with the relationship between man and the supernatural.
At a round table conference on “Religious Pluralism and Democracy in Nigeria”, religion is defined as “an expression of faith and belief, and the conscious and the sub-conscious response to the ultimate source of existence’.
It was emphasised that religion can be used to promote nation building and at the same time it can be an object of division.
Religious conflict is conceptualised as specific form of conflict between groups which differed ideologically along religious lines within a pluralistic setting with each striving for political relevance”.
Three broad types of religious conflicts have been identified in Nigeria, they are; a. Intra-religious disturbances which occur between different denominations or sects.
12 b. Interreligious conflicts prevalent between adherents of different religious beliefs, but capable of assuming socio-ethnic dimensions and c. Interreligious conflicts which though have socio-economic origins end up in form of religious conflicts.
Most religious conflicts in Nigeria often develop into inter-ethnic conflicts even where they began as purely religious disagreements.
The reverse is also the case namely; socio-ethnic conflicts are deflated and fought out under interreligious banner.
One plausible explanation for the close link between ethnic and religious conflict is the congruence in several respects between an ethnic and a religious identity such that the two forms of identities are mutually reinforcing rather than being exclusive.
The integration of ethnicity and religion into a system of common identity is most relevant in the Nigerian situation where the boundary of ethnic identity and religious allegiance tend to overlap especially during moments of conflicts.
Nigeria is a complex society with a multiplicity of religious and cultural allegiances and sensibilities.
Ethno-religious conflict has been a recurrent fact in virtually all the geo-political zones of the country.
Exercise 2 Outline the factors responsible for the integration of religion and ethnicity into a system of common identity in Nigeria.
3.3 Economic Conflict Economic conflicts are conflicts that emanate out of the demand for economic redistribution fuelled by socio-economic deprivation and inequality in the system.
Central to economic conflict is the question of denial of access to basic economic resources and opportunities.
Economic conflicts could be divided into two, first; are those based on conflicting interpretation of use of land.
Land is the most important resource in Nigerian communities; it is the basis upon which the family survives.
According to Brueggemann (1978), land is normally a place with historical meaning and provides continuity and identity across generations.
Land has much to do in human affairs because it is the first step in creating stability in families, communities and groups.
Therefore, land was used as an instrument of political control and prestige.
It was used to remind the settlers that they were only immigrants who lived at the pleasure of the indigenes.
In Nigeria for instance, management of land resources based on land tenure system has become a source of conflict because of 13 deliberate incompetence of the empowered authorities.
Under the Land Use Decree of 1978, the control of the rights of occupancy of certain lands is vested on the local/state government.
The Decree did not however specify clear land-use rights for pastoralist nor did it guarantee their access to land resources.
Therefore for the pastoralists, that considers access to grazing land as critical any attempt to limit it is usually resisted.
Housea and others (1995:1) have argued that, “indeed conflict in land use between pastoralists and the farmers arise from differences in the perception of land resources, the institutional tools for utilising the land resource base, and the very process of land utilization”.
The second aspects of economic conflict are those fuelled by the failure to spur economic growth despite the vast economic potentials in human and natural resources.
The country progressively slipped from being one of the middle-income oil producing countries in the late 1970s and early 1980s to one of the lowest-income countries in the early 1990s.
Moreover, the 2004 edition of the UNDP’s Human Development Report placed Nigeria in the 151st position, based on the Human Development Index.
This evidently meant that the country has failed consistently over the years to invest the massive flow of oils rents earned by successive governments in deepening the nation’s human capital base.
Poverty manifests in illiteracy, unemployment and poor living standards therefore appears to be at the heart of conflict.
A vibrant and youthful population, eager to work but finds none, will continue to agitate and involve in all kinds of activities and basic instincts to survive.
For instance, pauperization of the masses which was one of the immediate effects of SAP and market oriented reforms has been demonstrated to have sparked off general feelings of frustration and intolerance in Nigeria.
3.4 Urban Violence Urban violence as a form of conflict is very prevalent in Nigerian cities.
Sometimes they take the form of ethnic conflict, sometimes religious and at times class based i.e.
the poor of many ethnic groups attacking government properties and installations, or shops and house of the rich and the middle class.
This form of violence is usually perpetrated by street urchins such as Area Boys in Lagos, Yan Tauri in Kano and ethnic militia groups.
The root of urban violence perpetrated by street urchins has been attributed to the loss of traditional structures that kept people together and rural urban migration.
Rural urban migration created large pool of idle youths who are both skilled and unskilled and sometimes homeless in Nigerian cities.
They were always available for deviant behaviours.
For instance, anytime there is scarcity of 14 petroleum product (especially PMS), they engage in illegal sale of the product and openly control access to fuel stations through imposition of entry fees on motorists.
Ethnic militias, according to Badmus are an extreme form of ethnic agitation for self- determination as they assume militant posture and gradually metamorphosed into militia groups, each of which bears an ethnic identity and purport to act as machinery through which the desires of its people are sought to be realised.
The common features of these ethnically inspired movements are the resort to violence, preponderance of youth membership as well as ethnic identity affiliations.
Some key militia group in Nigeria include, Oodua People’s Congress (OPC), Movement for the Actualisation of the Sovereign State of Biafra (MASSOB), Arewa People’s Congress (APC), Ijaw National Congress (INC), Ijaw Youth Council (IJC) Egbesu Boys of Africa (EBA) Igbo People’s Congress (IPC) Niger Delta Volunteer Force (NDPVF) and Bakassi Boys.
There also exists a host such group in the North Central region of Nigeria.
In terms of organisation and finance they cannot be compared to the aforementioned however, they were usually available for spontaneous actions during crisis situation.
These groups are a major part of the political landscape, some demanding self-determination, some wanting control over local economic resources, some setting out socio-cultural objectives and some others formed all sorts of vigilante forces being used to combat rising levels of crime that the police failed to curb.
Violence is their modus operandi and competition between rival groups was fierce because of the availability of light weapons.
These are weapons that can be easily used or transported by individuals and small groups, such as, rifles, handguns, hand grenades and shoulder-mounted rocket launchers.
In theory, anyone could purchase, transport, use, maintain and conceal these weapons.
Proliferation of these weapons is one the effect of the post-cold war globalization because the relatively orderly arms trade of the cold war era gave way for a more diffuse arms trade that made control of the trade very cumbersome.
4.0 SUMMARY In this lecture we have looked into types of conflict bearing in mind that each conflict is characterised by a conflict situation, conflict behaviour and conflict attitude.
We are able to identify that patterns of cultural pluralism and its defining categories such as, identity issues, unstable political environment and 15 related socio-economic issues constitute the cleavages that exacerbates conflicts.
5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Distinguish between urban violence and conflict.
6.0 REFRENCES UNIT 3 CAUSES OF CONFLICT Contents 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 GENERAL DISCOURSE 3.2 COLONIAL LEGACY 3.3 GLOBAL SYSTEM 3.4 POLITICAL CULTURE 4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 TUTOR –MARKED ASSIGNMENT 6.0 REFRENCES 16 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous lectures, we have been able to establish that conflicts are inherent aspects of human relation whether at the group, national or international levels.
In this unit, we shall be exposed to a variety of causes of conflict especially the immediate causes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this lecture, you should be able to d. Outline the various types of conflicts.
e. Mention the nature of the conflicts whether they were temporary or long-term.
f. State the difference between urban violence and conflict.
3.0MAIN TEXT 3.1 General Discourse Scholars are not unanimous about causes of conflict.
It is however noted that human life is complex and the social sciences, so young that definite answers escape analyst.
However, in Michael Howard’s view the causes of conflicts have not changed fundamentally thought the centuries.
According to him: Just as Thucydides had written that the causes of the Peloponnesian war were ‘the growth of Athenian power and fear this caused in Sparta’, some of the conflicts today are born out of fear of domination by a superior power (Howard,1983:7-22).
Donald Kegan in surveying conflicts from the Peloponnesian war (431- 404B.C.)
to the Cuban Missile crisis of 1962 sees conflict not as an aberration but instead as a recurring phenomenon.
In his view, conflicts are the results of competition for power.
He argues that states seek power not only for greater security or economic gain but also for ‘greater prestige, respect, and deference, in short, honour’.
Kegan concludes that fear, often unclear and intangible, not always of immediate threats but also of more distant ones, against which reassurance may not be possible, accounts for the persistence of conflicts as a part of the human conditions not likely to change (Adejo, 2004:4).
No single theory of conflict exists that is acceptable to social scientists in their respective disciplines and the causes of conflicts are not only multiple but they have kept multiplying throughout history.
A study of wars between 1448 and 1989 by Kalvi J. Hosti identifies twenty-four different issues that caused wars.
According to him, territorial disputes causes over of all wars between 1648-1914 but have caused less than of all conflicts since 17 then.
Of the causal factors that have increased in importance, various national drives such as liberation, unification and secession have increased the most, up from an average of 3%(1648-1814) to an average of 13% (1815-1989).
In another study, Grieve reveals the conference of causes and cure of conflicts and cure of war in 1925 concluded that there were more than 250 causes of war listed under the four general categories of political, economic, social and psychological.
In a simpler sense, analyses of conflicts are usually based on three level dimensions: the system level, which generally talks about the nature of the world’s political system, the state level which is treated under the broad factors of the political and the economic due to the internal political dynamic of countries (as to whether it is capitalist, dictatorial, underdeveloped or if the economic resources and wealth could determine the level of aggression or proneness to it of a state).
Other scholars have cause to study whether anything in the character of a nation such as cultural trait that can be correlated to war-like behaviour, i.e.
nationalism in form of ethnocentrism, xenophobia and the like.
The third level of analysis of theories of conflict is the individual.
In this, some analyst have argued that the causes of conflicts may be in the nature of human beings which according to G.R.
Berridge and Kenneth Waltz is “proud, power-crazed, stupid and vicious”.
Such conflicts arise over matters of territoriality and human aggression can stem from stress, anxiety or frustration.
At this level, conflicts could also arise as a result of the socio-psychological need for power as some leaders have a power drive that may cause aggressive behaviour.
This equally goes with the inability of some national leaders to perceive events objectively due to the proclivity of human beings to see their opponents as more hostile than themselves.
Exercise 1 Explain the views of Donald Kegan regarding causes of conflict 3.2 Colonial Legacy Geographically, Nigeria lies at the extreme inner corner of the Gulf of Guinea in West Africa with a compact territorial area of about 373,000 square miles extending from the Gulf of Guinea on the South to Sahara Desert on the North covering four distinct physical regions.
As expected, these physical regional variations with their corresponding vegetation, soil and climatic peculiarities are the result of variations in rainfall and other climatic conditions.
These in turn are accountable for differences in soil fertility and the variations in crops 18 occupational and general economic activities among the people of the different regions.
The overall result of all these is the existence of numerous crops, and huge varieties of other mineral resources.
A state of affairs which made the British colonial authorities see Nigeria as an indispensable gold mine and which was to be held on to and exploited for as long as it was possible for the benefit of the home state (Britain).
During the colonial period, British authorities through several socio-political and economic policies subjected the entire territory and people to all sorts of exploitation and pillaging.
Given the fact that colonialism was motivated, especially by economic interests, the colonial authorities did not hesitate to adopt any policies and strategies which enabled them to attain their economic and general material interest not withstanding how detrimental such policies and strategies were to the colonised peoples.
For instance, the various ethnic groups or autonomous nations with different culture and aspirations were fused together in what the British called the amalgamation of the Northern and Southern protectorates.
It was a marriage not based on trust.
Perhaps one major effect of this is the prevalence of boundary disputes in Nigeria.
As at 1999, there were as many as 87 major boundary disputes in Nigeria.
The consolidated and Zonal Reports on Strategic Conflict Assessment of the Institute for Peace and Conflict Resolution of the Presidency shows that land and boundary disputes still constitute a major source of conflicts in all the six geo-political zones of the Nigerian federation.
Incessant boundary disputes seem to have turned Nigeria into a state at war with itself.
The problem manifests itself in various forms.
It could assume the nature of a dispute between two villages fighting over portions of the ancestral land, as in the case of Aguleri and Umuleri of Anambra state, or disputes between two communities astride interstate boundaries such as the case of Ogori in Kogi state versus Ekpedo in Edo state, or between two or more states of the federation quarrelling over forest reserves, such as the dispute between Edo and Delta states over the Urhonige forest reserve or oil wells as illustrated by the rival claims of Akwa Ibom and Cross River States over the oil rich Tom Shott Island.
3.3 Global System The end of the Second World War ushered in a bipolar world.
The world was divided between two opposing ideologies headed by the Soviet Union and the United States, former allies in the Great War.
The Soviet Union, a socialist state had communist ideology as an economic system while the United States is a democratic state with capitalism as her economic system.
The two nuclear super powers dominated the international politics of the 19 Cold War era.
The world was deeply divided as the USA led the democratic and the capitalist west and the Soviet Union led the dictatorial socialist and communist East.
The two nations with their nuclear balance of terror led two other important sub-regional organisations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), a Western organisation led by the USA and the Warsaw Pact, an Eastern Organisation, led by the Soviet Union.
The rivalry between the two brought about the global divide that placed independent nations as either belonging to the West or the East.
Independent nations that refused to join either of the blocs formed another international organisation known as the Non-Aligned Movement to reflect the reality of the day.
The conduct of the United Nations, particularly the peace initiatives of the Security Council also reflected this divide.
The Cold War clearly manifested in the way members of the Security Council voted on issues.
During this period, African states excited the attention of the world’s rival power blocs.
The position that each newly independent country adopted in its relations with the West or east was viewed as a matter of crucial importance.
Africa was considered to be too valuable a prize to lose.
While the old colonial powers sought to strengthen the special relationship they had mostly formed with their former colonies, the Eastern bloc embarked on major campaigns to gain influence in the new states.
According to the American President J.F.
Kennedy; ‘We see Africa as probably the greatest open field of manoeuvre in the worldwide competition between the communist bloc and the non-communist’.
Therefore, one major consequence of the super power rivalry in Africa is the increased tension surrounding local conflicts.
For instance, there reported cases of the American intelligence Agency (CIA) involvement in military coups all over Africa, Nigeria not excluded.
It was reported that most of the 100 successful and aborted military coups in Africa since 1960 had the influence of the CIA.
Another causal factor within the global environment is the effect of neo-colonial economic policies on Africa.
Institutions such as the World Bank, IMF and some high profile regional economic blocks have become instruments of intimidation rather than cohesion.
African countries have suffered internal unrest in their quest to implement Structural Adjustment Programme and other conditionalities imposed by the IMF and other donor agencies that did not take cognisance of Africa’s peculiarities.
(Various anti-SAP riots in Nigeria).
Perhaps most pertinent is the proliferation of small arms and light weapons (SALW) in the West African sub-region, region which Nigeria is located.
SALW are extreme tools of 20 violence because they are durable, highly portable, easily concealed, simple to use, extremely lethal and possess legitimate military, police and civilian uses.
Nations and manufacturers eager to dispose of arsenals of arms trade made superfluous by cold-war political developments and technological innovations have continue to see Africa as an attractive market.
According to Small Arm Survey, Nigeria has porous borders on both its land and sea edges allowing gun smuggling from a variety of countries.
Many of these weapons came from war torn countries elsewhere in Africa and some arms smuggling rings operate from Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria.
These weapons are cheap and widely available they are also lightweight and can be used by child soldiers.
A nation like Nigeria where tensions are high over every national issue, availability of SALW risks igniting or fuelling conflicts.
Actually, Nigeria provides an example of SALW availability and misuse.
For instance, SALW are brought into the Niger Delta region from various locations such as Russian AK-47, the German-G3, the Belgian- FN-FAL, Czech-machine guns and Serbian rocket propelled grenades (RPGS).
These weapons have contributed to the various conflicts in the Niger Delta area.
Exercise 2 Mention some of the effects of availability of SALW on the Nigerian society.
3.4 Political Culture Political culture whether diverse or homogenous is a product of many factors such as geography, historical developments and experiences, diversity of a nation’s population, pattern of traditional norms and practices, as well as varying levels of socio-economic development and socialization processes.
It has been defined by various scholars as, “the set of attitudes beliefs and sentiments which give order and meaning to a political process and which provides the underlying assumptions and rules that govern behaviour in the political system.
It encompasses both political ideals and the operating norms of a polity” (Pye, 1962:122).
Almond and Verba (1963) sees it sees it “as the pattern of individual political orientations, the attitudes towards the political system and its various parts and to the role of the self in the political system”.
Adedope (1981) says the political culture of any society is made up of certain values, feelings, information, skills and political attitudes of members of the same political community.
Political culture is, therefore, reflected in a nation’s ideology, in the duties of citizenship, in the conduct and style of political activity and in the attitudes towards the political leaders and followers.
21 Form the above, political culture could be said to be the values, norms, attitudes expected to guide the behaviours of people towards the political system.
The political culture of a country will determine the behaviour and attitude of the population towards the political system.
It creates, shapes, influences and sustains the citizen’s political cognitive map of the state of affairs.
Kolawole (1997) in his analysis submitted that a Libyan brought up in the age of Gaddafi’s authoritarianism naturally imbibes political ethos that adulates one-man rule and sees the leader not only as symbolising the state but actually being the state.
Also, American values eulogies and treasures the ideals of democracy.
It imbues as American with psychological fulfilment that his chosen leader will be responsive, responsible and receptive to him.
In contrast, in the countries of Latin America, Africa and South-East Asia, military rule was once an accepted norm.
In such societies, the political culture has incorporated, as one of its ethos the subordination of the civil society.
For instance in Nigeria, politics is not considered a game where your opponent is not necessarily your enemy.
The political culture of tolerance, accommodation and participation of all is lacking.
The political culture in Nigeria is such that every Nigerian associates first and foremost with his ethnic, religious and regional/zonal groups.
The reason for this according to Ake was that the nationalist movement was essentially a coalition of disparate groups united by their common grievances against colonial oppression.
It was typically a network of nationalities, ethnic groups and professional groups.
But even though they cooperated against colonial rule, their relationship was never free from tension and conflict.
Thus after independence, Nigerian leaders became concerned more with their ethnic groups.
In other words, the type of political leadership that comes up after independence lack national spread and acceptance thus bringing about distrust that seriously convulsed the polity.
Another aspect of the Nigeria’s political culture is thuggery and election rigging.
Thuggery is an act characterised by rudeness, hooliganism, touting, intimidation and harassment.
It is a behaviour that contradicts peace, harmony and co-existence among groups.
Political thuggery is an illegitimate and violent means of seeking political power with a view to subverting national opinion for parochial ends through self-imposition.
Thuggery and election rigging is a national malaise that has made politics in Nigeria manifest acrimony, assault, assassination, harassment and conflicts.
Prebendalism and god fatherism is another prevalent culture in the political environment in Nigeria.
The prebendal nature of Nigerian politics is caused by the excessive premium on political power.
Politics is conceived as an investment and the 22 godfather, having invested colossally, would want to take the most extreme measures including violence to win and maintain political power.
Exercise 3 Discuss the nature of the political culture in Nigeria.
4.0 SUMMARY This lecture has examined the causes of conflicts by first agreeing with existing literature that causes of conflicts are not only multiple but have kept multiplying with modernisation and globalisation.
The lecture also looks at the three level dimensions of conflict before capturing the specific Nigerian situation.
5.0 TUTOR –MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the contribution of colonial policies to post-colonial conflicts in Nigeria.
6.0 REFRENCES 23  UNIT 4 CONCEPT OF PEACE CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 PHILOSOPHICAL PERSPECTIVE 3.2 SOCIOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE 3.3 CRIME AGAINST PEACE 4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 6.0 REFRENCES 1.0 Introduction Deriving from the Latin Pax, peace in western world is generally considered a contractual relationship that implies mutual recognition and agreement.
Understandings of peace throughout the world often disclose a much deeper comprehension of peace in relation to the 24 huma1n conditions, which also includes inner peace.
Peace is a state of mind in concourse with serenity, a state of harmony, tranquillity, concord and a balance of equilibrium of powers.
It is the opposite of conflict, it abhors violence and war.
Peace is also a state of justice, goodness and civil government.
There are different perspectives of peace.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 Philosophical perspective The concept of peace is both an ethical virtue and an axiological value (Ikejiani-Clark, 2009:6).
Peace is seen as a virtue necessary for the perfection of both the individual and the achievement of justice and well-being in society.
Thus, peace is acquired as a moral achievement, a value which increases the worth and dignity of the individual.
It is an adornment pursued from the collective acquisitions for individual in society, which enhances the possibility of social, political and educational achievements of the perfect society as conceived by philosophers like Socrates, Aristotle, Aquinas and Kant.
Exploring the philosophical position on peace means analysing the word, idea and experience of peace.
The New Lexicon Webster’s Dictionary defines peace with the following value profiles: a) The condition that exists when nations or other groups are not fighting.
b) The ending of a state war.
c) The treaty that marks the end of war.
d) Friendly relations between individuals untroubled by disputes undisturbed by disputes.
e) Freedom from noise, worries, troubles fears, etc.
peace of mind.
A critical look at the profile given by Webster on peace exposes its limitations, which centre on the question: does the absence of war or hostilities mean peace in a community or state?
When Nigeria is not at war with any nation, does that translate to the philosophical and empirical fact that Nigeria is at peace with itself?
It can be concluded that the Webster’s profile on peace, common to global thinking, has spawned a false thinking and understandably of the elements of peace as conceived by philosophers over ages.
The philosophical deposition on peace is a dialectical, holistic and dynamic reality, which does 25 not see peace as a unit or factor in human society.
It is more of a comprehensive and successful assistance to mankind to meet the modern challenges of peace.
Exercise 1 Examine the value profiles built into the definition of peace by New Lexicon Webster’s Dictionary.
3.2 Sociological Perspective: This perspective views peace as a value that emanates from just human relationships which enhances harmony, creativity and productivity and prevention of war.
The position of religions on the issue of peace can be subsumed under the sociological perspective.
Harmony is a fundamental category in African Traditional Religion and thought.
It is regarded as finding a way in which differences can co-exist harmoniously.
In like manner, Christianity and Islam are generally acknowledged as religions that teach peace and promote peace among peoples and nations.
So also, all other world religion.
As a matter of fact, the modern world takes serious exception to the teachings and practices of any religion that promotes violence and conflicts among peoples.
The spirituality of peace sees it as a serene level of calm, which opens the perceptions of man to a higher reality.
St Augustine writes that consists in a certain order appropriate to an entity.
Every entity or state of affairs has its order.
The orderly arrangement of something is its peace.
Just like order, authority and obedience, Augustine believes, exemplify the peace of the home and of the political community.
Thus, peace, “is an ordered harmony of authority and obedience between citizens”.
In Augustine’s conceptual schemes, peace is simply the “calm that comes from order” and order “is an arrangement of like and unlike things whereby each of them is disposed in its proper place”.
Everyone, according to Augustine, longs for peace, even those clamouring for or waging war.
The human soul ultimately longs for peace, a peace that is finally found in God.
Writing on peace in his Populorum Progressio, Pope Paul VI posits that, “peace is not simply the absence of warfare, based on a precarious balance of power; it is fashioned by efforts directed day after day towards the establishment of the ordered universe willed by God, with a more perfect form of justice among men.” Exercise 2 Discuss St Augustine’s view of peace.
26 3.3 Political Perspective This perspective depicts peace as a broad concept subsumed in a number of ways such as balance of power or as a civil government.
The balance of power is a must for peace as a social contract underlying a structure of social expectations and associated social cooperation.
Huntington states that peace entails institutionalisation of political structures that guarantee security, which means that political structures acquire value and stability.
The implicit meaning is that to have peace, there must exist stable structures and secularity, which requires and assumes broad-based political participation by the citizen of a state.
Commenting on the subject of peace, Hon Justice Oputa expanded on the views espoused by St Augustine by affirming that, peace should not just be tranquillity because tranquillity could be misconstrued to mean “tranquillity of slavery or imposed violence and maintained by force”.
In his words, True peace results from true order.
An order imposed by force, oppression, fear, threats, blackmail, etc.
is a false order.
It is slavery.
A false order is merely tolerated.
But a true and balanced order favours the welfare and progress of all.
Peace is that order that provides for the welfare of all men, it is that order which provide what is needed to sustain life and self-respect, it is that order that produces a society that is free, harmonious, honoured by all, cultured and religious (Oputa,2004).
Explaining further, Justice Oputa stressed that, “there is peace in a man when his senses are subject to reason, when his reason is subject to faith, when his body is subject to his soul and when his entire personality is subject to God”.
There is peace in society when each man gives to his neighbour that which is due, when government gives to its citizen that which is their due and when all mankind gives glory to God.
Peace in this context means justice in action.
Oputa however further reminds us that, peace is very difficult to achieve: True peace does not come of its own and does not stay of its own.
True peace is always the result of great efforts and great sacrifice---- and therefore, everybody must collaborate to win and preserve it, and then make it advance and (ibid).
27 Peace could also be interpreted to mean conquest.
That is to say, peace must be won, for it is the prize for those who win the war against selfishness, self-centeredness, hate passion and envy.
The ideal peace is that peace which reflects transparency in the polity and eschews bribery and corruption.
In the words of Rev.
Fr.
Matthew Kukah “---in matters of peace and war, there really should be no spectators or by standers”.
3.4 Crimes Against Peace On the 8th of August, 1945, the governments of the United Kingdom, United States of America, the Provisional Government of the French Republic and the government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics entered into an agreement establishing the Nuremberg International Military Tribunal for the trial of Germany Major War criminals whose offences have no particular geographical location.
The tribunal was invested with power to try and punish the major war criminals of the European Axis countries, persons who had committed crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity, as defined in the Charter annexed to the Agreement.
Crime against peace was defined as: Planning, preparation, initiation or waging of a war of aggression or a war in violation of international treaties, agreements or assurances, or participation in a common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of any of the foregoing (Cukwura and Sylvester,2008:7).
It is important to mention in this lecture that the tradition of Nuremberg War Crimes Tribunal has been maintained even up to the present time.
4.0 SUMMARY In this lecture, we have discussed various perspectives of peace.
It is a desired end for all humans and also the outcome of an order within a holistic perspective.
This lecture concludes by affirming the position of Albert Einstein that, “peace cannot be kept by force it can only be achieved by understanding”.
5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How would you define peace in your own word?
6.0 REFRENCES 28  MODULE 2 ENVIRONMENT AND CONFLICT UNIT 1 Basic Analysis of Environment UNIT 2 Resources and Conflict UNIT 3 Global Perspectives of Environment and Conflict UNIT 1 BASIC ANALYSIS OF ENVIRONMENT Contents 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 DEFINITIONS OF ENVIRONMENT 3.2 TYPES OF ENVIRONMENT 3.3 FACTORS IN THE ENVIRONMENT THAT CAUSES CONFLCIT IN NIGERA 3.4 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION 29  4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT REFRENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION Since the end of the cold war, the link between environment and conflicts has been a subject of discussion globally.
In Africa, there have been studies linking environmental factors to conflict.
Consequently, a number of theoretical frameworks have influenced conceptions of environment and conflict.
While none of these frameworks contends that environment plays an exclusive or primary role in the causes of conflict, each assigns a prominent role to the environment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this lecture, you should be able to a.
Give various definitions of environment.
b.
Discuss the types of environment.
c. Outline the factors inherent in the environment that can ignite conflict in Nigeria.
3.0MAIN TEXT 3.1.1 Definitions of Environment Man lives in a physical environment which to a considerable degree influences his socio- economic activities.
The word environment has been defined by many scholars.
According to Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary and Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary, environment refers to the totality of external conditions affecting the life and development of organisms whether on land, air or water.
Sada (1988) is of the view that it will be more meaningful to conceive of the environment as a system within which living organisms interact with the physical elements.
Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA) describes to include “water, air, land and all plants and human beings or animals living therein and the interrelationships which exist among these or any of them”.
John Rau and David Wooten (1980)defined environment as the whole complex of physical, social, cultural, 30 economic and aesthetic factors which affect individual and communities and ultimately determine their character relationship and survival.
This is the system referred to as the ecosystem.
It is described by some scientist as the ‘principles of environmental unity’ because of the interdependent nature of its component parts.
Therefore, environment can be defined as ‘the total surrounding of man, including air, water, land, natural resources, flora, fauna, and humans, including their interactions’.
Albert Einstein described environment as ‘anything that isn’t me’.
Exercise 1 Do you agree with Albert Einstein description of environment as ‘anything that isn’t me?’ 3.1.2 Types of Environment John Rau and David Wooten in categorised the environment into the following Biophysical Environment: The physical and biological factors along with their chemical interactions that affect an organism.
Natural Environment: All living and non-living things that occur naturally on earth.
Built Environment: Constructed surroundings that provide the setting for human activity, ranging from the large scale civic surroundings to the personal places.
Social Environment: The culture that an individual lives in, and the people and institutions with whom they interact.
Health Environment: The existing health conditions of the people, including existing health facilities, health statistics and disease outbreak and trends in the human settlement.
Workplace Environment: Any premises part of premises which are not a domestic building and is made available as a place of work to anyone.
3.1.3 Factors of Environment that Causes Conflict in Nigeria Conflicts over environmental sources are almost a universal phenomenon.
Attributes of the environment are by their nature at peace with each other as the environment through the structure and functioning of the eco system establishes a steady state of equilibrium 31 between the component parts of the system.
He Nigerian environment has always been seen in narrow and managerial terms as something to be subdued and exploited for the sake of national development.
It was not until 1988, as a result of the conflict caused by the dumping of Italian toxic waste at Koko, Delta State, that the environmental management was properly institutionalised (Phil-Eze, 2009:394).
It is man’s development above the animal in an attempted to meet his basic needs that trespassed to upset the natural harmony within the ecosystem.
That is the beginning of environmental conflict.
Environmental conflicts are conflicts induced by environmental degradation which manifests as political, social, economic, ethnic, religious, territorial conflicts or conflicts over resource use, resource control, resource allocation to national interest in which the physical structure or the two parties to the conflict fail to respect one another, observe good judgement in the exploitation, control or development of an environmentally based activity.
The factors of environmental conflicts are difficult to resolve into physical (natural) and human components largely because of the role of man.
However, under the factors of environmental conflict in Nigeria, we have climate, water, flooding, soil erosion, minerals and non-renewable resources, renewable natural resources, mining, agricultural practices, animal husbandry, waste disposal, industrial activities dam construction and environmental refugees.
One important characteristics of the factors outlined above is that they usually induce environmental degradation.
The way and manner in which the various factors enumerated above contribute to environmental degradation and induce conflicts are as follows: Climate: Through global warming and climate change due to emission of greenhouse gases (GHG), leading to sea level rise, catastrophic storms, crop failure, desertification and food insecurity.
The adverse effect of global warming is felt more by the developing countries whose contribution to GHG emission is below 90% that of the developed countries.
This state of affairs induces conflict between the developed and developing world as Renner (1996) pointed out.
The global impact of the environment on human livelihoods is creating a new kind of casualty i.e.
environmental refugees.
Rising sea levels increasing desertification, weather –induced flooding and more frequent natural disasters have become a major cause of population displacement in several parts of Nigeria.
Water: Water resources development such as dam construction for portable water supply or hydro-electric power generation can inundate land, displace population or deplete 32 volume of water downstream.
All these bring undesirable changes to the host communities and induce conflict.
Flood: The control of flood through channelization into neighbouring communities, or farmland or creation of slump in somebody’s land induces conflict between villagers, communities or states in flood prone zones of Nigeria.
Soil Erosion: Anthropogenic activities that induce soil erosion have most often been resisted, especially in grazing land, farm boundaries, in the control of soil erosion and between migrant herdsmen and farmers.
Mining: Mining of on-renewable resources in Nigeria such as tin, oil and gas, gold, limestone, iron ore and kaolin has left the environment badly degraded to the point that the host communities can no longer carry on with their traditional means of livelihood.
This impoverishment of living space and socio-economic activities induces environmental conflict of monumental dimensions as we have witnessed in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria.
Renewable Natural Resources: These are resources such as fertile farmland, timber and non-timber forest products, and wildlife on which the people depend for livelihood.
When overexploited, destroyed or degraded to the point where the people feel deprived or marginalised by those whose interest is at variance with local community or region, it readily generates conflict.
Animal Husbandry: The search for green pasture by cattle herdsmen especially during the dry season, often force them to drive their herds through farmlands.
There, the animals graze and destroy farm crops.
These conflicts are very common in the semi-arid regions of northern Nigeria.
Waste Disposal: The improper disposal of waste can induce conflict at local, state or regional levels.
An example is the toxic waste deposited at Koko, Delta State, in 1988.
It generated such environmental conflict between the community and the state against the local and expatriate company that dumped it until it was removed.
3.1.4 Environment Pollution Environmental pollution has always generated controversies in Nigeria.
The social, economic, political and environmental cost of oil production cannot be overestimated.
Oil related environmental pollution is multidimensional in nature.
Actually, several years of oil 33 exploration, exploitation and production has left the Niger Delta region of Nigeria debased leading to collapse of the ecosystem and traditional means of livelihood.
Effects of oil exploration in the Niger Delta include: Oil Spillage Oil spillage is the most common and controversial of all the environmental impacts of oil exploitation.
Constitutional Rights Project (CRP, 1999) defines oil spills as uncontrolled releases of any product relating to oil production including crude oil, chemicals, or waste caused by equipment failure, operation mishaps, human error, or intentional damage to facilities.
Oil spillage occurs during the drilling of oil wells and as a result of oil pipelines leakages and during the loading of oil into the tankers.
Spills are potentially the most devastating on agricultural land and water resources.
UNDP (2006) reports that much of the environmental pollution in the oil-bearing areas is the result of oil spillage due, essentially, to accidents based on human error and equipment failure.
The report finds that a total of 6,817 oil spills occurred between 1976 and 2001, with a loss of approximately three million barrels of oil.
More than 70% was not recovered.
Approximately 6 % spilled on land, 25 % on swamps and 69% in the offshore environment.
Statistics from the Ministry of Petroleum Resources also indicate that between 1976 and 1996, a total of 4,836 incidents resulted in the spillage of at least 2,446,322 barrels (102.7 million U.S gallons) of which an estimated 1,896,930 barrels (79.7 million U.S gallons) were lost to the environment.
The extent of the impact on the eco system can best be imagined.
Orubu et al., (2004) share this view when they reported that massive oil spills occurring in the riverine areas have done untold damage to the aquatic ecosystem, particularly in the mangrove swamp forest zone.
An average of one oil spill occurs every week and three oil spills are recorded each month in most of the oil- bearing areas of the Niger Delta, in which the proportion lost to the environment is quite disturbing (Babatunde, 2010:3).
Thus, spills lead to the gradual poisoning of the water and the destruction of vegetation and agricultural lands.
In addition, oil spills and pipeline fires are regular features and official estimates are that there are at least 300 incidents each year.
Clearing of oil spillages is not properly carried out; in most cases, the remaining crude oil is set on fire in which case forests and rivers are set ablaze.
Oil spillage has exposed local people to severe hardship, poisoned the land, and polluted water bodies because once a spill occurs, it spreads all over the area, damaging the water and killing aquatic life.
In other words, spills and leaks not only pollute groundwater sources and destroy agricultural lands 34 and fisheries, they also pose an immediate threat to human life.
Incessant oil spills have always been a source of agitation and conflicts in the oil-bearing areas.
Gas Flaring Gas flaring is another major effect of oil exploitation on the environment of the oil-bearing areas and generates air pollution and heat.
Gas flaring is the deliberate burning of natural gas that is produced in the Niger Delta; it creates a ceaseless, high intensity flame.
Natural gas is a by-product of oil extraction, which is removed from the earth crust along with the crude oil.
The World Bank (1995) shows that gas flaring has been known to be the singular highest contributor to the problem of global warming or global climate change.
In the same vein, Orubu (1999) adds that greenhouse gases such as methane and carbon dioxide emitted from gas flares contribute to global warming, which could lead to a rise in sea level, accelerate the problem of climatic change and harsh living conditions on earth if not checked.
It also has negative effects on the immediate environment as it adversely affects plant growth, wildlife, and human beings.
It has been estimated that the total emission of carbon dioxide (CO2) from gas flaring in Nigeria amounts to about 35 million tons per year and it is on record that Nigeria flares the highest amount of gas in the world (World Bank, 1995, 2000/2001).
The percentage of gas flared in Nigeria, which is about three times the OPEC average, is about 16 times the world average.
Compounding the people’s plight is the close proximity of gas flares to residential areas, forests, and waterways, thereby making living unbearable to human beings, terrestrial and aquatic animals.
At the mouth of the canal, from which the open sea is visible from the Awoye community, the distant gas flare illuminates Chevron’s Parabe platform, which is nine kilometres away, and the Ewan platform about two kilometres.
A study of gas flaring in South-Eastern Nigeria by Isiche and Sanford (1976) found that at the global level, flaring in Nigeria contributes a measurable percentage of the world’s total emissions of greenhouse gases.
Specifically, due to the low efficiency of many of the flares, much of the gas is released as methane (which has a high warming potential) rather than carbon dioxide.
At the local level, the low-lying Niger Delta is particularly vulnerable to the potential effects of sea level rising.
Further, air and leaf temperatures increased up to eighty or one hundred meters from the stack, such that species compositions of vegetation are affected.
The most noticeable effect of the flares is light pollution.
Across the oil-bearing areas, the night sky is lit up by flares, which during the rainy season reflect brightly from the clouds.
It is difficult to differentiate between night and day because of the polluted air and burning light.
Communities close to flares complain that the light disturbs nocturnal animals, 35 driving them away from the area.
The economic and health cost of heat emissions from the flares and destruction of vegetation are part of the negative externalities of the wasteful flaring of oil-associated gas.
Indeed, gas flaring has been identified as the major cause of respiratory infection among the Niger Delta people, as well as the cause of reduced growth potentials of farm crops (Egwaikhide and Aregbeyen, 1999).
Though economically sensible for the oil producers, flaring is environmentally destructive.
Flaring of gas in Nigeria for about 50 years has been estimated to constitute a waste of 12.5 million dollars annually, an amount that would have been earned if the oil-associated natural gas was captured, sold, or used as a local energy source.
Drill Cuttings Oil extraction and production lead to the contamination of streams and rivers through the discharge of various materials into the environment during drill cuttings and drilling mud and fluids used for stimulating production.
The major constituents of drill cuttings, such as barite and bentonite clays, when dumped on the ground, prevent local plant growth until natural processes lead to the development of new topsoil.
In water, these materials disperse and sink, thereby suffocating local bottom-living plants and animals by burying them (ANEEJ, 2004).
In addition, air pollution arises during drill cutting from the carbon dioxide discharged into the atmosphere as a result of the cracking of wells (Adewuyi, 2001).
CRP (1999) identifies the chemicals and sludge generated in the oil production process to include oily residues, tank bottom sludge, and obsolete chemicals, which, if not properly treated and disposed of, carry high pollution and health risks.
Van Dissel (1996), cited in HRW (1999) explains that waste also comes in the form of drilling water.
Drilling for oil produces waste, largely mud, which in itself is relatively harmless, but when produced in large quantities can cause problems by changing the acidity or salinity levels of the soil and/or water and by increasing the turbidity of the water.
Therefore, the physical environment is altered in the course of oil wells drilling and vegetation is destroyed.
Canalisation Poorly designed causeways and canals, constructed to bring in heavy drilling equipment, affect the hydrology of the seasonally flooded fresh water swamps and the brackish water of the mangrove forest.
Canals disrupt the delicate hydrological system, especially when they are constructed on the border zone between freshwater and brackish water in the riverine areas; as such, they can disrupt the viability of long-established fishing grounds.
For instance, 36 a canal dug by Chevron near one of the oil-bearing communities in Ilaje area of Ondo State has reportedly caused accelerated erosion near the sea and has destroyed the local hydrological system by allowing saltwater into previous freshwater areas, thereby creating a saltwater marsh in place of much higher biodiversity freshwater swamp.
Since the canalization of the area, salt water from the ocean has completely altered their ecosystem and endangered the community’s means of survival; specifically, the traditional fishing ground and source of drinking water have been wiped out.
These artificial canals not only allow saline waters of the Atlantic into freshwater sources, they also lead to the scarcity of drinking water and kill many species of plants, animals and fishes.
Their construction has precipitously altered the entire ecosystem, as freshwater is destroyed.
Dredging This is another environmental effect of oil exploitation in the oil-bearing areas.
Dredging destroys the ecology of the dredged area where the spoils are dumped.
Although dredged material is, in principle, dumped on land, some of it inevitably washes back into the water, thereby increasing its turbidity and reducing sunlight penetration, which affects plant life and kills fish in the creeks and rivers.
Dredged materials in mangrove areas turns acidic once exposed to oxygen and silt dredged as a result of canalization and dumped on cultivated leaves can decrease farm yields.
Coastal Erosion Coastal erosion affects artificially all the oil-bearing areas of the Niger Delta bordering the Atlantic Ocean.
UNDP (2006) attributed this erosion as partly the result of rising sea levels and strong tidal wave current.
Oil and gas activities have also contributed to the increasing menace of erosion through the construction of canals, shore crossing, pipelines, jetties, and moles.
The sea waves break on the shore; land is erodes and washes into the sea.
Coastal erosion has become a constant threat to many oil-bearing communities sea incursion has led to the displacement of the people who are rendered homeless while their economic activities have been paralyzed.
The youths among them are usually ready-made cannon folders for recruitment into gangs and all sorts of negative networks.
Effluent and Waste from Oil Refineries The discharge of refinery effluents into freshwater sources and farmland devastate the environment and threaten human lives.
Such effluents contain excessive quantities of toxic 37 materials like mercury and chromium.
For instance, fish can store mercury in their brains for a long time and can easily pass this into the human food chain when consumed resulting in adverse effects on human population.
Studies conducted by the environment group, Environmental Rights Action (ERA, 2000), on some oil-bearing communities revealed that most of the underground aquifers are heavily contaminated with a cocktail of dangerous metal and chemicals.
Crude oil contains thousands of different chemicals, many of which are toxic and are known to be carcinogenic with no determined safe threshold for human exposure (HRW, 1999).
Further, materials such as metals, glass, plastic, and crates used by the oil companies, which are later thrown away, have a negative effect on the people and environment.
Atmospheric contaminants from refinery operations, such as oxide of nitrogen, carbon, and sulphur have been found to constitute major waste sources.
Lubrication oils and other wastes in the form of sludge, bitumen, slope, and oil, sand, or sediment are present in large quantities within the oil flow stations, storage terminals and tanks.
Chemical wastes are continuously dumped into the waterways, although the oil companies claim to technically reduce the toxicity of their wastes and properly get rid of them.
Gberesu (1989) opines that a high rate of disposal of fluids from the petroleum industry into the river is responsible for the increased floods experienced in the Niger Delta because the disposal has increased the viscosity of the river thereby reducing velocity.
Oil companies usually discharge production water, already contaminated with oil, directly into the surrounding creeks and rivers without adequate treatment.
Sludge and other lethal chemicals removed from the bottom of storage tanks in the course of maintenance activities are disposed of in the same way.
Oil leaks from storage tanks and equipment are also a regular phenomenon and these, combined with hydrocarbon vapour released and evaporated directly from the tanks themselves, have subjected the soil, rivers, and creeks in the vicinity of the oil terminals to slow but relentless devastation.
All the activities mentioned above have created an environment of frustration, anger and desperation which invariably has snowballed into lingering and volatile restiveness and conflicts in the area.
Exercise 2 Make a list of the environmental protection laws in Nigeria.
4.0 SUMMARY 38  In this lecture we have been able to establish the link between environment and conflict.
It has shown that there is no doubt that environmental factors affect relations between people, particularly with respect to the initiation and escalation of conflict.
We are able to review channels of influence and illustrate with examples areas where such channels have manifested.
5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Comment on the view that exploitation of natural resources and related environmental degradation are significant drivers of conflict in Nigeria.
6.0 REFRENCES UNIT 2 RESOURCES AND CONFLCIT Contents 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 THE POLEMICS OF RESOURCES AND CONFLCITS 3.2 OIL AS A CONFLCIT COMMODITY 3.3 FORMS OF OIL RELATED CONFLICT 4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT REFRENCES 39  1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Text 3.1 The Polemics of Resources and Conflicts Research into the area of natural resources and conflicts has revealed that there is a relationship between natural resources and environment.
A new school of conflict analysis led by Colliers and Hoeffler, Indra de-Soysa and Djankov and Reynal-Querol using economic paradigm to analyse contemporary conflicts in what they dubbed ‘greed-versus-grievance’ have provided in-depth analyses into the relationship between natural resources and conflict.
Using some intra-state conflicts and rebel movements in Africa as case studies, this school of thought argued that there is no causal link between factors such as lack of democracy, inequality and ethnic diversity and occurrence of armed or low-intensity conflict because all societies experience these sort of grievances.
However, the strongest correlation exists between the dependence on primary commodity exports and conflict.
Increased industrial activity and man’s search for environmental resources has intensified and accentuated the patterns of conflicts.
This has led to a different perspective of natural resources conflict, but which still follows the above lines of thought on the nexus between natural resources and conflict.
This perspective argues that natural resources exploration leads to climate change and this eventually snowballs into volatile conflict.
Following the logic that natural resources are products of the environment, for example oil is found in the sea or in the earth, so also are diamonds or gold, their exploration could result in environmental crises, which contribute to climate change, which may eventually lead to conflict (Ayodele, 2010:108).This perspective is better expressed in the studies of Cilliers and Holmberg (2009).
Both argue that natural resources exploration is more likely to produce conflict in resource-rich poor and fragile African states.
Colliers, in particular, take his cue from the UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki Moon, who made a direct link between climate change and resources exploration in the conflict ravaging Darfur, the Sudan.
According to him, amid the diverse social and political causes, the Darfur conflict began as ecological crisis, arising at least in part from climate change.
The changing rainfall pattern since the early 1980s and the resource competition primarily over grazing and water that Arab nomadic herders and black farmers.
By 2003 it 40 has evolved into full-fledged tragedy.
Moon’s statement shows that one of the most tragic conflicts in Africa was fuelled by climate change and natural resources contestation.
Thus, there is an overwhelming correlation between the two issues.
Reinforcing the natural resources-climate conflict argument, the findings of Homer-Dixon, the chief researcher on the Environmental Change and Acute Conflicts Project (ECACP), present another perspective.
He posits that environmental degradation has led to a scarcity in natural resources and is fuelling civil conflicts within the poorest states in the international system.
The Toronto Group and the Swiss Peace Foundation’s Programme in Environmental Conflicts (ENCOP) – represented by the work of Gunther Beachler who spearheaded a vast research programme on ecoviolence – corroborate this position.
From an environmental security perspective, it is argued that ecological transformation alters the socio-political fabric of a society, disrupts productive relationships and ultimately adversely affects the establishment of constraints in and mechanisms of social peace (Ayodele: 109).
Hence, conflict can be generated through the scarcity of resources by encouraging the elites to take possession of the resources, marginalizing the poor and having a debilitating effect on economic and social innovation – what Homer-Dixon terms the ‘ingenuity gap’.
According to Homer-Dixon: Many developing countries face increasingly complex, fast moving and interacting environmental resources scarcities.
These scarcities can overwhelm efforts to produce constructive change and can actually reduce a country’s ability to advocate reform.
Consequently, environmental scarcity sometimes helps to drive society into a self- reinforcing spiral of violence, institutional dysfunction and social fragmentation (Homer-Dixon, 1999: 24-44).
Homer-Dixon captures the situation of contestation in many poor countries experiencing climate change.
Scarcity, on the one hand, and, on the other, the abundance of natural resources have made Africa in general, and Nigeria in particular, worse off in all facets of human development as exploration of the environment for natural resources, and resultant scarcities, have resulted in many conflicts.
The Nigerian situation is compounded by a variety of factors, including poor governance and inadequate or ambiguous land tenure rights.
Exercise 1 41 Outline the positions of the various schools of thought on the relation between natural resources and conflicts 3.2 Oil as a Conflict Commodity Ross (2003) introduced three parameters by which to categorise conflict commodities.
This include lootable versus non-lootable, obstructable versus non-obsrtructable, and legal versus illegal resources.
Based on this categorisation he develops seven hypotheses on the role of these commodities in civil wars.
The first factor lootability refers to the ease by which a resource cn be extracted from the ground.
For example, opium can be grown easily with a minimum in terms of investment (seed), labour and expertise.
Given a conducive climate and sufficient fertile soil, any farm can grow opium with less effort than many other cash crops, accounting for a high lootability factor.
Similarly, alluvia diamond can be extracted from river beds with low outlays in terms of investment and moderate technical know-how, however, at the expense of comparatively high labour costs.
Clearly, both commodities are characterised by a high lootability factor.
In contrast, deep-shaft mining and the exploration and production of oil require a much higher capital investment and substantial geological know-how, making these resources much less accessible to insurgents and therefore less lootable.
This product tends to favour governments and their client list elites rather than rebel or militia groups.
Income from non-lootable resources can have a major impact on the balance of a conflict, as witnessed in Sudan where the surge of oil revenue has allowed the government of Sudan to modernise its armed forces and to tip the scales in the long-standing campaign against the various rebel groups in the South.
Another aspect of the lootability issue is focused on manpower requirements.
According to Ross (2003) resources that are easily lootable are characterised by a high dependency on locally recruited labour.
Alluvial miming for diamonds, gold or coltan presents major employment opportunities for the local population.
While forced or slave labour has been a factor in some countries, more often than not the people working the mines are either being paid or allowed to retain a share of their finds.
This 42 generates income opportunities and an economic trickle-down effect particularly in the absence of other forms of salaried employment in crisis areas.
In contrast, non-lootable resources are usually exploited using comparatively fewer workers and depend on machines for much of the heavy work, i.e.
drilling and excavating.
Given the absence of the necessary technical skills among the local population, international mining companies very often recruit their personnel and security operatives.
Therefore, mines and oil production facilities are usually ‘enclave economies’, entirely dependent on the outside world for workers, spare parts and other inputs with few links to the surrounding communities, which often suffer from the side effects of resources exploitation, such as degradation of the environment, without sharing the profits from it.
As witnessed for example in the Niger Delta, this can be a major cause of conflicts.
Where the grievances are not adequately addressed both by government and the oil companies, this can strengthen the cause of insurgents, calling for secession or resource control as in the case of the Niger Delta.
The next important factor to measure the role of a commodity in financing insurgent operations is obstructability.
This refers to ease with which a conflict party can obstruct he access of a commodity to the markets.
Most natural resources have comparatively little intrinsic value but depend on the demand from the global market.
This includes for example such traditional objects of value as diamonds and gold, which have little practical use beyond serving as ornaments and therefore need access to jeweller’s shops in Europe, North America and Asia, but also for crude oil (which depends on a refinery before being of much use as fuel) or coltan, which plays a role in the production of semi-conductor chips.
As a result, the producer needs access to transportation hubs, such as railways, airfields and ports to ship the commodities to markets usually global markets.
It is important to mention again that some resources have significant advantages over other, the most notable being the weight-value ratio.
Whereas some goods, most notably diamonds, gold and coltan command a high price for comparatively small quantities, other such as oil and gas need to be exported in bulk.
Consequently, diamonds can be fairly easily smuggled out of crisis area, often using human mules for the first part of the journey, while other commodities require the use of trucks, railroads or even pipelines for access to the markets.
Therefore, fixed installations such as pipelines and railway lines are usually rewarding targets for disgruntled groups.
This has been a constant concern for oil companies operating in the Niger Delta.
LOOTABILITY AND OBSTRUCTABILITY OF VARIOUS RESOURCES 43  LOOTABLE NON-LOOTABLE HIGHLY OBSTRUCTABLE - Onshore, remote oil and gas MODERATELY Agricultural products Deep-Shaft Minerals OBSTURCTABLE NON-OBSTRUCTABLE Coca, Opium, Alluvial Gems Deep-shaft gems, Offshore oil and gas SOURCE: Ross Micheal (2003) Natural Resources and Civil War: An Overview.
World Bank Research Observer.
Finally, the legality of a commodity is of relevance, because illegal substances (such as drugs, coca and opium) tend to command high prices on the global market, precisely because they are illegal.
Consequently, rebel groups which are willing to cooperate with organised crime in North America, Europe or even run their own distribution networks abroad, can benefit greatly from this trade.
It is clear from the above that even though oil is a non lootable conflict commodity, insurgent groups can target oil installations, blow up pipelines and kidnap oil workers in an attempt to stop production.
In the Niger Delta, oil workers have been held for ransome by armed groups and oil has been stolen from rigs and pipelines.
For instance, between January and September 2004, there were 581 reported cases of pipeline vandalism and profits from large scale stealing from oil pipelines have been reported to be approximately $1billion per annum with sales primarily to East Asia and West African States.
Exercise 2 3.3 Forms of Oil Related Conflicts Basically oil production has given rise to contradictions at different levels of the Nigerian society, between the states and the oil producing minorities, amongst the oil producing communities, between the elites and the masses of the oil producing communities, between the state and the oil majors, and amongst the oil majors.
However, of these, it is the low intensity conflicts between the state and the oil producing communities and amongst the oil majors and the oil producing communities that is more common.
Find below classification of forms of oil related conflicts prevalent in Nigeria.
44 a) Local and Regional Conflicts based on Socio-Economic Factors: most conflicts related to oil exploration and production stem from the protests of local communities against the ecological degradation and the destruction of traditional lifestyles by the activities of international oil companies.
This is often combined with a feeling of neglect, triggered by the fact that usually only very small portion of the oil revenue is re-invested locally and the lion’s share of profits remains with the central government.
While most protests at this level are initially peaceful, they have the potential to turn into violent confrontations between police, company security agents and locals, often involving acts of sabotage.
b) Criminal Activities against Oil Installations and Personnel: Where oil is produced onshore, or where land-based pipelines are present, ‘bunkering’ (the theft of oil from wells and pipelines) is increasingly becoming a problem for oil companies.
What has often started as a small-scale survival strategy of the local population shows increasingly the characteristics of organised crime, fostered by a climate of lawlessness and underdevelopment, which put a large reservoir of disgruntled youth at the disposal of local warlords.
Oil rigs and workers are seized and held for ransom, and in some cases, politically motivated resistance overlaps with criminal acts.
c) Oil Production as a cause for Separatist Insurgencies: Oil exploration and production is an important factor in triggering secessionist insurgencies.
While these are often based on a set of causes, such as ethnicity, religion or ideology, the promise of becoming an oil rich mini-state, in which the bulk of oil revenue remains with the local political elites rather than with the central bureaucracy in a far-away federal capital plays an important role in building popular support for separatist movements.
d) Oil production in National Wars: As discussed above, oil is different from other resources in being less accessible to insurgent groups battling the government.
However, it dose play an important role in supplying the government with much needed cash to import arms and ammunition during times of conflict.
Naturally, this makes oil installations an attractive target for rebel attacks, with onshore installations being particularly vulnerable.
e) Inter-State Conflicts over Resource Exploitation: In the absence of the necessary financial and technological resources to take oil exploration and production into their own hands, the most important asset for political elites in tapping the lucrative oil 45 sector lies in the claim to sovereignty over the exploration areas.
Given the often poorly mapped border areas in part of the African continent, this holds a lot of potential for inter-state conflicts over conflicting claims on potential oil rich areas.
4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT REFRENCES 46  MODULE 3 UNIT 1 CONFLICT DYNAMICS AND ANALYSIS UNIT 2 CONFLICT RESOLUTION AND MANAGEMENT STYLE UNIT 3 MODELS OF CONFLICT RESOLTUION, TRANSFROMATION AND MANAGEMENT IN NIGERIA UNIT 1 CONFLCIT DYNAMICS AND ANALYSIS Contents 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 DEFINITION OF CONFLICT DYNAMICS AND ANALYSIS 3.2 BASIC STEPS IN CONFLCIT ANALYSIS 3.3 METHODS OF CONFLICT ANALYSIS 47 4.0 Summary 5.0 Self- Assessment Exercise REFRENCES 1.0 Introduction The global system is replete with myriad of both tractable and seemingly intractable conflict situations.
As demonstrated in other lectures, the causes of these conflicts are multifarious and diversifying.
Just as the causes of the conflicts are multifarious, approaches to analysing and understanding their dynamics also varies.
Some help in solving the issues while some other contribute to the protracted nature of the conflicts.
Therefore, the major focus of this lecture is to expose the student to various approaches of conflict analysis and dynamics.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this lecture, you should be able to: State the differences between conflict dynamics and conflict analysis State why conflict analysis is important and identify the components of conflict analysis and conflict dynamics.
3.0 Main Text 3.1 Definition of Conflict Dynamic and Analysis Fisher et al defines conflict analysis as those activities that are undertaken by any person doing anything, either directly or indirectly, to know as much as possible about what is going on in a given conflict.
According to Albert (2001), conflict analysis has to do with a critical review, interpretation and explanation of what is observed and recorded about the conflict 48 situation.
It is graphic representation of the findings gathered from a conflict situation so as to present a precise documentation of the nature of the conflict in question.
Conflict analysis is a process that embraces both internal and external efforts of stakeholders and interested individuals to bring about the understanding of the interpretation of the situation.
(Idasa: 2007) agrees that conflict analysis acts as a lead way to understanding the components of the conflict situation and what peaceful methods could be applied.
In other words, conflict analysis is to gain a good understanding of the problem areas in which external organisations can make a meaningful contribution to reducing the potential for conflict and advancing the peace process.
It is an action-oriented analysis of the causes and dynamics of a conflict and of the starting points for peaceful management and overcoming of a conflict.
Conflict analysis is an important process for the following reasons: • It helps in understanding the causes and development of a conflict.
• It enables mediators know the parties involved in the conflict, their level of strength and influences.
• It helps mediator to be equipped with a better understanding of the context of the conflict in question.
• It assists mediators to have an idea of what the needs, interests and positions of the disputants are.
• There is need to identify the external stakeholders in the conflict and this is one function conflict analysis undertakes.
• It enables the intervener identify the entry points to the conflict.
• It gives a better insight into the issues of the conflict and how it could be resolved.
Conflict Dynamics In every conflict situation there is a progression of the emergence of the conflict in question.
The creation of supports, the consolidation of positions in the conflict and breakdown in communication are some of the evolutionary processes of every conflict situation.
Finances, time and external stakeholders are made available while objectives and 49 goals surrounding the conflict are misplaced.
The steps put down here are present in most conflicts.
They act as guide to identifying the nature of a conflict.
This, however, does not imply that there is a stereotype way of addressing conflict situations.
Konteh (2006) agrees that conflict prevention is emerging as central strategy that seeks to integrate efforts of all those working for peace.
Community leaders, women groups, journalists’ business men and women, students and teachers have demonstrated that their influence could sometimes extend beyond that of soldiers, politicians and diplomats.
Conflict dynamic takes the form of conflict analysis designed on the a) History of the relationship.
b) The primary and secondary actors.
c) The structures (factional goals, attitudes and behaviours).
d) The intensity 9low, moderate or extreme violence).
e) Strategies adopted by parties, including communication patterns and interactions between parties.
f) The pattern of regime responses and g) The facilities of conflict transformation.
Exercise 1 Distinguish between conflict dynamics and conflict analysis 3.2 BASIC STEPS IN CONFLICT ANALYSIS STEP ONE: Analysis of Key Conflict Factors The first step in appreciating and tackling conflicts is the understanding what (undp.org: Inter-agency framework for conflict analyses in transition situations) refers to as proximate conflict factors.
This is particularly important to ensure that transition programmes militate against the impact of violent conflict over short term.
Also important is the analysis of structural conflict factors, in order to ensure that its input becomes assets for long-term peace building and development.
Also (undp.org), emphasise that in the process of analysis, it nay be useful to identify more immediate conflict triggers, in order to better anticipate possible 50 events or processes that may spark violence in the process of transition and to design a transition strategy which reflects such conflict dynamics.
STEP TWO: Active Analysis Actors can alos be stake holders in a conflict.
It consists of primary, secondary and external stake holders.
The primary stake holders are made up of those directly affected in the conflict such as women, children and the elderly.
They are the most vulnerable during conflict therefore, their interest should be considered in analysing conflict situation.
The government agencies, militants, politicians, civil societies and clergies fall into the secondary stakeholder category.
They often act as mediators and are expected to use their personal areas of influence in quelling down the situation.
According to (Idasa, 2007), external stakeholders are made up of governments, multi-national companies and donor agencies that have indirect interest in the conflict.
They possess framework conditions required for a successful resolution.
Therefore, this step compliments step one above, especially the analysis of key proximate and structural conflict factors in a given transition situation, with an actor based assessment that focuses on shorter-term interests and motivations.
According to (undp.org), people are central to understand how groups become polarised around key conflict issues, as well as what drives the interest of those promoting violent conflict.
By providing an understanding of the potential risks associated with engaging with internal and external actors, this may also help address the issue of interlocutors and partners, with whom support agencies (local and international) interact, both in humanitarian and development terms, in transition situations.
Particularly the actor mapping will be centred on analysis of the following: a) Their stated interests b) Their hidden agendas c) Their relationships with other actors, at various levels, and their perceptions of such interrelationships d) Their resources that they still require, in order to realise their agenda.
Meanwhile, it is important o note that when actors, as well as the roles they play in a given context are equally of critical importance and must be carefully delineated.
51 Table 1: Actors Analysis Matrix Actors Stated Hidden Connects/with Resources Resources Interests Agenda Contradicts they have they need with Local Sub-National National Regional International SOURCE: Inter-agency Framework for Conflict Analysis in Transition Situations, November 2004:9 http://www.undp.org/cpr/documents/prevention/interagency framework STEP THREE: Analysis of Capacities for Peace Basically, the term capacities for peace refer to structures, processes and institutions that exist in society in order to peacefully and constructively manage conflict.
These include: informal approaches to conflict resolution, role of traditional authorities, strong civil society, a culture of tolerance, role of the judiciary, inter-village meetings, traditional courts, truth commissions, etc.
While spoilers pose potent threat to long term peace building, if not adequately addressed within the framework of traditional strategy and programming, identifying capacities for peace may prove equally critical to further define entry points for UN transition programmes.
In line with undp.org, the three steps presented above are not mutually exclusive and exhaustive but represents recurring stages for conflict analysis in most conflict-prone areas.
3.3 METHODS OF CONFLICT ANALYSIS One major way of analysing a conflict situation that could lead to a peaceful management if properly and sincerely done by the bodies involved in the peace process, is by applying the 52 following methods: conflict mapping, systematic questioning, circular questions/changes in perspective.
However we shall elaborate on one.
Conflict Mapping: Albert (2002) describe conflict mapping as the initial snap shot.
It enables the inventor know the timing and his method of gaining entry into the conflict at hand.
This method evaluates the object of the conflict, for instance, conflict of interests, conflict of needs, conflict of values, conflict of identity, ideological conflict, conflict of beliefs and conflict of judgment.
Circles are used to represent a party in conflict mapping method.
The size of the circle used in the process of conflict mapping will determine the extent of power of the parties concerned.
The information given in mapping is updated from time to time.
This is referred to as ‘Conflict Tracking’.
Tracking in this sense means to monitor, observe and record the trend of change and continuity in the conflict process.
It serves as a guide to what the seriousness of the conflict looks like and if there is any room for resolution.
Each track has opportunities loaded in it.
In understanding this process, the most important track is dealt with and others fall in naturally.
The numbering done in conflict mapping also represents the tracking of a conflict.
With this, the inventor will be able to note down the relationship shared amongst the parties (Albert, 2000).The illustration below, indicates levels of relationship shared by warring parties when applying conflict mapping.
53  This method as the name suggests, represents the various layers by which a conflict situation is made up of and how it should be approached.
The intervenor is expected to dig through these layers to be able to identify the appropriate desire of the warring parties.
The intervener does not have to rely on the position (outer layer) alone.
The intervener is expected to go farther down to the inner layer to know the people’s needs.
Most times they are hidden in order for the opponents not to identify their areas of vulnerability.
The adoption of this layer 54 becomes necessary because, their major aim of fighting lies here and not at the positional or interest angle which are sometimes used as means of attracting attention tot their plight/protest.
Most times, these last two are posed as camouflage.
A high level of communication with the disputants should be maintained by the inventor.
This would enable the intervener extract some truth from them.
In ABC triangle below, the cause of the conflict affects the attitude of those directly involved in the conflict and the changed attitude will then lead to a change in behaviour in most cases.
This change in behaviour is the stage of fight, yelling, argument, chaos and so on.
When this happens, it brings about what is referred to as circle of pain amongst the warring parties.
On the other hand, when the bone of contention is properly handled and it brings about positive change, then there is what is called circle of change.
In this situation, the parties involved are happy and progress is made.
In this method of conflict analysis, the intervener will have to go back to the cause of the problem in order to be able to change the attitude of the disputants and automatically, their behavioural pattern will change.
The change of one stage will naturally allow other stages fall into place.
Therefore, no stage should be ignored when adopting this method of conflict analysis.
(Attitude-change emotion) A A B BB C (Change behaviour) (Context /Cause) 55  P (Process) (Problem)P P (People) The second triangle is a demonstration of what is called PPP method of conflict analysis.
Under the first P, the intervener is interested in the people involved in the conflict, people affected, the parties structures, issues of change, their perception of one another in the conflict and the level of communication links shared by these parties.
The second P represents process which oversees the process of resolution that each party want to adopt.
Is there any historic link to the issues of contention?
The intervener would also concern himself with the emerging issues of contention (if any and if different from the past issues).
The nature of their present relationship should also be analysed here.
What factors are capable of escalating the conflict and the roles played by each party in doing this should equally be introduced, while adopting this style of conflict analysis.
The third P represents problem considering the parties interests, positions, needs, ideologies and how uncompromising they are with each party.
The basic issues surrounding their agreements should be considered here also.
The available resources for funding peace processes and the timing for this should equally be addressed under this P. The stage of escalating and de-escalating of the conflict should be carefully studied at this stage.
The essence is to know the right time and right conflict management approach to apply on the 56 parties.
In all of these Ps, the intervener would also have to put into consideration, the least important points of resolution the parties involved may accept during peace processes.
Exercise 2 What is the essence of conflict analysis?
4.0 Summary This lecture interrogates the basic issues relating to conflict dynamics and analysis.
One important point to note about conflict dynamics is that, most times, the needs of disputants are identified and ignored by stakeholders therefore creating room for conflict situation.
By analysis we refer to a detailed study of any conflict situation using specific frameworks, paradigms and methods.
It equally refers to the study of a problem, which aims to bring about a patterned and systematic understanding of certain issues under focus.
In general, to analyse is to break down a given system or sub-set with a view to enhancing appreciation and understanding of the given phenomenon.
5.0 Self- Assessment Exercise Using a typical conflict situation as a case, apply a method of conflict analysis of your choice in interpreting the conflict REFRENCES 57  UNIT 2 CONFLICT RESOLUTION AND MANAGEMENT Contents 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 CONCEPTUALISING CONFLICT RESOULTION 3.2 CONCEPTUALISING CONFLICT MANAGEMENT 3.3 CONCEPTUALISING CONFLICT TRANSFORMATION 4.0 Summary 5.0 Self- Assessment Exercise REFRENCES 1.0 Introduction Equipping oneself with the knowledge of the nature of conflicts and how to manage them is very essential in order to avert conflict situations in the society.
In an attempt to achieve the above stated objective it is important to know that basic concepts of conflict are an expanse.
It is not limited to conflict bound processes but also problem solving processes such as, conflict resolution, conflict management, and conflict transformation.
A proper understanding of these concepts would contribute to our understanding the problem solving tools required to achieve a security friendly environment.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this lecture, you should be able to: • Explain the various terms in your own words.
58 • Discuss the theoretical and practical issues in conflict management and resolution • Analyse the differences between the various concepts.
3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 Conceptualising Conflict Resolution Conflict resolution is often confused with the term conflict resolved.
Conflict resolution is primarily not conflict resolved, but agenda setting on peace principles.
It is defined by Heitler as “the attainment of a solution that satisfies the requirement of all the seemingly conflicting forces and thereby, produces a feeling for all participants”.
Wallenstein (2008) defines conflict resolution as a situation where the conflicting parties enter into an agreement that solves their central incompatibilities, accept each other’s continued existence as parties and cease all violent acts against each other.
It is essentially aimed at intervention to change or facilitate the course of a conflict.
According to Albert (2001) conflict resolution serves three purposes namely: minimization of chances of destructive conflicts, stabilization of cessation of destructive conflicts sa as to prevent escalation, and prevention of outbreak of a full-blown conflict done by uprooting the basic reasons for the conflict.
According to Heitler (1990) a “cooperative process of conflict resolution must entail the following: a) The Positions: These should be made known.
These are the initial statements of the warring parties as regards to what they want and are saying.
b) Explore Underlying Concerns: These are the concerns of the parties.
These interests are lying behind the initial positions made known and act as stepping stones to addressing the issues at stake.
c) Joint-Problem Solving: this should be practical in the true sense of it.
It involves selecting mutual satisfying solutions.
This is when the two warring parties cooperatively explore their underlying concerns and work out ways of attaining a resolution.
According to Heitler, the exploration of their underlying concerns and interests often disclosed that conflict actually involves concerns and complementary.
59 The solutions should equally complement each other’s needs irrespective of their incompatibility.
Conflict resolution can be both formal and informal.
Also, it can either aim at resolving to terminating conflicts in an open and predictable process in accordance with legal principles or focus on efforts to increase cooperation among the parties to a conflict and deepen their relationship by addressing the conditions that led to the dispute, fostering positive attitudes and allying distrust through reconciliation initiatives, and building or strengthening the institutions and processes through which the parties interact.
Conflict resolution tends to emphasise intervention by skilled but powerless third parties working unofficially with parties to foster new thinking and new relationships.
It is important to note that there is no ready-made conflict resolution for every conflict.
It differs from one conflict case to the other.
However, through exhibiting various styles and approaches, conflicts can be handled.
It is a process that requires more of a cooperative, dialoguing and joint problem solving processes.
In all of these, it is important to note that, the essence of conflict resolution is to uproot the major cause of the conflict in question.
Exercise 1 In your own word, state the purposes of conflict resolution.
3.2 Conceptualising Conflict Transformation In 3.1 above, we discussed the concept of conflict resolution but can conflict really be resolve?
Is conflict resolution a realizable goal?
Or is it an ideal situation to which we may strive?
The word resolution suggests that conflict is a bad social phenomenon which should be removed because of its assumed destructive outcomes.
Conflict energizes and motivates social change, and since its resolution may not always be possible, or at times even necessary, some scholars prefer to use the concept of conflict management or conflict transformation.
60 According to Botes (2001), conflict transformation is a prescriptive concept.
It suggests that left alone, conflict can have destructive consequences.
However, the consequences can be modified or transformed so that self-image, relationships, and social structures improve as a result of conflict instead of being harmed by it.
In the words of Botes, transformation involves transforming the way conflict is expressed.
It may be expressed competitively, aggressively or violently, or it may be expressed through non-violent advocacy, conciliation, or attempted cooperation.
He agrees that activism is important in early stages of a conflict to raise people’s awareness of an issue.
According to hi, activism uses non-violent advocacy to escalate and confront conflict.
At this point Lederach, (1981:14) argues that once awareness and concern is generated, then mediation can be used to transform the expression of conflict from mutually destructive modes toward dialogue and interdependence.
Conflict transformation as introduced in the literature by Lederach (1995) draws on familiar concepts of conflict management and resolution.
Miall(2001) defines conflict transformation as a process of engaging with transforming the relationship, interest, discourses and, if necessary, the very constitution of society that supports the continuation of violent conflict.
It recognises that conflicts are transformed gradually, through a series of smaller or larger changes as well as specific steps by means of which a variety of actors may play important roles.
It was in this regards that Lederach had argued that conflict transformation must actively envision, include, respect and promote the human and cultural resources form within a given setting.
This involves a new set of lenses through which we do not primarily see that the setting and the people in it as the problem and the outsider is the answer.
According to Lederach, we understand the long-term goal of transformation as validating and building on people and resources within the setting.
He further emphasised that transformation takes place at different levels and has a number of dimensions.
61 At the personal level, it involves emotional, perceptual and spiritual aspects of change desired for the individual.
It also affects relationship touching on communication between parties that need to affect structures that generate conflict through deprivation, exclusion and other forms of injustice.
TYPES OF TRANSFORMATION: Miall identified different types of conflict transformation.
They are: a) Context Transformation: This refers to changes in the context of conflict that may radically alter each party’s perception of the conflict situation, as well as their motives.
b) Structural Transformation: This refers to changes in basic structure of the conflict, which is to the set of actors, their issues, incompatible goals and relationships, or to the society, economy or state with which the conflict is embedded.
Miall argued that asymmetric conflicts cannot be transformed, without changing the unbalanced and contested relationships that lie at their roots.
c) Actor Transformation: This concerns the transformation of positions that parties take on key issues at the heart of the conflict as well as the way in which, parties redefine or reframe those positions in order to reach compromises or resolutions.
d) Personal Changes of Heart or Mind Set of Individual leaders or Groups: This is a kind of personal transformation that affects attitude, memory, behaviour and relationships.
Of note is the fact that of all the group usually involved in conflict transformation activities, Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) have been found to be more active.
They often seek an in-depth understanding of the roots of conflict, and most of the time, work closely with people both within and 62 outside the conflict parties.
The seek open space for dialogue, sustain local and national conferences as well as workshops on paths towards peace, identify opportunities for development and engage in peace building, relationship building and institutional building over the longer term.
(Otite, 2001:10) summaries conflict transformation to mean a complex web of interdependence factors, i.e.
the parties concerned, social relationships, the changing positions and roles of interveners, and the moderation of planned and unintended consequences .
Otite further agrees with Lederach that “Conflict transformation represents a comprehensive set of lenses for describing how conflict emerges from, evolves within and brings about changes in the personal, relational, structural and cultural dimensions, and for developing creative responses that promote peaceful change within those dimensions through non- violent mechanisms”.
Exercise 2 Outline the steps required for true conflict transformation Conceptualising Conflict Management Most literature on conflict management argues that conflicts are ineradicable consequences of differences of values and interest with and between communities.
The propensity for violence according to them arises from existing institutions and historical relationships, as well as from the established distribution of power.
Resolving such conflicts is viewed as unrealistic arguing that the best that can be done is to manage and contain them and occasionally reach a historic compromise in which violence may be laid aside and normal politics resumed.
According to Miall (2001), conflict management is the art of appropriate intervention to achieve political settlements, particularly by those powerful actors having the power and resources to bring pressure on the conflicting parties in order to induce them to settle.
It is also the art of designing 63 appropriate institutions to guide the inevitable conflicts into appropriate channels.
According to Yaqub (2001) conflict management is “process that requires the services of the warring parties or a third person----the third party may be an individual, a national or international institution”.
Bloomfield and Reilly (1998) see conflict management as the positive and constructive handling of differences and divergence.
It addresses the more realistic question of managing conflict such as, how to deal with it in a constructive way, how to bring a practical, achievable, cooperative system for the constructive management of differences.
Boutros-Ghali (1993) sees conflict management to span the broad spectrum of peace processes such as early warning systems, conflict prevention, peace- making, peacekeeping, peace enforcement and post conflict peace building for intervention.
Conflict management is geared towards capacity building remedies to support peace processes and the initiative may arise from a complex mix of NGOs, bilateral and multilateral regional and universal initiatives.
It is a wider concept involving conflict resolution and conflict transformation when necessitated, and it is more of a long-term arrangement involving institutionalised provisions and regulative procedures for dealing with conflict whenever they occur.
Albert (2001) points out curative (reducing) versus preventive (avoiding) as the two major therapies that can be applied in managing conflict situation.
Conflict management should not only start off when there is conflict.
Conflict by nature, could come up at any point in time and it is very imperative the necessary tools be put in place in order to manage the situation properly.
According to the Conflict Resolution Stakeholder Network (CRESNET, 2001) “---- having a positive approach to conflict helps one to manage it in a constructive manner with positive results like, dialogue, development, change, understanding, 64 friendship, improved communication, progress, peace, love and relationship building”.
Early Warning System of Conflict Management: A system is seen as structured elements organised in terms of specific functionality.
Strategically, an early warning capacity is the management integration of expert local knowledge with existing specialised systems and processes of emergency management service.
Emergency management stakeholders assess the functionality and integration of these systems and processes for fitness of purpose relative to a specific hazard.
An early warning capability provides for preparedness, response and mitigation mechanism needed to deal with emergency needs.
Early warning emphasises the need to improve and optimise not only the science and technology, and human capability in the entire range of interactions that support emergency management.
It is the conscious social attempt to use science and technology to accurately detect, interpret and report a hazard event at the earliest possible moment (Hall, 2007:33).
The community and emergency managers need communication technology infrastructure that integrates traditional methods of communication to relay and transmit emergency information to every community, person at risk and risk managers.
Early warning system is thus an accurate descriptor for the functionality provided by specialised science and technology based system and processes, such as those focused on the detection and interpretation of hazard events, or issuing alerts and warning for those events.
The idea is to improve and optimise information through vigilance and participation, augment and confirm the information from the scientific or technical systems with local knowledge.
According to online dictionary, EWS is a “system or procedure designed to warn of a potential or an impending problem”.
It was first used for the purpose of predicting natural disaster and stock market crashes.
In the 1980s, it was 65 introduced to predict famine and potential refugee flow.
This early warning was primarily to alert relief agencies of impending humanitarian crises to allow for contingency planning and ensure the timely provision of adequate food, shelter and medication.
As a form of conflict management, its application is to keep a close watch over the activities that could lead to conflict (pre-conflict) situations, those that could escalate an existing conflict (on-going conflict) and also to monitor activities during and after ceasefire (post-conflict).
The activities being monitored are those of the group that make up the society and those involved in the conflict in question.
“It is a network of sensing devices such as a satellites or radar, for detecting an enemy attack in time, to take defensive or counter-offensive measures” (Wali, 2008: 216).
It could also take the form of observer mission.
This entails the use of military personnel, civilian police and indigenes that make up that society.
The concept of EWS comprises the following: • Collection of information using specific indicators.
• Analysis of information-attaching meaning to indicators, setting it into context and recognising crisis development.
• Formulation of best and worst case scenarios and response options.
• Communication to decision makers and the targets (Ifesinachi, 2009:106).
Most part of the world presently rely more on the reactive stage of controlling conflict situations.
One of the responsibilities of EWS should be that of taking into serious consideration, the negative signs of the conflict situation.
The essence of this, is to assist the necessary institution prepare appropriate and sustainable measure suitable for the prevention and curative of such conflicts.
This approach should not be “seen as an end in itself, but rather, as a tool for preparedness, prevention and mitigation of conflicts” (Yaqub, 2001: 12).
In 66 reference to the above statement, a publication of the Institute for Peace and Conflict Resolution (2000), confirms that early warning system could “prevent conflicts of catastrophic dimension at every level…Nigeria has a plethora of potential conflicts and that the main tool of response, military force will produce long term solutions nor strengthen democracy”.
Peace education can also be introduced as one of the mechanisms of EWS so as to impart knowledge of peaceful methods to people in general.
The extensive involvement of the National Environmental Standards and Regulation Agency (NESREA) should also be considered as a EWS to assist in managing and probably averting conflict situations that might ensure between oil companies and hot communities as a result of environmental degradation.
4.0Summary Understanding the basic concepts aimed at problem solving such as, conflict resolution, conflict transformation and conflict management is a very essential ingredient as we plan to achieve sustainable peace.
Conflict resolution and transformation is analytically both a state of affairs and a process.
As a process, conflict resolution and transformation come to about the same changing phenomenon, defined by several planned and unforeseen intervening variables which requires an equally dynamic phenomenon of conflict management.
This viewpoint indicates that conflict, as a process, is managed to avoid its escalation, reduce its instances or degree of anger and criminal misconduct.
And if conflict is so managed to produce peace, such a built-up peace may not be a permanent condition, especially if such a particular conflict was a symptom or part of a large aggregate of conflicts, existing between communities.
Therefore, conflict management which is designed as a long-term tool is important as a means of coping with the processes of resolving or transforming conflict.
67 5.0 Self- Assessment Exercise What do you understand by the terms, conflict resolution, conflict transformation and conflict management?
REFRENCES 68 UNIT 3 MODELS OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION AND MANAGEMENT IN NIGERIA Contents 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN TEXT 3.1 APPROACHES TO CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.2 TRADITIONAL METHODS OF CONFLCIT RESOLUTION 3.3 NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT’S METHOD OF CONFLCIT RESOLUTION 3.4 NGOS AND CONFLCIT RESOLUTION 4.0 Summary 5.0 Self- Assessment Exercise REFRENCES 1.0 Introduction In the last lecture we discussed three different concepts of problem solving during conflict situation at the conceptual level.
It is important also to note that resolution is very different from settlement.
While, settlement merely reduces the intensity of conflicts, resolution removes the very ground of conflicts.
It provides an opportunity to interact with the parties concerned with the hope of at least reducing the scope, intensity and effects of conflicts.
During formal or informal meetings, conflict resolution exercises permit a re-assessment of views and claims as a basis for finding options to crisis and to divergent points of view.
Those who organise conflict resolution exercises usually constitute third party such as, traditional rulers, modern sectoral leaders, outstanding opinion leaders, etc.
It is the activities of those third parties that is the focus of this lecture.
69 2.0 Objectives At the end of this lecture, you should be able to: • Identify the approaches to conflict resolution.
• Discuss traditional methods of conflict resolution with examples.
• Discuss the role of government in conflict resolution with examples.
• Define and give examples of NGOs.
• Discuss the roles of NGOs in conflict resolution.
3.1 Approaches to Conflict Resolution According to Albert (2001) conflicts are responded to in three possible ways in any society: by avoidance, confrontation and problem-solving.
Avoidance means a situation where a group alleging injustice or discrimination is literally ignored or denied recognition by those being accused and those who have the capacity for helping to redress the injustices done to the group.
Avoidance, as observed by Wilmot and Hocker (1998:114 cited in Albert, 2001), is characterised by “denial of the conflict, equivocation, changing and avoiding topics, being non-committal, and joking rather than dealing with the conflict at hand”.
This kind of response to a conflict situation compounds problems as the party that is avoided will later seek other means of getting listened to such as violence.
Avoidance allows conflict situations to seem resolved on the surface only to come up later more intense.
Confrontation is a very common response to conflict in Nigeria.
However, from previous lectures we have been able to establish that confrontation i.e.
violence hardly resolves a conflict rather it compounds it.
This brings us to the third possible way; problem-solving.
Problem-solving according to (Albert, 2001) refers to the situation in which the parties to a conflict either by themselves or through the assistance of a third 70 party, find solutions to their problems in a cordial environment.
Problem- solving procedure is non-judgemental and highly participatory in nature.
It promotes co-operation between antagonists who jointly analyse the structure of the conflict and carefully work out strategies for reconciling with each other.
The dominant question in a problem-solving setting is, how can the parties to a conflict peacefully work together in the community they both own and share with one another?
How do the groups develop relational empathy?
Or to be more specific, how do the two cultures merge into the production of a ‘third culture’ Third culture according to Broome (1993:104 cited in Albert, 2001: 35) can only occur in a conflict situation “through interaction in which participants are willing to open themselves to new meanings, to engage in genuine dialogue, and to constantly respond to the new demands emanating from the situation”.
It is an essential prerequisite for conflict resolution.
This approach is popularly considered to be the best method of dealing with conflict as its outcomes are usually self-supporting in the sense that it is advantageous to all parties in the dispute.
It empowers the parties, meet their vital needs for identity and security and lay the foundation for a stable and cooperative relationship consistent with the welfare and development of each party.
According to Lederach (1997) problem solving procedures can be introduced into a conflict by using three main approaches namely: Top-down: The peacemakers in the top-down approach are usually eminent personalities with public profiles.
The work of these people is usually backed by the government or international organisations considered neutral in the conflict.
The peacemakers in this kind of setting shuttle between the top-level leaders of the conflict believing that any agreement reached with these people will trickle down the line.
This approach hardly yield positive dividends in Nigeria because the youths are usually in charge of the conflicts and the traditional rulers with whom top-down peacemaker might want to strike a deal with have been 71 discredited.
For instance, to an average Niger Delta Youth, the elders or traditional rulers of his community is considered a sell-out.
They are accused of being easily compromised or settled by government and oil companies.
Middle-Range: This approach is based on the understanding that those who lead community conflicts belong to the middle range and that if properly integrated in the peace process, might be very instrumental in facilitating sustainable peace.
This approach is the one favoured by the protagonists of the problem-solving model of conflict management.
This approach can be operationalized in three different stages; through conflict management training, problem solving workshops and establishment of peace commissions or committees.
The closest Nigeria has moved in this approach to conflict intervention is the occasional constitution of panels of inquiry into community conflicts and the on-going Niger Delta Amnesty Programme.
The advantage of the middle-range approach consists in the fact that those involved in the peace process can easily liaise with the high-level leaders of the conflict as well as the grassroots population about peace terms available to their society.
Grassroots or Bottom-up: The grassroots population in any society usually has an intimidating numerical strength.
Peace initiatives developed from this point could be intimidating to leaders of a conflict.
Peace initiatives come directly from the people either because they are tired of fighting or because they can no longer cope with the costs of continued hostility.
The best way to sustain a grassroots peace agreement is to follow it up with a problem solving workshop or conflict transformation training for the affected parties on how to respond constructively to future conflicts.
Exercise 1 Mention the advantages of problem-solving procedure to conflict.
72 3.2 TRADITIONAL METHODS OF CONFLCIT RESOLUTION It is very dangerous to relegate culture to the background in conflict resolution.
Although culture is a marker of social differences, it should not be regarded as an obstacle to conflict resolution in multi-ethnic societies.
More often, people interpret social action and social reality through their indigenous conceptions and knowledge therefore understanding the local indigenous theories of conflicts is essential to their solution.
The importance of this observation rests on the fact that many inter-ethnic conflicts in Nigeria are based on historical grounds, ethno-philosophy and even myths surrounding original and settlers claims to land, water and grazing land resources in contemporary times.
Nader (1968) identifies three major structural levels at which conflict occur i.e.
intra-family, intra-community and inter-community.
This anthropological insight indicates that there are also institutional means for conflict resolution even in the traditional societies.
According to Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940, cited in Otite and Albert, 2001:8), “conflict resolution in non-western societies is not necessarily identified with specialised political offices”.
Commenting further, Nader points out that other means or agencies of resolving or regulating conflicts in indigenous societies.
They include diviners, shaman, chief priests, and town and village councils.
Often referred to as council of elders when seated according to designated order, they make pronouncements that shift rapidly from political judicial to conflict resolution.
The elders may not have physical power to enforce decisions, but they rely on leaders of various age- grades or youth associations to bring about and monitor peace on the basis of the negotiated terms in particular conflicts.
Town council or elders council are agents of conflict resolution because of the people’s surviving confidence, trust and reliance on culture as a means of rallying and mobilizing people to behave in patterned ways.
73 Traditional religious beliefs and practices are still strong even among practitioners of Islam and Christianity in Nigeria for example.
The world of ancestors is usually considered an extension of the world of the living and the supernatural beings are part of system of thoughts in virtually all the various groups that constitute Nigeria.
Ancestors and predecessors, royal and non- royal like other deities and shrines, are believed to impose decisive rightful verdicts in controversial issues of conflict within and between communities.
For example, kolanut hospitality are cultural instruments in the various Nigerian societies that had been employed to settle intra-family and inter-ethnic conflicts in the open glare of an attentive audience in town or village squares or at the shrines of common deities, ancestors and predecessors.
By so doing, they involve the living and the dead in the process.
Also the use of African hospitality, commensality, reciprocity and belief system, use of common language and metaphor often make positive contributions to conflict resolution.
The traditional systems of conflict resolution have stronger potency of handling conflicts because both adjudication and mediation reduces protracted conflicts and enhances everybody’s satisfaction with the decisions.
They also reduce the re-occurrence of conflicts.
As in modern westernized situations, those involved must be capable of demonstrating patience, sincerity, wit, physical endurance, wisdom and probing skills.
Whereas these attributes involve trained specialists in some cases in modern societies, the traditional African conflict management profile generally involves almost everybody with authority in several areas of life in the society.
According to Elias (1963), Schapera (1956) and Gluckman (1967) (all cited in Otite and Albert, 2001: 339), the principles involvrd in the resolution, transformation and management of conflict are associated with the customary systems of government and justice.
African societies in general have demonstrated how judgement and justice can be used to resolve conflicts and 74 disputes.
This is achieved in the process of sitting in council (with political roles) and turning it to court (with judicial roles), rulers target and achieve compensation, restitution and reconciliation.
This practise under the control of the same actors, in which political authority strengthens judicial decisions, is an important way of pleasing and satisfying various parties in a conflict.
75
