 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: AEM512 COURSE TITLE: RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION AEM512 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Course Team Dr. B.O.
Ovwigho (Writer/Developer) - DELSU Prof. A. Adebanjo (Programme Leader) - NOUN Dr. N. E. Mundi (Coordinator) - NOUN ii AEM512 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-191-X All Rights Reserved iii AEM512 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Course Overview………...........…………………….............……….. 1 Schedule of Activities ………………….......................….………….
1 Aims of the Course……………………….......................…………... 1 Course Objectives……………………........................……………… 1 Study Units………………………………........................………….. 2 Unit Structure …………………………….......................………….. 3 Assessment…………………………….......................……………... 4 Important Dates……………………........................………………… 4 Conclusion ……………………….........................………………….. 4 iv  Course Overview This course, “Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension (AEM512)” is a one-semester, 2-credit unit course taught in the fifth year of the Agricultural Extension Management Programme leading to the award of the B. Sc Degree in Agricultural Extension Management of the National Open University of Nigeria.
It is taught to all students registered for the degree programme.
The course consists of a total of 13 study units.
Schedule of Activities The course is made up of 13 units.
Each unit consists of activities which are expected to be covered in one study week.
A topic which is highly loaded may be broken down and treated under two or more units.
However, some topics may be longer because they contain ideas which cannot be separated into units.
Learners are expected to study each unit on their own.
You are expected to attend weekly tutorials at your study centre where tutorial facilitators (tutors) are available to clarify issues and assist in your understanding of the instructional content.
Aims of the Course The broad aim of the course is to enable the learners appreciate the various rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
These programmes which are primarily designed for the development of the youth and agriculture need to be understood by every agricultural extension worker.
To this end, it is expected that the learner should be able to appreciate the efforts of the federal and state governments in fostering agricultural development through youth involvement.
The course starts by introducing you to the various definitions of the youth.
This will enable you know your target audience and come up with an operational definition of youth.
The history, objectives and philosophy of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension will be discussed.
Selected rural youth programmes in Nigeria and other countries will also be discussed to enable you appreciate the role of governments in developing the youth as well as agriculture.
The course is very dynamic as it embraces recent youth problem behaviours and approaches to solving them.
The course will stimulate you to think about the rural youth of today and how you can solve their problems Course Objectives Each study unit has specific objectives.
These specific objectives have been synthesised into overall objectives which will enable you achieve AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION the broad aim of the course.
At the end of the course, it is expected that students should be able to:  define youth from the UN, African, religious- African and social- personal points-of-view  state an operational definition of youth  state three educational, social, economic and recreational objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension  outline the steps you would follow in organising rural youth club  describe and state three objectives of a named rural youth programme in agricultural extension in Nigeria.
 describe and state three objectives of a named rural youth programme in foreign country.
 discuss four recent youth problem behaviours in Nigeria  state and explain seven roles of the Federal Government of Nigeria in tackling youth problems.
Study Units The course is made of 5 modules and 13 units listed as follows: Module 1 Definitions of Youth, History, Objectives and Philosophy of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension Unit 1 Definitions of Youth Unit 2 History of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension Unit 3 Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension Unit 4 Philosophy of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension Module 2 Organisation of Rural Youth Programmes Unit 1 The 4-H Club Unit 2 Steps for Organising a Rural Youth Club Unit 3 Functions of Officers of Rural Youth Club ii AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Module 3 Selected Rural Youth Extension Programmes in Nigeria and other Countries Unit 1 Examples of Rural Youth Extension Programmes in Nigeria Unit 2 Examples of Rural Youth Extension Programmes in other Countries Module 4 Rural Youth Extension Programme Unit 1 Meaning and Branches of Rural Youth Extension Programme Unit 2 Role of Rural Youth Extension Programme in Youth Development Module 5 Youth Behaviour Problems and the Role of Government Unit 1 Definition and Types of Youth Behaviour Problems Unit 2 Some Adolescent Behaviour Problems Unit 3 Role of Government Agencies in Curbing Youth Behaviour Problems Unit Structure Each study unit has a list of contents with the following structure: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading The essence of this structure is to facilitate proper understanding.
The introduction is a brief on the expected contents of the study unit.
Objectives are the specific expected behaviours of the learner (you) by the end of the unit.
Study the objectives before proceeding into the unit and try to identify them as you study the main content.
You should also re-look at the objectives at the completion of the unit to ascertain your understanding of the main content.
iii AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Main content contains the instructions and teachings that have been passed to the learner.
Conclusion is a brief round-off of concepts that were taught in the unit.
Summary comprises a re-statement of list of sub-topics and concepts that had been taught in the unit.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA): At the end of each unit there is a set of Tutor-Marked Assignments which will form part of your overall assessment for the course.
They are to be answered and submitted to your tutor/facilitator for grading and subsequent return to you.
Assessment The overall assessment consist of a first part, the continuous assessment i.e.
the Tutor-Marked Assignment(TMA) and a second part, the final written examination (covering all areas of the course) which will be written at the study centre.
The TMAs must be submitted to your tutor in accordance with stated deadline schedules.
You might find it useful to review self-assessment exercises, tutor-marked assignment and your tutors comments in preparation for the final examination.
Important Dates Remember that the tutorials usually take place at your study centre as arranged by your tutor.
Plan your time to make room for these dates.
Dates for examination and examination time table are normally accessible on the university’s website, and also displayed on notice boards at your study centre.
Look out for these dates.
Conclusion At the end of the course, the learner should be able to come up with a generally acceptable definition of youth.
The learner should be able to manage and organise a rural youth programme.
Besides, you will be able to appreciate the role of government in youth and agricultural development.
In particular, the learner should be able to provide advisory services to the youth, government and non-governmental organisations on how to develop the youth through agriculture and related programmes.
iv AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Course Code AEM512 Course Title Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension Course Team Dr. B.O.
Ovwigho (Writer/Developer) - DELSU Prof. A. Adebanjo (Programme Leader) - NOUN Dr. N. E. Mundi (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA v AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-191-X All Rights Reserved vi AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Definitions of Youth, History, Objectives and Philosophy of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension……………...........………... 1 Unit 1 Definitions of Youth…………............…………..…... 1 Unit 2 History of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension………..............……………….
6 Unit 3 Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension……………….............…......... 10 Unit 4 Philosophy of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension……………................……….
14 Module 2 Organisation of Rural Youth Programmes............. 18 Unit 1 The 4-H Club…………………............……………… 18 Unit 2 Steps for Organising a Rural Youth Club….............… 23 Unit 3 Functions of Officers of Rural Youth Club............….
28 Module 3 Selected Rural Youth Extension Programmes in Nigeria and Other Countries .................................... 32 Unit 1 Examples of Rural Youth Extension Programmes in Nigeria………………………....................................... 32 Unit 2 Examples of Rural Youth Extension Programmes in Other Countries………….......................................….. 37 Module 4 Rural Youth Extension Programme……….............. 42 Unit 1 Meaning and Branches of Rural Youth Extension Programme……………………….............................… 42 Unit 2 Methods and Role of Rural Youth Extension Programme in Youth Development………............…... 46 Unit 3 Importance of Cooperatives in Rural Youth Extension Programme………………….........……....... 50 Module 5 Youth Problem Behaviours and Role of Governments…………………...........……………….
53 Unit 1 Definition and types of Youth Behaviour Problems… 53 Unit 2 Some Adolescent Behaviour Problems……….............. 57 Unit 3 Role of Government Agencies in Curbing Youth Behaviour Problems……………….........................….. 60 vii NoneAEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MODULE 1 DEFINITIONS OF YOUTH, HISTORY, OBJECTIVES, AND PHILOSOPHY OF YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Unit 1 Definitions of Youth Unit 2 History of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension Unit 3 Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension Unit 4 Philosophy of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension UNIT 1 DEFINITIONS OF YOUTH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 United Nation’s Definition of Youth 3.2 African Definition of Youth 3.3 Religious-African Definition of Youth 3.4 Social-Personal Definition of Youth 3.5 Operational Definition of Youth 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is necessary to have a holistic definition of the term youth before any attempt at discussing rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
The definitions would provide a focus for the course.
The various definitions of youth fall into four (4) broad categories namely the United Nation’s definition, African definition of Youth, Religious- African definition, and Social- personal definition.
An operational definition or a working definition would be developed at the end of the unit.
1 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  give the United Nation’s definition of youth  define youth from the African, religious- African and social- personal point of view  state an operational definition of youth  synthesise two differences between the UN and African definitions of youth.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 United Nation’s Definition of Youth The United Nation classifies youth as young persons within the age bracket of 15 – 24 years.
This categorisation excludes many rural youths.
Most rural girls become involved in the adult world of work before the age of fifteen (15) years.
In other words, the period known as youth did not exist to those youths who were employed at an early age into the adult world of work.
Youth in this group moved directly from childhood to adulthood.
The United Nation’s definition view human development as mere spectrum of ages without considering the social and economic maturity that goes with age.
There are situations where age may not match with the expected social, psychological and economic development of the individual (Rau and Lindley, 1985; Swanson and Claar, 1984).
3.2 African Definition of Youth In Africa and many developing countries, a youth is defined as a person who is not yet married and depends on the parents for social and economic survival.
A man is expected to gain economic independence before going into marriage.
By economic independence, we mean that the man should have a sustainable means of livelihood.
A fifty (50) years old man who is not yet married and cannot cater for himself is classified as a youth in the African setting.
A married man who is under the ‘apron strings’ of his parents particularly in terms of feeding, clothing and accommodation is not usually addressed as a man in a village meeting.
Likewise an individual with a well-paid job but not yet married is regarded as a youth irrespective of his wealth and age.
The idea is that such an individual has no sense of social responsibilities and commitment for the survival and perpetuation of the society in which he is a member.
A bachelor could go to a beer parlour and drink to forget himself but a responsible married man would not engage in such an act because he would think of his wife and children in every step he takes.
2 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Marriage is the most crucial factor for conferring adulthood on girls and not economic independence.
Once a girl is married she is expected to exhibit the behaviours and characteristics of an adult woman irrespective of age.
From the foregoing, age categorisation is not a major factor for classifying an individual as a youth under the African definition of youth.
The African definition of youth considers the biological, social, intellectual and economic maturity that goes with age (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009) 3.3 Religious-African Definition of Youth Most religious organisations classify youths as people between the age range of 15 – 40 years irrespective of marital status and means of livelihood.
To them, youth is in the mind.
Sometimes, we find persons above forty (40) years who join youth organisations in churches and mosques.
This definition is based on the belief by most Africans that ‘adult life begins at forty (40)’.
‘A fool at forty is a fool forever’.
A person who is forty (40) years old is expected to have started charting a course of perpetuating himself and contributing to the advancement of the society (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
3.4 Social-Personal Definition of Youth The social-personal definition states that a youth is any individual with a sound mind, heart and body.
Here, age categorisation is not a criterion for differentiating youth from adults.
The proponents of this definition maintain that youth are the agile and able bodied men and women who can do manual work without stress and contribute to the welfare of society.
They often argue that some young persons within the age range of 15–24 may not have the required strength and agility associated with the youth stage of life hence older persons who are strong in terms of health; mind and body regard themselves as being more youthful (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
3.5 Operational Definition of Youth From the various definitions of youth, we can develop an operational definition that would be acceptable to all cultures.
To this end, we can define youth with the following key sentences:  youths could be regarded as individuals whose ages range from 15 – 24 years in cultures where marital and economic independence are not primary consideration in the definition of youth  in some societies, youths include people between the ages of 15 – 40 years 3 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION  a youth can be regarded as a person who is economically dependent on the parents and not yet married  a youth is an individual who may be above 40 years but quite sound in mind, heart and body (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
In how many ways can we define youth?
2.
How do people in your community define youth?
4.0 CONCLUSION The definition of youth varies from culture to culture.
However, in this unit, it was affirmed that there are four main definitions of youth.
These are the UN definition, African definition, religious – African definition and social – personal definition.
5.0 SUMMARY Youth could be defined as young people between the age of 15 and 24.
Some others define youth as young persons whose ages range from 15 – 40 years.
In some cultures a youth is a person who is not yet married and still depends on the parents for social and economic survival.
Some people believe that a youth is a person who is strong in mind, heart and body.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention the names that are given to children, youth, old people, men, women and divorced women in your local dialect.
2.
Define youth from your community point of view.
3.
Discuss the following definitions of youth:  United Nation’s Definition of Youth  African Definition of Youth  The Religious - African Definition of Youth  The Social – personal Definition of Youth 4.
Give an operational definition of youth that would be acceptable to all cultures.
4 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Rau, W. E. & Lindley, W. I.
(1985).
‘Rural Youths: Some Broad Characteristics’.
In: FAO, Training for Agriculture and Rural Development.
Rome: FAO.
p.1.
Swanson, B. E. & Claar, J.B. (1984).
‘The History and Development of Agricultural Extension’.
In: B. E. Swanson (Ed.).
Agricultural Extension : A Reference Manual.
Rome: FAO.
pp.1 – 18.
5 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 2 HISTORY OF RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Pre-Colonial/Colonial Period of Rural Youth Extension Programmes 3.2 Post Colonial Period of Rural Youth Extension Programmes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The history of any programme is necessary in order to establish a basis for new approaches and innovations.
The history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension is convoluted but could be divided into two main periods.
These two periods are the pre–colonial/colonial period and post- colonial period.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe in detail the pre–colonial/colonial history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension  discuss vividly the post colonial history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension  state one difference between the pre–colonial/colonial and post colonial history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Pre-Colonial/Colonial Period of Rural Youth Extension Programmes The pre–colonial/colonial era of rural youth extension programmes was characterised by missionary extension activities in the rural areas.
When the missionaries visited the rural areas they attended to the needs of the 6 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION rural inhabitants.
They provided free medical services and even settled among the people in order to properly acquaint themselves with the problems of the people.
The main focus of instructions in the missionary Schools was teaching of Christianity as a new religion.
The missionaries were credited with the status of being the pioneer of western education in Africa.
Many children and youth were admitted into the schools.
The products of the missionary Schools became interpreters, court clerks, and teachers.
During the missionary period, many associations and clubs were formed.
A typical example was the Young Men Christian Association (YMCA) which exists till today.
The period witnessed the introduction of social welfare department in the old colony of Lagos.
The department of Botanical Research was established in 1893 with headquarters at Olokemeji in the former Western region (Jibowo, 2005; Fanfuwa, 1982).
The specific objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension during the period were to:  reduce the problem of increasing juvenile delinquency such as stealing, drug abuse, indolence and idleness;  promote community development through group activities for both boys and girls;  encourage youths to make good use of their leisure time.
Recommended regular hours were between 6.00 am and 3.30 pm.
The leisure hours were between 5.30 pm and 7.30 pm; and  develop the spirit of self-reliance and dignity in manual labour (Ovwigho, 2004).
3.2 Post Colonial Period of Rural Youth Extension Programmes The objectives of the post colonial period of rural youth programmes were similar to those of the colonial era.
However, emphasis was laid on concrete agricultural development.
There was also a strong need to start the education of the young people early in life since the mind was usually more fertile and receptive to new ideas at a younger age.
This understanding led to the establishment of various agricultural training programmes, Schools of Agriculture and rural youth programmes in agricultural extension, including the Farm Settlement Schemes, Back to Land Programme, Operation Feed the Nation, Green Revolution and National Directorate of Employment.
During this period, rural youth programmes were transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
Today, NGOs and corporate bodies including Shell Petroleum Development Company of Nigeria (SPDC), Mobil, Chevron and AGIP have established various rural youth programmes for the purpose of agricultural development (Jibowo, 2005; Ovwigho, 1985; Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
7 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 3.3 Differences between Pre-Colonial/Colonial and Post Colonial History of Rural Youth Agricultural Extension Programmes During the pre-colonial/colonial history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension, training was organised mainly through apprenticeship.
Jibowo (2005) noted that conscious efforts were made in selection, introduction and teaching of practices involved in producing good varieties of crops and breeds of animals during the colonial era.
The contents of the training programme also included good character development and citizenship training.
The colonial masters visited villages in order to teach the youths better agricultural practices and innovations.
However, during the post colonial era, formal institutions were established to carry out the training of youths in agriculture.
The formal institutions include the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, National Directorate of Employment (NDE), Universities and Colleges.
Modern innovations and practices were disseminated to the youths through these formal institutions.
4.0 CONCLUSION The pre–colonial/colonial period of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension was not radically different from the post colonial era in terms of the objectives.
The differences in both periods, however, lay in the approaches and the content of training programmes.
The pre– colonial/colonial period placed more emphasis on moral development and citizenship training, while in the post colonial period, emphasis was laid on concrete agricultural development.
The pre-colonial history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension was carried out mainly through informal institutions while the post-colonial history was characterised by formal training.
5.0 SUMMARY There were two main periods in the history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
These periods are divided into pre– colonial/colonial and post colonial periods.
The pre–colonial/colonial period was dominated by missionary activities.
The post colonial period was managed by the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources and later the National Directorate of Employment.
8 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss briefly the pre–colonial/colonial history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
2.
Explain briefly the post colonial history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
3.
State one difference between the pre - colonial/colonial and post colonial history of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fafunwa, B.
(1982).
History of Education in Nigeria.
Lagos: Heinemann.
Jibowo, A.
A.
(2005).
‘History of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.’ In: S.F.
Adedoyin (Ed.
).Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ilorin: Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.
1- 12.
Ovwigho, B. O.
(2004).
‘Rural Youth Extension Programme’.
Lecture Notes, Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension, Delta State University, Asaba Campus.
Ovwigho, B. O.
(1985).
‘Problems of Agricultural Programmes’.
The Nigerian Observer, Thursday January 31, 1985, p.7.
Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
9 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 3 OBJECTIVES OF RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Educational Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension 3.2 Economic Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension 3.3 Social Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension 3.4 Recreational Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Today, the objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension have been expanded from what they used to be during the colonial era.
The objectives could be divided into educational, economic, social and recreational objectives.
These objectives were designed for the educational, social and economic empowerment of the youth.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the educational objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension  explain the economic objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension  comprehend the social objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension  explain the recreational objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
10 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Educational Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension The educational objectives of rural youth programme in agricultural extension are to: (1) develop good character, self confidence and citizenship (2) develop good leadership skills (3) appreciate that there is pride and dignity in manual labour (4) teach the youth how to keep accurate records and accounts in agriculture and other businesses; and (5) teach the youth how to solve their problems in a systematic manner and by cooperative means ( Adedoyin, 2005; Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009; Savile, 1965).
3.2 Economic Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension The economic objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension are to: (1) improve their level of skills in agricultural, mechanical, home management, health and hygiene (2) encourage youths to engage in small–cale industries (3) prevent idleness and provide opportunities for economic empowerment and self-reliance (4) increase production of agricultural goods and other services in the rural areas (5) facilitate the production and marketing of the various items of vocational trades in the rural areas (6) enable the youth acquire entrepreneurial, profitability and communication skills; and (7) increase the efficiency of agricultural production through the use of proven technologies (Adedoyin, 2005; Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009; Savile, 1965).
11 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 3.3 Social Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension The social objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension are to: (1) inculcate good moral and citizenship training on the individual with a sense of civic pride (2) enable youth become patriotic members of the community (3) develop mutual respect and trust for both the young and old; and (4) learn the value of extension work and cooperate with the extension service (Adedoyin, 2005; Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009; Savile, 1965).
3.4 Recreational Objectives of Rural Youth Programmes in Agricultural Extension The recreational objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension are to: (1) appreciate the aesthetic value of plants, animals and other natural resources ( by aesthetic value we mean a situation where the youths are trained to have love for plants, animals and natural resources) (2) teach the youth how to use their leisure time more satisfactorily (3) teach youth how to make good use of their time in handicrafts and other profitable trades.
(this involves training the youth to use their time more profitably instead of engaging in acts inimical to societal existence); and (4) develop good health habits.
This involves training the youth to imbibe good health habits and maintain clean body (Adedoyin, 2005; Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009; Savile, 1965).
4.0 CONCLUSION The educational objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension are geared mainly towards education of the rural youth while the economic objectives are designed for economic empowerment.
The social objectives are geared towards social development.
The recreational objectives enable the rural youth to use their time wisely.
5.0 SUMMARY The objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension are sub–divided into educational, economic, social and recreational 12 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION objectives.
These sub-divisions have various objectives which should be studied properly by the student.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State four educational objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension 2.
Mention five economic objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension 3.
Write out three social objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension; and 4.
State four and explain two recreational objectives of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adedoyin, S. F. (2005).
‘Youth and Children Programme in Extension.’ In: S. F. Adedoyin (Ed.).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ilorin: Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.
60 – 68.
Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Savile, A. H. (1965).
Extension in Rural Communities.
London: Oxford University Press.
13 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 4 PHILOSOPHY OF RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Philosophy of Rural Youth Extension Programmes in Agricultural Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The philosophy of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension explains the reasons as well as the methods and techniques which could be used to achieve sustainable rural youth development programmes in agricultural extension.
The method of carrying out rural youth extension programme revolves around education of the youth.
The youth are made to be aware of their problems and guided towards solving them by educational means.
The purposes of rural youth extension programme are social development and economic empowerment of the youth.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the philosophies of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension  state the philosophies of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Philosophy of Rural Youth Extension Programmes in Agricultural Extension The philosophies are stated and discussed in the following paragraphs: (1) Rural youth have latent talents and abilities which could be developed for the benefit of the society.
Many rural youth die 14 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION with their talents because of lack of guidance and rural youth programmes designed for their welfare.
The establishment of rural youth programmes particularly in agricultural extension helps to direct and activate the talents of the youth for their own benefits and that of the society.
(2) The youth are leaders of tomorrow.
A rural youth programme in agricultural extension provides an avenue for preparing the youth to take up leadership positions and responsibilities.
We become leaders in any given vocation if we are able to show discipline and master ship about the art and science of the vocation.
(3) When the youth are not engaged in worthwhile ventures they become problem to the society.
Rural youth programmes are built around the philosophy of helping the youth to help themselves.
These programmes help the youth to achieve their educational and economic goals.
When the youth are gainfully employed they do not involve themselves in acts inimical to society.
The youth stage of life calls for proper management on the part of the leaders in order to reduce youth restiveness, crisis, idleness and deviant behaviours.
(4) The organised youths benefit more from government development initiatives than the unorganised youths.
It is better for government authorities to organise youths into different bodies for the purpose of reaching out to them for economic empowerment and in furtherance of democracy.
Rural youth programmes in agricultural extension are designed to bring the youths into the mainstream of social and economic development.
This cannot be achieved without organising the youths into youth bodies or organisations.
(5) Membership of rural youth programmes is voluntary.
Rural youth programmes are open to any rural youth who meets the requirements for membership and participation.
The major membership requirements are parents’ consent and willingness to carry out projects.
Youths are not coerced to join.
There is free entry and free exit.
The programmes are non – political and non – sectarian.
(6) Rural youth programmes are usually operated through joint endeavour.
It involves the use of non–directive and participatory approaches.
The programmes are not forced on the people rather they evolve from the people themselves.
The professional youth 15 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION leader acts merely as facilitator.
The programme involves the people, government authorities and NGOs.
The programmes are organised in the villages and supervised by the professional youth leader (Ovwigho, 2004).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the philosophical foundations upon which rural youth programme in agricultural extension is based.
4.0 CONCLUSION The philosophies of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension are concerned with the reasons, methods and techniques for sustainable rural youth programmes.
The method of carrying out rural youth programme is by education.
The reasons for rural youth programmes in agricultural extension are geared towards social and economic empowerment of the youths.
5.0 SUMMARY The philosophies of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension could be summarised as follows:  Rural youths have latent talents and abilities which could be developed for benefits of the society  Rural youth programmes are usually operated through joint endeavour  Youths are leaders of tomorrow  When youths are not engaged in worthwhile ventures they become problem to the society  The organised youths benefits more from Government development initiatives than the unorganised youths.
 Membership of rural youth programmes is voluntary.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State five (5) philosophies of rural youth extension programmes in agricultural extension 2.
State and discuss in detail (4) philosophies of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
16 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Ovwigho, B. O.
(2004).
‘Rural Youth Extension Programme’.
Lecture Notes, Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension, Delta State University, Asaba Campus.
17 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MODULE 2 ORGANISATION OF RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES Unit 1 The 4-H Club Unit 2 Steps for Organising a Rural Youth Club Unit 3 Functions of Officers of Rural Youth Club UNIT 1 THE 4-H CLUB CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of the 4 – H Club 3.2 The Young Farmers’ Club 3.3 The Objectives of the Young Farmers’ Club 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The 4–H club exists in all countries and is known by various names.
The 4–H clubs are clubs which cater for the social and economic development of the youth.
It is necessary to have a clear understanding of the meanings of these clubs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the meaning of 4 – H club  explain briefly the meaning of Young Farmers’ Club  comprehend the objectives of the Young Farmers’ Club  organise a Young Farmers’ Club  enumerate the advantages of the Young Farmers’ Club in schools.
18 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of the 4 – H Club The 4–H clubs are youth clubs designed to train the head, heart, hands and contribute to good health.
The 4–H means the following: Head – to think clearly and carry out responsibilities Heart – to understand and appreciate things in life Hands – to work willingly and well Health – to build strong bodies.
In several countries, including the United States of America, Jamaica, and Nigeria, the 4–H clubs are simply referred to as Young Farmers’ Club or Rural Youth Club.
In Kenya, they are called 4–K club.
In Guatemala they are called 4 – S club and in the Republic of Benin they are called 4–D club.
The 4–S when translated from Spanish means Knowledge, Service, Health and Feelings.
The 4–D club means we have taken our Decision to do our Duties for a real Development of our dear Dahomey (Savile, 1965; Ajayi, 2006).
3.2 The Young Farmers’ Club (YFC) The Young Farmers’ Club exists in secondary schools and colleges.
These clubs have gradually faded out due to poor funding, poor perception of agriculture, drudgery associated with manual labour, oil wealth and desire for white collar jobs.
The Young Farmers’ Club provides a forum for practical, formal and informal training in agriculture, home economics and social development.
Young and educated people are more receptive to modern ideas and innovations hence they could be used as channels for disseminating new technologies to older farmers in the community.
Members of the Young Farmers’ Club can help parents read instructions contained on agro– chemicals and in their applications.
3.3 The Objectives of the Young Farmers’ Club The general objective of the Young Farmers’ Club is to attract young persons to take up agriculture as a lucrative means of livelihood.
The specific objectives are to:  transfer new technologies to other farmers within the community  make young school leavers take up farming as a lucrative occupation  equip the youth with leadership and vocational skills  foster citizenship training 19 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION  maximise profit by employing new methods and technologies in agricultural production  encourage initiative and entrepreneurial skills  imbibe dignity and pride in manual labour  generate interest in farming among club members, parents, teachers and others through project work  understand the true value of service to mankind; and  increase the health and vitality of club members and other people around the environment (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
3.4 Advantages of the Young Farmers’ Club in Schools Generally, the Young Farmers’ Club is geared towards making the youth to appreciate the dignity in manual labour and take agriculture as a lucrative means of livelihood.
The specific advantages of having Young Farmers’ Club in schools include:  training the youth to become good leaders.
The issue of leadership is very paramount in nation building because youths are the future leaders in the agricultural, educational, economic and political industries.
It also helps them to become good followers because good leadership also means good followership  enabling the students to imbibe the spirit of discipline which is later transferred to the larger society.
Punctuality and hard work are the hallmarks of the Young Farmers’ Club programme  the Young Farmers’ Club is designed to help students develop practical skills, knowledge and interest in agriculture  encouraging mutual trust, cooperation, and understanding among students  helping students understand nature and how nature helps in sustaining life through agriculture.
3.5 Organisation of Young Farmers’ Club in Schools The following principles should be borne in mind when organising Young Farmers’ Club in schools:  it is necessary that every student offering agriculture should be a member  the agriculture teacher should serve as a leader by giving advice on the running of the club  students should be acquainted with the aims and advantages of the Young Farmers’ Club  elections should be conducted to select officers to run the affairs of the club 20 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION  all members should be fully engaged in the activities of the club  there should be a workable constitution to guide members in the running of the club  all the necessary resources such as finance, equipment and manpower needs geared towards achieving the objectives of the club should be provided  there should be proper records of all the activities of the club  members should be grouped into committees for proper execution of projects  there should be a well planned and regular schedule of club meetings.
If possible meetings should be held on weekly basis  The club should be formally registered with the school authority.
Parents of club members should be informed about their wards’ involvement in the club.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What principles would you consider in organising the Young Farmers’ Club in schools?
2.
State the meaning of 4H in the 4H-Club?
4.0 CONCLUSION The 4-H clubs are designed to train the head, hand, heart and contribute to good health.
The Young Farmers’ Club is a veritable instrument for attracting the youth to take up farming as a lucrative means of livelihood.
The Young Farmers’ Club offers numerous advantages to the students.
5.0 SUMMARY In all countries, the meaning of the 4–H club is basically the same.
The 4-H club means training the head; having a heart that could understand and appreciate things; using our hands to work willingly and well; and to develop good health for the body.
The Young Farmers’ Club exists in schools and colleges.
The philosophy of the Young Farmers’ Club is built around the fact that young and educated people are more receptive to modern ideas and innovations.
The broad objective of the Young Farmers’ Club is to attract the youth to take up agriculture as a lucrative means of livelihood.
21 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the meaning of 4–H Club.
2.
Describe briefly the Young Farmers’ Club.
3.
State 9 objectives of the Young Farmers’ Club.
4.
Write a short essay on the declining number of Young Farmers’ Clubs in Nigerian schools and colleges.
5.
What are the advantages of the Young Farmers’ Club to the student?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, A. R. (2006).
A Guide for Young Farmers’ Club Programme.
Akure: Sag Impression.
Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Savile, A. H. (1965).
Extension in Rural Communities.
London: Oxford University Press.
22 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 2 STEPS FOR ORGANISING A RURAL YOUTH CLUB CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Rural Youth Club 3.2 Steps for Organising Rural Youth Clubs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are many types of rural youth clubs.
Any club that is organised for the rural youth for the purpose of citizenship training, social and agricultural development could be regarded as a rural youth club.
There are definite steps for organising rural youth clubs which are discussed in this unit.
Examples of rural youth clubs include Young Farmers’ Club, Bird Foundation Nature and Nurture Club.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define rural youth club  outline the steps in organising rural youth club  enumerate the principles for organisation of a rural youth club.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Rural Youth Club A rural youth club is a group of young people within the age range of 12–30 years under the guidance of a social worker, local volunteer leader or an extensionist.
Rural youth clubs are geared towards developing the youth to take up leadership positions in the area of agriculture, home economics, community development, commerce, industry and civic responsibilities.
Typical examples include forest conservation clubs, wildlife protection clubs and Young Farmers’ Club.
Membership is voluntary and officers are elected.
Rural youth clubs like other clubs are good means of attracting young people together for the purpose of skills acquisition under the extension agent, technical or 23 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION professional leader.
The club holds regular activities and meetings.
Membership requirements include parents’ consent; ability to keep records; agreement to embark on projects related to the club; an understanding to exhibit products; accept and demonstrate new technologies relevant to the club (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009; Savile 1965).
3.2 Steps for Organising Rural Youth Clubs The steps for organising rural youth clubs are discussed below: 1.
Understand the Village/Community: This takes the form of community survey or profile description.
The extension agent should identify the physical, social and demographic conditions of the community in order to be well acquainted with the natural resources, culture, language, age, habits, leadership patterns and structure as well as social and economic institutions.
A good understanding of the community enables the social worker to design effective and workable development plans.
2.
Legitimating: This involves introducing the club to the community.
First, present the idea to the traditional rulers and Chiefs.
The consent of a cross section of parents and other leaders within the community is also important.
Once the idea is accepted by the traditional rulers and Chiefs, they in turn help to disseminate the information and attract potential members.
Second, meet with the youth and parents and get them interested in the proposed club.
It may be necessary to show improved varieties and demonstrate new practices in order to get the parents and youths interested.
When a good number of parents and youth have become interested, gather them under the influence of the traditional ruler and explain the objectives of the club, benefits to the youths, parents, and entire community.
Explain the responsibilities of members, local leaders and social workers.
3.
Select Advisory Committee: Set up an advisory committee made up of parents, local leaders and members of the club.
Projects are usually based on the needs, abilities, and interests of the youth.
The committee should develop a plan for projects implementation.
Youths and their parents are advised to select suitable projects for implementation considering available resources.
4.
Recruitment of Members: Recruitment of members is a continuous exercise.
Recruitment drive involves the use of 24 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION printed materials or leaflets, personal contact, and mass media publicity.
5.
Election of Officers: It is suggested that once about 20-30 members have enlisted in the club, elections should be conducted into the various elective positions.
6.
Conducting Meetings: Conducting youth club meetings is a critical issue which requires understanding and good leadership qualities.
Poorly organised meetings often generate conflicts which could mar the existence of the club.
The agenda contained in the notice of meetings should be clearly drawn up.
Meetings are usually held on monthly basis.
It is beneficial if a schedule of meetings for the whole year is drawn up so that members can prepare adequately in advance.
7.
Planning the Club Programme: Planning of a rural youth programme is a joint responsibility of club members, local leaders, parents and the professional youth leader.
The club programme includes meetings, tours and other activities planned to cover at least one year period.
When programmes are planned well in advance, it enables members to prepare their own part in advance with regards to activities such as field trips, shows and contests.
Basically, youth club programmes of activities should specify the following aspects of the programme: i.
Events and activities ii.
Intended achievement iii.
Time and place of regular meetings iv.
Programme for each regular meeting v. Special activities for the year which may include exhibition of products or crops grown by members, demonstration of new practice, skills or contests.
The programme for the year should be built into a chart and made available to members (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
3.3 Organisation of a Rural Youth Club To organise a rural youth club the following principles must be borne in mind:  carry out recruitment drive for members  make sure that parents of potential members are informed well in advance  carry out a natural and socio-economic survey to know the best type of rural youth programme best suited for the community 25 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION  let community leaders agree on the club to be carried out with reference to suitability for the community  elect officers in a purely democratic process for the purpose of ensuring those who can successfully run the affairs of the Club  projects should be planned jointly with members, parents and leaders  meetings should be held regularly at least once in a week  professional leader should relate cordially with Officers of the Club and other members of the community to ensure a harmonious atmosphere necessary for success of the Club programmes.
4.0 CONCLUSION Rural youth clubs are means of attracting and encouraging the youths to take up agriculture as means of livelihood.
The professional youth leader should be versatile in the planning and implementation of rural youth programmes in order to achieve the required success.
5.0 SUMMARY A rural youth club is a group of young people within the age range of 12-30 years.
Membership is voluntary and officers are elected.
The sequential steps in organising rural youth clubs include: 1. understand the village/community 2. legitimating 3. select advisory committee 4. recruitment of members 5. election of officers 6. conducting meetings 7. planning the club programme.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the term rural youth club.
2.
State and discuss seven (7) sequential steps that you would follow in organising a rural youth club programme.
3.
As an extension officer posted to a rural community explain how you would organise a rural youth club programme.
26 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Savile, A. H. (1965).
Extension in Rural Communities.
London: Oxford University Press.
27 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 3 FUNCTIONS OF OFFICERS OF RURAL YOUTH CLUB CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of Officers of Rural Youth Club 3.2 Problems of Rural Youth Club Leadership 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the preceding unit, the steps for organising rural youth club were discussed and election of officers was discussed as one of the steps.
In this unit, we shall discuss the functions of the officers.
The Knowledge of the problems of rural youth club leadership is important in managing the affairs of rural youth clubs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to:  mention the officers of a rural youth club  state the functions of the officers of a rural youth club  discuss the problems of rural youth club leadership.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Officers of Rural Youth Club and Functions The officers of a rural youth club are: 1.
President 2.
Vice President 3.
Secretary 4.
Social Secretary 5.
Public Relations Officer 6.
Treasurer 7.
Financial Secretary 8.
Recreation Officer.
28 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION President:  presides over all club meetings  calls meeting to order  works and plans with local leaders to arrange for meetings and promote club activities  motivates club members to participate in discussion  constitutes members of committees where necessary  helps to maintain order during meetings; and  draws up agenda for meetings.
Vice President:  takes over the duty of the President in his absence  studies the duties of the President  serves as members in most committees; and  plans for recreational activities.
Secretary:  writes minutes of meetings and keeps records of attendance  reads minutes of previous meetings  distributes circulars, pamphlets and correspondence  keeps the relevant ministry/government officials abreast of the club activities  circulates notice of meetings  keeps a list of committee members; and  keeps club records and constitution.
Social Secretary:  plans and organises social activities like picnics, field trips and parties  liaises between the treasurer and president to determine material and financial requirements for social functions  comes up with the intended number of social activities for the year; and  purchases items required for social functions.
Public Relations Officer:  serves as a link between the club and other individuals/corporate organisations  publicise club activities  signs letters of invitation and posters; and  reports the activities of the club in local media.
29 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Treasurer:  collects all dues and moneys accruable to the club  keeps records of all moneys collected and paid out  pay bills approved by the President or club leader; and  gives financial report during club meeting.
Financial Secretary:  keeps record of all income and expenditure  may give financial report during meetings; and  works closely with the treasurer to ensure that the financial records are up- to- date.
Recreational Officer:  helps in organising games and other recreational activities  might lead the club in singing at all meetings especially if he is good at it  introduces new games and dances to club members; and  works together with the other officers during picnics and tours.
(FFA, 1975; Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
3.2 Problems of Rural Youth Club Leadership The problems of rural youth club leadership include:  Leadership Tussle: Rural youth club leadership is often marred by leadership tussle within and outside the club.
Club leaders must endeavour to prevent undue external interference with the clubs’ activities.
The club leaders should maintain democratic principles in all their actions.
 Inadequate Professional Leaders: Professional youth leaders include extension workers, community development officers and social workers.
These categories of workers are grossly inadequate in developing countries.
 Lack of Interest: The increasing lure of white collar jobs and crude oil wealth have made many youths to be disinterested in rural youth clubs.
They often consider joining rural youth clubs as a waste of time.
 Lack of Fund: Rural Youth Club activities are funded by parents of members, influential individuals and philanthropic organisations.
Many parents are reluctant to provide fund for rural youth club activities because they do not see the immediate 30 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION benefits; hence the leaders find it difficult to meet their obligations to the club (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
4.0 CONCLUSION The officers of rural youth club are very important in determining the success of the club activities.
To this end, the officers must be carefully selected based on the principles of democracy.
However, every member of the club should bear in mind that he is also an officer.
5.0 SUMMARY There are eight elective positions in a rural youth club.
These are the President, Vice President, Secretary, Social Secretary, and Public Relations Officer, Treasurer, Financial Secretary and Recreation Officer.
The functions of these officers have been highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention eight officers of a rural youth club.
2.
State five functions of the president of a rural youth club.
3.
State five functions of the secretary of a rural youth club.
4.
What is the relationship between the functions of the president and vice president?
5.
Discuss briefly the problems of rural youth club leadership.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Future Farmers of America, FFA (1975).
Future Farmers of America Advisors Handbook.
National FFA Centre.
Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
31 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MODULE 3 SELECTED RURAL YOUTH EXTENSION PROGRAMMES IN NIGERIA AND OTHER COUNTRIES Unit 1 Examples of Rural Youth Extension Programmes in Nigeria Unit 2 Examples of Rural Youth Extension Programmes in other Countries UNIT 1 EXAMPLES OF RURAL YOUTH EXTENSION PROGRAMMES IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Farm Settlement Scheme 3.2 National Directorate of Employment 3.3 Songhai Delta Vocational Centre (Amukpe) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The federal, state governments and corporate organisations in Nigeria have embarked on a good number of rural youth programmes in agricultural extension.
These programmes include the Operation Feed the Nation (1976), Green Revolution Programme (1980), Back to Land Programme, Rapid Food Production Programme, Directorate for Food Roads and Rural Infrastructure, Farm Settlement Scheme, Songhai Vocational Centre (Amukpe), and National Directorate of Employment and so on.
Many of these programmes were short-lived owing to poor management and implementation.
The broad objective of these programmes was to encourage the youths to take up agriculture as a lucrative means of livelihood.
In this unit, we shall discuss the Farm Settlement Scheme, National Directorate of Employment, and Songhai Vocational Centre because they were the most popular and sustainable.
32 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  state five objectives of the Farm Settlement Scheme  describe the agriculture sub-programme of the National Directorate of Employment (NDE)  describe and state three objectives of the Songhai Vocational Centre.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Farm Settlement Scheme The Farm Settlement Schemes were established in the 60s by the former regional governments of Nigeria.
The goal of the scheme was to enhance the standard of living of farmers and attract youths into agriculture.
The youths were made to settle and work on the farm.
The scheme was laudable but short-lived due to mis-management, government bureaucracy, inadequate planning, lack of finance, and negative attitude of settlers.
It was found that many of the settlers were too young to appreciate that farming involves a lot of hard work.
The specific objectives of the scheme were to: i. attract young and educated persons to take up farming as a lucrative venture ii.
test and demonstrate new technologies to enhance adoption rate among farmers iii.
increase profit and standard of living of farmers iv.
reduce unemployment among youths v. develop a sense of civic responsibilities among the youths; and vi.
establish pilot projects for host communities.
The merits of the Farm Settlement Scheme were: i. the youths were provided the opportunity to learn on the farm ii.
ideas were synchronised better because the learners easily associated the learning task with the environment iii.
modern and scientific techniques were demonstrated to the learners iv.
modern and scientific technologies were transferred to other farmers in the community through the settlers (Akinsanmi, 2004; Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
33 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 3.2 National Directorate of Employment The National Directorate of Employment (NDE) was launched on 30th January, 1987 in response to the soaring rate of unemployment among the youth and University graduates.
The emphasis of the programme was on self-reliance.
The sub-programmes are National Youth Employment and Vocational Skills Development Programme; Small Scale Industries and Graduate Employment; Agriculture Sector Employment Programme; and Special Public Works Programme.
The agriculture sector employment programme was established for the purpose of boosting agricultural production and providing sustainable means of livelihood to intended beneficiaries.
The beneficiaries were mainly University graduates, holders of Higher National Diploma, Ordinary National Diploma and Nigeria Certificate in Education in agriculture and related disciplines.
Those who have no basic education in agriculture were given training and orientation in the chosen area of agriculture.
The government through the NDE provides land and loans to the beneficiaries after the training programme.
The NDE agriculture programme was implemented by the Federal Government in collaboration with the various state governments and non-governmental organisations.
Every state has an NDE agriculture programme committee in charge of the organisation and implementation of the programme.
The NDE agriculture programme cuts across all agricultural enterprises including crop production, poultry, cattle, sheep and goat production, piggery, fishery, and rabbitry as well as the reactivation of dormant farms.
The merits of the NDE programme are: i.
Funds were made available to the youths, especially unemployed graduates to carry out production in any chosen agricultural enterprise ii.
The programme has been sustained for more than twenty two (22) years because of the strong institutional backing and funding by government, NGOs and corporate bodies iii.
Continuous training of staff and loan beneficiaries has made the programme profitable and sustainable.
3.3 Songhai Delta Vocational Centre (Amukpe) The Songhai Delta Vocational Centre was established in March 2003 by the Delta state Government of Nigeria.
The desire to establish the centre was informed primarily by the increasing youth restiveness and social insecurity particularly in the oil producing arses of the state.
The Songhai Delta was patterned after the Songhai Parakou (Republic of Benin) Integrated Rural Development Centre.
The broad objective of the 34 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Songhai-Delta is to provide different vocational skills acquisition programme for the teeming youth population.
The specific objectives are to: i. facilitate self-employment among the youths using locally available resources; ii.
redirect the attention and energy of youths into agriculture and related income generating activities; iii.
provide intensive vocational training for selected young graduates who in turn will establish similar centres; iv.
encourage trainees to discover and develop a high sense of responsibility through emphasis on self-discipline; dialogue, creativity, initiative and courage; and v. assist trainees master the mechanism of operating an integrated farming system.
The merits of the Songhai-Delta are: i. to provide good residential accommodation for trainees as against many other programmes established in the past ii.
there are different agricultural and youth training schemes which make the centre a beehive of activities iii.
vocational and industrial attachment is provided for students all over the country at the centre (Nzamuzo, 2004; Ovwigho and Ifie 2009).
4.0 CONCLUSION The federal and state governments have embarked on a number rural youth programmes in agricultural extension for the purpose of attracting the youth to take up agriculture as a means of livelihood.
However, most of the programmes were short-lived owing to mismanagement, poor funding, government bureaucracy and lack of interest by the beneficiaries.
The Songhai- Delta and National Directorate of Employment have stood the test of time because of the strong institutional structure.
5.0 SUMMARY The three rural youth programmes in agricultural extension are geared towards encouraging the youths to take up agriculture as a means of livelihood.
The farm settlement scheme was laudable in that the youths were made to live on the farm.
In the case of the NDE, the youths were provided loans and land to enable them carry out production on a chosen area of agriculture.
The Songhai-Delta Vocational centre which was established by the Delta State Government has become a learning centre for youths and others who are interested in agriculture.
35 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State five objectives of the Farm Settlement Scheme.
2.
Describe in detail the agriculture sub-programme of the National Directorate of Employment.
3.
State three objectives of the Songhai Vocational Centre.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinsanmi, O.
(1994).
Senior Secondary Agricultural Science.
London: Longman Group Ltd. Nzamuzo, G. (2004).
‘Agricultural Projects: Beware of Easy Money’.
Spore, 111: 16.
Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
36 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 2 EXAMPLES OF RURAL YOUTH EXTENSION PROGRAMMES IN OTHER COUNTRIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 UNESCO’s Info Youth Programme 3.2 The Village Polytechnic Programme (VPP) of Kenya 3.3 The Village Youth Economic Group (VYEG) Programme of the United Republic of Tanzania 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Many advanced and developing countries have embarked on one form of rural youth programmes or the other in agricultural extension.
In this unit, the UNESCO’s Info Youth Programme, the Village Polytechnic Programme of Kenya and the Village Youth Economic Group of the United Republic of Tanzania were discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  state seven objectives of the UNESCO’s Info Youth Programme  describe the Village Polytechnic Programme of Kenya  describe the Village Youth Economic Group of Tanzania; and  state the relationship between the Village Polytechnic Programme of Kenya and the NDE of Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 UNESCO’s Info Youth Programme The UNESCO’s info youth programme was established in 1991 to address the social and economic needs of young people particularly in developing countries.
The programme was premised on the findings that young people were most vulnerable and affected by difficult social and economic conditions such as the growing rate of illiteracy, unemployment, poverty, consequences of conflicts, drug abuse, 37 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION HIV/AIDs pandemic and various forms of marginalisation.
Young people are at the forefront of technological innovations and development, hence the crucial need to improve and expand their access to the benefits of information.
The programme was run in partnership with government ministries and non- governmental organisations.
The programme has been carried out in New Delhi, Afghanistan, Africa, Latin America, Europe, Asia and the Pacific.
The general objective of the programmes was to improve and expand the access of young people to the benefits of information.
The specific objectives are to: i. ensure equitable access to information as well as economic, political and social empowerment programmes for youth ii.
promote new ways of information dissemination and creative expression for the youth iii.
enhance the ability of youth in accessing information with the assistance of new information technologies both in work and learning environment iv.
bolster the emerging globalisation of knowledge among young people v. create and share new knowledge with the aid of information and communication technologies vi.
keep decision makers up-to-date on current trends and issues relating to young people vii.
provide access to information and preventive education support in the global fight against HIV/AIDS viii.
raise awareness and facilitate the initiation and training of young people in information and communication technology skills, particularly in disadvantaged areas and post conflict zones; ix.
promote unity of cultural and language diversity among young people; and x. support the youth to foster a culture of peace, tolerance and sustainable development (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
3.2 The Village Polytechnic Programme (VPP) of Kenya The Village Polytechnic Programme was essentially a youth vocational skills acquisition programme covering all areas of mechanics.
The Village Polytechnic was established in 1969 with 280 village polytechnics.
The programme fell under the administrative responsibilities of the Ministry of Culture and social services.
At the local level, the village polytechnics were administered by management committees working under a manager.
The desire for village polytechnic was proposed by host communities.
In the first instance, the communities were expected to show their commitment by making available the facilities required for the training programme.
The Ministry makes available technical advice on matters such as 38 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION appropriate training disciplines, tools and equipment required.
After the initial obligations have been met application could be made to the village polytechnic to be formally registered.
If the application was granted it qualifies for further assistance.
At this level, the assistance might include payment of salaries, supply of some tools and expenditures.
The programme was also actively supported by a number of international agencies.
Some of the agencies supplied volunteers to work as instructors while others assist in the supply of tools and equipment.
The objectives of the programme were directed towards self- employment in the rural areas although some graduates did sought employment in urban areas while others applied their skills on part-time basis in agriculture as the primary source of income.
Any village polytechnic was likely to operate training programme in three or four of the following areas:  Brick work and Masonry  Carpentry and Joinery  Black Smiting  Car Mechanics  Plumbing and Pipe Fitting  Leather work  Tailoring  Home Economics  Typing The training could be on production basis where the items made were sold or services rendered were paid for on a commercial basis.
One of the more common examples was where village polytechnics gave training in construction work.
They tendered for and obtained contracts for the erection of buildings.
The monies generated through production activities were supposed to be used in meeting recurrent costs but less than 20 percent of these expenses were likely to be met in this way, hence the need for financial support from the ministry and donor agencies.
Graduates from village polytechnics were motivated to form groups and engage themselves in production activities on a cooperative basis (Zarraga and Green, 1985).
3.3 The Village Youth Economic Group (VYEG) Programme of the United Republic of Tanzania The Village Youth Economic Group Programme was an innovative programme designed to overcome unemployment particularly among primary school leavers.
The government launched the Village Youth Economic Group in order to integrate young people into the development process.
The initial role of the programme was advocacy in 39 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION which regional and district youth coordinators visit villages and motivate village governments to support groups.
The type of venture to be undertaken depends on the potential for income generation but the commonest enterprises in the rural areas were agricultural production enterprises.
Agricultural Village Youth Economic Groups were allocated land generally about 4 hectares.
The youth work this land under the guidance of village government specialists.
Other assistance may be made available through district development communities in the initial tilling of the virgin land and in obtaining credit for purchase of seeds and basic tools.
The overriding role of the Village Youth Economic Group was that of a facilitator, motivating support for the economic project; bringing together experts who provide advice; and other day-to-day assistance required by the youth if they are to become self-reliant.
Rural youths are made to learn agricultural production skills through both formal and informal systems.
In urban areas, the economic activities may include metal work, wood work, electronics, brick work and masonry.
Graduates from secondary technical schools or existing artisans were motivated to lead village youth economic group in urban areas for those who might not have received basic education training.
Training is given on the job and feasible arrangements were made with existing institutions to accord training related directly to the activities being undertaken by the work group.
One basic deficiency of the programme was that some groups engage themselves in activities with limited economic potentials and there was a problem of identifying which activities youth should engage in.
There were over 800 village youth economic groups throughout Tanzania under the Ministry of Information and Culture (Zarraga and Green, 1985).
4.0 CONCLUSION The Village Polytechnic Programme and the Village Youth Economic Group were geared toward youth empowerment.
The programme led to a reduction in youth behaviour problems as well as unemployment.
Both programmes were similar to the Farm Settlement Scheme and the National Directorate of Employment in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY The main objectives of the UNESCO’s Info Youth Programme were to make the youths accessible to information, particularly about HIV/AIDS and provide training on Information Communication technologies.
The Village Polytechnic provided training on Brick work and Masonry, Carpentry and Joinery, Black Smiting, Car Mechanics, Plumbing and Pipe Fitting, Leather work, tailoring, Home Economics and Typing.
The desire to have a Village Polytechnic was proposed by a host community.
Under the Village Youth Economic Group, the commonest enterprise 40 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION was agricultural production.
The Agricultural Village Youth Economic Groups were allocated land generally about 4 hectares.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State five objectives of the UNESCO’s Info Youth Programme.
2.
Describe the Village Polytechnic Programme of Kenya.
3.
Describe the Village Youth Economic Group of Tanzania.
4.
State two relationships between the Village Polytechnic Programme of Kenya and the NDE of Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ovwigho, B.O.
and Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Rau, W. E. & Lindley, W. I.
(1985).
‘Rural Youths: Some Broad Characteristics’.
In: FAO, Training for Agriculture and Rural Development.
Rome: FAO.
Zarraga, J.
C & Green, G. D. (1985).
‘Skills Training Programme with Particular Reference to Rural Youths.’ In: FAO, Training for Agriculture and Rural Development.
Rome: FAO.
41 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MODULE 4 RURAL YOUTH EXTENSION PROGRAMME Unit 1 Meaning and Branches of Rural Youth Extension Programme Unit 2 Methods and Role of Rural Youth Extension Programme in Youth Development Unit 3 Importance of Cooperatives in Rural Youth Extension Programme UNIT 1 MEANING AND BRANCHES OF RURAL YOUTH EXTENSION PROGRAMME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Rural Youth Extension 3.2 Branches of Rural Youth Extension Programme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A programme could be defined as a collection of activities needed to be done.
It could also mean a plan or procedure for dealing with some matters at our disposal.
Rural youth extension programme as different from rural youth programmes in agricultural extension has been introduced in many developing countries.
The broad aim of the programme is to provide advisory services, particularly to rural youths who are engaged in agriculture.
In this unit, we shall examine the meaning and branches of rural youth extension programme.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define the term rural youth extension programme  explain the rationale for rural youth extension programme  explain the three branches of rural youth extension programme.
42 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Rural Youth Extension Programme This is a type of extension programme designed to meet the needs of the youths in agriculture, health care and rural community development programmes.
Rural youth agricultural extension programme is an integral aspect of agricultural extension targeted at the rural youth.
In other words, the clientele of rural youth extension programme are the youths living in the rural areas.
Rural youth extension programme represents an attempt to bring the youth into the mainstream of agricultural development.
Rural youths have need for practical training in agriculture, home economics, group leadership and progressive rural living.
Agricultural extension remains an important weapon for improving the future of rural youths through the development of community-based rural youths and young farmer organisations.
Rural youth extension programme is basically geared towards improving the educational, economic and social life of rural youth so that they can develop desirable ideals, citizenship and good standards of farming.
It involves harnessing and developing the potentialities of the youth through training to enable them acquire the right attitude and abilities for working cooperatively with others and growing up to appreciate the civic responsibilities of the community.
The emergence of the sociology and psychology of youth as disciplines gave rise to programmes like youth extension programme.
Rural youth extension programme becomes expedient in developing countries owing to the continual youth restiveness, leadership tussle and related disturbances.
3.2 Branches of Rural Youth Extension Programme Rural youth extension programme embraces rural youth agricultural extension programme, social development and home marking, and health care and hygiene programme.
These branches are discussed under the following sub-headings: Rural Youth Agricultural Extension Programme: Rural youth agricultural extension programme is geared towards solving the problems of youths engaged in agricultural production.
The objectives of rural youth agricultural extension programme are to: i. acquire knowledge and stills that would assist them in increasing agricultural production as well as in the distribution and marketing of agricultural produce ii.
demonstrate scientific and improved methods of farming iii.
increase the efficiency of agricultural production through the use of improved techniques of production 43 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION iv.
enable the youth know the value and preserve wild life and other natural resources v. enable youths learn the economics of production; and vi.
create employment opportunities and foster economic independence through the provision of credit facilities and related services.
Social Development and Home Making: Rural youth extension programmes could be used to achieve social transformation and home management in the rural areas.
The main targets of the social development and home making sub-programme are the female folks who suffer educational discrimination in rural settings.
The programme prepares the female folks for family living bearing in mind that the family is the smallest unit of national development.
It also provides learning experience to help rural youth develop attitudes, habits and standards of behaviours consistent with community life.
Through this programme rural youth are made aware of their social problems and encouraged to seek out objective solutions to them.
The youths are taught and encouraged to demand and use improved techniques of home making and better nutrition.
Youths are also encouraged to engage in cultural, recreational and community improvement activities.
Health Care and Hygiene Programme: The incidence of disease rages, and poverty and squalor are highest in the rural areas.
Diseases such as typhoid fever, kwashiorkor, measles and obesity as well as bone malformation like rickets and osteomalacia are common.
The sanitary conditions of most rural areas are generally poor.
Health extension workers attached to Local Government Area Offices usually provide advisory services on health matters to youths and adults within their area of jurisdiction.
Some of them are made to reside with the people for better understanding, treatment and care.
They provide advisory services on how to prevent communicable disease and pests infestations.
In cases of severe health problems, educational campaigns are carried out by the ministry of health.
When the youths are properly equipped and guided they help to enforce sanitary regulations and carry out campaigns against certain prevailing diseases in the rural areas.
Health care delivery systems and various methods of child care are taught to youth in order to reduce morbidity and mortality rates.
Rural youth health programmes are also geared towards changing the un-progressive health practices such as female circumcision, tribal marks and drinking of impure water.
Through concerted community development efforts coupled with educational campaign, many rural people have began to embrace the drinking of pipe borne water and practices like late weaning.
Many rural people now appreciate the importance of wearing clothes, keeping the body clean and environmental sanitation.
44 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 4.0 CONCLUSION Rural youth extension programme is an important tool for transforming the youth in all areas of rural life.
The programme revolves around agricultural advisory services, social development and home making as well as health care and hygiene programme.
5.0 SUMMARY Rural youth extension programme is designed to meet the needs of the youths in agriculture, health care and rural community development programmes.
This means that the clientele of rural youth extension programme are the youths living in the rural areas.
The reasons for introducing rural youth extension programme stem from the recurrent youth restiveness, leadership tussle and related disturbances.
The main branches of rural youth extension programme are: rural youth agricultural extension programme, social development and home making, and health care and hygiene programme.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the term rural youth extension programme.
2.
Explain in detail the rationale for rural youth extension programme.
3.
Explain any three branches of rural youth extension programme which you have studied.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, A. R. (2006).
A Guide for Young Farmers’ Club Programme.
Akure: Sag Impression.
Maunder, A.U.
(1972).
Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual.
Rome: FAO.
Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Savile, A. H. (1965).
Extension in Rural Communities.
London: Oxford University Press.
Swanson, B.E.
& Claar, J.B. (1984).
‘The History and Development of Agricultural Extension’.
In: B.E.
Swanson(Ed.).
Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual.
Rome: FAO.
45 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 2 METHODS AND ROLE OF RURAL YOUTH EXTENSION PROGRAMME IN YOUTH DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Methods of Rural Youth Extension Programme 3.2 Role of Rural Youth Extension Programme in Youth Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall examine the methods and roles of rural youth extension programme in youth development.
Understanding the roles which could be played by rural youth extension programme in youth development would enhance our functions as high level manpower extension officers.
By making use of the right method of rural youth extension programme, the extension agent would be able to bring the desired changes on the youth.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the methods of rural youth extension programme  state six roles of rural youth extension programme in youth development  discuss in detail five roles of rural youth extension programme in youth development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Methods of Rural Youth Extension Programme There are three main methods of carrying out rural youth extension programme namely individual, group and mass method.
46 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Individual Methods: The individual contact method involves mainly the use of inter-personal communication.
This includes home visit, result demonstration, personal interview, letters, telephone, fax and e- mail.
The method could be used to identify the felt and unfelt needs of the youth for their benefits and that of the society.
This method is useful in identifying potential members of rural youth clubs since it enables the youth and parents where necessary to respond to questions during the visit.
Group Methods: This involves the use of small groups varying from 8- 20 persons.
The group contact methods include result demonstration, method demonstration, Focus Group Discussion, panel discussion and semi-structure interviewing.
The group contact method could be used to demonstrate relevant skills, teach home economics, sculpture, fashion, design, agricultural practices, welding and fabrication.
Group members also benefit from interaction with one another.
Mass Methods: This involves the use of mass media communication facilities.
These methods include the use of radio, television, newspapers, bulletins, circular letters and hand bills.
This method is suitable in creating awareness about new technologies because they could reach a large number of persons at the same time.
For example, the television broadcast can reach more than one million persons at the same time.
However, they may be expensive to the individual.
3.2 Role of Rural Youth Extension Programme in Youth Development The roles of rural youth extension programme in youth development include: Development of Talents: Rural youth extension programme is not only restricted to agricultural development but revolves around any action that can improve the outlook and standard of life of the youth.
A youth could be talented in singing.
It is the duty of the rural youth extension agent to identify this talent and arrange for a music expert to provide him the necessary training that would enable him become self-reliant in terms of economic and social welfare.
Dissemination of Information: Rural youth extension programme helps to provide useful and practical information to youths who are engaged in farming.
The information are concerned with improved practices and innovations that can increase agricultural output.
47 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Leadership Training: Youth leaders are trained in the art of leadership to enable them live harmoniously and cooperatively among themselves and others.
Training enables the youth to be patient and happy with his job.
Marketing and Distribution of Agricultural Produce: Rural youth extension programme provides marketing information to the youth.
Information on where and when to sell is important so the youth can derive maximum benefits from their products of agriculture and vocational trades.
Change in Attitude and Perception: Rural youth extension programme helps to persuade the youth on the value of change.
It persuades the youth to change their un-progressive habits and fatalistic beliefs.
Assist Youths in Using Technical Information: There is certain technical information which requires the guidance of the rural youth extension worker.
The technical information might include mixing and application of herbicides and fertilisers (Williams, Fenley and Williams, 1984).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE i.
What are the methods of rural youth extension programme?
ii.
What are the benefits of rural youth extension programme?
4.0 CONCLUSION The various methods of rural youth extension programme revolve around the individual, group and mass methods.
Rural youth extension programme plays a significant role in youth development.
Governments should ensure that these roles are not neglected in our drive to ensure a pride of place for the teeming youths.
5.0 SUMMARY There are three methods of rural youth extension programme namely individual, group and mass.
The roles of rural youth extension programme in youth development could be itemised as follows:  development of talents  dissemination of information  marketing and distribution of agricultural produce  leadership training  change in attitude and perception  assist youths in using technical information.
48 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State six roles of rural youth extension programme in youth development.
2.
Discuss in detail five roles of rural youth extension programme in youth development.
3.
State and discuss three methods of rural youth extension method.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Williams, S.K.T.
; Fenley, J. M. & Williams, C. E. (1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Les Shyraden.
49 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 3 IMPORTANCE OF COOPERATIVES IN RURAL YOUTH EXTENSION PROGRAMME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Cooperative Society 3.2 Importance of Cooperative Societies in Rural Youth Extension Programme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Cooperative societies enable the youths to manage better the proceeds of their agricultural enterprises.
It also enables the youth to pool their resources together for the purposes of profit maximisation, procurement of loan and investment on land and machineries.
It is, therefore, necessary to examine the importance of cooperatives so that the extension worker can better manage them for youths who are engaged in agriculture.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define the term cooperative society  explain the importance of cooperatives in rural youth extension programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Cooperative Society A cooperative society is an organised body of men and women who have come together voluntarily for the purpose of enhancing their social and economic well-being.
Members of cooperative societies usually pool their resources such as land and money together so that they could have the benefits of large scale production and access to loan from banks.
The banks find it more convenient to give loans to cooperatives rather than individuals.
The cooperatives serve as insurance against defaulters.
Unlike rural youth clubs and associations, cooperative 50 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION societies are registered with the state Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
Agricultural cooperatives help to facilitate production, storage of produce, mobilise credit as well as in marketing and distribution of agricultural products.
In communities where there are no agricultural cooperatives the extension worker should endeavour to establish one (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
3.2 Importance of Cooperative Societies in Rural Youth Extension Programme The establishment of cooperatives as part of rural youth extension programme is important for the following reasons: Identification of Youths in Various Vocations: Individual youths can be located easily through membership of cooperative society.
When youths in the vocation form cooperatives they become better organised than those who are not members of cooperatives.
Banks and other development agencies prefer using the cooperative as a medium of reaching the youth with credit and other facilities to aid agricultural production.
For the Purpose of on the Job Training: Cooperatives usually carry out training programmes for their members as part of their social responsibilities.
Through cooperative societies, governments and development intervention agencies can organise vocational training programmes for youths who are already engaged in a vocation.
Provision of Consumption Credit and Mobilisation of Fund: Funds are necessary for the growth of business organisations.
Cooperatives help to provide consumption credit and mobilise funds for members.
Credit mobilisation involves borrowing money and encouraging members to save against the ‘rainy days’.
Mutual Trust and Exchange of Ideas: When youths come together under the Umbrella of a cooperative they eventually develop trust, interact and help one another in times of difficulties.
This connotes the usual exchange of ideas and knowledge which characterise group relationship.
In this sense, the less competent youths in the vocation are able to get their production problems solved by interacting with the more competent and experience youths (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
4.0 CONCLUSION A cooperative society can be defined as a group of men and women who have come together to solve their common economic and social 51 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION problems.
Rural youth cooperative are very useful to youths involved in agricultural production and similar rural income generating activities.
5.0 SUMMARY A cooperative society is an organised body of men and women who have come together voluntarily for the purpose of enhancing their social and economic well-being.
The importance of rural youth agricultural cooperatives includes:  identification of youths involved in various vocational trades  on-the-job training of youths who are already in a vocation  provision of credit and mobilisation of fund  generates mutual trust and ideas.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define in detail the term cooperative.
2.
Discuss the role of cooperatives in rural youth extension programme.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
52 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MODULE 5 YOUTH BEHAVIOUR PROBLEMS AND THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENTS Unit 1 Definition and Types of Youth Behaviour Problems Unit 2 Some Adolescent Behaviour Problems Unit 3 Role of Government Agencies in Curbing Youth Behaviour Problems UNIT 1 DEFINITION AND TYPES OF YOUTH BEHAVIOUR PROBLEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Youth Behaviour Problems 3.2 Description of some Recent Youth Behaviour Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Youth behaviour problems are those attitudes which negate societal existence.
This unit is devoted to a critical examination of youth behaviour problems and a discussion of some recent youth behaviour problems in different parts of Africa.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define youth behaviour problem and give examples  describe some recent youth behaviour problems in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Youth Behaviour Problems Youth behaviour problems are those behaviours which the society does not approve.
These behaviours fall out of the cultural norms, beliefs and value system.
Youth behaviour problems vary from time to time.
The 53 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION types of youth behaviour problems that exist today are different from the ones that existed twenty or thirty years ago.
The earliest forms of youth behaviour problems include disobedience, truancy or lying, fighting, stealing, absenteeism, alcoholism, staying away from the home and rebelliousness.
The new forms of youth behaviour problems are youth restiveness, armed robbery, burning and arson, militancy, kidnapping, blood drinking, cannibalism, ritual murder, cultism and human trafficking.
3.2 Description of some Recent Youth Behaviour Problems Recent youth behaviour problems in parts of Africa include youth restiveness, youth militancy, kidnapping, suicide bombing and sea piracy.
Youth Restiveness: Youth restiveness is a psychological construct used to describe the continual youth behaviour problem as a result of dissatisfaction with the distribution of common wealth and resources.
These behaviours could result into war as well as burning and arson.
Youth Militancy: The term youth militancy is used to describe youth behaviour problem which involves the use of fire arms and dangerous weapons to make demands from government authorities, corporate organisations and individuals.
Youth militancy started in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria when youths started making demands from oil companies for a fair deal of the crude oil proceeds.
Kidnapping: In kidnapping, youths take hostage of individuals and expatriates by means of arms.
The kidnapped victims are released only after payment of ransom.
Nigeria is rated as one of the worst countries in cases of kidnapping.
Suicide Bombing: In suicide bombing, the bomber plants bombs on himself with the aim of killing many others apparently for an unjust cause in his mind.
Suicide bombing which started in the Arab world has spread to Nigeria.
Sea Piracy: In sea piracy, the abductors take hostage of ships and passengers until ransoms are paid.
Sometimes, the victims are robbed of their possessions.
Somalia is the worst African county in terms of sea piracy.
In fact, it has been reported that sea piracy in the east coast of Somalia is a daily occurrence.
Indecent Dressing: The extent to which indecent dressing constitutes behaviour problem remains a debate in the country and other parts of the world.
A behaviour problem is any behaviour that is at variance 54 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION with the socio-cultural norms of a given society.
There are socially approved dressing codes in all cultures.
The problem of indecent dressing arises when the individual deviates from the established dressing codes.
Most youths nowadays especially in our country do not often dress according to the societal dressing culture.
Sometimes, we find girls who wear dresses that expose their woman-hood.
This dressing culture is spreading rapidly among the female folks.
We know a lawyer, a banker, a teacher and a doctor by his dressing habit.
Similarly, we know a prostitute by his dressing habit.
Indecent dressing should be discouraged among our youths (Ovwigho, 2009).
Armed Robbery: This is when undesirable youths take up arms to dispossess other members of the society of their belongings be it money, jewels, cars other material possessions.
In the past, stealing was common behaviour problem among children and youths which was often overlooked by parents and other older members of the society.
The proliferation of arms and the changing value system account greatly for the increasing rate of armed robbery.
Robbers have maimed and made many people hopeless.
The youths should be taught the right moral values at the home, religious institutions, schools and through the mass media in order to stem the increasing rate of armed robbery and other problem behaviours.
Cultism: This is when youths join secret cults in order to cause mayhem and destruction to other members of the society.
Secret cults apparently started as pressure groups in our higher institutions of learning.
Secret cults are now in every segment of our society.
Even primary School pupils now join secret cults.
4.0 CONCLUSION Youth behaviour problems are cankerworms eating into the very fabric of the society.
No matter the angle from which we look at the increasing youth behaviour problem, the major cause is unemployment hence rural youth programmes in extension become very necessary.
5.0 SUMMARY Youth behaviour problems can be defined as those behaviours which the society does not approve.
They include fighting, stealing, armed robbery, rebelliousness, youth restiveness, youth militancy, kidnapping, sea piracy, suicide bombing, indecent dressing, alcoholism and cultism.
55 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the term youth behaviour problem and give five examples.
2.
Discuss four recent youth behaviour problems in Nigeria.
3.
Describe ten newspaper reports of youth militancy in the Niger- Delta region of Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ogunseye, T. (2009).
‘Kidnapping: Growing Evil in the Land.’ The Sunday Punch, Lagos, p.2.
Ovwigho, B. O.
(2007).
‘Curbing Youth Restiveness in the Niger-Delta Region: The Role of the School’.
A lecture delivered at the Association of Private School Owners of Nigeria (APSON) Week, Uvwie Local Government Chapter, Delta State, Nigeria.
Ovwigho, B. O.
(2008).
‘The Nigerian Youth: The Need for Responsible Followership’.
A lecture delivered to selected youths in Delta State at Isele-Uku in a 3-Day Workshop organised by the Federal Ministry of Youth Abuja between 10th & 13th December 2008.
Ovwigho, B. O.
(2009).
‘Imbibing the Right Moral Values: A Key to Righteous Living’.
A lecture delivered at a Workshop on Youth Development organised by the Directorate of Youth Development, Delta State, Asaba, held on 25th December, 2009.
56 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 2 SOME ADOLESCENT BEHAVIOUR PROBLEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Adolescence and Adolescent 3.2 Some Adolescent Behaviour Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is necessary to study the behaviour problems of the adolescent because it is a critical phase of the youth stage.
Much bad behaviours are developed during adolescence.
If the bad behaviours are not curbed, the adolescent may carry them to adulthood.
In this unit, we shall start by defining the terms adolescent and adolescence before looking at some of the behaviour problems of the adolescent.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define the terms adolescence and adolescent  describe some behaviour problems of adolescents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Adolescence and Adolescent Adolescence: Adolescence is a period in human growth and development which falls between the age range of 12 and 18 years.
It is the early part of the youth stage of life.
It is a period of both character and human development.
It is a period when both good and bad characters are formed by the individual.
The adolescence period marks the on-set of puberty and development of secondary sexual characteristics.
These secondary sexual characteristics include development of pubic hairs, spermatogenesis, and changes in voice among the males.
The females, depending on heredity, develop a round shape and enlargement of the breast bud.
Menstruation begins at this stage.
57 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Adolescent: The adolescent is the person or individual who is at the stage of the adolescence in human development.
We can say that a person is an adolescent when he or she is at the adolescence period of life.
3.2 Some Adolescent Behaviour Problems Some adolescent behaviour problems are discussed briefly as follows: Dressing Habits: Indecent dressing as earlier discussed is more peculiar to adolescents.
They often dress at variance to societal approved dressing culture.
The boys prefer putting on Jeans trousers, T-shirts, and long sleeves.
Similarly, the girls like to put on Jeans trousers, T-shirts, skirt, top or blouse.
The latest among the girls is low waist.
These dressing styles have no African cultural base.
Imitation: Adolescents like to imitate themselves or members of their peer group for both bad and good habits.
Behaviours could be inherited, learned or instinctive.
The environment plays a major role in learning.
It is what the adolescents learn from their peer groups that they often display in the society.
Smoking and Drinking; The habits of smoking and drinking among boys and girls are usually formed at the youth stage of life.
Peer group influence is often the primary cause of smoking and drinking.
Most adults agree that they started smoking at adolescence.
Smoking and drinking often lead to frail nerves, thereby, making the adolescent want to fight at the slightest provocation.
Group Habits: Adolescents like to form and belong to groups.
These grouping habits often lead to street gangs, cult groups and area boys.
Adolescents should be encouraged to join only those groups that provide opportunity for positive learning, mutual support, respect, civic responsibilities, recreation and sports (Ovwigho and Ifie, 2009).
Faster Reaction to Stimuli: The adolescents often react fast to environmental stimuli.
Hawkins (1999) epitomised the adolescents as people who are easily irritated by unpleasant situations and reacts vehemently to public disgrace.
This informs the reason for frequent fighting among the adolescents SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1. Who is an adolescent?
2.
What behaviour problems do you think are peculiar to adolescent?
58 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 4.0 CONCLUSION Adolescence is a period in human development while the individual passing through the phase of the development is the adolescent.
The adolescents have peculiar behaviours.
The good behaviours should be encouraged while the bad ones should be discouraged by parents, guardians and teachers.
5.0 SUMMARY Adolescence is a period in human growth and development which ranges between 12 and 18 years of age.
It falls within the early part of the youth stage of man’s life.
The behaviour problems of the adolescence include dressing habits, imitation, smoking and drinking, group habit and faster reaction to stimuli.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the terms adolescence and adolescent.
2.
Discuss some of the behaviour problems of adolescent.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Hawkins, J.D.
(1999).
‘Preventing Crime and Violence through Communities that Care’.
European Journal on Crime, Policy and Research, 7: 444-458.
Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
59 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION UNIT 3 ROLE OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES IN CURBING YOUTH BEHAVIOUR PROBLEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Role of Government Agencies in Curbing Youth Behaviour Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Governments in conjunction with its various organs, especially the schools and ministries have played major role in reducing youth behaviour problems.
The amnesty programme granted to the Niger- Delta militants by the Federal Government of Nigeria is a typical example of how government authorities can initiate programmes to stem youth behaviour problem.
The entire amnesty programme revolves around skills acquisition which we have been discussing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  appreciate and list eight roles of the government in curbing youth behaviour problems  state and explain seven roles of the Federal Government of Nigeria in tackling youth problems.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Role of Government Agencies in Curbing Youth Behaviour Problem Government roles in reducing youth behaviour problems are mainly educational and economic empowerments.
However, these roles could be thought of in line with development of rural areas, vocational and general education for youth, provision of loans/credit facilities, formation of youth clubs, self employment schemes, recreation and sports, legislation, and provision of markets and marketing facilities.
60 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION Development of Rural Areas: The ideological perspectives of rural development encapsulate three definitional viewpoints.
First, is the conceptual proposition, which relates rural development to the provision of social amenities by governments, individuals, corporate organisations and non-governmental organisations in order to improve rural living conditions.
Second, is the view that links rural development to agricultural transformation and industrialisation.
Third, is the view that translates rural development to mean improvement in human capital and economic improvement of the rural dwellers.
Implicit in these viewpoints is that rural development is geared towards change for better living.
The provision of basic amenities, industries, and agricultural machinery, recreational and educational facilities will make the rural areas more attractive to the youths.
The lack of social and basic amenities exacerbates rural-urban migration.
It is recommended that government and non-governmental organisations should wake up to the challenges of providing social and basic amenities in the rural areas to reduce the exodus of youths to the urban areas.
Studies have shown that farming was being abandoned at a fast rate by the youths owing to the attractive and fast income generating job opportunities in the towns and cities.
The establishment of cottage industries and mechanisation of agriculture will help a long way to improve the economic base of the rural areas thereby attracting the youths into agriculture and related income generating activities.
Vocational and General Education: Vocational education is an all round educational programme provided for people who have tentatively chosen an occupation but require certain skills and general education to enhance job performance.
Virtually all countries of the world crave for the educational improvement of her citizens, but the difference lies mainly in the utilitarian value and vocational contents.
Considering the rate of graduate unemployment and idleness among the youth, the introduction of vocational education for the purpose of self-employment becomes imperative.
Education is a dynamic process and should be made responsive to the changing needs of the society.
The type of education that would make youths actualise their innate talents and carry on in a better way what they already know how to do is the most useful avenue for integrating the youth into the mainstream of social and economic development.
Youth vocational education programme required both multi-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary approaches.
These approaches should involve the extension or social worker, expert and general education teacher at different stages of the instructions.
Vocational education helps to instil self confidence and esteem in job performance.
A youth that is a talented dancer and musician could be exposed to training programme under a music expert in collaboration with a social worker and general education teacher.
The role of the social worker is to identify the talents of the youth and make 61 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION recommendations to the experts and general education teacher.
The general education teachers are responsible for teaching subjects such as mathematics, English Language, Social Studies, Geography, History and Religious Knowledge.
The experts are drawn from the field of interest of the youth.
The experts are masters of vocations such as computer operation, carpentry or wood work, music, technical drawing, electrical instrumentation and electronics.
The training section should be interwoven with vocational guidance.
The vocational education programme could be carried out with a small group in vocational training centres.
The education curricula of most African countries are now being tailored to acquisition of vocational skills.
It is only government authorities with sympathy for vocational education that can bring about a more practically oriented educational system.
Proper education at all levels prepares the youth to become good citizens.
Provision of Loans/Credit Facilities: The expansion of vocational businesses among youth has been greatly limited by finance.
Money is needed to purchase machineries and tools required for vocational trades.
Governments and non-governmental organisations can assist the youth by providing credit facilities to enable them sustain their chosen vocation.
Credit facilities could be channelled though extension agents, community banks, informal money lenders and NGOs working in the rural areas to registered youth associations for purpose of financing their potentialities.
The latent talent of the youth may not be actualised without conscious investment in terms of finance.
Formation of Youth Clubs: Youth clubs, including age grade, gender specific groups, young farmers’ club, rural youth club, boys’ scout, girls’ guide, red cross and similar organisations constitute the organised youths in the society.
The organised youth bodies are more responsible and easy to manage with regards to development intervention.
The organised youth clubs provide the forum for interaction and learning.
The major objectives of youth clubs are to expose youths to various occupations as well as to instil confidence and citizenship training.
Citizenship training enables the youth to become a well adjusted and disciplined member of the society.
Self-Employment Scheme: Self -employment schemes abound in Africa.
The most popular in Nigeria are the National Directorate of Employment (NDE) established in 1987, skills acquisition centres, youth development scheme organised in 1999 by the Shell Petroleum Development Company of Nigeria and the NDDC skills acquisition centres.
In Kenya, the most popular is the village Polytechnic Programme (VPP).
In Tanzania, we have the Post Primary Training Centres Programme (PPTCP) and the village Youth Economic Group Programme (VYEGP).
In Zambia, the youth training cum production 62 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION programme, the Chitambo Youth Project, the Monze Youth Project and the Msekhochika School Leavers Project were the most popular.
In China, the Communists Youth League and Young Pioneers play formidable roles in project design and implementation as well as in agricultural extension services.
The goal of youth employment scheme is to reduce the unemployment rates in developing countries.
It is necessary to expose youth to vocational trades so that they could become gainfully employed and masters of the trade.
It has been found that when youths acquire vocational skills early in life, they do not often have time for activities that are inimical to societal well being.
The youth become pre-occupied with the thoughts and demands of the occupation instead of delinquent and criminal acts.
Considering the high rate of unemployment in Africa, it becomes exigent for youths who are undergoing formal education to learn a trade during the holiday or at their spare time in order to overcome the problem of unemployment after graduation.
Recreation and Sport: Government should encourage youths to take part in athletics, games and sports.
Many youths have become famous in athletics and games.
Apart from the fame and financial gain in games like football, it also helps in promoting international cooperation and friendship among countries and between individuals.
If youths are made to engage in worthwhile ventures like games and athletics they eventually become useful to themselves and the entire society.
In America, a youth can become rich from games such as boxing, basketball, volleyball, table tennis and lawn tennis.
Legislation: Youths are not often given the opportunity to contribute their quota to social and economic development.
Appropriate legislation should be made by governments for the purpose of recognising the place of youth in the society.
Youth development should be made an integral part of policy design and implementation at the local, state and federal levels of governments in Africa.
Government should enunciate programmes and policies to show what the youth should be doing at any point in time.
Youths should be allowed to participate fully in the formation and implementation, of programmes and policies affecting their well-being.
The participatory technique ensures commitment to implementation, maintenance and evaluation of intervention programmes on the part of the beneficiaries.
Provision of Markets and Marketing Facilities: The lack of markets and marketing facilities hinder the production of certain goods and services especially in the rural areas.
There are ready markets for most agricultural goods whereas markets for pottery, art works, and sculptural designs are not easily available.
A system of markets and marketing 63 AEM512 RURAL YOUTH PROGRAMMES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION should be developed by governments and communities for the evacuation of the products of vocational trades to ensure sustainable rural economic growth and development.
Without markets, youth may not have the incentives to produce.
Efforts should be made to include items of vocational trades such as weaving, sculpture, wood work and pottery in the international market in order to stimulate their continuous production by the youths.
Rehabilitation and Amnesty: Government has embarked on various reforms for the youth.
A typical example is the amnesty programme.
The youth are gradually made to become responsible citizens through skills acquisition programmes.
4.0 CONCLUSION Government has played major role in youth development.
The present problem lies on materialism and ostentatious display of wealth.
In other words, the changing value system has continued to exacerbate the problem of youth restiveness in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY The various arms of governments have played different roles in curbing youth behaviour problems.
These include rural development, vocational and general education, provision of loans/credit facilities, formation of youth clubs, self-employment scheme, recreation and sports, legislation, provision of markets and marketing facilities, rehabilitation and amnesty.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the amnesty programme of the Federal Government.
2.
State and explain seven roles which have been adopted by the Government of your country in tackling youth problems.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Essang, S. M. (1975).’Stimulating Economic Progress in Rural Communities.’ In: S. O. Olayide, O.Ogunfowora, S.M.
Essang, & F.S.
Idachaba (Eds.).
Elements of Rural Economies.
Ibadan: Ibadan University Press.
Nzamuzo, G. (2004).
‘Agricultural Projects: Beware of Easy Money’.
Spore, 111: 16.
Ovwigho, B.O.
& Ifie, P.A.
(2009).
Principles of Youth Development in Africa.
Benin-City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
64
