 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE: AEM 502 COURSE TITLE: EXTENSION ORGANISATION, MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION AEM 502: EXTENSION ORGANISATION, MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION 1.
CONCEPTS, THEORIES, GUIDELINES AND PRINCIPLES OF EXTENSION ORGANISATION 2.
MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF VARIOUS LEVELS OF EXTENSION AND OTHER RELATED STAFF 3.
STAFF RECRUITMENT, SELECTION, PLACEMENT AND SUPERVISION 4.
PRINCIPLES OF MORALE AND MOTIVATION 5.
IMPLICATIONS OF EXTENSION STAFF DEVELOPMENT AND PROMOTION 6.
CREATING CONDUSIVE WORKING ENVIRONMENT, DISCIPLINE 7.
ASSESSMENT OF EXTENSION WORK ENVIRONMENT 8.
IMPROVING NIGERIAN EXTENSION SERVICE 2 Module 1: Unit 1 Concept of Management in Agricultural Extension Organisations Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Concept of an Extension Organization 3.2 Concept of management.
3.3 Managerial skills-technical 3.4 Managerial skills – human 3.5 Managerial skills – conceptual and design 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Agricultural extension activities are carried out by persons within an organization specifically designed and put together for extension activities.
This unit will help you understand what an extension organization is, the concept of management and managerial skills required of a manager of an agricultural extension organisation.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to 1.
Define an agricultural extension organization 2.
Discuss the concept of management as related to extension organization 3.
Understand the necessary managerial skills needed by extension administrators 3 3.1 Concept of an Agricultural Extension Organization Agricultural extension means different things to different people.
To the farmers, it is a form of assistant to help improve their knowledge, efficiency, productivity, profitability and contribution to the good of their family, community and society.
To the politicians, planners and policy makers, it is a policy instrument to increase agricultural production, to achieve national food security and at the same time help alleviate rural poverty.
To the practitioner, agricultural extension enhances and accelerates the spread of useful knowledge and technologies to rural people.
These activities are expected to lead to increased and sustained productivity, increased income and well-being of farm people and to the promotion of national food security and economic growth.
An agricultural extension organization is therefore a formalized intentional structure of roles or position targeted at achieving extension activities.
3.2 Concept of management.
Ever since people began forming groups to accomplish aims they could not achieve as individuals, managing has been essential to enter the coordination of individual efforts.
Management is the process of designing and maintaining an environment in which individuals working together in groups efficiently accomplish selected aims.
There are some necessary skills required of managers of extension organizations.
We shall discuss three of them in this unit.
3.3 Managerial skills- Technical skills Technical skill is knowledge and proficiencies in activities involving methods, process and procedures.
Thus, it involves working with tools and specific techniques.
Managers of extension organizations should thus be able to teach their staff specific techniques in doing their job.
4  3.4 Human skill This is the ability to work with people.
It is cooperative effort, team works and the creation of an environment in which people feel secured and free to express their opinions.
Managers of extension organizations should thus be competent in interpersonal relationships.
They must be able to blend the efforts of subordinates who may differ in background, specialization and points of view into motivated teams of workers.
3.5 Conceptual and Design Skills This is the ability of the managers to recognize significant elements in a situation and to understand the relationships among the elements.
He must be able to discern the problem of the farmer in his social, economic and sometimes political context, he must be able to analyse the information at his disposal.
The manager should be able to proffer practical solution to such problems.
This is the aspect of design skill.
The design skill is the ability of manager to solve problems.
4.0 Conclusion It is necessary that formalized structures be set up to accomplish agricultural extension activities.
Roles also need to be defined for people in such structures so that proper running and functioning of such organizations can be achieved.
Such structures will therefore need people who have the necessary skills to coordinate such activities.
We have discussed these issues in this unit.
5 5.0 Summary In this unit, you have been introduced to what an extension organization is all about as well as the concept of management.
You were also taken through the necessary skills required for managers of agricultural extension organizations.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Define an agricultural extension organization 2.
Discuss the concept of management 3.
Identify the managerial skills you have learnt in this unit 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 6  Module 1: Unit 2 Principle of Management I Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Principles of management- introduction 3.2 Principles of management – division of work 3.3 Principles of management – authority and responsibility 3.4 Principles of management –discipline 3.5 Principles of management – unity of command 4.0Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Every Organisation has principles upon which their activities are conducted.
These are foundational bases for the conduct of such activities.
There are many principles of management.
They are flexible, not absolute and must be useable regardless of changing and special conditions.
In this unit, we shall begin to consider some of these principles.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to 1.
Define what principles are and 2.
Discuss some principles of management 7  3.1 Principles of Management Principles in management are fundamental truths.
They are what are taught to be truths at a given time explaining relationships between two or more sets of variable, usually an independent variable and a dependent variable.
Principle could be descriptive or predictive but not prescriptive.
They describe how one variable relates to another that is, what all happen when these variables interact.
They do not prescribe what people should do.
The following are some of the commonly used principles: 3.2 Division of work This is the specialization that economist consider necessary for efficiency in the use of labour.
Division of work stems from the assumption that breaking down the work into smaller units of activities will help individuals to better focus on them as well as enable them to develop more skill in doing such activities.
3.3 Authority and Responsibility Authority is the power inherent in a position.
It is a combination of official factors, deriving from the manager‘s position and personal factors.
This is a mix of intelligence, experience, moral worth; past service etc.
Responsibility arises from authority.
It has to do with what he uses the authority to accomplish.
Every manager must understand that he is not in position for any other reason but to ensure compliance to rules and regulations vis a vis accomplishment of organisational goals.
He must hence use the power invested in that position maximally.
3.4 Discipline 8 Discipline is a respect for agreements, which are directed at achieving obedience, application, energy and the outward marks of respect.
Discipline requires good superiors at all levels implying that those who will discipline must have a high moral justification for doing so.
Discipline also requires that rules and regulations of the system are made explicit for all to know.
3.5 Unity of command This means that employees should receive orders from one superior officer only.
Thus, employees will be directly responsible to one superior officer per time.
This will help prevent clash of instructions.
4.0 Conclusion It is necessary to understand the principles upon which activities of organizations are based.
This will help you in understanding how activities in the organization are carried out.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have been able to identify four principles upon which extension organization activities are based.
This includes that of division of work, authority and responsibility, discipline and unity of command.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What do you understand by principles?
2.
Why are principles necessary?
3.
Discuss four principles of management that you have learnt.
7.0 References and Further Reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 9 Module 1: Unit 3 Principle of Management II Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Principles of management- unity of direction 3.2 Principles of management- subordination of individual to general interest 3.3 Principles of management- remuneration 3.4 Principles of management- centralization 3.5 Principles of management-order 4.0Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction We started considering principles upon which agricultural extension activities are conducted.
In this unit, we shall continue to consider some of those principles.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to 1.
Discuss some more principles of management 3.1 Unity of Direction This principle informs that each group of activities with the same objective must have one head and one plan.
It relates to the organization of the ‗body corporate‘ rather than to personnel.
Though it does not mean all decision should be made at the top.
10 3.2 Subordination of Individual to General Interest This refers to the submission of individual agenda and plan to the interests and welfare of the organization.
Individuals must be ready to sacrifice their own ideas and interest to that of the organisation.
This will enhance commitment and reduce interference of individual beliefs, perception etc with organisational goals or other workmates.
Nevertheless, when the two are found to differ, management must reconcile them.
3.3 Remuneration This principle suggests that remuneration and methods of payment should be fair and commensurate to services rendered.
It should also affect the maximum possible satisfaction to employees and employer.
3.4 Centralization This refers to the extent to which authority is concentrated or dispersed.
Some agricultural extension organizations command more influence from management giving organisation a strong management style ready to face emergencies.
Nevertheless, this style reduces and inhibits staff initiative and participation in management, which could also have detrimental consequences.
However, individual circumstances will determine the degree that will give the best results.
3.5 Order This is ensuring a place for everything and everyone.
There must be materials and social order.
People and resources must be organized/ well arranged to prevent chaos.
4.0 Conclusion The principles discussed under this unit are essential to the proper functioning of agricultural extension organizations.
This is because agricultural information disseminated must not be confusing, thus the need for unity of direction, centralization of commands and order.
Due 11 to the need to ensure that personnel are motivated for work, there is the need to properly consider remuneration to conform with level of input from each person.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have been taken through four crucial principles of management, which include centralization, order, remuneration, subordination of general interest to individual interest and unity of direction.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss Five principles of management of agricultural extension organisations you have studied in this unit 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 12 Module 1: Unit 4 Principle of Management III Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Principles of management- equity 3.2 Principles of management-stability of tenure 3.3 Principles of management-esprit de corps 3.4 Principles of management- initiative 3.5 Principles of management-scalar chain 4.0Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction We have hitherto discussed nine principles of management in an agricultural extension organization.
In this unit, we shall consider five more essential principles.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss about the principles of equity, stability of tenure, espirit de corps, initiative and scalar chain.
3.1 Equity Managers should deal with subordinates in kindness and justice.
This is to elicit loyalty and devotion from personnel.
There must be fairness in treatment of staff based on established regulations to prevent favoritism 13 3.2 Stability of Tenure This principle is to ensure that staff are stable on their jobs and the rate of turnover is reduced to the barest minimum.
High turnover poses a danger and increases costs and could also be both a cause and the effect of bad management.
3.3 Espirit de Corps This principle is that which believes ―in union there is strength‖.
It is an extension of the principle of unity of command.
This principle emphasizes the need for teamwork and the importance of communication in obtaining it.
3.4 Initiative This principle encouraged managers to permit their subordinates the opportunity to exercise their initiative.
Initiative is conceived as the thinking out and execution of a plan.
This is one of the keenest satisfactions for an intelligent man to experience.
Subordinates should thus be believed in to be able to use their initiative for the good of the organization.
3.5 Scalar Chain This principle assumes a chain of superiors from the highest to the lowest ranks.
This chain should not be departed from needlessly but could be short-circulated when to follow its compulsory would be detrimental.
4.0Conclusion The unit has made it clear that there is need for management to have a human face in the running of its affairs.
Thus, managers of agricultural extension organizations should be kind and create an atmosphere where there is commandership.
Staff should not be treated as robots or tools for action they should also be permitted to use their own initiative.
14 5.0 Summary In this unit, you have been taken throuh five more principles in management.
These are principles of equity, stability of tenure, espirit de corps, initiative and scalar chain.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What do you understand by the principle of equity?
2.
Discuss the principle of initiative?
3.
Write briefly on the principle of stability of tenure?
7.0 References and Further Reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 15 Module 1: Unit 5 Managerial Functions in an Agricultural Extension Organisation Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Managerial functions- planning 3.2 Managerial functions- organizing 3.3 Managerial functions- staffing 3.4 Managerial functions-supervision 3.5 Managerial functions- controlling 4.0Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Management of every organization has various statutory functions that they perform on a day-to-day basis or periodically such that the aims and objectives of the organization can be achieved.
In agricultural extension organizations these functions do not differ from what obtains in other organization.
In this unit, we shall consider those functions that are germane to extension activities.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to 16 1.
Highlight the major managerial functions of agricultural extension organisations 2.
Discuss the major managerial functions of agricultural extension organisations.
3.1 Planning Planning involves the selection of mission and objectives and the action to achieve them.
It requires decision making, that is, the choosing of future courses of action from among alternatives.
Organizing Organizing involves establishing an intentional structure of roles for people to fill in an organization.
It is intentional in the sense of making sure that all the tasks necessary to accomplish goals are assigned to people who can do them best.
This organizational structure helps in creating an environment for human performance.
Staffing Staffing involves filling and keeping filled, the position in the organizations structure.
This is done by identifying work-force requirements; inventorying the people available and recruiting, selecting, placing, promoting, appraising, planning the careers of, compensating and training or otherwise developing both candidates and current job holders so that tasks are accomplished effectively and efficiently.
3.4 Leading or supervision Leading or supervision involves influencing people so that they all contribute to organization and group goals.
It has to do predominantly with the interpersonal aspect of managing.
Leadership involves motivation, leadership styles, approaches and communication.
17 3.5 Controlling Controlling is measuring and correcting individual and organizational performance to ensure that events conform to plans.
It involves measuring performance against goals and plans, showing where deviations from standards exist and helping to correct them.
4.0 Conclusion Managerial functions in agricultural extension organisations begin from the planning stage in determining the objectives to pursue and how to do it.
This leads to the recruiting and management of staff to ensure that objectives are met.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have been exposed to the five basic managerial functions of agricultural extension organizations, which include planning, organizing, staffing, supervision and control 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss the planning function of managers of agricultural extension organizations 2.
Discuss the staffing function of managers of agricultural extension organizations 3.
Discuss the organizing function of managers of agricultural extension organizations 4.
Discuss the control function of managers of agricultural extension organizations 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 18  Module 2: Unit 1 Theories Used in Agricultural Extension Organisations Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Definition of theory 3.2 Purpose of theories 3.3 Theories of extension organization-functional theory 3.4 Theories of extension organization-decision making theory 3.5 Theories of extension organization-human relations theory 4.0Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Theories help us to make predictive judgments about what could happen in the occurrence of certain events.
Among humans involved in work relationships, there is the need for those who manage them to be able to predict actions and reactions of their staff.
This will enable better planning and decision-making.
In this unit, we shall begin to examine theories used in the management of extension organization 2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you will be able to 1.
Define what a theory is, 19 2.
Discuss the usefulness of theories and 3.
State some theories of extension organization management 3.1 Definition of Theory A theory is an explicit and objective statement of which either by summary or speculation suggests that a relationship exist between data or knowledge and the reasoning from this observation.
It is also a relationship between factors or the ordering of such facts in some meaningful way.
Theory is a speculative idea or plan of how something might be done.
It is the systematic statement of principles involved in some certain observed phenomenon.
3.2 Purpose of theories Theories are useful in agricultural extension organization management as they help managers and administrators in the execution of their duties.
Theories of Extension organization serve the following purposes.
1.
A basis for research 2.
A guideline to administration and organization of action 3.
It serves as a guide to the application of new knowledge 4.
A basis for decision making operations and action in organization 5.
It helps to understand, predict and adjust management behaviour more objectively and systematically.
However, no single theory can achieve the objectives set above.
Thus, the different theories compliment the other in providing the framework for proper understanding of management operation.
In this subunit, the six theories of management that will be examined are: 1.
Functional theory 2.
Decision making theory 20 3.
Human relation theory 4.
Fusion theory 5.
Social process theory 6.
Theory X, Y and Z 3.3 Theories of agricultural extension organization- Functional theory This theory is accredited to Fredrick Taylor.
It explains administrative behaviour in terms of administration process and formal function of the administrator.
The theory divides the function of an administrator into minute components of 1.
Planning 2.
Organizing 3.
Staffing 4.
Directing 5.
Coordination 6.
Reporting 7.
Budgeting The functional theory assumes a division of labour among employers, which leads to three basic sub-concepts of 1.
Division of labour i.e.
providing specific responsibilities to individuals i.e.
making them responsible 2.
Specialization i.e.
making individuals concentrates on one activity to acquire proficiency and expertise in it.
3.
Line-staff relationship i.e.
the relationship between the administrators (line) and the professional (staff) 21 Principles underlying the functional theory include 1.
Specialization which helps to lead efficiency 2.
Staff structure and hierarchy, which reveals each staff responsibility and line or authority.
This also leads to efficiency.
3.
Span of control, which helps to ascertain the number of persons that is economically profitable to the organization 4.
Adequate delegation of authority which helps a subordinate to be able to take responsibility in the absence of her superior 5.
Job evaluation by supervisors which helps management assess employee activities and thus remunerate accordingly 3.4 Decision Making Theory This theory established decision making in an organization as the complex of human association, events and activities leading to and including any conclusion for a programme of policy and or operation.
It helps to identify the best course of action from a set of objectives/ alternatives.
It suggests that no single individual takes decision alone in any organization.
The decision maker makes decisions within an environment.
The goals or ends to be achieved must be stated.
Relevant alternatives to accomplishing the goals must be stated which must be ordered in preference.
The choice is finally made and the decision maker must be ready to accept responsibility for the decision taken.
3.5 Human Relations Theory This theory suggests that interaction of people in terms of endeavour and the integration of people into work situation which motivates them to walk cooperatively and satisfactory.
It infers that individuals should be able to fit into another‘s shoe and be able to see things in another point 22 of view.
Another aspect of the theory also suggest the primary roles of the administrator as being concerned with the causal forces which make a group or an individual think or being motivated to produce effectively and with satisfaction in his/her work.
The theory believes that wages alone do not bring satisfaction to work.
Those other non- physical factors are divided into two (a) hygiene factors and (b) motivator factors.
4.0Conclusion The theories we have considered in this unit makes it clear that various situations and circumstances do occur in agricultural extension organization, which administrators will have to deal with.
These theories will help them to make informed decisions even about futuristic actions of the organization and the individual staff.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about the definition of theories, usefulness of theories and three of the theories used by administrators of agricultural extension organisations.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is a theory?
2.
What is the usefulness of theories in an organization?
3.
Discuss three theories used by administrators of agricultural extension organisations used 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 23 Module 2: Unit 2 Theories Used in Agricultural Extension Organisation II Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Theories of extension organization-social process theory 3.2 Theories of extension organization-fusion theory 3.3 Theories of extension organization- theory X and Y 3.4 Theories of extension organization- theory Z 4.0Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we started examining some theories, which administrators of agricultural extension organisations use in the conduct of their functions.
This we have seen to be of great importance and help in helping them make decisions.
In this unit, we shall conclude discussions on the theories.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit you should be able discuss some more theories used by administrators of agricultural extension organization.
3.1 Theories of extension organization II - Social Process Theory This theory pioneered by Hawthrone is based on the philosophy that accepts organizational behaviours as a system of mutually interdependent variables.
This theory sees an organization as a 24 complex of mutually dependent variables functioning and related to a social field.
These variables include persons and their motives, attitudes, beliefs sentiments, jobs and activities, the physical work setting and the formal or informal organization itself.
These factors and more others are related in complex whole.
This theory makes organizations loose their distinctiveness and find meanings in terms of human behaviour and the operation of the total system.
This theory thus emphasizes the interaction among the parts rather than the component parts in isolation of each other.
3.2 Fusion Theory This theory postulated by Max Weber is based on the concepts of socialization and personalization.
It believes there is a simultaneous operation of the two concepts, where the organization attempts to restructure the individual as an agent for the accomplishment of its goals (socialization).
On the other hands, the individual also tries to use the organization as a medium through which to achieve his personal objective that is, personalization.
The administrator should therefore understand this and balance these two forces.
3.3 Theory X and Y This theory believes that scientific management and administration can predict and control human behaviour.
The theories assert that the behaviour of the individual in any work environment depends on the type of administration style employed on the individual.
Theory X believer an average person hates work and should be coerced or threatened to perform at desired level.
He avoids responsibility and prefers to be controlled, can only work if he is going to be punished or rewarded for doing so and in an industrial setting, less than his full potential is utilized.
25  Theory Y is the opposite of theory X and believes an average person has positive attitude towards work, achieves the highest level of performance though self initiative, has a sense of responsibility, has basic needs and works through motivation, commitment, satisfaction and self direction.
He actualized his dreams through self-initiative and personal development.
Theory X is based on the principle of control and direction through the exercise of power and authority while theory Y is based on the creation of a situation in which the individual can achieve its goals through self-ambition and desire while also meeting organizational objectives.
3.4 Theory Z This believes there is no ideal situation where we have either situation of theory X and Y in operation.
This theory reconciles the two theories.
It believes the individual and organization are always in conflict because of the dual role of consumer and producer.
The role of the administrator is thus to collate the aggregate demand of individual consumers and producers to meet that demand necessary for the attainment of organization goals.
This theory assumes that by discipline of the organization and confidence of the individual in the organization, through a precise system of communication and the assurance that the organization is out to secure the workers welfare, the lapses of theory X and Y can be overcome.
4.0Conclusion The theories we have discussed in this unit has revealed that administrators of extension organisations needs to understand the different variables that influence and motivate staff under their control.
Thus the theories will help to properly manipulate these variables which exists within the organization and the individual to the accomplishment of organizational goals 26 5.0 Summary In this section, we concluded on the various theories of agricultural extension organization management.
You should now be able to discuss what we mean by the theories of fusion, social process, X, Y and Z.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss the theory of social process 2.
What do you understand by theories X, Y and Z?
3.
Discuss the fusion theory.
7.0 References and Further Reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman, W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual Module 2: Unit 3 Roles, Responsibilities & Attributes of Agricutural Extension Personnel Table of Content 27 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Concept of roles and responsibilities of extension personnel 3.2 Roles and responsibilities of the village extension agent.
3.3 Roles and responsibilities of the subject matter specialist 3.4 Roles and responsibilities of the supervisory staff or extension officers 3.5 Critical attributes of extension personnel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Human resources form the bedrock of the agricultural extension system.
This is because they are the ones that actually do the job of information and technology dissemination.
It is thus necessary to clarify what each person does to enhance effectiveness and reduce clash of roles and responsibilities.
This we shall look into in this unit.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to understand i.
What a job description is ii.
The roles of various personnel in the extension organization and iii the critical attributes of extension personnel.
3.1 Concept of Roles and Responsibilities of Various Levels of Extension personnele 28 A job description gives the details of what is expected from the current jobholder.
On the other hand, key performance areas are specific and show the critical functions relevant at present and for the future to achieve the objectives.
The identification of key performance areas helps in role clarity as well as in delegation of functions.
This in turn aids in performance appraisal and training.
Generally, four or five key areas for a job are identified.
The core extension personnel of developing countries consist of village extension workers, subject-matter specialists and supervisory staff or extension officers.
Examples of key performance areas of core extension personnel are given below.
3.2 Roles and responsibilities of the Village Extension Workers.
The following constitute the roles and responsibilities of the people in this category (1) make regular and systematic visits to villages and farms to develop rapport with the clientele and to understand their problems; (2) undertake educational activities in the form of meetings, campaigns, demonstrations, field days, training sessions and exhibitions; and (3) provide advisory services to the farmers and solve their production problems.
3.3 Roles and responsibilities of the Subject-Matter Specialists.
The following constitute the roles and responsibilities of people in this category (1) Keep abreast of current recommendations and findings related to farm production by maintaining continuous contact with agricultural research stations; (2) Provide feedback to the research system about farmers' problems which need solutions; and 29 (3) Train and backstop village extension workers on the latest farm technology and help them in solving field problems.
3.4 Roles and responsibilities of Supervisory Staff or Extension Officers.
The following constitute the roles and responsibilities of people holding these positions (1) Plan, organize, coordinate and implement extension programmes and activities; (2) Supervise and monitor the work of field staff, providing guidance, motivation, and evaluation of performance; and (3) Coordinate the programme with inter-and intradepartmental agencies.
3.5 Critical Attributes for Extension Personnel The key performance areas indicate the important roles and contributions of different categories of extension personnel.
Once the roles are delineated, they can be analysed to indicate the attributes, which can discriminate an effective from an ineffective role occupant.
These critical attributes consist of qualities such as educational qualifications, skills, experience, physical characteristics, mental abilities, values, and attitudes needed for extension.
The critical attributes needed for field-level and supervisory extension staffs are necessary formal training in agriculture, practical skills and experience in farming, and knowledge of modern farm practices.
Abilities in group dynamics, human relations and communication are also important.
Basic skills related to management and leadership are needed by extension supervisors.
Values and attitudes such as faith in rural people, commitment to agricultural development, and concern for the whole community are important for all extension personnel 4.0 Conclusions 30  In every organisation, people have different roles geared towards the fulfillment of organizational goals.
It is thus essential to help every individual to know and understand the part he/she is to play in the whole arrangement.
Such individuals must also possess skills and attributes that will enable them carry out such roles effectively and efficiently.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about what a job description entails the roles and responsibilities of extension personnel within the organization and the critical attributes needed in extension personnel.
A job description gives details of what is expected from a current jobholder.
We also examined various critical attributes needed by extension personnel such as educational qualifications, skills, experience, physical characteristics, mental abilities, values, and attitudes needed for extension.
6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
What do you understand by a job description?
2.
List the roles of the following a. village extension agent b. subject matter specialist and c. extension officer 3.
Identify five necessary attributes of extension personnel 7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 31 Module 2: Unit 4: Staff Recruitment, Selection, Placement and Supervision in Extension Organisation Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation 3.2 Principles of staff recruitment in Extension Organisation 3.3 Steps in Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation-Job design 3.4 Steps in Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation –Managerial appraisal 3.5 Steps in Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation - Advertisement 4.0Conclusion 5.0Summary 6.0Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction People make up organizations.
They are the ones who use the available resources to accomplish organization objectives.
To this end managers recruit, select, place and promote people.
This will have to be done within organizational policies as well as the external environment such as laws, regulations etc 2.0 Objectives This unit will make you have knowledge of the following 1. how staff is recruited for extension activities 2. how staff are selected for extension activities 32 3. how staff are placed for extension activities 4. how to motivate staff in extension organisation 3.1 Staff Recruitment in Extension Organisation Recruitment is important in selecting the right kind of extension personnel.
Since the job of extension personnel calls for technical skills as well as commitment and willingness to educate rural people, an appropriate selection system is essential to ensure the right selection.
The success of extension depends heavily upon selection of qualified and motivated personnel.
Extension organizations in developing countries use two major sources of recruitment: from outside and from within.
Entry-level positions such as village extension workers and agricultural extension officers are filled by outside recruitment, using the services of government placement agencies.
Other channels of recruitment are advertisements, private placement agencies, professional search firms, and educational institutions.
In some countries, farmers are recruited to help extension agents Most of the extension departments in developing countries have the policy of promoting or recruiting within for middle-level and top-level positions.
The advantages of this policy are that it promotes loyalty and provides opportunities for existing extension staff to get high-level positions.
However, its greatest disadvantage is that it prevents the lateral entry of talented extension personnel and promotes complacency because seniority ensures promotion.
3.2 Principles of staff recruitment in extension organizations The purpose of staffing is based on two principles.
The first principle is the principle of staffing objectives.
This is to ensure that those qualified fill the positions and those who are able and willing occupy such positions.
The second principle is that of staffing.
This means the clearer 33 the definition of organizations roles, their human requirements, techniques of appraisal and training, the more assurance of managerial quality.
The first principle stresses the importance of desire and ability to undertake the responsibilities of management and the second principle rests upon the important body of knowledge concerning management principles.
This means that any organization that does not have established job definition, staff appraisal and system of training and development will have to rely on coincidence or outside sources to fill positions with people.
3.3 Steps in staff recruitment-Job description Selection is the process of choosing from among candidates from within the organization or from outside the most suitable person for the current position or for future positions.
The selection of extension staff starts with a description of the job for which candidates are sought.
The kind of technical or academic qualification, pay and other remuneration must also be set forth from the beginning.
3.4 Steps in staff recruitment- Managerial appraisal This step involves the setting of criteria or qualification required for persons who will fill the position.
Educational, technical and other personal attributes of the would be staff are set forth at this stage.
The type and period of experience required of such persons are also decided upon.
3.5 Steps in staff recruitment -Advertisement After criteria for each position has been set forth, the job opportunities are then made known to all potential applicants through advertisement.
This could be an internal advertisement i.e.
within the organization or an external one i.e.
open to those outside the organization or both.
34 The wider the publicity the more assurance that well qualified candidates will be attracted for the positions.
This could be through newspapers, bulletins, magazines of related agricultural institutions etc.
The help of extension workers' training centres, agricultural colleges, rural institutions and local government agencies may be sought to give wide publicity, as well as to inform candidates living in rural areas.
4.0Conclusion For achievement of organizational goals in the most effective and efficient manner, it is important that personnel involved in such activities be of the right kind and quality.
This is the import of recruitment.
Thus, necessary principles need to be followed such that sentiments and biases are not introduced into the process.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt what recruitment is vis a vis the necessary steps in the recruitment exercise.
Furthermore, principles that guide recruitment exercises have been elucidated and have also been explained 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
What do you understand by recruitment of staff?
2.
What principles should guide the recruitment of personnel for agricultural extension organisations?
3.
Identify the steps in recruitment of staff that you have learnt in this unit.
7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 35 Module 2 Unit 5 Steps in Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation II Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Steps in Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation II -Short listing 3.2 Steps in Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation- Interview 3.3 Steps in Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation- Placement 3.4 Steps in Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation – Induction and orientation 3.5 Steps in Staff recruitment in Extension Organisation – Advantages of induction 4.0Conclusion 5.0Summary 6.0Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction We started examining the steps in staff recruitment in extension organizations in the last unit.
In this unit, we shall conclude on the remaining steps for staff recruitment.
We shall also look into staff placement and their supervision.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to i.
State the remaining steps in the recruitment of staff for extension organizations.
36 ii.
You should also be able to understand what we mean by supervision.
3.1 Short listing Short listing is the process of sorting out the applications received to identify those who met the set requirements.
The educational qualifications, type and years of experience etc are scored and a cut off mark is set.
The scores of the candidates may also be arranged in descending order and the number that fall within that required for the interview are selected.
3.2 Interview The interview is the most frequently used by management in evaluating potential candidates.
However because selection of extension personnel demands cognitive and non-cognitive abilities, various tests are also employed to test this areas of the potential candidates.
Testing cognitive ability includes a knowledge test, a skill or ability test, and an aptitude test.
A non-cognitive test is a measure of behavioural dimensions which are important for field- level extension personnel, including concern for and commitment to rural people, empathy, problem-solving orientation, high motivation to influence and educate farmers, ability to work under unsupervised and difficult village conditions, patience and persistence, and team spirit.
The assessment centre approach, originally used during World War II, can also be used to select extension staff.
In this approach, an organization develops its internal resources for assessing new staff.
The candidates to be recruited go through a number of simulation exercises, and an expert assesses their behaviour.
The techniques used are a psychological test, role-play, in- basket exercise, group discussion, projective test, knowledge test and interviews.
37 3.3 Placement of Extension Staff Best of the candidates who meet the requirements of the organization from the interview stage are given employment.
They are then placed within the organization.
Placement of staff is a decisive step by management, which involves matching what the supervisor reasons the new staff can do with what the job demands (requirement), the strain and working conditions etc.
A placement approach, where there is no specific requirements for staff to be recruited can also be used in selection of staff.
The staff after being found employable is placed on a job position or another designed for him based on his strength and weakness as revealed during the selection process.
3.4 Induction or orientation After employing people, they should be welcomed by the organization.
Induction or orientation is a formal welcoming wherein new staffs are made to meet the organization i.e.
briefed on what the organization is about, their vision, goals, processes etc.
Induction has to do with indoctrinating the new staff giving in the manner of operations of the organization.
It is like a socialization of the new staff.
They are made to understand what is required of them in their new jobs.
It gives a brief over view of what the organization stands for, the facilities and opportunities available for them etc.
the staff are also taken round the establishment to meet people in the different departments they will be working with.
3.5 Advantages of induction or orientation Many things could go wrong within an organization even after employing qualified staff.
This could be because of many reasons.
Among them is the fact that they are new within the 38 organization and despite their prior knowledge of their professional activity, they may not know the workings of their new environment.
This is why induction or orientation is deemed necessary.
Induction and orientation for newly employed staff also have the following advantages 1.
It provides the new employee with general information about the organizations policies, procedures, practices or rules that will affect them.
2.
It helps them to rapidly learn to measure up with the standard for performance, thus increasing the value of the organization in satisfying their human needs for personal growth on the job.
3.
It helps to keep accidents, damage to machineries and equipment vis a vis clash of roles to the barest minimum 4.
Dissatisfactions, complains and absenteeism can be greatly reduced to the barest minimum as they will know how to go about informing the organization on such issues 5.
It helps new staff to quickly adapt itself to the new working environment and also will be ready to learn new task or skills necessary to meet necessary obligations.
4.0 Conclusion Every staff after being employed needs to be made to understand the philosophies and principles guiding the operation of such organisations.
This will help them to work in tandem to the organizational principles and philosophies and not against it.
The orientation process will also assist them to know what benefits they have to gain as they work in such organisations.
The 39 activities discussed in this study will help agricultural extension staff to quickly integrate into the system and achieve organisational goals.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt the remaining steps in the recruitment process, which includes short listing, interview, placement, induction or orientation as well as the advantages of induction.
6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
Identify methods used during the interview stage for agricultural extension organisations.
2.
What do you understand by induction and orientation?
3.
What are the advantages of induction or orientation?
7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 40 Module 3 Unit 1 Supervision within the Agricultural Extension Organisation.
Table of content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Supervision – concept and principles 3.2 Roles of supervisor 3.3 Functions of supervisor- Direction and organization 3.4 Functions of supervisor-motivating the extension personnel 3.5 Functions of supervisor- work group management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 Introduction When a group of people interacts together within an organisation to achieve a purpose, there is need for coordination of activities to ensure that activities go on as planned and that interpersonal interactions are mediated for smooth running of the organisations.
Persons responsible for such functions will also need to understand the principles guiding their interaction with their subordinates.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you must be knowledgeable about 1.
The concept of supervision 41 2.
The principles guiding supervisory roles 3.
The different functions of a supervisor 3.1 Supervision –Concept and principles Supervision is defined as the art of working with a group of people over whom authority is exercised in such a way as to achieve their greatest combined effectiveness in getting work done.
It involves the provision of administrative leadership, guidance and delegation of authority necessary for the satisfactory attainment of both organizational objectives and employee goals.
Traditionally the supervisor defines standard and regulates reward and punishment.
He interprets government policies, coordinates budget and gives enough room for the individual worker to perform the task of his job.
Supervision entails helping workers to greater competency and growth as individuals.
The two major functions of supervision are therefore task orientation (direction and organization of activities,) and concern for employees (motivation of employees and management of work groups).
Supervision is a purposeful activity.
This purpose makes it imperative that principles necessary to guide their attainment be developed.
Principles upon which effective supervision is based includes 1.
A clear understanding of the objectives and roles of supervision in the whole organization by all extension staff 2.
Supervisor must have authority to carry out his responsibilities 3.
Supervisory role must be democratic and exercise authority only when situation demands 4.
Supervisor must be confident, shows enthusiasm and takes initiative in directing the efforts of others in striving towards organizational objectives 42 5.
Delegation of appropriate authority to individuals who are in the best position to make decisions appropriate at that level.
6.
All supervisors within the organization must share common insight and willingly accept the team work pattern in supervision 7.
Vertical and horizontal communication must be maintained between supervisors and those with whom they work.
3.2 Roles of the supervisor The following are some of the roles of the supervisor 1.
The coordination of staff and work in different locations and at different levels of the organization.
2. providing information and communication link between supervisee and management 3. providing administrative and logistic support to staff 4.
Interpreting programs and project policies at intermediate level and providing information for policy formulation at management level.
5. monitoring and appraising production, performance of staff and project 6. planning staff development and training programs 7. providing conducive environment for work 8.
Applying sanctions, rewards and punishment where necessary to ensure compliance and performance in accordance with agreed standards.
3.3 Functions of supervisors-Direction and organization Two major functions of supervision are task orientation and concern for employees.
Therefore, direction and organization of activities, motivation of employees, and management of work groups are the important functions of extension supervisors.
We shall discuss the first function 43 here.
Extension supervisors have to plan the work and maintain a high standard of performance.
The whole process of job analysis, identification of key performance areas, and performance appraisal will help in planning and organizing extension work.
The training and visit system of extension has introduced mechanisms for defining goals, planning, and scheduling work at the field level with provisions for monitoring and evaluation.
Some of the management techniques used by extension organizations in overall planning and management of programmes are the programme evaluation and review technique (PERT/critical path method (CPM), management by objectives (MBO), programme and performance budgeting system (PPBS), and time management techniques.
These techniques have been practised by extension organizations in Asian and African countries with varying success.
Personal computers offer good scope for extension managers to increase certain managerial skills.
3.4 Functions of supervisors- Motivating the extension personnel The work motivation and morale of extension staff, as reported earlier, are very poor in many countries.
The reasons are many.
The bureaucratic structure of extension administration, lack of rewards and incentives, poor facilities, poor promotional avenues, and the low esteem given to extension are the major causes of poor motivation and morale.
Extension supervisors should have the ability to motivate and lead the field extension workers so that the field agents perform more than routine jobs, and supervisors should be involved in attaining excellence in extension work.
This calls for extension managers having an understanding of various theories of motivation as applicable to frontline extension agents.
Therefore, knowledge of major theories of motivation such as Maslow's hierarchy of needs theory, Herzberg's two-factor theory, McClelland's need theory, theory X and theory Y, and expectancy theory of motivation is essential.
Special training for developing motivation among field-workers has to be undertaken by supervisors.
44 3.5 Functions of supervisors- Work group management Every organization has formal and informal groups.
Formal groups are established by the management, while informal groups are spontaneous and developed to satisfy mutual interest of the members.
Because work groups have a considerable influence on the work situation, supervisors should be sensitive to the needs of the group and develop skills to guide and achieve the group's goal, which will benefit the organization and the members.
Effective extension supervision can use work groups in problem solving because they can provide many creative solutions.
One way to improve supervisory effectiveness in extension work is to develop a leadership style, which represents the extension workers' group interest at the higher level of organization.
This will increase the confidence and morale of the work group.
An understanding of group dynamics and their implications for increasing work-group performance is essential for extension supervisors.
For example, in the "Hawthorne Effect‖, increased performance due to special treatment of the group can be effectively used in extension organizations Studies have also pointed out that well-developed group dynamics result in increased extension performance.
4.0 Conclusion Supervision provides the administrative leadership, guidance and delegation of authority necessary for the satisfactory attainment of both organizational objectives and employee goals.
It is thus important that such functions are done in line with the appropriate principles .
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt the meaning of supervision, the principles guiding supervisory activities and the functions of supervisors of agricultural extension organisations.
6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
What is supervision?
45 2.
What are the principles guiding supervisory activities in an agricultural extension organisation?
3.
Discuss the functions of a supervisor.
7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman, W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 46 Module 3 Unit 2 Staff training and development within the Extension Organization Table of content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Staff training and development within the Extension Organization 3.2 Learning theories and training 3.3 Approaches to training- traditional approach 3.4 Approaches to training-experiential 3.5 Approaches to training- performance based approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 Introduction Deficiencies in knowledge, skills and ability among extension personnel, particularly those of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, are remarkable.
Statistics revealed that about 39 per cent of the extension personnel worldwide have a secondary-level and 33 per cent had intermediate-level education.
Moreover, within each region, there is a lot of variation in basic academic qualifications of the frontline extension workers, SMS, and administrators.
Differences in training received are also wide.
In Africa, most frontline extension workers still have only a secondary 47 school diploma.
The poor educational background of extension personnel necessitates regular training.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should have knowledge of 1.
Staff training and development within an agricultural extension organisation 2.
Learning theories and principles and 3.
Approaches to training in an agricultural extension organisation 3.1 Staff training and development within the Extension Organization Training is the process of acquiring specific skills to perform a job better.
It helps people to become qualified and proficient in doing some jobs.
Usually an organization facilitates the employees' learning through training so that their modified behaviour contributes to the attainment of the organization's goals and objectives.
Training is also defined as the process of teaching, informing or educating people so that (1) they may become as well qualified as possible to do their job, and (2) they become qualified to perform in positions of greater difficulty and responsibility The training of extension personnel contributes directly to the development of human resources within extension organizations.
"Training programmes are directed towards maintaining and improving current job performance, while development programmes seek to develop skills for future jobs".
Training has to start with the identification of training needs through job analysis, performance appraisal, and organisational analysis.
Once the training needs of extension personnel 48 have been identified, the next step is to organize training programmes.
Methods such as games, role-playing, simulation exercises and case study can be used in extension organizations to create learning situations based on experience.
Training based on actual field experience should be emphasized.
Emerging new farm technologies such as integrated pest management and improved practices in horticulture call for actual field experience.
Extension agents need training not only in the technological aspects but also in human relations, problem solving, sensitivity towards disadvantaged groups and the basic concepts of management.
3.2 Learning theories and training Learning theories are the basic materials, which are usually applied in all educational and training activities.
The more one understands learning theories, the better he or she will be able to make decisions and apply them to achieving the objectives.
The behaviorists, the cognitivists and the humanists emphasize different aspects of the teaching-learning process in their approaches.
While the behaviourists stress external conditions (environment) resulting in observations and measurable changes in behaviour, the cognitivists are more concerned with how the mind works (mental processes such as coding, categorizing, and representing information in memory).
The humanists, on the other hand, emphasize the affective aspects (e.g., emotions, attitudes) of human behaviour that influence learning (IRRI, 1990).
In extension systems, effective training must be able to take care of all the theories of learning in order to change the action, belief and knowledge components of a trainee simultaneously.
Andragogy (a theory of adult learning) is usually used rather than pedagogy (a theory of child learning) in extension training.
49 3.3 Approaches to training- traditional approach There are three approaches to training: (1) the traditional approach, (2) the experiential approach, and (3) the performance-based approach.
We shall be discussing the first approach in this section.
In the traditional approach, the training staff designs the objectives, contents, teaching techniques, assignments, lesson plans, motivation, tests and evaluation.
The focus in this model is intervention by the training staff.
3.4 Approaches to training-experiential In the experiential approach, the trainer incorporates experiences where in the learner becomes active and influences the training process.
Unlike the academic approach inherent in the traditional model, experiential training emphasizes real or simulated situations in which the trainees will eventually operate.
In this model, the trainers and trainees jointly determine the objectives and other elements of training.
Trainers primarily serve as facilitators, catalysts or resource persons.
3.5 Approaches to training- performance based approach In the performance-based approach to training, goals are measured through attainment of a given level of proficiency instead of passing grades of the trainees.
Emphasis is given to acquiring specific observable skills for a task.
This performance-based teacher education (PBTE) model is mostly task or skill centered and is also applicable to non-formal educational organizations such as extension.
4.0 Conclusion Training is important in agricultural extension organisations to help improve and refresh the capabilities of personnel to accomplish targeted goals.
More so as new trends emerges even in 50 the field of agriculture due to technological development, agricultural extension personnel knowledge and skill should be kept updated.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about staff training and development within an agricultural extension organization, theories of learning and the approaches to training and staff development within the organisation.
6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
What do you understand about staff development within an agricultural extension organisation?
2.
Discus the theories of learning as related to agricultural extension discussed in this unit 3.
What are the approaches to training used in an agricultural extension organisation?
7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman, W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 51 Module 3 Unit 3 Types of training in Agricultural Extension Organisations Table of content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Types of training –pre service 3.2 Types of training - in-service 3.3 Types of in-service training- induction or orientation 3.4 Types of in-service training-foundation training 3.5 Types of in-service training-on the job 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 Introduction Having discussed the approaches to training in the former unit, it is necessary to also know about the types of training opportunities that are open for use by agricultural extension organisations.
More so, as the organization need to continually, pass current and relevant messages to their clientele.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify as well as discuss the various types of training programmes 52  3.1 Types of training –pre service Training may broadly be categorized into two types: pre-service training and in-service training.
Pre-service training is more academic in nature and is offered by formal institutions following definite curricula and syllabuses for a certain duration to offer a formal degree or diploma.
Pre-service training is a process through which individuals are made ready to enter a certain kind of professional job such as agriculture, medicine or engineering.
They have to attend regular classes in a formal institution and need to complete a definite curriculum and courses successfully to receive a formal degree or diploma.
They are not entitled to get a professional job unless they earn a certificate, diploma or degree from the appropriate institution.
Preservice training contents emphasize mostly technical subject matter such as crops, animal husbandry, and fisheries as well as pedagogical skills to prepare the students to work in agriculture.
In general two types of pre-service training are available for agricultural staff.
These are (1) degree level (at least a bachelor's degree in agriculture or related field), which is usually offered for four years by a university or agricultural college; and (2) diploma level, which is mostly offered by the schools of agriculture for a period of two to three years.
The entry point for the former is normally twelve years of schooling and for the latter ten years of schooling.
3.2 Types of training - in-service In-service training, on the other hand, is offered by the organization from time to time for the development of skills and knowledge of the incumbents.
In-service training is a process of staff development for improving the performance of an incumbent holding a position with assigned job responsibilities.
It promotes the professional growth of individuals.
It is a program designed to strengthen the competencies of extension workers while they are on the job.
In-service 53 training is a problem-centered, learner-oriented, and time-bound series of activities, which provide the opportunity to develop a sense of purpose, broaden perception of the clientele, and increase capacity to gain knowledge and mastery of techniques.
In-service training may broadly be categorized into five different types: (1) induction or orientation training, (2) foundation training, (3) on-the-job training, (4) refresher or maintenance training, and (5) career development training.
All of these types of training are needed for the proper development of extension staff throughout their service life.
3.3 Types of in-service training- induction or orientation Induction training is given immediately after employment to introduce the new extension staff members to their positions.
It begins on the first day the new employee is on the job.
This type of training is aimed at acquainting the new employee with the organization and its personnel.
Induction training for all new personnel should develop an attitude of personal dedication to the service of people and the organization.
This kind of training supplements whatever pre-service training the new personnel might have had.
When people start to work in an organization for the first time, they are eager to know what sort of outfit they are getting into, what they are supposed to do and whom they will work with.
They are likely to be more attentive and open-minded than experienced employees.
In fact, the most favourable time for gaining employees' attention and for moulding good habits among them is when they are new to the job.
3.4 Types of in-service training-foundation training 54  Foundation training is in-service training, which is also appropriate for newly recruited personnel.
Besides technical competence and routine instruction about the organization, every staff member needs some professional knowledge about various rules and regulations of the government, financial transactions, administrative capability, communication skills, leadership ability, coordination and cooperation among institutions and their linkage mechanism, report writing, and so on.
Foundation training is made available to employees to strengthen the foundation of their service career.
This training is usually provided at an early stage of service life.
3.5 Types of in-service training-on the job This is ad hoc or regularly scheduled training, such as fortnightly training under the training and visit (T&V) system of extension, and is provided by the superior officer or the subject-matter specialists to the subordinate field staff.
This training is generally problem or technology oriented and may include formal presentations, informal discussion and opportunities to try out new skills and knowledge in the field.
The superior officer, administrator or subject-matter specialist of each extension department must play a role in providing on-the-job training to the staff while conducting day-to-day normal activities.
4.0 Conclusion Training and staff development is one aspect of agricultural extension that must be regular and continuous as there is a high rate of development in research and technological breakthroughs.
To this end agricultural extension personnel must be kept abreast of such developments which is accomplished through training.
5.0 Summary 55 In this unit you have learnt about training activities in an agricultural extension organisation which includes pre service training and its various forms as well as In-service training in its various forms like orientation, foundational training and on the job training.
6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
List the two major categories of training 2.
Discuss the importance of preservice training 3.
What do you understand by induction training?
7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 56 Module 3 Unit 4 Training in Agricultural Extension Ogranisation II Table of content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Types of in-service training –Maintenance or Refresher Training 3.2 Types of in-service training- Career or Development Training 3.3 Phases of training – Planning 3.4 Phases of training -Implementation phase 3.5 Phases of training- Evaluation phase 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 Introduction As discussed in the last unit, there are different types of in service training.
We shall continue in this unit to discuss two more types of in-service training and begin outlining the process that is to be followed in preparing for training activities 57 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to 1 Discuss about the remaining two types of in service training 2.
Identify the stages in planning training programmes for agricultural extension personnel.
3.1 Maintenance or Refresher Training This training is offered to update and maintain the specialized subject-matter knowledge of the incumbents.
Refresher training keeps the specialists, administrators, subject-matter officers, extension supervisors and frontline workers updated and enables them to add to the knowledge and skills they have already.
Maintenance or refresher training usually deals with new information and new methods, as well as review of older materials.
This type of training is needed both to keep employees at the peak of their possible production and to prevent them from getting into a rut.
Career or Development Training This type of in-service training is designed to upgrade the knowledge, skills and ability of employees to help them assume greater responsibility in higher positions.
The training is arranged departmentally for successful extension workers, at all levels, for their own continuing education and professional development.
Extension services organisations that provide the opportunity for all staff to prepare a plan for career training will receive the benefits of having longer tenured and more satisfied employees, which increases both the effectiveness and efficiency of an extension service.
Although extension workers are responsible for designing their own career development 58 education, the extension organization sometimes sets some criteria and provides opportunities for the staff by offering options.
Phases of training –planning stage Training is a circular process that begins with needs identification and after a number of steps ends with evaluation of the training activity.
A change or deficiency in any step of the training process affects the whole system, and therefore it is important for a trainer to have a clear understanding about all phases and steps of the training process.
In the broadest view, there are three phases of a training process: planning, implementation and evaluation.
The planning phase encompasses several activities, two of which - training needs identification and curriculum development - are very important.
3.3.1 Training Needs Identification.
Training need is a condition where there is a gap between "what is" and "what should be" in terms of incumbents' knowledge, skills, attitudes, and behaviour for a particular situation at one point in time.
This gap is called "a problem," which usually occurs when a difference exists between "desired performance" and "actual performance."
The needs identification process assists trainers in making sure that they have matched a training programme to a training problem.
Training needs identification is possible through different analytical procedures.
3.3.2 Curriculum Development.
This is the most important part in a training programme after a need for training has been identified.
The curriculum specifies what will be taught and how it will be taught.
It provides the framework and foundation of training.
The first phase of curriculum development determines what will be taught, that is, the training content.
59 3.4 Phases of training -Implementation phase Once the planning phase of a training programme is complete, then it is time to implement the course.
Implementation is the point where a trainer activates the training plan, or it is the process of putting a training programme into operation.
The first step towards implementing a training programme is publicity.
Most of the well- established training centres develop training brochures, which contain course descriptions, prepare an annual calendar of training opportunities and inform concerned organizations, agencies or departments well ahead of time about their training plans.
Once the training centre and concerned organizations agree to implement training, the next step is to arrange available resources such as sufficient funds for the course and facilities for food, lodging, transportation and recreation.
All these resources need to be well managed and coordinated to run the programme smoothly.
3.5 Phases of training- evaluation phase Evaluation is a process to determine the relevance, effectiveness and impact of activities in light of their objectives.
In evaluating an extension training programme, one needs to consider that most training activities exist in a larger context of projects, programmes and plans.
Training evaluation is a systematic process of collecting information for and about a training activity which can then be used for guiding decision making and for assessing the relevance and effectiveness of various training components."
The following are four criteria to evaluate training programmes: (1) reaction, (2) learning, (3) behaviour, and (4) results.
Each criterion is used to measure the different aspects of a training programme.
Reaction measures how the trainees liked the programme in terms of content, methods, duration, trainers, facilities and management.
Learning measures the trainees' skills and knowledge, which they were able to absorb at the time of training.
Behaviour is concerned with 60 the extent to which the trainees were able to apply their knowledge to real field situations.
Results are concerned with the tangible impact of the training programme on individuals, their job environment or the organization as a whole.
4.0 Conclusion Training and staff development in an agricultural extension organisation is a sine qua non.
This is because of the high turnover of new agricultural technology churned out by research.
This will help update the knowledge and skill of their staff to be able to cope effectively with the reality of the times.
It is thus necessary to properly identify what needs to be passed across to the staff vis a vis how it should be done.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about refresher training and career development for agricultural extension staff.
You have also learnt how to plan for training programmes.
6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
What do you understand by refresher training programmes?
2.
Discuss career development programmes for agricultural extension staff 3.
Itemize the stages in planning training programmes.
7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 61 Module 3 unit 5 Training in Agricultural Extension Ogranisation III Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Major procedures used in determining training needs-organizational analysis 3.2 Major procedures used in determining training needs- Individual analysis 3.3 Major procedures used in determining training needs-group analysis 3.4 Types of Evaluation 3.5 Selecting a Training Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 Introduction Having discussed the types of training programmes conducted for personnel in agricultural extension organisation, we also need to critically examine the various ways of determining such needs.
These needs could be on the organisational level, group or individual level.
Determination of needs to be met by training is essential if the training programme will be of benefit both to the staff as well as to the organisation.
After such training, there is also need to evaluate what has been done to ensure that the goal of such programme has been achieved.
62 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify the various ways of identifying the training needs within an agricultural extension organisation or within a group or that of an individual.
You should also be knowledgeable about how to evaluate training programmes.
3.1 Major procedures used in determining training needs-Organizational analysis Organizational analysis determines where training emphasis should be placed within the organization and is based on the objectives of an organization.
Concerning what one should do in analysing an organization.
It consists of four steps: 1.
Stating the goals and objectives of an organization 2.
Analysing the human resources 3.
Analysing efficiency indices 4.
Analysing the organizational climate The results of these analyses are then compared with the objectives of the organization.
These comparisons point to specific areas in which training is needed.
3.2 Major procedures used in determining training needs- Individual analysis Individual analysis aims at identifying specific training needs for an individual or group of employees so that training can be tailored to their needs.
This analysis centres on individuals and their specific needs concerning the skills, knowledge or attitudes they must develop to perform their assigned tasks.
The possible methods or techniques for individual analysis include performance appraisal, interviews, questionnaires, tests, analysis of behaviour, informal talks, checklist, counseling, critical incidents, recording, surveys, and observations.
63 3.3 Major procedures used in determining training needs- Group analysis Group analysis includes a number of techniques in which a group of well-informed employees discuss different aspects of the organization, the employees, and the tasks to identify the major discrepancies in achieving predetermined targets for each of them with a view to assessing training needs as distinguished from other necessary changes for removing these discrepancies.
The major techniques which are used in this approach are brainstorming, buzzing, cardsorts, advisory committee, conferences, problem clinic, role playing, simulation, task forces, workshops, and so forth.
Many problems exist in an organization, but some problems cannot be solved by training.
After a preliminary needs analysis, which gives probable causes and solutions, the results should be verified with the concerned personnel of the organization to determine whether training is an appropriate action to solve that problem.
3.4 Types of Evaluation On the basis of the time dimension, evaluation may be classified as (1) formative evaluation and (2) summative evaluation.
Formative evaluation involves the collection of relevant and useful data while the training programme is being conducted.
This information can identify the drawbacks and unintended outcomes and is helpful in revising the plan and structure of training programmes to suit the needs of the situation.
Summative evaluation is done at the end of the programme and makes an overall assessment of its effectiveness in relation to achieving the objectives and goals.
Evaluation could however be also classified into four major types: (1) evaluation for planning, (2) process evaluation, (3) terminal evaluation, and (4) impact evaluation.
64 3.4.1 Evaluation for planning provides information with which planning decisions are made.
Training contents and procedures (methods and materials) are usually planned at this stage in order to choose or guide the development of instructional aids and strategies.
3.4.2 Process evaluation is conducted to detect or predict defects in the procedural design of a training activity during the implementation phase.
Through this process the key elements of the training activities are systematically monitored, problems are identified, and attempts are made to rectify the mistakes before they become serious.
Process evaluation is periodically conducted throughout the entire period of the programme.
3.4.3 Terminal evaluation is conducted to find out the effectiveness of a training programme after it is completed.
The objectives of terminal evaluation are to determine the degree to which desired benefits and goals have been achieved, along with the causes of failure, if any.
3.4.4 Impact evaluation assesses changes in on-the-job behaviour as a result of training efforts.
It provides feedback from the trainees and supervisors about the outcomes of training.
It measures how appropriate the training was in changing the behaviour of participants in real-life situations.
3.5 Selecting a Training Method A training programme has a better chance of success when its training methods are carefully selected.
A training method is a strategy or tactic that a trainer uses to deliver the content so that the trainees achieve the objective.
Selecting an appropriate training method is perhaps the most important step in training activity once the training contents are identified.
There are many training methods, but not all of these are equally suitable for all topics and in all situations.
To achieve the training objective, a trainer should select the most appropriate training method for the content to involve the trainees in the learning process.
Four major factors are considered when selecting a training method: the learning objective, the content, the trainees and the practical 65 requirement.
Training methods should be selected because of the degree to which they do the following: 1.
Allow active participation of the learners.
2.
Help the learners transfer learning experiences from training to the job situation.
3.
Provide the learners with knowledge of results about their attempts to improve.
4.
Provide some means for the learners to be reinforced for the appropriate behaviour.
5.
Provide the learners with an opportunity to practise and to repeat when needed.
6.
Motivate the learners to improve their own performance.
7.
Help learners increase their willingness to change.
These criteria indicate that a single training method will not satisfy the objectives of a training programme.
Varieties of training methods are available to a trainer.
The most commonly used methods include: 1.
Instructor presentation.
The trainer orally presents new information to the trainees, usually through lecture.
Instructor presentation may include classroom lecture, seminar, workshop, and the like.
2.
Group discussion.
The trainer leads the group of trainees in discussing a topic.
3.
Demonstration.
The trainer shows the correct steps for completing a task, or shows an example of a correctly completed task.
4.
Assigned reading.
The trainer gives the trainees reading assignments that provide new information.
5.
Exercise.
The trainer assigns problems to be solved either on paper or in real situations related to the topic of the training activity.
66 6.
Case study.
The trainer gives the trainees information about a situation and directs them to come to a decision or solve a problem concerning the situation.
7.
Role play.
Trainees act out a real-life situation in an instructional setting.
8.
Field visit and study tour.
Trainees are given the opportunity to observe and interact with the problem being solved or skill being learned.
4.0 Conclusion Training and appropriate methods of training are prerequisite elements for every agricultural extension organisation, if they must remain relevant to the needs of its clientele.
This is because the effectiveness of the organisation rests on the knowledge of personnel as well as the necessary skills needed to make such knowledge bear upon their clientele.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learnt about the various way of determining training needs, methods of executing training programmes as well the different methods of evaluating the training activities to ascertain whether it fulfilled its objectives 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
Identify three procedures for determining training needs in an agricultural extension organisation 2.
Describe three ways you will use to evaluate training programmes 3.
List four factors to be considered in selecting a training method.
7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 67 Module 4 Unit 1 Motivation in Agricultural Extension Ogranisation Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Motivation 3.2 Motivators 3.3 Differentiating between motivation and satisfaction 3.4 Theories of motivation – hierarchy of needs theory 3.5 Theories of motivation- two-factor theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading Introduction The work motivation and morale of extension staff are very poor in many countries.
The reasons are many.
The bureaucratic structure of extension administration, lack of rewards and incentives, poor facilities, poor promotional avenues, and the low esteem given to extension are the major causes of poor motivation and morale.Extension supervisors should have the ability to motivate and lead the field extension workers so that the field agents perform more than routine jobs, and supervisors should be involved in attaining excellence in extension work.
This calls for extension managers having an understanding of various theories of motivation as applicable to frontline extension agents.
68 Objectives In this unit, you will learn about motivation and what can be used to motivate staff.
The differences between motivation and satisfaction will also be made clear.
You will also be introduced to the theories of motivation.
3.1 Motivation Motivation is a general term applying to the entire class of desire, drives, needs, wishes and similar forces.
It is the drive and effort to satisfy a want or goal.
When someone is motivated, it means something was done to satisfy the inert drives and desires in the person, which now made the person to act in a desired manner.
It is the act of creating a situation in which actions that provide net satisfaction to individual members of the enterprise and which at the same time make appropriate contribution towards the objectives of the enterprise.
It is trying to increase individual satisfaction or to reduce individual dissatisfaction.
It is a form of inducement to do something, a drive towards an outcome and includes the entire class of drives, desires, needs, wishes and similar forces.
Human motives are based on needs, whether consciously or subconsciously felt.
Some are primary needs, such as the physiological requirements for water, air, food etc.
other needs may be regarded as secondary such as self esteem, status, affiliation with other, self actualization etc.
The causes of motivation may be unknown or known.
A motivator is something that influences an individual‘s behaviour.
Staff can be motivated through higher income, change in social status, promotion etc.
69 3.2 Motivators Motivators are things that induce an individual to perform.
While motivators reflects wants, motivators are the identified rewards or incentives that sharpen the drive to satisfy these wants.
An administrators can do much to sharpened motives by establishing an environment favourable to certain drives.
For examples, people in an organization that has developed a reputation for excellence and high quality, tend to be motivated to contributed to this reputation.
A motivator is thus something that influence an individual behaviour.
It makes a difference in what a person will do.
It must be noted that people can often satisfy their wants in a variety of ways and also they can be motivated in a variety of ways.
Administrators should therefore identify the best mix of alternatives that will provide the necessary inducement for staff.
Rewards in the form of money i.e salary package, bonuses, increase in salary is the most used motivator, promotions based on performance is also another.
Penalties for performance below expectations like fear of loss of jobs, loss of income, loss of bonuses, demotion etc are also important motivators.
Another motivator is welfare packages for staff like free lunch, free medical care for the family, opportunities for loans and advances, career development programmes etc.
3.3 Difference between Motivation and Satisfaction Motivation is the drive and effort to satisfy a want (achieve an outcome) while satisfaction refers to the contentment experienced when a want is satisfied.
Satisfied staff are those who have been well motivated and were able to achieve their goals.
3.4 Theories of Motivation – Hierarchy of Needs Theory This theory was put forth by a psychologist Abraham Maslow.
He saw needs in the form of hierarchy ascending from the lowest to the highest and he conclude that when one set of needs is satisfied, this kind of need ceases to be a motivator.
70 The basic human needs placed by Maslow in an ascending order of importance are discussed below and shown in figure 1.
1.
Physiological needs These are the basic needs for sustaining human life itself, such as food, water, warmth, shelter and sleep.
The assumption is that until these needs are satisfied, to the degree necessary to maintain life, other needs will not motivate people.
2.
Security or safety needs These are the needs to be free of physical danger, and of the fear of losing a job, food, or shelter, until a person has food and shelter, he will not think of securing it.
3.
Affiliation and Acceptance Needs When people have the basic needs of life and feel secured, then thy will seek to affiliate /interact with others in their environment.
Since people are social beings, they need to belong to and be accepted by others.
4.
Esteem needs When people have been able to get themselves accepted, hey tend to have another need, to be held in esteem by others as well as themselves.
This produces the desired for power, prestige, status and self confidence.
They won‘t want to stay away among the crowds.
5.
Need for Self Actualization This is regarded as the highest need and it is the desire to become what is capable of becoming.
It is the need to maximize one‘s potential and to accomplish something.
Though this theory is being refuted in recent times, current research findings nevertheless have established two levels of needs that is, biological needs and other need.
They also confirm that those other needs only emerge when the biological needs have been met.
71  Need for Self- actualization Esteem needs Affiliation or Acceptance Needs Security or safety needs Physiological needs Figure 1: Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs 3.5 Two Factor Theory The two-factor motivations is a modification of Maslow‘s need approach.
It was put forth by Fredirick Iterzberg and his associates.
The two factors they recognized were grouped as dissatisfiers and satisfiers/ motivators.
Dissatisfiers also known as maintenance, hygiene or job context factors which include company policy and administration, supervision, working conditions, interpersonal relations, salary status, job security and personal life.
When they exist in a work environment in high quantity, they yield no dissatisfaction.
There presence does not motivate in the sense of yielding satisfaction.
However, their lack or absence would result in dissatisfaction.
These factors just keep the work going that is, maintenance.
72  The second group identified as satisfiers are related to the job content.
They include achievement, recognition, challenging work, advancement and growth on the jobs.
Their existence will yield feelings of satisfaction or no satisfaction (not dissatisfaction).
4.0 Conclusion Until certain basic needs of personnel are met, whether personal or that which has to do with their jobs, nothing else will be able to draw out the best from such workers.
The understanding of what motivates a person is a knowledge, which has helped agricultural extension organizations to be able to get the best from their staff.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learnt 1.
What motivation and motivators are?
2.
Maslows‘ theory of motivation and 3.
The two factor theory of motivation theories 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
What is motivation?
2.
Identify five motivators you have learnt in this unit] 3.
Discuss the Maslows theory of hierarchy of needs 7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 73 Module 4: Unit 2 Motivation in Agricultural Extension Ogranisation II Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Theory of motivation- expectancy theory 3.2 Theory of motivation- equity theory 3.3 Theory of motivation- reinforcement theory 3.4 Theory of motivation- McClelland‘s needs theory 3.5 Motivational techniques 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 Introduction Individuals are motivated by various factors at particular times, which may be different from what motivates another individual giving the same circumstances.
This is why we need to understand the various theories of motivation, so as to have a broad overview of the issue.
In this unit, we shall be concluding our discussions on the theories of motivation.
2.0 Objectives In this unit, you will learn four more theories relating to motivation.
At the end of the unit, you should be able to explain the following: 1.
Expectancy theory 74 2.
Equity theory 3.
Reinforcement theory 4.
McClelland‘s needs theory 3.1 Expectancy Theory This theory was propounded by a psychologist Victor Vroom.
He holds that, people will be motivated to do things to reach a goal if they belief in the worth of that goal and if they can see that what they do will help them in achieving.
In essence, peoples motivation toward doing anything will be determined by the value they place on the outcome of their effort (whether positive or negative), multiplied by the confidence they have that their efforts will materially aid in achieving a goal.
Motivation is thus the product of anticipated worth that an individual places on a goal and the chances he or she sees of achieving that goal.
Mathematically, Vrooms theory can be stated as force = valence x expectancy Where force is the strength of a person‘s motivation, valence, is the strength of an individual preference for an action outcome and expectancy as the probability that a particular action will lead to a deserved outcome.
However, a motive to accomplish something might be determined by a desire to accomplish something else.
For example working harder to reach more farmers for a promotion or rise in pay and not necessary for the value of the outcome of the effort.
3.2 Equity Theory This theory is based on an individuals subjective judgments about fairness of the reward she or he got, relative to the inputs (which include many factors such as effort, experience and 75 education), in comparison with the rewards of others.
Adam J.
S has received a great deal of credit for the formulation of the equity theory.
Mathematically put, Outcomes by a person = Outcomes by another person Inputs by a person inputs by another person If individuals feel that they are unequally rewarded, they may be dissatisfied, reduce the quantity or quality of output or leave the organization.
On the other hand, if they perceive the rewards as equitable, they probably will continue at the same level of output.
If they think the rewards are greater than what is considered equitable, they may work harder.
It is however to be noted that people may overestimate their own contributions and the rewards other receives.
Also certain inequalities may be tolerated for some time by staff, but prolonged feelings of inequality may result in strong reactions to an apparently minor occurrence.
For example, an employee queried for being a few minutes late may get angry and decide to quite the job.
This is not because of the query, but because of long-standing feelings that the rewards for his or her contributions are inequitable in comparison with other‘s equals.
Likewise, a person may be very satisfied with a weekly salary of N500 until he or she finds out that another person doing similar work get N200more.
3.3.
Reinforcement theory The reinforcement theory was developed by another psychologist, B. F. Skinner.
His approach to motivation is also called positive enrichment or behaviour modification.
He holds that individuals can be motivated by proper design of their work environment and praise for their performance.
He also argued that punishment for poor performance produces negative results.
Those who follow this theory, not only praise good performance, they analyse the work situation 76 to determine what causes workers to act the way they do and then they initiate changes to eliminated troublesome areas and obstructions to performance.
Specific goals are set with workers participation and assistance, while prompt, regular feed back of results is made available, and performance improvements are rewarded with recognition and praise.
In this approach, even when performance does not equal goals, ways are found to help people and praise them for the good things they do.
Giving people full information on organization problems, especially those in which they are involved, has been also found highly useful and motivating.
This approach strongly lies in its emphasis on the removal of obstructions to performance careful planning and organizing, control though feedback and the expression of communication.
3.4 McClelland’s Needs Theory This theory put forward by David McClelland identified three types of basic motivating needs.
This was classified as (a) the need for power, (b) the need for affiliation and (c) the need for achievement.
People with high need for power have a great concern for exercising influence and control.
They seek positions of leaderships and are frequently good conversationalist.
Though often argumentative, forceful, outspoken, heard headed and demanding.
They enjoy teaching and public speaking, People with high need for affiliation usually derive pleasure from being loved and tend to avoid pain of being rejected by a social group.
As individuals, they are likely to be concerned with maintaining pleasant social relationship.
To enjoy a sense of intimacy and understanding.
They are ready to console and help other in trouble and to enjoy friendly interactions with others.
77  Individuals with a high need for achievement have an intense desire for success and an equally intense fear of failure.
They want to be challenged and they set moderately difficult (but not impossible) goals for themselves.
They take a realistic approach to risk, they are not likely to be gamblers but rather prefer to analyse and assess problems, assume personal responsibility for getting a job done.
They also like specific and prompt feedback on how they are doing.
They tend to be restless, like to work long hours and do not worry unduly about failure.
In extension organizations, the need for affiliation is important as it deals primarily with people and such that coordination of the efforts of individuals working in groups can be effective.
4.0 Conclusion Having considered the various theories of motivation, it is explicit that various contributing factors are involved.
These stem from both internal and external forces working on the individual.
Managers of agricultural extension organization will thus make a success of their work if they put these factors into consideration in their administration.
Though only one theory will not be able to fully explain what could motivate an individual, using a mix of these theories will help accomplish much more.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about four more theories of motivation.
These include 1.
Expectancy theory 2.
Equity theory 3.
Reinforcement theory 4.
McClelland‘s needs theory 78 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
Explain the expectancy theory of motivation 2.
What are the three basic motivating needs put forward by McClelland?
3.
Discuss the main ingredients in the reinforcement theory 7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman,W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 79 Module 4: Unit 3: The Extension Organisation Working Environment Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Reward system 3.2 Improving working conditions at the field level 3.3 Career planning and development 3.4 Job enrichment and design 3.5 Role intervention 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction An important aspect of human resource management, which needs special attention in extension organizations, is the creation of a conducive working environment.
Extension staff works within an environment, which consists of different forces that enhance or could hinder the smooth flow of activities.
For management to effectively maximize the abilities of its staff, these factors need to be considered and moderated within organisation‘s policies and resources to bring out the best in its employees.
Issues like promotion within the organization and development of staff needs to be taken seriously.
80 2.0 Objectives This unit will help give you knowledge of how to create a conducive working environment for extension staff.
3.1 Reward system The reward system has to do in particular with the monetary package of extension personnel, which should attract, retain and motivate extension personnel.
Reward should however not be limited to monetary terms, it could also include provisions of opportunities for training and promotion.
A reward system which encourages superior performance so that pay and wage administration will be an effective tool to promote performance, motivation, and satisfaction should be adopted.
A clear job description, performance standards and performance appraisal will help in evaluating extension work and rewarding people for meritorious service.
Non-monetary rewards such as recognizing the good ideas of field workers or awarding honourable titles will also help in improving performance.
Extension personnel may also be encouraged to form professional societies to develop and communicate high standards, as well as to recognize superior performance.
A professional monthly journal or newsletter can help extension agents to communicate innovative ideas and reinforce superior performance.
Promotion may be a reward for out standing performance, past performance or because of the firm‘s desire to better utilize an individuals skills and abilities.
Promotion is a change within the organization to a higher position that has greater responsibilities and requires skills that are more advanced.
It usually involves higher status and an increase in pay.
Care should however be taken not to promote people into positions where they do not have the required competency.
Most of the extension departments in developing countries have the policy of promoting within for middle- level and top-level positions.
The advantages of this policy are that it promotes good morale, 81 loyalty and provides opportunities for existing extension staff to get high-level positions.
However, its greatest disadvantage is that it prevents the lateral entry of talented extension personnel and promotes complacency because seniority ensures promotion.
3.2 Improved Working Conditions at the Field Level.
Lower level extension workers often have to work under unpleasant and isolated conditions.
A carefully planned system of field allowance should be put in place.
The living conditions of field extension workers must be improved by providing adequate facilities for housing, transport, medical and educational allowances for children.
If personnel will be motivated to live and work among the rural people, better living conditions should be ensured for them and their families 3.3.
Career Planning and Development for Extension Personnel.
A career refers to all of the jobs that people hold during their working lives.
Career planning is the process by which employees plan their career goals and paths.
Career development refers to all of the technical and managerial skills employees acquire to achieve their career plans.
Career advancement, which gives a picture of future opportunities in terms of promotion, is a motivating factor for performance and development of skills.
As part of career development, extension personnel should be provided with opportunities to develop their technical and managerial skills to enable them to occupy higher positions.
3.4.
Job Enrichment and Job Design Job enrichment refers to detailed analysis of the work to know the factors which make it a satisfying experience.
Job enrichment uses the job as the medium of developing employees and changing organizational practices.
Some of the factors which increase job satisfaction are a sense 82 of achievement in the job, recognition for the job, the nature of the work itself, and opportunities to learn new things and grow.
The principles of job enrichment, according to Herzberg (1966), are removing controls while retaining accountability, introducing new tasks, giving a complete unit of work, granting job freedom, and helping employees to become expert in their tasks.
Extension managers that want to increase the quality of work and job satisfaction among extension personnel can practise these principles.
Job design lays greater emphasis on human values and refers to structuring a job to satisfy the technical, organizational, social and human requirements of the person performing the work.
Based on the humanization of work, job design aims at increasing the quality of work life through treating the employees as human beings and emphasizing their development and involvement in work decisions.
It emphasizes the use of extrinsic and intrinsic job factors, employee participation in management, autonomy, adaptability and variety.
3.5.
Role Interventions The study of roles, which are the positions employees hold in an organization, as defined by the expectations of significant persons and the individuals occupying the positions, is a comparatively neglected aspect of organizations.
Roles are an important dimension in increasing organizational effectiveness.
Through their roles, people are linked with the organization.
This linkage increases organizational effectiveness by integrating the individuals with the organization.
Such integration increases mental well-being and personal effectiveness.
The purpose of role- based intervention is to increase the mutuality of roles in organizations.
Role-based interventions are done through learning situations such as process laboratory, group discussion and use of 83 questionnaires and schedules.
Role-based interventions in extension organizations will result in increased work commitment, motivation, creativity and team spirit.
4.0 Conclusion In this section, you have seen that for management to effectively maximize the abilities of its staff, various organizational and environmental factors need to be considered and moderated within organization‘s policies and resources to bring out the best in its employees.
Therefore, a conducive working environment is essential for good performance.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt a conducive working environment can be created by  Having a good reward system  Improving field level working conditions  Career planning and development  Job enrichment and design  Role intervention 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
Mention ways of creating a conducive working environment in an extension organization 2.
Discuss the reward system in creating a conducive working environment 7.0 References and further reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman, W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 84 Module 4: Unit 4: Appraisal in Agricultural Extension Organisations Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Concept of appraisal in Extension Organisation 3.2 Purposes and process of appraisal 3.3 Methods of appraisal in Extension Organisation- potential appraisal 3.4 Methods of appraisal in Extension Organisation- performance review and counseling 3.5 Discipline in Extension Organisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In the previous sections, we discussed how extension personnel are recruited, trained and become part of a work group.
These are all vital activities.
However, the ultimate measure of effective human resources within an extension organization is the performance of extension personnel.
In this unit, you will learn how to assess staff of extension organizations as well as disciplinary measures that are used to ensure compliance to organizational goals.
2.0 Objectives After completing this unit, it is expected that you will 1.
Understand the concept of assessment in extension organization 2.
Know the reasons behind assessment of staff 85 3.
Understand discipline in extension organization 3.1 Concept of appraisal in Extension Organisation Performance appraisal is important for effective human resource management.
Performance appraisal is a process of assessing employee performance in order to guide and develop the employee's potential.
In many extension organizations which are government departments, the performance appraisal is nothing more than a confidential judgment of work done and a character report used to facilitate disciplinary action or promotion.
The employees do not get feedback about their performance.
Extension organizations need to have an open appraisal system to provide feedback and opportunities for open discussion with employees on their performance, because they have immense potential to grow and develop.
This system can create a healthy working climate and employee motivation.
3.2 Purposes and process of appraisal The performance appraisal, which aims at facilitating employee development, has the following major purposes: (1) to provide feedback and guidance, (2) to set performance goals, (3) to identify training needs, and (4) to provide inputs for management in the administration of rewards, and promotion.
The steps involved in effective performance appraisal are (1) identification of key performance areas and setting yearly objectives under each KPA, (2) identification of critical attributes for effective performance, (3) periodic review of performance, (4) discussion of performance with employees and (5) identification of training and developmental needs.
86 3.3 Methods of appraisal-Potential Appraisal The potential appraisal is a future-oriented appraisal by which the potential of an employee to occupy higher positions and to assume higher responsibilities is evaluated.
The potential appraisal can help the extension staff to know their strengths and weaknesses and can motivate them to further develop their skills.
Thus the potential appraisal helps in planning overall career development of employees.
Some of the techniques used for the appraisal are self-appraisals, peer rating, the management by objectives (MBO) approach, psychological test and simulated work exercises, case analyses, and leadership exercises.
3.4 Methods of appraisal -Performance Review and Counseling An important purpose of the performance appraisal is to counsel and guide employees towards greater job effectiveness.
Thus, a system of performance counseling is needed in extension organizations.
The manager provides performance counseling to the subordinates to help them in the analysis of job performance, identification of training needs, and finding solutions to the problems, which hinder job effectiveness.
Counseling is an art of communication involving two people - manager and employee.
Counseling differs from training in that the former involves a dynamic relationship and establishes more mutuality and confidentiality.
The success of performance counseling depends upon the employee's interest, a climate of openness and mutuality and the counseling process.
Extension managers can use directive, nondirective, and cooperative counseling.
87 3.5 Discipline in Extension Organisation Discipline is the act of ensuring, correcting and restoring deviations of personnel from the accepted norm.
It is needed in every organization because due to factors, which may not be within the control of management, certain staff could deviate from complying to rules and regulations as well as in fulfilling their roles and responsibilities.
Discipline could be in the form of queries, which are served deviants and later kept in their files.
This could later be a set back for them during promotions or when staff needed to be recommended for higher position or training opportunities.
Staff could also be demoted in rank or retained at the same level at the next promotion exercise.
The ultimate form of discipline is a sack of the staff, which will serve as a deterrent to other staff.
4.0 Conclusion Appraisal of extension personnel is crucial to the continued relevance of the agricultural extension organization.
It is essential that staff is evaluated to check how they are fulfilling their roles and responsibilities as well as their level of effectiveness and efficiency.
It is also to ensure that they are doing so in line with the principles and philosophies of the organisation.
This calls for discipline as a form of correction and restoration of order into the system.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learnt, 1.
The meaning of appraisal 2.
The purpose of appraisal and 3.
The methods of appraisal.
88 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss the concept of appraisal in an agricultural extension organisation 2.
Itemize reasons for appraisal of staff 3.
Discuss the methods of appraisal you have learnt 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman, W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 89 Module 4: Unit 5 Improving the Nigerian Extension System Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Establishing the policy framework for the provision of agricultural extension services.
3.2 Choosing the right approaches to extension 3.3 Proper planning, monitoring and evaluation 3.4 Choosing effective and affordable methods 3.5 Correct staff selection, training, support and conditions of service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 Introduction The Nigerian extension system like any other in developing countries is faced with many challenges.
These varies from policy formulation, linkages between research and extension, selection of system of extension to be used to problems of targeting the clientele and gender mainstreaming amongst many others.
This unit focuses on steps that are necessary to bring about improvement in the Nigerian extension system.
2.0 Objectives After studying this unit, you should be able to present ways that can be used to improve the Nigerian extension system.
90  3.1.
Establishing the policy framework and legal basis for the provision of agricultural extension services.
Failure of governments to provide unambiguous policy directives and legislative authority for extension systems makes the job of the extension administrator extremely difficult and leads to disappointing extension results.
Poor extension advice may flow to farmers from a variety of sources in an uncoordinated, sporadic, and costly manner.
Lack of consistent policy direction and funding may force the provision of extension on an ad hoc basis, rather than the institutionalised basis needed to ensure the uninterrupted flow of extension guidance to farmers.
The lack of specific guidance for the extension administrator is particularly serious because there may be no basis for accountability or for knowing and fulfilling the expectations of agriculture, planning, and finance policy.
3.2.
Choosing the approach (es) and organizational structure for establishing or improving the extension system.
Government officials contemplating establishment of an extension system, as well as newly appointed administrators considering comprehensive change in an existing system, need help in improving the understanding of extension and in exploring alternative approaches to its provision.
The advantages and disadvantages of possible approaches need to be explored in the settling of government policies, structure, resources and purposes to be achieved.
In what situations can specific approaches—such as training and visit, participatory, general agricultural extension, and commodity specialized—be considered and recommended?
An organizational structure appropriate for the approaches selected needs to be developed.
91 Major debate focuses on whether one extension organisation should cover agriculture as a whole, including crops, livestock,and such forestry or fisheries as form part of a general farming operation, or whether there should be separate organizations for each.
There is the question of whether extension and research should be placed together organizationally.
To what extent should the farmers‘ own organizations or commercial entities be involved in providing extension?
Should extension be a function placed within an organization unit—agriculture, forestry, or fisheries department or commodity organization—and be but one of the duties assigned to a single officer at the field level?
Or should the agricultural extension function be assigned to projects such as those for integrated agricultural or rural development?
Should agricultural colleges and universities manage extension programmes?
3.3.
Planning and managing implementation of the programme, including monitoring and evaluation.
Perhaps in no other aspect of extension is the need for improvement so widespread as in management; and better programme planning, monitoring and evaluation are essential elements in its achievement.
Weakness to be addressed include inappropriate programme content because of programming exclusively by passing down orders from the top rather than by planning that also involves extension staff, farmers, and researchers at lower administrative and field levels; lack of specific tasks and programme goals to permit measurement of performance; weak or nonexistent technical backstopping and supervision of field staff; inappropriate allocation of resources; and the almost complete absence of systematic monitoring and evaluation.
This state of affairs has its origin in the lack of training in management of those assigned managerial and supervisory responsibilities and in the failure to provide for discharge of planning, monitoring, and evaluation functions in the extension organizational structure and staffing pattern.
92 3.4.
Choosing effective and affordable extension methods.
There is no shortage of proven methods to choose from for conveying any particular message to any specified target audience.
The problem is that extension workers have either not been taught the methods or that they are not given the resources to use them.
Too few extension organisation have made provision for developing, testing, and producing extension and teaching materials and for guidance in the use of modern educational, instructional, and communication technology.
In practical terms, what the individual fieldworker knows and has the resources to apply are the determinants of the methods employed.
There may be methods that are not effective either in producing learning and motivating farmers or in terms of cost.
Another unfavourable result may be that too few of those who most need help are being reached.
3.5.
Staff selection, training, support, and conditions of service The numbers of extension workers in many countries are grossly inadequate in terms of the norms.
Worldwide, the range is between 1:325 in Europe to about 1:3,000 in Latin America.
Lack of transport, materials and facilities compounds the difficulties posed by insufficient numbers.
At least equally serious in limiting the performance of field staff is the inappropriateness of their experience and training and the inadequacy of supervisory and subject-matter specialist support.
In this respect, the Global Consultation on Agricultural Extension (1989) reported that 39% of extension personnel worldwide have only secondary level with another 33% at the intermediate level, leaving 23% and 5% to university degree and post-graduate degree respectively.
Even extension staff members fortunate enough to have attended intermediate-level agricultural schools and faculties are rarely well prepared for discharge of extension responsibilities.
Some curricula do not include training in extension methodology, organisation, and management or in 93 farm management, marketing, credit, rural sociology, and the like.
Education in technical fields is frequently lacking in the practical orientation and field experience so essential in preparing effective extension staff.
All of these deficiencies in pre-service education are compounded by the lack of quality of in-service training, which should be provided on a systematic basis to keep staff abreast of developments in technology and in training and educational methodology.
Both pre- service and in-service training are adversely affected by the shortage of locally relevant teaching materials.
Attracting and retaining quality staff in extension, particularly at the field level, is a major problem.
Salaries, opportunities for career advancement, and other conditions of service are often not sufficient to support a family, let alone to compensate for the difficult living conditions in rural areas.
Even for capital or provincial city-based staff, conditions of service compare unfavourably with those in alternative employment opportunities.
Other challenges include reaching the disadvantaged groups—women and youth, and, more generally, the rural population living in poverty and establishing linkages with other services and facilities for agricultural and rural development.
4.0 Conclusion This section has helped you to understand some of the challenges that the extension system in Nigeria battles with.
It has however proffered solutions as to how to bring about improvement on what presently exists.
94 5.0 Summary In this section, you have learnt about  The challenge of improving the Nigerian extension system 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 1.
To what extent, has staffing affected the performance of the Nigerian agricultural extension system.
2.
Government role in improving the Nigerian agricultural extension system cannot be overlooked, discuss.
7.0 References 1.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H.: Management -A global perspective 2.
Newman, W.H.
: Administrative Action -The Techniques of Organization and Management 3.
FAO: Improving Agricultural Extension -A Reference Manual 95
