 COURSE GUIDE AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL Course Team Dr. L.A .Akingbile - (Course Developer/Writer) – University of Ibadan Dr. N. E. Mundi (Programme Leader/ Course Editor) - NOUN Dr. Jari Sanusi (Course Coordinator)- NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058-406-3 All Rights Reserved ii AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………………………………………….
iv What you will Learn in this Course ………………………..….
iv Course Aims …………………………………………………… iv Course Objectives ……………………………………………… v Working through this Course …………………………………... v Course Materials ……………………………………………….. vi Study Units ……………………………………………………… vi Assignment File ………………………………………………… vii Presentation Schedule ………………………………………….. vii Assessment ……………………………………………………… vii Tutor-Marked Assignment ……………………………………… viii Final Examination and Grading ………………………………… viii Course Marking Scheme ………………………………………... viii How to Get the most of this Course …………………………….
ix Tutors and Tutorials …………………………………………….. x Summary ………………………………………………………… xi iii AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION Management of Agricultural Extension Personnel is one of the fundamental courses for a Master’s Degree Programme in Agriculture (M.Sc.)
in any university.
This course is a suitable elective course for anyone who intends to study administration and social science-related professional programmes particularly, those that are concerned with human resource management.
This course has 4 modules and 18 units.
The first module starts with an introduction.
This gives a focus on the concept meaning and objectives of personnel management.
The second module focuses on the scope and functions of personnel management.
This module will acquaint you with what effective human or personnel management and control could achieve in any task of agricultural production.
The third module will bring you to the realm of organisations and departmentalisation required in personnel management and to also sensitise you with the qualities that must be possessed by a good extension personnel.
The fourth module is to expose you to the possible problems that could be faced by an extension personnel manager.
The understanding of the likely problems in personnel management is to prepare you for the search of the possible causes and to proffer appropriate solutions.
In this module also you will learn about staff appraisal, budgeting agricultural policy and management of human resources.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE You will learn about the concept, meaning, objectives and scope of personnel management in agricultural extension and also the problems inherent in the subject and what the qualities of good extension personnel are.
COURSE AIMS The aim of this course is to create in-depth knowledge of what personnel management is and to emphasise the qualities of a good extension personnel and the manager.
This will facilitate the interaction between the extension personnel, the manager and other agencies associated with extension practice and ultimately agricultural production.
Thus, the aims of the management of Agricultural Extension Personnel Course are to: iv AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE • discuss the concept and meaning and objectives of personnel management • explain the scope and functions of personnel management • discuss the organisation, departmentalisation and personal qualities of a good extension personnel • explain the problems facing an extension personnel manager • discuss the formulation of good extension policy • explain the departmentalisation and the extension personnel manager • state the objectives and manpower planning in Extension.
COURSE OBJECTIVES In order to achieve the course aims, there are some overall objectives set for the course.
Besides, each module and each unit has its respective objectives which you and your course facilitator must constantly refer to, so that no objective is skipped.
At end of the course, you should be able to: • identify with the meaning of personnel management • explain the scope and functions of personnel management • discuss how personnel management is organized and departmentalized • identify the personal qualities of a good extension personnel • identify the problems facing the extension personnel manager • discuss the formulation of good extension policy • state the objectives of manpower planning in extension.
WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read each study unit of this study material and read other materials which may be provided by the National Open University of Nigeria.
Each unit contains self assessment exercises for this course and at certain points in the course you would be required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
The course should take about a total of 17 weeks to complete.
Below, you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course on time and successfully.
I would advise that you avail yourself the opportunity of attending the tutorial sessions where you have the opportunity of comparing knowledge with peers.
v AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE COURSE MATERIALS The main components of the course are: 1.
The Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References 4.
Assignments 5.
Presentation Schedule STUDY UNITS The course is divided into modules that are made up of units.
The study modules and units in this course are as follows: Module 1 Concepts, Meaning and Objectives of Personnel Management Unit 1 Concepts of Personnel Unit 2 Managerial and Administrative Qualities Unit 3 Basic Processes of Management/Administration Unit 4 Extension and Extension Education Unit 5 Personnel Management in Extension Module 2 Scope, Functions and Training of Personnel Manager Unit 1 Scope of Personnel Management Unit 2 Functions of Personnel Management Unit 3 Extension Training Unit 4 Extension Supervision Module 3 Organisation, Departmentalisation and Qualities of Extension Personnel Unit 1 Concept of Organisation Unit 2 Departmentalisation Unit 3 Extension Personnel and Functions Unit 4 Coordination Module 4 Agricultural Extension Policy, Manpower Planning and Staff Appraisal Unit 1 Types and Purpose of Staff Appraisal Unit 2 Budgeting in Extension Management Unit 3 Staffing and Personnel Management vi AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE Unit 4 Agricultural Extension Policy Unit 5 Management of Human Resources Each unit consists of one to two weeks work and includes an introduction, objectives, reading materials, exercises, conclusion, summary, tutor-marked assignment (TMA), references and other resources.
The unit directs you to work on exercises related to the required reading.
In general, this exercise questions you on the material you have just covered.
Together with TMAs, these exercises will help you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE Your course materials give you important dates for the early and timely completion and submission of your TMAs and attending tutorials.
You should remember that you are required to submit all your assignments by the stipulated time and date.
You should guard against lagging behind in your work.
ASSIGNMENT FILE In your assignment file, you will find all the details of the works you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itseff, and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
There are many assignments for this course, with each unit having at least one assignment.
These assignments are basically meant to assist you to understand the course.
ASSESSMENT There are three aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are self-exercises, second are the tutor-marked assignments and third is the written examination/end of course examination.
You are advised to be sincere in attending the exercise.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply infonnation, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor/facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course work.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final or end of course examination of about vii AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE three hours duration.
This examination will count for 70% of your total course mark.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) The TMA is a continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You are required to submit at least four (4) TMAs before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The TMAs would be given to you by your facilitator and returned after you have completed them.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading and your study units and, references However, it is desirable to demonstrate that you have read and researched more into other references which will give you a wider view point and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your facilitator on or before the deadline given in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The end of course examination for agricultural science education will be about 3 hours' duration and has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which will reflect the type of self-resting, practice exercise and tutor-marked assignment problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Utilise the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the whole course.
You might find it useful to review your self-tests, TMAs and comments on them before the examination.
The end of course examination covers information from all parts of the course.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME Assessment Marks Assignment 1 — 4 Four assignment, best three marks of the four account at 10% each = 30% of course marks viii AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE End of course examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course materials.
HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the greatest advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some readings to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or recommended books.
You are provided exercises, to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do, by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main content of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your references or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or visit the study centre nearest to you.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment 2.
Organise a Study Schedule - Design a 'Course Overview to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available at the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
ix AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE 3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your references and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Visit your study centre whenever you need up to date information.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), visit your study centre for your next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to space your study so that you can keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutors comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignment.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
FACILITATOR/TUTOR AND TUTORIALS There are 14 hours of tutorial provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of these tutorials as well as the names and phone number of your facilitator, as soon as you are located a tutorial group.
x AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE Your tutor or facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress on any difficulties you might encounter and provided assistance to you during the course.
You mail your Tutor-Marked Assignment to your tutor before the schedule date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e-mail and discuss problems if you need assistance.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your facilitator if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • you have difficulty with the self-test or exercises • you have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your course facilitator and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain much benefit from course tutorials prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in active discussion.
SUMMARY Social Relationship and Behavioural Change is a course that intends to provide you with the concept extension communication process.
Upon completing this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of the nature, scope, tasks of the extension worker, principles and concepts of social relationship, human behaviour, communication and adoption process.
Thus you will be able to plan programmes in agriculture and manage them.
In addition, you will be able to answer the following type of questions: 1.
What does social relationship mean?
2.
What is behavioural change?
3.
Give examples of the nature of social change.
4.
Discuss the importance of group dynamics.
5.
Of what significance is the measurement of social change?
xi AEM 507 COURSE GUIDE 6.
Identify the various strategies for introducing change in agricultural communication.
7.
Discuss why people resist change in agriculture.
8.
Explain the basic elements of communication process.
9.
Discuss the factors affecting the adoption of new technologies.
Of course, the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the foregoing lists.
xii  MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Introduction Unit 1 Concept and Meaning of Management …… 1 Unit 2 Objectives of Personnel Management in Extension ………………………………….. 5 Unit 3 Role of Management in Agricultural Extension ………………………………….. 9 Module 2 Scope and Functions of Personnel Management Unit 1 Conditions for Effective Extension Management …………………………………... 13 Unit 2 Goals and Functions of Management ……….
17 Module 3 Principles of Personnel Management Unit 1 Management Theories ……………………… 22 Unit 2 Classification of Agricultural Extension Management Theories ……………………… 25 Unit 3 Theory XYZ ………………………………… 32 Module 4 Personal Qualities of a Good Extension Personnel Manager Unit 1 Competencies in Agricultural Extension Management ……………………………….. 37 Unit 2 Basic Core Competencies Required in Agricultural Extension Management ……… 42 Module 5 Functions of a Personnel Department I Unit 1 Personnel Management Processes ………….
46 Unit 2 Planning …………………………………….. 50 Unit 3 Organising ………………………………….. 55  Module 6 Functions of A Personnel Department II (Staffing) Unit 1 Staffing ………………………………….. 59 Unit 2 Predicting Personnel/Staff Needs and Staff Selection …………………………… 63 Unit 3 Staff Recruitment and Placement ……….
67 Unit 4 Staff Appraisal or Evaluation …………… 71 Unit 5 Personnel Training and Development …… 74 Module 7 Functions of a Personnel Department III Unit 1 Directing and Coordinating ……………….
79 Unit 2 Budgeting and Reporting ………………….
85 Module 8 Problems Confronting an Extension Personnel Manager (Supervision and Control) Unit 1 Supervision ………………………………….
89 Unit 2 Control ……………………………………… 96 Unit 3 Managerial Skills …………………………… 101 Module 9 Duties or Tasks of a Personnel Manager Unit 1 Tasks of a Personnel Manager ……………….
105 Unit 2 Principles of Bureaucracy and Organisation .. 111 Module 10 Expansion of Personnel Manager Unit 1 Key Components of Classical Organisational Theories …………………………………… 116 Unit 2 Management Thought …………………….
120  AEM 507 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION Unit 1 Concept and Meaning of Management Unit 2 Objectives of Personnel Management in Extension Unit 3 Role of Management in Agricultural Extension UNIT 1 CONCEPT AND MEANING OF MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Management 3.1.1 Leading by Example 3.1.2 Management as a Programme 3.2 Meaning of Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is the common saying that to fail to plan is to plan to fail.
This affects all spheres of life, including management in agriculture.
This is as the nation being largely agrarian needs to develop the agricultural sector in order to be able to feed the teeming population as well as provide raw materials for the industries.
The extent to which the personnel used in agricultural development are managed will be a function of good and effective planning.
It is therefore important that the act of leading personnel in all sectors, and especially in the agricultural sector is mastered by agriculturists so that the sector will not end up being the one that fails to plan and thus plans to fail.
This course unit is therefore designed to equip you with the concept and definition of management in ensuring that you have the required skills of a good manager and will thus end up being among those that will help to manage the personnel that are used in agriculture, especially in the field of agricultural extension in the nearest future.
Thus, understanding the crux of management of agricultural extension personnel is a key to strategic planning in agricultural extension.
This course is therefore designed to equip you for the task.
1  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define management • explain the concept of management • plan management activities for your organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Management Management originates from the old French word ménagement “the art of conducting, directing”, as well as from Latin word manu agere “to lead by the hand.” It characterises the process of leading and directing all or part of an organisation through the deployment and manipulation of human, financial, material, intellectual or intangible resources.
(wikipedia.org/wiki/Management).
This definition is interesting because it traces the root meaning back to the latin phrase meaning “to lead by the hand”.
Leading by the hand implies giving direction that is stronger than just a passing suggestion, yet still fairly gentle in approach.
3.1.1 Leading by Example Leading by the hand implies that the person doing the leading is first going where the follower is being led.
The leader is not asking the follower to do something he is not willing to do himself.
It is also regarded as the guidance and control of action required to execute a programme.
This implies that some individuals are charged with the responsibility of conducting a programme (www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA/evaluation/glossary/glossary_m.htm).
3.1.2 Management as a Programme Management also refers to a “programme”.
This implies that for management to be effective, there needs to be some type of defined approach or system in place.
The system becomes the plan, while management is guiding others in following that plan.
The organisational process thus includes strategic planning, setting objectives, managing resources, deploying the human and financial assets needed to achieve objectives, and measuring results.
Management also includes recording and storing facts and information for later use or for others within the organisation.
Management functions are not limited to managers and supervisors.
Every member of the organisation has some management and reporting functions as part of their job (home.earthlink.net/~ddstuhlman/defin1.htm).
2  AEM 507 MODULE 1 This definition is more in-depth and is tailored towards business-like management.
It consists of three primary activities.
First, management establishes a plan.
This plan becomes the road map for what work is going to be done.
Second, management allocates resources to implement the plan.
Third, management measures the results to see how the end product compares with what was originally envisioned.
Most management failings can be attributed to insufficient effort occurring in one of these three areas.
The definition goes on to talk about how management is responsible for measuring details that may not be required presently, but may be useful later on.
These measurements often help determine the objectives in the planning stage (Appleby, 1981).
When management is following this type of sequence, it becomes a continuing cycle.
Plan, execute, and measure.
The measurements become the basis for the next planning stage and so on.
3.2 Meaning of Management Management is the activity of getting things done with the aid of people and other resources (wps.prenhall.com/wps/media/objects/213/218150/glossary.html).
This perception of management focuses on management as the process of accomplishing work through the efforts of others.
Skilled managers can accomplish much more through others than they can through their own single efforts.
A good manager is thus not the one that can do all by him/herself but one that can make people do all.
Management is also the effective utilisation and coordination of resources such as capital, plant, materials, and labour to achieve defined objectives with maximum efficiency (www.ecbp.org/glossary.htm).
This perceives management as focusing not only on the people but the entire range of resources necessary to follow a plan in order to achieve efficiency.
Management according to Ogunbameru (2004) is not just getting from point A to point B.
It is getting there by choosing the best possible path.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the concept and meaning of management.
This includes the role of management as involving leading by example as well as management as a programme.
The meaning of management has also been explained as the utilisation and coordination of resources to achieve objectives with maximum efficiency.
It has exposed you to how you can use management to make a difference in 3  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL directing affairs in organisations to achieve results that will lead to agricultural development.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that management: • originated from both the French word ménagement “the art of conducting, directing”, as well as from the Latin word manu agere “to lead by the hand” • involves leading by example, as the person doing the leading is first going where the follower is being led • as a programme guides people in following a laid down plan • is the effective utilisation and coordination of people and resources to achieve set goals.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Describe the concept of management.
ii.
How does management ensure the leading of people by example?
iii.
Describe how management as a programme helps people to follow set plan.
iv.
How will you as a manager mobilise people and resources to achieve your organisation’s set goals.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand.
Pitman Publishing.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan.
Spectrum Books Ltd,p.
577. wikipedia.org/wiki/Management www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA/evaluation/glossary/glossary_m.htm home.earthlink.net/~ddstuhlman/defin1.htm wps.prenhall.com/wps/media/objects/213/218150/glossary.html www.ecbp.org/glossary.htm UNIT 2 OBJECTIVES OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 4  AEM 507 MODULE 1 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Objectives of Management 3.2 Implications of Management 3.3 Management as a Process 3.4 Management in Agricultural Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The need for a broad understanding of management as well as the objectives it set out to achieve needs to be properly understood by all concerned about agricultural development, especially students that are being groomed to be future managers.
This unit thus attempt to set out the objectives of management by bringing out its implications in order for good understanding.
Thus, the way management relates the managers with the people and resources they have to manage as well as the process of management becomes imperative.
This is also more important in the context of agricultural extension where the soul of agricultural development in the country is molded.
This is because the bulk of farmers that feed the nation, and in fact more than 60 percent are peasant farmers who are the direct clienteles of agricultural extension.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the implications of management • describe management as a process • explain management in agricultural extension.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Objectives of Management The major objectives of management are to plan, organise, lead and control.
Planning is the process of setting goals and deciding how best to achieve them, while organising is the process of allocating and arranging 5  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL human and non-human resources so that plans can be carried out successfully.
Leading is the process of influencing others to engage in the work behaviours necessary to reach organisational goals.
Controlling on the other hand is the process of regulating organisational activities so that actual performance conforms to expected organisational standards and goals (Ogunbameru, 2001).
Planning is more important for to managers than for middle or first-line managers.
This is so because top managers are responsible for determining the overall direction of the organisation, a charge that requires extensive planning.
Leading on the other hand is more important for first-line supervisors than for managers at higher levels.
Management thus aims to ensure that leadership at all levels put in all it takes to achieve the aims of the extension organisation.
3.2 Implications of Management Management can be described as: 1.
The process of getting activities completed efficiently with and through other people 2.
The process of setting and achieving goals through the execution of five basic management functions: planning, organising, staffing, directing, and controlling; that utilise human, financial, and material resources (www.crfonline.org/orc/glossary/m.html).
The first description looks at the fact that management is getting work done through other people, while the second divides management into five components.
These components are all parts of the three components (plan, execute, measure) that was considered earlier.
However the more detailed description helps show the activities that occur in each of the three phase definition.
These can thus be said to be the objectives that management attempt to serve.
It is thus important that the process attribute of management is considered.
3.3 Management as a Process Management is also the process of planning, leading, organising and controlling people within a group in order to achieve goals.
Management in this case addresses accomplishing work through other people (Ogunbameru, 2004).
This definition stresses the activities that are necessary for reaching particular goals as the process of achieving the 6  AEM 507 MODULE 1 objectives of the organisation by bringing together human, physical, and financial resources in an optimum combination and making the best decision for the organisation while taking into consideration its operating environment (www.ucs.mun.ca/~rsexty/business1000/ glossary/M.htm).
In this case, the different components that managers need to control in order to achieve objectives were considered.
One differentiator of this definition is the way it considers the operating environment as part of what a manager must understand.
It is also referred to as the role of conducting and supervising a business (www.becbiz.com.au/glossary.htm).
This is a broad definition of management that does not consider management as something that can take place outside of a business.
3.4 Management in Agricultural Extension Agricultural Extension management or administration is an important aspect or a precondition for agricultural development efforts because it caters for the management of people and resources for the achievement of the objectives of agricultural development.
It is perhaps for those reasons that the department of agric extension services sometimes referred to as the technical services division of the Agricultural Development Projects are administered as separate entities within the government.
If any organisation has to succeed, it must be properly managed, administered and supervised (Aromolaran, 2000).
This is why all modern organisations use management/administrative processes to accomplish their goals.
It is for these reasons that the study of management of agricultural personnel becomes important for the overall development of expertise.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has assisted you to understand the implications of management as it assists to utilise people and resources to achieve results.
It has also explained the concept of management as a process and how it is important in management of agricultural personnel in agricultural extension.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has acquainted you with: • the implications of management 7  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL • the fact that management is a process of planning, leading, organising and controlling people within a group in order to achieve goals • the fact that good management in agricultural extension is a precondition for agricultural development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the implications of management.
ii.
List the processes involved in management.
iii.
Describe how management in agricultural extension can aid agricultural development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aromolaran, E. A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos, BLV Print Tech., p. 153.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2001).
Practical Agricultural Administration.
Lagos, Kuntel Publishing House.
P. 163.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamic.
Ibadan.
Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577. www.crfonline.org/orc/glossary/m.html www.ucs.mun.ca/~rsexty/business1000/glossary/M.htm www.becbiz.com.au/glossary.htm UNIT 3 ROLE OF MANAGEMENT IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION CONTENTS 8  AEM 507 MODULE 1 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Roles of Management 3.1.1 Role in Problem Solving 3.1.2 Role in Development 3.1.3 Role in National Welfare 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Management plays several roles in facilitating the running of organisations.
The roles are important that they cannot be done without if success is to be achieved in the running of such organisation.
This is particularly the case in agricultural projects generally, and agricultural extension in particular.
The roles include those of problem solving, that of sustained development as well as role in national welfare.
Understanding of these roles will assist students to appreciate better what values good management of agricultural personnel hold for the overall development of the agricultural sector in a country like Nigeria that is agrarian in nature.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • appreciate the role of management in problem solving • identify the developmental role of management • state the role of management in national welfare.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Roles of Management Management has been variously described as the act of using people and resources to achieve the objective of an organisation.
It thus plays important roles in the development of organisations in effort at achieving the overall development of communities.
In agricultural extension, it plays the roles in effort at agricultural development through problem solving.
It is a known fact that if the problems confronting the agricultural sector are effectively tackled, the nation has the potential to feed the whole world as it is reported that up to 60 percent of Nigerians 9  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL are involved in agriculture and agricultural related activities in the country.
It is thus important that those roles played by management are examined.
3.1.1 Role in Problem Solving Professional administrative management in agriculture and extension is slowly emerging as a special class of discipline.
Professional managers and personnel managers are beginning to show up as a leading group in our fast urbanising and industrialising society distinct from labour and separate from ownership.
Production depends on them and they also try to manipulate consumption patterns through advertisements, technology transfer innovativeness, etc.
This phenomenon in industry and the private sector in general has now permeated agriculture where management and administrative competence have become rare commodities for which the employer is prepared to pay (Aromolaran, 2000).
Today’s Nigerian agriculture is greatly beset with a large number of problems.
These problems are more administrative than technical.
The impression is often given that technical research and new practices are available, that funds are expended, but the desired result is hardly achieved because of the lack of professional managers capable of administering the extension and other supporting services.
If this misconception is to be corrected, agricultural extension must train and develop managers and administrators for the ascribed role in administration.
3.1.2 Role in Development Most human endeavor requires organisation described sometimes as the planned structures of an enterprise.
Agricultural extension, like all other endeavours require this (planned) structure.
It involves deliberate attempt to desirable relationship, ways in which decisions are made, activities to be performed are lined up, lines of authority are indicated, level of accountability and degrees of reward and punishment established.
It is formalised through a group of people working together in a concerted way to achieve a pre-determined objective (Dahama, 1976).
It is in this context that the importance of Agricultural extension emerges, essentially because agricultural extension occupies a key position of power and influence in the agricultural development process of the country.
Therefore, to carry out these key roles and sustain its key position of power and influence, it must be properly managed.
3.1.3 Role in National Welfare Agricultural extension contributes to national welfare and therefore, its proper administration and effective management is imperative for its success in this role context.
National welfare is predicated on a well 10  AEM 507 MODULE 1 clothed, housed and satisfied society capable of defending itself and keeping the wheels of development on an upward spiral.
Agricultural management sustains this role of national welfare through the sustenance of a well developed agricultural and food production capability through a well administered agricultural extension service manned by competent and dedicated staff.
A development of staff motivation, dedication and preparedness for selfless service is achievable through administration and efficient management of extension systems.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have attempted to learn about the roles that management play in agricultural extension organisations.
You have learnt that management helps to solve the problem of service provision and service utilisation in agricultural extension.
Its roles in development hand national welfare have also been explained to bring out its importance in agricultural development.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: • it is not enough to have technical research and new practices being available, as well as funds are expended, but there must be good management in order to achieve agricultural development • management ensures a planned structure aimed at achieving development in all organisations, especially extension • staff motivation enhances dedication which is brought about by good management in efforts at achieving national welfare • management helps extension to achieve a well developed agricultural and food production capability by competent and dedicated staff.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
How can management help to solve the problem plaguing agriculture in the country?
ii.
Explain how management can help to play the role of management in the nation’s agricultural sector.
iii.
What is the relationship between management and national welfare?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 11  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL Aromolaran, E. A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos:.
BLV Print Tech., p. 153.
Dahama, O. P. (1976).
Extension and Rural Welfare..India.
Ram Prasad and Sons: AGRA – 3.
P. 716.
12  AEM 507 MODULE 2 MODULE 2 SCOPE AND FUNCTIONS OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Conditions for Effective Extension Management Unit 2 Goals and Functions of Management UNIT 1 CONDITIONS FOR EFFECTIVE EXTENSION MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conditions for Effective Extension Management 3.1.1 A National Policy Embodied in Legislation 3.1.2 Underlying Philosophy 3.1.3 Availability of Information 3.1.4 Source of Manpower Development 3.1.5 Availability of Ancillary Services 3.1.6 Conducive Environment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Extension management requires some conditions for it to be effective in efforts at achieving agricultural development in the country.
This is because management can not occur in a vacuum.
It has to operate in an environment in which all the ingredients required for success are available.
Such environment should be that of policy framework that will protect the participant in the process of management.
Even when the policy environment is favourable, it is important that other factors that will make the cooked soup complete and palatable are in place.
It is then that extension management can effectively achieve its set goal of agricultural development.
13  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify conditions that will make extension management to be effective • explain the relationship between the respective conditions required for effective extension management • state the role that conducive environment play in extension management.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conditions for Effective Extension Management Even though effective management ensures an effective extension services, this cannot be achieved in the absence of other essential factors.
Such factors must emphasise the policy environment as well as the physical environment.
This is as there is little magic the best of managers can perform in a situation of an environment that is not conducive (Appleby, 1981).
Consequently, an effectively administered extension service will result if only the following conditions exist 3.1.1 A National Policy Embodied in Legislation Such a policy must establish the educational role of the extension system and its relationship to other areas of agricultural and rural development.
Therefore, no formal organisation can succeed unless it is backed by law.
That policy must enunciate the purpose of the organisation as well as the modalities for accomplishing that purpose.
3.1.2 Underlying Philosophy Successful extension management presupposes a philosophy of extension management embodying the concept of human resources development as a major goal.
Every organisation derives its objective and goals from its basic philosophy.
In agricultural extension, it is believed that if you want to produce more and better food, you should produce more and better farmers and finally think of how you can support them with better planting materials and input services.
3.1.3 Availability of Information Effective management of an extension service is premised on access to good source of reliable information required for the solution of problems of information required for the solution of problems of rural people.
14  AEM 507 MODULE 2 Therefore, administrative success can only be achieved if such an information base about rural people and the scientific information to be transferred is available.
This enhances the credibility of the extension administrator such that when he speaks, people want to listen.
3.1.4 Source of Manpower Development For agricultural extension administration to succeed, it must have a source of trained people adequate to supply the personnel needs of the extension service and other related systems.
Such source could be from colleges of agriculture, polytechnics and universities.
This is because the minimum requirement for agricultural extension personnel in Nigeria is a Diploma in Agriculture or related fields.
The trainings should also be such that provide the type of knowledge that equips the trainees ready for the jobs required of them on the field.
3.1.5 Availability of Ancillary Services Adequate ancillary services must be provided.
According to Ogunbameru (2004), these ancillary services include farm services such as seed supply, tractor hiring, credit, transportation, marketing etc, without which extension management will be largely ineffective.
It is one thing to convince the farmers to use improved seeds; it is another thing for the farmers to be able to access the improved seeds when needed.
As an example, the problem of availability and affordability has seriously affected the use of fertilizers in the country.
3.1.6 Conducive Environment An environment conducive to agriculture and rural development, including such things as incentive for production such as credit, appropriate land tenure, conducive economic atmosphere, political stability etc which assures the producer of a fair price for his produce and a fair share of government benefits accruing from improvements in his farming practices.
A conducive environment can do what several persuasions will not be able to achieve.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have attempted to learn about the conditions that are germane for effective extension management to be achieved.
This ranges from a policy framework, to an underlying philosophy that guides the operation of extension.
Also, there must be source of manpower and information as well as ancillary services for effective extension management to be achieved in efforts at achieving sustainable agricultural development.
15  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • a policy legislation in the context of a sound guiding philosophy is appropriate for an effective extension management • the sources from which information are obtained as well as the source of training of manpower help to determine how effective extension management will be • a conducive environment helps to determine the state of extension management in any country • that ancillary services are important ingredients towards achieving an effective extension management.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the role played by policy legislation in effort at achieving effective extension management.
ii.
What are the ancillary services required for management of extension services to be effective?
iii.
Mention the factors that must be present before we can say that an environment is conducive for extension management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand: Pitman Publishing.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 16  AEM 507 MODULE 2 UNIT 2 GOALS AND FUNCTIONS OF MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Essence of Management 3.2 Functions of Management 3.2.1 Planning 3.2.2 Organising 3.2.3 Leading/Motivating 3.2.4 Controlling 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Management involves organisation which presupposes that goals and objectives that are achievable are set and that machineries are put in motion towards achieving them.
The machineries must be able to address the questions of what has to be done, how is it going to be done and why is it going to be done.
If these three questions are well considered and appropriate solutions are found for them before the commencement of an endeavor, then management will achieve the purpose for which the organisation is set up.
There is the common saying that failing to plan is planning to fail.
Also, organisation is the soul of any business and any business endeavour that is not well organised will find it difficult to succeed.
The acts of motivating and controlling personnel ensure that men and resources are utilised to achieve the goals set for an organisation.
It is thus important that these functions are well articulated and clarified before the commencement of any management endeavor in order to achieve success.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the very essence for which management is discharged • explain the goal of management and what level of achievement is acceptable • categorise the how of management 17  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL • explain why some management theories are to be used in some situations while some others will not be appropriate for that situation • list basic functions that management performs in extension.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Essence of Management Management may be described as the guidance, leadership and control of human and non-human resources towards the achievement of a pre- determined organisational goal.
The essence of management is the belief that objectives are achievable more effectively through organisation, that is, by interrelating sub- divisions of work and allocating them to men and women who are placed in a position of authority so that work may be better organised and accomplished.
Ogunbameru (2004) asserted that this description of management presupposes 3 different approaches: a.
The ‘What’ of Management This involves the management/administrative tasks that must be performed and the level of achievement that is acceptable.
Often times, this approach reflects the subject matter content of management.
This involves planning, organising, staffing, directing, and controlling.
These tasks should be performed in manners that will bring grandeur to the business of management if success will be achieved, especially in the nations’ agricultural development.
b.
The ‘How’ of Management This relates directly to the methods and processes of management.
The methods and processes involve the theories that are employed in management activities as well as the manners in which management functions are supervised and controlled.
c. The ‘Why’ of Management This relates to the behavioural science approach which explains why some patterns of management are more successful than others.
As an example, when is it require to use theory X or Y and not theory Z and why is a particular theory more applicable to a situation than the other.
All these issues need be resolved in any organisation where management functions are being utilised so that the much desired goals of management can be achieved.
18  AEM 507 MODULE 2 These three approaches are internally related and should be applied consistently in achieving the goals of management.
The what, how and why of management should therefore be addressed in all management situations so that the effort will achieve the desired results.
3.2 Functions of Management Management operates through various functions, often classified as planning, organising, leading/motivating and controlling.
These functions indicate the direction in which management goes in order to achieve the set goals.
The functions are all important and are interrelated (Akinsorotan, 2007).
The functions are variously described in efforts at explaining the activities involved in management.
3.2.1 Planning This involves deciding what needs to happen in the future (today, next week, next month, next year, over the next five years, etc.)
and generating plans for action.
It is the road map that indicates the direction an organisation will go in the course of management.
It thus specifies what has to be done before the other, how it has to be done and who will get each task in the specified plan executed.
The plans so generated are used to direct the affairs of the organisation.
3.2.2 Organising These are the activities carried out to make optimum use of the resources required to enable the successful carrying out of plans.
This involves decision making on who is in the best position to carry out an activity and which resources are to be utilised in effort at achieving the set goals.
Organising is important in management as it involves decision on the optimum use of resources to achieve the goals set for the organisation.
It is not enough to have the required resources but if they are not well organised, the plans set out for achieving the goals of the organisation will not be realisable.
The optimal use of resources determines the efficiency of any organisation.
3.2.3 Leading/Motivating The act of leading and motivating involves exhibiting skills in these areas for getting others to play an effective part in achieving plans.
Leadership provides direction for an organisation and one way of achieving efficient leadership is to ensure that personnel are well motivated on their personal self realisation and the fulfillment in the work environment.
Leading and motivation thus go hand in hand to 19  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL make staff put their best into effort at achieving the goals set for an organisation.
3.2.4 Controlling This involves monitoring, that is, checking progress against plans.
The plans set for an organisation may be followed to specification or there may be deviation in the process of execution.
It is controlling or monitoring that ensures that the plans are religiously followed.
It also leads to timely realisation of the need to amend set plans if need be.
The plans may need modification based on feedback.
Controlling helps to monitor implementation of plans.
This helps to identify those plans that must be pursued to conclusion as against those that need to be modified.
Whatever will be the decision is based on the feedback obtained from effective monitoring.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have gone through the questions that need to be answered in order to achieve the goals of management.
The questions include the what of management which involves the tasks that have to be achieved, the how of management which affects the methods and processes, as well as the why of management which includes the approach that explains why some patterns in management are more successful than the others.
The functions of management range from planning, to organising as well as leading/motivation.
You have learnt than when plans are set, you need resources and personnel to be able to actualise the plans.
If these functions are not effectively coordinated, it will be difficult to actualise the plans that have been set.
You have also learnt that controlling helps to monitor implementation of plans to ensure that the organisation does not derail from the plans.
It has also been added that monitoring helps to know which plans have to be amended in the course of execution as a result of timely feedback.
5.0 SUMMARY You should have learnt in this unit that: • the management/administrative tasks that must be performed and the level of achievement that is acceptable has to be well specified in order to achieve the goal of management • the methods and processes of management which involves the theories that are employed must be clear and able to achieve the goals that have been set for management 20  AEM 507 MODULE 2 • that some patterns of management are more successful than others in specific situations and thus need to be understood.
• planning is an essential function of management • the need to make optimum use of the resources required to enable the successful carrying out of plans is organising • it is important to lead personnel towards achieving the goals set for an organisation through adequate motivation • monitoring through checking progress against plans is known as controlling as a management function.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Mention the theories that make the methods and processes of management achieve its goals.
ii.
Why are some patterns of management more successful than others?
iii.
List the management/administrative tasks that must be performed to achieve the goals of management.
iv.
Describe the function of planning.
v. Explain why leadership and motivation are two sides of a coin.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 21  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL MODULE 3 PRINCIPLES OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Management Theories Unit 2 Classification of Agricultural Extension Management Theories Unit 3 Theory XYZ UNIT 1 MANAGEMENT THEORIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Management Theories 3.2 Purpose of Agricultural Extension Theories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Management theories are formulated to help in explaining how responsibilities are assigned in work situations.
It specifies relationships between managers and other personnel in effort at achieving efficiency in work situations.
It serves some purposes which include being a basis for research, a guide for administrative action, a guide for application of new knowledge, as well as being a basis for planning and execution.
It also helps the understanding, prediction and adjustment of a work situation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe management theories • explain the purpose of agricultural extension management theories.
22  AEM 507 MODULE 3 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Management Theories The methods of allocating work and ascribing responsibilities through centralised or otherwise authority is guided by basic principles which have now been formulated by administrative behaviour specialists designated as theories.
In management, a theory may be described as a set of assumptions from which a set of basic principles and laws may be derived (Ogunbameru, 2004).
It embodies an explicit and objective statement integrating isolated body of data into a coherent and consistent framework.
It thus permits the specification of relationships between islands of empirical data and logical extrapolation from obtained relationships or erstwhile un-investigated phenomenon.
Management theories are thus body of knowledge that are designed to serve specific purposes (Appleby, 1981).
3.2 Purpose of Agricultural Extension Management Theories In agricultural extension, theories according to Aromolaran (1998) serve principally the following purposes: a.
Basis for Research It provides a basis for research, that is, an instrument with which the administrator’s behaviour and the supervisory response of administrators, managers, supervisors and workers can be measured and investigated in complex organisations.
b.
Guide for Administrative Action It provides a guide for administrative and organisational action.
Extension staff behaviour differs under different administrations or administrative structures and incentives.
This explains why some administrative sectors succeed where others fail.
c. Guide for Application of New Knowledge Theory provides a guide for the application of new knowledge.
New ways of doing things in an organisation are generated either through research or repeated practice, both of which to some extent are based on theories and basic assumptions.
The application of this new knowledge leads to greater efficiency and higher worker productivity.
d. Basis for Planning and Execution Theory provides a basis for decision making, project implementation and action as well as reorganisation in order to have improvement in getting work done.
e. Help Understanding, Prediction and Adjustment 23  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL Theory helps the understanding, predicting and adjusting of management behaviour more systematically to the work environment and the structure of the extension service.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been able to learn about management theories as methods of allocating work and ascribing responsibilities.
Theories serve specialised purposes in agricultural extension such as being basis for research and being basis for planning and execution.
A good understanding of management theories will help students and practitioners in mastering the art of management in agricultural extension and other organisations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: • a management theory may be described as a set of assumptions from which a set of basic principles and laws may be derived • agricultural extension management theories serve as basis for research • understanding, predicting and adjusting of management behaviour can be enhanced through management theories • theory provides a basis for decision making, project implementation and action.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Define the concept management theory.
ii.
List four purposes that management theories serve.
iii.
How does management theory provide a basis for research?
iv.
Explain how new knowledge is generated through management theory.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.New Zealand: Pitman Publishing.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos: Concepts Publications, p. 154.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan.
: Spectrum Books Ltd. 24  AEM 507 MODULE 3 UNIT 2 CLASSIFICATION OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MANAGEMENT THEORIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classification of Agricultural Extension Management Theories 3.1.1 Functional Theory 3.1.2 Decision Making Theory 3.1.3 Social Process theory 3.1.4 Fusion Theory 3.1.5 Human Relations Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Several authors have put ideas together to develop management theories that explain the ways and manners the business of management are being conducted and the explanations that can be adduced for the different ways personnel behave in work situations as well as how managers perceive and respond to those situations.
The management theories that are germane to agricultural extension practice are discussed in this unit and their import buttressed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the functional theory • describe how the decision making theory explains management • list the merits of the human relations theory • distinguish the difference between the fusion theory and the social process theory.
25  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Classification of Agricultural Extension Management Theories While several classification of theory may exist, those most relevant to extension management/administration include the following: a. Functional theory b.
Decision making theory c. Human relations theory d. Fusion theory e. Social process theory f. Theory XYZ.
3.1.1 Functional Theory This was credited to Fredrick Taylor.
The theory sometimes referred to as an administrative process theory tends to explain management behaviour in terms of administrative process and function of behaviour (Appleby, 1981).
It is a form of functional specialisation.
It stresses that an organisation has position incumbent and functions which the manager performs, that is, in any organisation.
There are positions and responsibilities, tasks and duties which must be assigned to individuals appointed to those positions.
The function of management is to ensure that these duties, tasks and responsibilities are adequately understood and effectively performed by all and sundry, including the manager himself.
It suggests that the functions of the manager under this theory includes: (1) planning, (2) organising, (3) staffing, (4) directing, (5) coordinating, (6) managing and supervising and (7) reporting.
Collectively, the proponents of the functional theory prescribe a division of labour based on functional specialisation.
Some of the basic concepts derived from the functional theory include the following: a. Specialisation leads to efficiency: Extension personnel become acquainted with specific roles when there is specialisation.
They thus become efficient in the tasks they perform over time that the organisation benefits there from at the end of the day.
A specialist in crop becomes more efficient than will a generalist in crop.
b.
Staff arrangement which shows established hierarchy of authority is easier to operate.
This makes staff know the line of command and be more responsive.
c. A limited span of control consistent with the manager’s psychological span of interest is essential for performance.
A span of control is the number of people that is attached to one 26  AEM 507 MODULE 3 supervisor.
It is believed that span of control helps to control under-utilisation.
d. The delegation of authority must be commensurate with responsibility so that subordinates can act on the instructions of the manager.
The subordinates have better access to their superiors and so can get tasks performed with dispatch.
e. Job evaluation by supervisors should be based on predetermined criteria of performance.
The subordinates know what is expected of them and what will not be acceptable.
3.1.2 Decision Making Theory Even though functional theory is relatively acceptable to most management theorists, it however has its disadvantages.
Consequently, a series of principles were enunciated, out of which the decision – making theory evolved.
It grew out of the desire to overcome some of the limitations of the functional theories.
The intent was to develop a set of concepts that permit the description of discrete decisions in an administrative environment.
Therefore, the decision making theorists suggested that the most important aspect of management is rational decision making ability.
From this position, they described management as the process of rational decision making and suggested that the success of an organisation can be measured by the aggregate correctness of its decisions.
Decision making in itself is, however, affected by the following conditions: a.
The decision making environment – there is usually an environment conducive to collective responsibility for collective decision making and or individual decision making.
Where this environment is not supportive, decisions taken could be faulty.
The extension organisation must ensure that the decision making environment is conducive for goal attainment.
b.
The decision maker himself – the decision maker must not be indecisive.
He must be forthright (straight forward, credible).
He must be flexible without being autocratic.
He must be rational and must be able to stand his grounds.
c. The goal or end to be served.
The seriousness of a decision is determined by its end or its outcome (goal).
When the goal of a decision is flimsy and unimportant, decisions tend to be snappy, but where the consequences of a decision are far reaching, greater thought are put into it and complex information seeking is undertaken.
d. The choice of the decision itself.
The selection of an alternative from a combination of alternatives most appropriate to the resolution of the problem must be properly considered.
The 27  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL decision must reflect the selection of the best alternative out of the whole series of alternatives that best suit the solution that the manager wants to pursue.
Consequently, he must be aware that there is no problem with only one solution.
3.1.3 Social Process Theory The social process theory while accepting the utility of the functional and decision making theories suggests that both theories do not adequately explain management/administrative conditions in the work environment.
That rather, they see an administrative organisation as a social field, embodying a number of variables which include persons and organisations as well as their motives, attitudes, beliefs, sentiments, jobs and activities, the physical work setting as well as informal and formal sub units, all of which comprise and influence a complex whole.
In this framework, the component variables tend to use their distinctiveness and find real meaning in terms of human behaviour and the operation of the total system.
The social process theory therefore emphasises these inter-relationships among the parts rather than each component part operating in isolation.
The essence is that the manager/administrator should ensure that this relationship is in perfect harmony (Aromolaran, 1998).
To accomplish this harmony, the theory suggests the following: • Consistency in individual and organisational goals implemented through a structure of status and role expectancy that enables both to achieve their aims.
The extension organisation must ensure consistency in individual and organisational goals through effective staff motivation.
• A conducive physical work environment, that is, job specificity and situation which may be internal or external to job performance, but which ensure effective social interaction, exchange of ideas and functional socialisation which enhances performance.
• Linkage processes, essentially two way communication between super-ordinates and sub-ordinates as well as within subordinates.
• Goals of the organisation: This provides the basis for purposeful behaviour and desire to perform.
Where the goals are not well understood, the status and role expectations are most likely not be effectively enacted.
• The individual expectations, needs and desires for belonging to the organisation.
28  AEM 507 MODULE 3 3.1.4 Fusion Theory The proponents of the fusion theory focused on the problems of integrating or fusing individual goals and organisational objectives.
They based their theory on a dual concept of socialisation and personalisation.
Socialisation is the process by which an organisation attempts to structure the individual to become an agent for the accomplishment of its objectives.
On the other hand, personalisation is the process by which an individual tries to use the organisation as the medium through which to achieve his personal objective.
Consequently, the fusion theorists suggest that employers and their prospective employees appear to be in a state of apparent conflict.
The purpose of management, therefore, is to minimise this conflict and reduce the problems therefore.
They suggest that this conflict is not a zero-sum game because both the individual and the organisation often benefit.
The greatest benefit accrue to both parties when near complete fusion is achieved, and this is the point at which the individual achieves maximum expression of its personality possible and the organisation has its demands and expectations fulfilled at the highest possible level.
A good manager is the one who keeps the fusion growing and continuously enlarges the area of intersection to the extent possible.
The more the intersection, the better it is for both the individual and the organisation.
The key words in the fusion theory are socialisation, personalisation, individual goals and organisational objectives.
The extension organisation must therefore ensure a fusion in individual goals, organisational objectives, socialisation and personalisation.
3.1.5 Human Relations Theory The origin of the human relations theory derives from the reaction to scientific management enunciated by a man called Fredrick Taylor.
This theory was justified on the popular belief that a fair wage was the primary motivating factor to work for effective performance.
This premise (the fair wage concept) soon failed as it was observed that as employee’s wages rose beyond subsistence income levels, they sought ego satisfaction, self actualisation, recognition and non-monetary rewards (fringe benefits).
There was therefore a need to come up with alternative explanation for this transient behaviour, and the human relations theory provided such an explanation.
Even though the functional theory and the scientific management approach were originated in the 15th century, they continued to operate and were well used to manipulate workers in both developed and developing countries.
Recently, and following from a body of knowledge, the human relations theory has tried to justify behaviour of contemporary man by developing a set of principles and ideas which seek non-monetary strategy of reward 29  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL systems to boost employee morale, efficiency and satisfaction on the job in order to increase productivity for the organisation.
The human relations theory argues against the position which sees workers as a unit of production and in its place suggests the individual worker as a dynamic being whose behaviour characteristics change under varying conditions of the social structure in which he and others are a part.
The theory proposes that organisational behaviour depends not only on the methods or the equipment that are provided, but also on the skills of the manager in providing an environment conducive to maximum productivity by his personnel.
The core elements of the theory may be summarised as follows: • That the amount of work accomplished by a worker is determined not only by his physical capacity but is accelerated by his social capacity to interact.
Extension organisations must thus ensure that the social environment is conducive for goal attainment.
• That non-economic (non-wage) factors play a central role in determining the motivation and happiness of the worker.
• That the highest specialisation is by no means the most efficient form of division of labour.
Job description which is functional, as well as job enrichment such as job rotation both combine to form good human relations.
• They suggested that workers do not react to managers as individuals but as members of informal groups exerting social pressure and control, in order to achieve their individual needs, so they organise into labour unions.
The human relation theorists emphasise the need of communication between the ranks and file of management with the workers, as well as participating decision making and democratic leadership.
In essence, they theorised that the best manager, administrator and or supervisor should be: • Employee oriented – to take the interest of the employees seriously.
• He should delegate responsibility • He should provide the necessary freedom for his employees to perform.
• He should be one who can motivate and inspire his employees to higher levels of performance.
30  AEM 507 MODULE 3 4.0 CONCLUSION The functional theory is a form of functional specialisation which stresses that an organisation has position incumbent and functions which the manager performs.
The decision making theory sees the most important aspect of management as rational decision making ability and posited that the success of an organisation can be measured by the aggregate correctness of decisions.
The social process theory emphasises inter-relationships among physical work setting, informal and formal sub units and that the parts rather than each component part must be in perfect harmony.
The fusion theory fuses individual goals and organisational objectives while the human relations theory emphasised the fair wage concept.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • management theories are developed to explain factors that explain why managers and personnel act the way they do in workplace • decision making theory is an improvement on the functional theory • social process and fusion theories consider the role that several factors play in explaining organisational behaviour.
• human relations theory emphasises the fair wage concept.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the functional theory in management.
ii.
What are the similarities and differences between the functional theory and the decision making theory iii.
How does management theory provide a basis for research?
iv.
Explain how new knowledge is generated through management theory.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand: Pitman Publishing.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos: Concepts Publications, p. 154.
31  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL UNIT 3 THEORY XYZ CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Theory XYZ 3.1.1 Theory X 3.1.2 Theory Y 3.1.3 Theory Z 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The attitude that individuals put up in work situations are functions of what their aspirations are as well as how well they feel the work environment assists them to achieve those aspirations.
They tend to put in their best when they feel such is acknowledged effectively and tend to put in the minimal effort when they feel their best will not be appreciated.
They thus tend to divide their loyalty when they feel threatened and devote their whole loyalty when they feel appreciated.
The work environment as well as the individual’s aspirations are thus important factors in determining how well people get their assigned work done.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the similarities and differences between theories X and Y • identify how theory Z explains management • describe the interrelationships between theories X, Y and Z • distinguish between the situations in which each of theories X, Y an Z are appropriate.
32  AEM 507 MODULE 3 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Theory XYZ Theories X and Y are the brainchild of a gentleman called McGregor Douglas.
McGregor tried to use a scientific management orientation as well as the human relations theory to predict and explain the behaviour of the worker on his job.
Consequently, he developed some basic assumptions about the behaviour of man in relation to the concept of administration and management.
These basic assumptions he referred to as theory X and Y (Aromolaran, 1998).
3.1.1 Theory X Under theory X, he assumed that the average man: • Hates work In order for the average man to work, he must be coerced, controlled, directed, and if necessary, threatened to perform at desired level.
That the average man avoids responsibility and prefers to be told what to do, as he does not like to be held accountable and punished for whatever was not done appropriately (Hence the common slogan ‘I am directed to do it’).
He suggested that what was needed in administration was a set of generalisations which: • make human behaviour more correctly predictable • increase the ability of individuals to control the behaviour of others.
He concludes by asserting that much of the traditional administrative and managerial styles, policies and practices are based on these pervasive and all-inclusive assumptions about the nature of man.
The overriding principle in his theory was that control and direction could be achieved through the exercise of power (Appleby, 1981).
He also concedes that as economies develop and wages increase above subsistence level, theory X becomes difficult to justify.
He then postulated an alternative to theory X which is theory Y.
3.1.2 Theory Y In contrast to theory X, McGregor postulated a new set of assumption which is more consistent with the state of knowledge about human behaviour in contemporary times (Aromolaran, 2000).
These set of assumptions include: 33  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL a.
The average man has a positive attitude towards work and that when his level of performance is less than desirable level, it could be because he lacks the necessary incentives and resources necessary to do so.
b.
That the average man will exercise self control and self direction on the job.
In essence, he does not like to be told how to accomplish his tasks all the time.
He has sufficient self personal initiative and whenever he fails to accomplish tasks at acceptable levels, it was either he was not told what to do in a clear manner or he was not given the necessary supportive facilities to get the work done.
c. The third characteristic of theory Y is that commitment to organisational goal and therefore desire for higher levels of performance is a function of the rewards associated with it.
d. That the average man learns under conducive conditions not only to accept responsibility, but he seeks it (satisfactory + permissive work environment).
That the capacity to exercise a high level of creativity, imagination and ingenuity in the solution of organisational problems is widely distributed in the population.
In essence, McGregor recommends an administrative process which emphasises the principle of mutual responsibility and shared objectives between the administrative management and workers recognising interdependence between all members of the organisation.
Second, he suggests interdependence between all members of the organisation and its clientele group and that either is indispensable for a satisfactory achievement of the organisation’s goals.
3.1.3 Theory Z Theory Z takes the position that the organisation and the individual are in a state of perpetual conflict because of the dual position of the individual in a given organisation, both as a producer and as a consumer of resources.
It means that individuals who work in a given organisation tend to suck the organisation dry by seeking maximum benefits, even though he recognises that he will not survive if the organisation goes dead from low production.
Therefore, the theory suggests that the role of administration in organisation is to collate the aggregate demand of individual workers as consumers and organise production to satisfy that demand, bearing in mind the need for a surplus, referred to sometimes as profit, impact or effectiveness under normal conditions.
The implication is that the employer should make sure that each employee works for his salary and more.
34  AEM 507 MODULE 3 4.0 CONCLUSION Theory Y is the opposite of theory X.
While theory X assumes that an average individual hates work and will not want to take responsibility, theory Y suggests that an average individual loves work and likes to take responsibilities.
It submits that when an individual does not perform an assigned task correctly, it is as a result of the fact that the instruction to carry out the task was not clear.
Theory Z on the other hand shows the interplay between the employer and the employee.
That an average employee will want to maximise his gains from an organisation, and that it is the extent to which the organisation is able to make the employee work for his or her pay that determines how successful the organisation is.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Theory X perceives an average individual as hating job • Theory Y views an average individual as loving job and thus wants to take responsibility • Theory Z shows the usual interplay between the interest of individuals in an organisation and that of the organisation that employed them • That theory X becomes in-operational as economies develop and wages increase above subsistence level.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the role of theory X in management.
ii.
What are the similarities and differences between theories X and Y?
iii.
When does theory X become irrelevant?
iv.
Explain how theory Z perceives the interplay between individual employees’ goal and that of the organisation for which they work.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action, New Zealand.
Pitman Publishing.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos: Concepts Publications.
p. 154 Aromolaran, E. A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech., p. 153.
35  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL MODULE 4 PERSONAL QUALITIES OF A GOOD EXTENSION PERSONNEL MANAGER Unit 1 Competencies in Agricultural Extension Management Unit 2 Basic Core Competencies Required in Agricultural Extension Management UNIT 1 COMPETENCIES IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Competences in Agricultural Extension 3.1.1 Competencies for Achieving Tasks 3.1.2 Managerial and Administrative Competencies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The basic knowledge, attitudes, skills and behaviours which are required for the effective performance of managerial duties are referred to as competencies.
The extent to which managerial functions are performed effectively is dictated by the competencies that the manager possess.
Managers that are vast in the competencies required for their job performance succeed, while those that are lacking in the required competencies fail to achieve the targets set for their organisations.
It is thus important that managers imbibe the requisite competencies needed for them to succeed in the art of management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the competencies required in agricultural extension management for achieving tasks • list the managerial and administrative competencies.
36  AEM 507 MODULE 4 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Competences in Agricultural Extension A competency is a sufficient quantity of knowledge, skill and ability to accomplish a particular task or purpose.
Competencies are defined as the basic knowledge, attitudes, skills, and behaviours that contribute to excellence in extension education programmes.
Many extension systems identify and define specific core competencies.
In agricultural extension, the required competencies for achieving tasks are as explained below.
3.1.1 Competencies for Achieving Tasks Each extension professional needs to possess the following competencies for task achievement (Appleby, 1981): • Personal strength: This helps to get job done to conclusive level.
It is difficult for an individual that does not possess strength to bring out the strength in others.
• Capabilities as an educator: This is important as the thrust of extension is education and information • Capabilities in information technology: The low extension agent- farmer ratio require the use of information technology to reach more farmers at a time and update one’s knowledge • Expertise in their academic specialty: Credibility is a function of expertise and trustworthiness, and anyone who is not credible through displaying expertise will lose the confidence of farmers.
• Employees are the most valuable assets of the extension system (Ogunbameru, 2004).
To enhance the effectiveness of the extension employee and increase extension’s professional value, it is recommended that development and training opportunities must focus on areas relating to core competencies.
In doing so, extension will increase its capability to better serve customers by effectively working within communities to determine needs.
This is important in developing and delivering educational programmes that address these needs, and in creating successful individual and group accomplishments.
3.1.2 Managerial and Administrative Competencies The managerial and administrative competencies that should be possessed by extension personnel should centre on: • Integrity- This enhances the worth value of extension personnel.
37  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL • Fairness and sound judgement- This helps to develop empathy in extension personnel • Good health- It helps in the discharge of responsibilities as health is wealth • Decisiveness- Extension personnel are usually found in conditions where they have to make decisions.
Being decisive and not wavering will help extension programme to maintain its hold.
• Faithfulness- It is important that extension personnel are faithful to their responsibilities on the job.
• Courage- This imbues the spirit to forge ahead even when the environment is not conducive • Initiative- Being initiative helps to proffer solutions to problems that arise in the course of execution of projects, which are usually not planned for.
• Versatility- The non-formal nature of agricultural extension education demands that an extension personnel is versatile to retain credibility • Sense of humour- Ability to make rural household members receptive to information in the face of their pressing household problems demand display of sense of humour • Credibility- This is a function of trustworthiness which must be reinforced by knowledge of the subject matter • Ability to cooperate and work with others- Extension work is a team work and cannot be done by any individual in isolation from others.
4.0 CONCLUSION In the unit you have attempted to learn about the definition of competencies and how they apply to agricultural extension, the competencies required for performing agricultural extension tasks, as well as the managerial and administrative competencies that are important in ensuring that the personal attributes of a good extension manager is imbibed by all in extension work in order to achieve tangible results.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • a sufficient quantity of knowledge, skill and ability to accomplish a particular task or purpose in agricultural extension is referred to as competency 38  AEM 507 MODULE 4 • four competencies are required for achieving tasks which bother on personal strength, capability as an educator, capability in information technology and expertise in academic specialty • managerial and administrative competencies include integrity, fairness and sound judgement, good health, decisiveness, fairness and courage.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Define competency in agricultural extension.
ii.
What are the four competencies required for achieving tasks?
iii.
Explain the managerial and administrative competencies desired in agricultural extension management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand: Pitman Publishing.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd,.
39  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL UNIT 2 BASIC CORE COMPETENCIES REQUIRED IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Basic Core Competencies 3.1.1 Information and Education Delivery 3.1.2 Interpersonal Relations 3.1.3 Knowledge of Organisation 3.1.4 Leadership 3.1.5 Organisational Management 3.1.6 Professionalism 3.1.7 Subject Matter 3.1.8 Community and Social Action Processes 3.1.9 Diversity/Pluralism/Multiculturalism 3.1.10 Educational Programming 3.1.11 Engagement 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Core competencies are important personal qualities of a good extension personnel manager.
They are required to be possessed for the efficient performance of the tasks and duties that an extension personnel manager has to discharge.
Among the core competencies, some are basic that are even more demanded.
The values of those basic core competencies therefore need to be explored so that the goals of the extension organisation can be achieved.
Such competencies range from knowledge and delivery, attitude and disposition as well as ability to carry people along through empathising with them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain each basic core competencies required as personal qualities by a good extension personnel manager.
40  AEM 507 MODULE 4 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Core Competencies The eleven basic core competencies required in agricultural extension management as adapted from North Carolina Cooperative Extension include the following 3.1.1 Information and Education Delivery This involves the mastery of communication skills (such as written and verbal), application of technology, and delivery methods for supporting educational programmes and guiding behaviour change among extension learners.
This will enhance the credibility of the extension organisation.
3.1.2 Interpersonal Relations This involves the ability to successfully interact with diverse individuals and groups to create partnerships, networks, and dynamic human systems.
This is as a successful extension programme must effectively carry along all stakeholders (Ogunbameru, 2004).
3.1.3 Knowledge of Organisation An understanding of the history, philosophy, and contemporary nature of the extension organisation will assist the manger to achieve resounding success in extension activities.
It is good knowledge of extension organisation that will make the manager appreciate the goals of the organisation and buy into it.
3.1.4 Leadership This involves the ability to influence a wide range of diverse individuals and groups positively.
This will assist extension managers to achieve the much needed multiplier effect in extension education (Aromolaran, 1998).
3.1.5 Organisational Management This is the ability to establish structure, organise processes, develop and monitor resources, and lead change to obtain educational outcomes effectively and efficiently.
Knowledge of organisational management helps in entrenching the structure of the organisation.
41  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.1.6 Professionalism Professionalism involves the demonstration of behaviours that reflect high levels of performance, a strong work ethic, and a commitment to continuing education and to the mission, vision, and goals of extension.
This will entrench credibility and trustworthiness.
3.1.7 Subject Matter This involves the mastery of a scientific discipline, a research body of knowledge, or a technical proficiency that enhances individual and organisational effectiveness.
This is important as it is not possible to give what one does not have.
3.1.8 Community and Social Action Processes This is the ability to identify and monitor variables and issues important to the vitality of communities (e.g., demographics, economics, human services, environmental, etc.
), and the ability to use and apply these variables to programme prioritisation, planning, and delivery.
This is important as extension must work with the people where they reside (Appleby, 1981).
3.1.9 Diversity/Pluralism/Multiculturalism This involves the awareness, commitment, and ability to include one’s own as well as the other’s different cultural perceptions, assumptions, norms, beliefs, and values.
This shows that a good extension manager must imbibe empathy in all his/her dealings with clienteles.
3.1.10 Educational Programming This is the ability to plan, design, implement, evaluate, account for, and market significant extension education programmes that improve the quality of life of extension learners.
This is important as good planning is the crux of every extension organisation’s activities.
3.1.11 Engagement This is the ability to recognise, understand, and facilitate opportunities and to broker the necessary resources that best respond to the needs of individuals and communities.
Thus, development must be community driven.
42  AEM 507 MODULE 4 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have attempted to learn about how important the information and education delivery, interpersonal relations, knowledge of organisation, leadership prowess, organisational management, professionalism, knowledge of subject matter, good community and social action processes, appreciation of diversity, educational programming and community engagement are in the discharge of the responsibilities of a good extension personnel manager.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • knowledge of information and education delivery is important for a good extension personnel manager • a good personnel manager must have good human relations and leadership prowess • there must be sound knowledge of organisation and subject matter for an extension personnel manager to succeed in his or her work • appreciation of diversity as well as ability to enhance community engagement are important in the discharge of extension work.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Mention the core competencies that are required by a good extension personnel manager.
ii.
Of the core competencies, which ones relate to relationship with the people and their environment.
iii.
Which of the core competencies have to do with the personal traits to be imbibed by the extension personnel manager?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand: Pitman Publishing.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos: Concepts Publications, p. 154.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 43  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL MODULE 5 FUNCTIONS OF A PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT I Unit 1 Personnel Management Processes Unit 2 Planning Unit 3 Organising UNIT 1 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT PROCESSES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personnel Management Processes 3.1.1 Planning 3.1.2 Organising 3.1.3 Staffing 3.1.4 Directing/Controlling 3.1.5 Coordinating 3.1.6 Reporting 3.1.7 Budgeting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The exercise of authority over subordinates requires adequate planning and organisation of actions and activities.
These are known as personnel management processes.
The processes involve the planning, organising, staffing, directing/controlling, coordinating, reporting and budgeting for the extension organisation.
These series of activities are the functions that a personnel department is expected to perform in efforts at achieving successful extension management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify or list the personnel management processes • describe the personnel management process.
44  AEM 507 MODULE 5 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Personnel Management Processes Personnel management is the exercise of authority over persons sometimes referred to as subordinates.
Often times, the theories of management determine administrative behaviour or explain the outcome of administrative behaviour.
In order for management and administration to occur and the theories of management to apply, some basic processes must be put in place.
Sometimes, the word organisation refers to an agency and then management/administration is applied as the process for managing that agency.
Concurrently, organising infers putting human and material resources together to ensure the achievement of the purpose for which the agency is established.
This is the process of management.
It is the way the tools of administration are handled that ensures how an organisation achieves its aims or fails to do so.
These tools which provide the process of administration include the following: 1.
Planning 2.
Organising 3.
Staffing 4.
Directing/Controlling 5.
Coordinating 6.
Reporting 7.
Budgeting 3.1.1 Planning This is working out a broad detail about what needs to be done and the methods for doing them in order to accomplish the purpose set for a given programme of the extension service.
3.1.2 Organising This involves the establishment of a formal structure of authority through which work subdivision are arranged, defined and coordinated for the achievement of a pre-determined goal.
It sometimes refers to the assemblage of facilities and materials that are required for the accomplishment of a given task (Appleby, 1981).
3.1.3 Staffing This is the personnel function of recruitment, selection, placement, development of staff and maintenance of favourable conditions of work.
45  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.1.4 Directing/Controlling This is the administrative task of making decisions and incorporating them into specific circulars, general orders and instruction etc.
as the operational guideline within the extension system.
3.1.5 Coordinating This implies securing the interrelatedness of all sections and units within the extension system and outside of it to ensure harmony in the achievement of extension goals.
3.1.6 Reporting This involves keeping all those to whom the extension system is responsible well informed about what is going on.
3.1.7 Budgeting This is fiscal planning, accounting and control.
It includes the management of advance proposal management of financial releases etc.
It is the instrument for seeking fund, disbursing funds, allocating time and managing staff time expenditure.
We thus have financial budgeting as well as time budgeting (Aromolaran, 1998).
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have attempted to learn about the processes of personnel management which is the exercise of authority over persons sometimes referred to as subordinates.
You have also attempted to learn that these processes involve the planning, organising, staffing, directing/controlling, coordinating, reporting and budgeting for the extension organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • the efficient exercise of authority over subordinates is the main task of a good personnel management • planning, organising and directing are important management processes in ensuring that extension organisations achieve their set goals • efficient staffing, reporting as well as staff and time budgeting are important for using subordinates to achieve desired goals.
46  AEM 507 MODULE 5 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Mention the processes involved in personnel management.
ii.
In the exercise of authority over subordinates, which of them ensures that the right person is put at the right position among the subordinates?
iii.
Describe the importance of time and staff budgeting.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand ;Pitman Publishing.
Aromolaran, E. A (1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos : Concepts Publications, p. 154.
47  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL UNIT 2 PLANNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Planning 3.1.1 Concept of Planning 3.2 Reason for Planning 3.3 Levels of Planning 3.3.1 Strategic Planning 3.3.2 Tactical Planning 3.3.3 Contingency Planning 3.4 Leadership 3.5 Objectives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Planning which is the process of organising events designed for achieving the goals set for an organisation demands that the courses of action intended to achieve those goals are clearly specified.
Also, the level at which the planning is done determines who does it, how it is done and to what depth is it gone.
All these help to make the activities set to be carried out to achieve goals by the organisation are clear to all.
This is important in planning in extension organisations like in all other organisations to achieve effective management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the reason for planning • explain the different levels of planning • state the role of leadership in planning • explain the need for setting clear objectives in planning.
48  AEM 507 MODULE 5 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Planning 3.1.1 Concept of Planning Planning in any organisation occurs in different ways and at all levels.
A top-level manager, say the manager, of a manufacturing plant, plans for different events than does a manager who supervises, say, a group of workers who are responsible for assembling modular homes on an assembly line.
The plant manager must be concerned with the overall operations of the plant, while the assembly-line manager or supervisor is only responsible for the line that he or she oversees (Aromolaran, 2000).
Planning could include setting organisational goals.
This is usually done by higher-level managers in an organisation.
As a part of the planning process, the manager then develops strategies for achieving the goals of the organisation.
In order to implement the strategies, resources will be needed and must be acquired.
The planners must also then determine the standards, or levels of quality, that need to be met in completing the tasks.
This infers deciding in advance what needs to be done as well as the most efficient way of doing it.
It covers a wide range of activities and decisions, including the following: a.
The clarification of objectives b.
Establishment of policy c. The mapping out of programmes and extension campaigns.
d. The determination of specific methods and procedure e. Fixing day to day schedules of work and activities f. Taking action g. Monitoring of individual activities and h. Evaluation of overall achievement.
3.2 Reason for Planning Once a plan is adopted, the extension manager goes ahead to implement it.
He begins to give instructions, written and verbal, to his subordinates as to what needs to be done.
He mapping out of programmes and extension campaigns.
Consequently, the extension manager assumes an administrative leadership role in the implementation of the plan.
In this respect, he provides guidance, sometimes through instructions, control or sometimes through the provision of resources and ensuring that they are used correctly (Dahama, 1976).
49  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.3 Levels of Planning In general, planning can be strategic planning, tactical planning, or contingency planning.
The level at which planning is being done determines the depth and the extent of the plans.
The types and their characteristics are as discussed as follows: 3.3.1 Strategic Planning This is long-range planning that is normally completed by top-level managers in an organisation.
Examples of strategic decisions that managers make are: who the customer or clientele should be, what products or services should be sold, and where the products and services should be sold.
3.3.2 Short-Range or Tactical Planning This is done for the benefit of lower-level managers, since it is the process of developing very detailed strategies about what needs to be done, who should do it, and how it should be done.
To return to the previous example of assembling modular homes, as the home is nearing construction on the floor of the plant, plans must be made for the best way to move it through the plant so that each worker can complete assigned tasks in the most efficient manner.
These plans can best be developed and implemented by the line managers who oversee the production process rather than managers who sit in an office and plan for the overall operation of the company.
The tactical plans fit into the strategic plans and are necessary to implement the strategic plans.
3.3.3 Contingency Planning This allows for alternative courses of action when the primary plans that have been developed do not achieve the goals of the organisation.
In today's economic environment, plans may need to be changed very rapidly.
Continuing with the example of building modular homes in the plant, what if the plant is using a nearby supplier for all the lumber used in the framing of the homes and the supplier has a major warehouse fire and loses its entire inventory of framing lumber.
Contingency plans would make it possible for the modular home builder to continue construction by going to another supplier for the same lumber that it can no longer get from its former supplier (Ekpere, 1990).
50  AEM 507 MODULE 5 3.4 Leadership This is provided sometimes through checking performances and evaluating achievements.
As mentioned earlier, a sound plan starts with a clear statement of objectives or recognition of a specific goal to be achieved.
It may be more realistic for the extension manager to express his planned statement to infer 30 percent increase in maize yield per hectare or 20 percent increase in the number of farmers in the local government area who have planted an improved cassava variety.
Such a clear statement of intent provides: • A vital linkage in the planning process and aids decentralisation, as individuals at different levels of the organisation are guided by the same basic premise (statement of fact or statement of intent and objective assumption).
• Second, clear statement of intent provides a basis for voluntary coordination, individual motivation as well as essential elements in the process of control.
3.5 Objectives Objectives can be broad or specific.
They can be of singular or multiple purposes, but in all cases, a clear statement of purpose universally accepted and understood within an organisation is the most important guarantee for an effective management (Akinsorotan, 2007).
To be meaningful, objectives must be more than mere words.
They must be implementable and attract the commitment and dedication of those who were employed to work on them.
Therefore, most plans in agriculture and indeed agricultural extension must be realistic and the projections conservative.
In extension management, most assumptions deal with social conditions and human behaviour, both of which are highly unpredictable.
If the operational conditions change substantially, a plan could loose its value.
However, this can be rectified with real planning to meet the new situation.
In general, planning is expensive and its real value can hardly be justified in monetary terms.
In the long run however, there is often high management payoff to all the planning processes in agricultural extension.
A plan may be broad or it may be specific.
It may be long, perceptive or short term.
It may be a standing plan or a running plan.
Irrespective of whichever it is, it must always provide a guide to the extension effort.
It is always better to plan than not to do so.
This is because it helps the extension system and worker to correct all possible errors that could have been made if there was no plan.
51  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have attempted to learn about the concept of planning as well as the different levels at which planning is done.
You have also learnt about the roles of leadership in planning and execution of the plans.
The importance of setting clear and achievable objectives in planning in planning has also been stressed and why plans must be made to achieve the commitment and dedication of those employed to implement them.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • planning involves clarification of objectives as well as mapping out of programmes and extension campaigns • it involves mapping out of programmes and extension campaigns for achieving organisation goals • planning is done at strategic, tactical or contingency levels.
• planning succeeds when extension managers provide leadership • stating clear objectives to be achieved is a key factor in planning.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Describe the concept of planning.
ii.
Explain the different levels planning.
iii.
Why is it important that objectives set in planning are clear and achievable?
iv.
How is leadership important in planning?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aromolaran, E. A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech., p. 153.
Dahama, O. P. (1976).
Extension and Rural Welfare.India.
Ram Prasad and Sons: AGRA – 3.
P. 716.
Ekpere, J.
A.
(1990).
Agricultural Extension: A Searchlight of the Nigerian Small Farmer.
University of Ibadan Lecture Series, Delivered on behalf of the Faculty of Agriculture and Forestry.
Ibadan.
University of Ibadan Press.
P. 94.
Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd. 142pp.
52  AEM 507 MODULE 5 UNIT 3 ORGANISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organising 3.2 Issues Addressed by Organising 3.3 Essence of Organising 3.4 Departmentalisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The act of organising involves the grouping of similar activities together that is, dividing and grouping the work that must be done, including general management and personnel management, into individual jobs.
It also involves defining the established relationships between individuals that occupy positions and performing the tasks of specific job.
It is thus a means of delineating the activities involved in executing the responsibilities of an organisation in a way the will ensure that all personnel play their part easily and correctly in ways that will help achieve organisational goals.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the term organising • describe the issues addressed by organising • state the essence of organising • evaluate the term departmentalisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organising This is the grouping into management units, the activities necessary to implement a plan, as well as defining the relationship among the executive and staff in such units.
It becomes functional through an organisational chart.
Organising refers to the way the organisation 53  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL allocates resources, assigns tasks, and goes about accomplishing its goals.
In the process of organising, managers arrange a framework that links all workers, tasks, and resources together so the organisational goals can be achieved (Ogunbameru, 2004).
The framework is called organisational structure.
Organisational structure is shown by an organisational chart.
The organisational chart that depicts the structure of the organisation shows positions in the organisation, usually beginning with the top-level manager (normally the President or the General Manager) at the top of the chart.
Other managers are shown below the President.
There are many ways to structure an organisation.
It is important to note that the choice of structure is important for the type of organisation, its clientele, and the products or services it provides—all of which influence the goals of the organisation (Newman, 1976).
In agricultural extension, the management process of organising consists of: • Dividing and grouping the work that must be done, including general management and personnel management, into individual jobs.
• Defining the established relationships between individuals that occupy positions and performing the tasks of specific job.
• Together, the above two conditions define the job description in an organised manner.
3.2 Issues Addressed by Organising The primary issues that the organising process address in management include: (a) How activities should be subdivided into groups for purposes of management.
This suggests what departments need to be created and (b) What criteria should be used in assigning responsibilities to departments?
(c) It also seeks to understand what divisions need to be created.
Consequently, in a typical Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, it is this rationalisation, that is, the desirability of assigning jobs, tasks and responsibilities by specialisation that leads to the organising of the ministry into divisions such as agriculture, fisheries, veterinary medicine etc.
Each of these divisions is further subdivided into sections or units such as annual crops, tree crops etc (Williams, 1978).
54  AEM 507 MODULE 5 3.3 Essence of Organising The essence of this organisation is that it: • facilitates control – It is easy to control activities in an organisation if the line of command is clear • aids coordination – Organising indicates the relationship between one unit and the other and thus aids coordination • secures adequate attention – Attention is secured if the number of people that a manager has to control is limited as this aids a focused attention • It aids recognition of local conditions – The local conditions are taken into consideration in the act of organising in an extension organisation • It reduces administrative costs - This is because it provides for unity of command as well as lead to defined line of authority.
3.4 Departmentalisation This is the grouping of similar activities together to form a unit.
It can be easily done in simple organisations, but it is not quite easy in complex organisations (Akinsorotan, 2007).
Organisations could be departmentalised on the following basis: • It could be functional: This is where the major functions are used to classify the units.
• It could be geographical: This is a situation where there are several branches in the different parts of the state or locality.
The cardinal points of north, east, south and west, or even their combinations can be used to describe the units.
• It could be on the basis of product or service: In large organisations where different products are handled, a particular product can be used to classify the organisation, e.g.
those that produce cocoa drink and those that produce kola drink.
• It could be on the basis of customer.
This is on the basis of those that patronise the unit e.g.
children, men, women in hospitals or sections in Departmental stores.
• It could be on the basis of process or equipment: This is on the basis of process of production or the equipment used.
• It should be noted that more than one method could be employed in a particular organisation in effort at achieving good organisation.
55  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has enabled you to understand what organising is all about and the essence of organising.
It has also explained the issue of departmentalisation in organising as well as the issues that are addressed in organising.
These issues are important in order to achieve sustainable organising of extension organisations.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has acquainted you with: • the goal of organising in an organisation • how activities should be subdivided into groups for the purpose of management • criteria to be used for assigning responsibilities to departments • an understanding of divisions that need to be created.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Mention the three issues that are addressed in organising.
ii.
List the five essence of organising.
iii.
Mention the five bases that can be used to departmentalise an organisation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd. 142pp.
Newman, W. H. (1976).
The Techniques of Organisation and Management: Administrative Action.
USA: Prentice-Hall Inc. NJ, p. 486.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577.
Williams, S. K. T. (1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife Press, p 98 – 104.
56  AEM 507 MODULE 6 MODULE 6 FUNCTIONS OF A PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT II (STAFFING) Unit 1 Staffing Unit 2 Predicting Personnel/Staff Needs and Staff Selection Unit 3 Staff Recruitment and Placement Unit 4 Staff Appraisal or Evaluation Unit 5 Personnel Training and Development UNIT 1 STAFFING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Staffing 3.2 The Management Function of Staffing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is important that while effort is made to prepare good plans for an organisation, effort is made to ensure that the staff/personnel that are employed to implement the plans are those that have good capacity and understanding of the goals and workings of the organisation.
This is important so that the work of management will be easy and ensure that round pegs are put in round holes.
This ensures that the dynamism required in extension activities are brought into it and the demand nature required of extension activities are entrenched so that the goals of extension of helping people to help themselves is achieved by the organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the concept of staffing • explain the management function of staffing.
57  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Staffing It is generally considered that the success of any human endeavour is closely related to the quality of personnel who perform the task necessary for the achievement of its goals as well as the conditions which affect the personnel’s physical and mental well being.
Consequently, in agricultural extension, it has become an acceptable fact that the quality of staff is one of the most important factors essential for its success.
The problem which the extension administrator faces therefore is how to secure, develop, utilise and retain the services of highly qualified staff in the effective implementation of extension work programmes.
This helps extension personnel develop their latent abilities while applying their skills and talents in the best interest of the extension organisation (Appleby, 1981).
The extension manager will not only be improving the general efficiency of staff members, but will also be making it possible for them to actualise their personal aspirations as well as achieve higher professional satisfaction.
3.2 The Management Functions of Staffing The management function of staffing includes the following: a.
Predicting personnel/staff needs – This involves planning on the caliber and level of staff that are required to achieve the goals of the organisation.
It is the pre-determining of which personnel are required by the organisation and the qualities and qualifications they must possess.
b. Personnel/Staff recruitment – This involves the selection of people that possess the best criteria for filling the positions that have been penciled down.
Recruitment is usually done by the organisation, or the services of management agencies can be employed to effect the recruitment.
c. Personnel/Staff screening and selection – Selection is the act of selecting a round peg to fill a round hole, and not selecting a square peg to fill a round hole.
d. Personnel/Staff appointment, orientation and placement – It is important that once staff are appointed, they are taken through orientation before they are placed in positions where they will carry out the organisation’s responsibilities.
Effective orientation assists them to be able to play their assigned roles effectively (Aromolaran, 1998).
e. Personnel/Staff performance appraisal and evaluation – Performance appraisal helps to ensure that the role performance 58  AEM 507 MODULE 6 of staff measures up to the expectation of the organisation as specified in the organisation’s plan (Aromolaran, 2000).
f. Personnel/Staff development and training – Continuous development of staff through regular training help to keep them abreast of developments in their work schedule and assists the organisation to achieve sustained progress.
It is thus important that an extension organisation cultivates the habit of regular staff training and development.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt about the importance of employing the service of competent staff members to man the activities of extension organisations in different cadres.
The various actions involved in ensuring effective staffing have been itemised in effort at ensuring that an organisation achieves its goals.
The quality of staff is thus an important factor essential for organisations’ success and so how they are engaged becomes important.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: • the success of any human endeavour is closely related to the quality of personnel who perform the task necessary for the achievement of set goals • the conditions which affect the personnel’s physical and mental well being determine their job performance • recruitment, selection, placement, appraisal and development of staff affect the extent to which personnel see themselves as being part of the organisation’s vision.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Describe the processes that make up staffing in personnel management.
ii.
How does staffing determine the achievement of set goals by organisations?
iii.
Discuss how the physical and mental well being of personnel affect their job performance.
59  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand: Pitman Publishing.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos: Concepts Publications, p. 154.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech., p. 153.
60  AEM 507 MODULE 6 UNIT 2 PREDICTING PERSONNEL/STAFF NEEDS AND STAFF SELECTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Predicting Personnel/ Staff Needs 3.2 Meaning of Staff Selection 3.3 Aids to Staff Selection 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Efforts to predict staff needs are premised on the need to plan for the future.
Such plans are ingredients for ensuring the sustainability of staffing in any organisation.
The prediction should be such that the maximum capacity to be achieved by the organisation is envisaged, and appropriate staff need to take care of the organisational responsibility are well prepared for.
Prediction of staff need should determine which of the staff would be programme staff, that is, those to be employed for the duration of the programme as well as career staff, that is, those to be permanent and stay on up till their retirement from the organisation that employed them.
Staff selection is very important in any organisation.
The extent to which it is properly done determines the efficiency and effectiveness that can be achieved by the organisation.
The extent to which the different aids of staff selection are utilised affect the staff turn-over rate, how effective the staff would be as well as how committed they would be to such organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the essence of predicting personnel/staff needs • describe staff selection and what it entails.
61  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Predicting Personnel/ Staff Needs The prediction of staff needs in agricultural extension should be based on the programmes and objectives of agricultural extension.
Oftentimes, in the process of project formulation, estimate of future staff needs are made.
In general, however, the staffing function in any on-going extension establishment must include prediction of social trends and economic development which could impact on the number of farm families that must be reached and therefore the number of extension personnel that the extension system require.
The most important aspect of staffing is a staffing decision which according to Akinsorotan, (2007) is guided by either of two approaches: a. Programme staffing: This essentially involves employing staff to carry out specific tasks, with emphasis on its performance on short term basis.
This typology is represented by staff appointed under contract terms.
b.
Career staffing: This involves employment of staff on a permanent or pensionable basis.
Whatever the method used, it must be remembered that extension staff are employed to perform specific tasks.
Therefore, an analysis of the job requirement is very important for communicating responsibilities, training, performance appraisal, and self development as a basis for improving the individual as he progresses on the job.
3.2 Meaning of Staff Selection Staff selection involves selecting an individual to fill a job position from among a large number of applicants; the extension manager has in mind what the job for which he is selecting an individual entails.
He should also know what qualities are required for that individual to satisfactorily perform the tasks required of the position.
His task therefore, is to screen as many applicants as necessary to select those who are most qualified and have the best aptitude for the job from among the applicants.
3.3 Aids to Staff Selection There are several aids to staff selection: a.
Application form: Application forms are used to get the details of prospective staff, their antecedents and how best they will fit into the goals of the organisation.
Application ensures that it is only those that have innate interest and would be willing to work 62  AEM 507 MODULE 6 towards the goal achievement of the organisation will apply.
Application forms require prospective applicants to indicate their referees who would provide information on the applicants.
Application forms serve as basis for short listing of intending staff that have good potentials that can be explored by the organisation.
Only candidates that beg to apply for job in an organisation are considered for jobs in such organisations.
b.
Reference letter – This is a report written by someone who knows the applicant very well (a referee), recommending the applicant for a given job.
The referee is required to express the competencies possessed by the applicant in the context of the job that is being applied for.
c. Telephone conversation – This is used in most private sector jobs, particularly at the upper managerial levels.
It ensures that there is prior conversation with the prospective staff.
This is used to create rapport and iron out issues that need to be sorted out with dispatch.
d. Personal interviews: Personal interviews are the final point at which staff to be recruited are determined.
Personal interviews may be written and or oral.
In most of the cases, written interviews are used to prune down the number of applicants to a manageable level in situations where the number of applicants are many, while oral interview are the final points where the prospective employers have direct interaction with the applicant to determine suitability.
Personal interviews are conducted to test the competencies of the applicant and determine suitability for jobs.
e. Tests – This may be aptitude tests or intelligence tests.
These tests are beginning to be more and more popular.
They are either conducted by the organisation or are contracted to management firms who do this for a fee.
Such tests are used to prune down the number of applicants to a manageable level before the final personal interviews are conducted.
These tests help to determine the aptitude and intelligence of applicants and determine their suitability to be considered for personal interviews.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that predicting staff needs should be based on objectives of agricultural extension and purpose of the programme.
Also, staffing decision should be based on whether the staffing is programme or career based.
Therefore, the aim of any extension programme should be properly spelt out so that staffing will be done accordingly.
This unit has emphasised that staff selection is about selecting the best applicant among several applicants to fill a job position with the use of some aids like application forms, tests etc.
It is 63  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL therefore crucial for an extension manager know how to select the best applicant that will perform the task satisfactorily using the best combinations of qualities.
5.0 SUMMARY At the end of this unit, you have learnt that: • staffing in extension work should be based on the economic development and social trends that will impact the lives of rural families positively • choosing extension staff can either be programme or career - oriented • staff selection involves the selecting of an individual to fill a job position from among a large number of applicants • application forms, reference letter, personal interviews, telephone conversation and tests are some of the aids to staff selection.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the essence of predicting personnel/staff needs in extension work.
ii.
What are the two approaches that guide staff decision?
iii.
Explain what staff selection entails.
iv.
Describe some aids to staff selection.
v. What is the significance of reference letter in staff selection process?
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
64  AEM 507 MODULE 6 UNIT 3 STAFF RECRUITMENT AND PLACEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Staff Recruitment and Job Description 3.2 Factors to be Considered in Staff Recruitment 3.3 Staff Placement 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Staff recruitment involves the delineation of staff and the tasks they had to perform on the job.
Such delineation should clearly clarify the job description and how it is to be executed, as well as factors to consider in staff recruitment.
The job description should be such that indicate clarity of purpose in a manner that the officer occupying the position will know what has to be done, how it is to be done and what goal the organisation expects of him to achieve in effort at achieving the general goal of the organisation.
The synergy required must be well specified.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe staff recruitment and job description • explain the need for staff placement • identify the factors to be considered in staff recruitment.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Staff Recruitment and Job Description The aim of staff recruitment is to fill vacancies with the best available people.
For it to be effective, it must be a planned and continuous process, and should be done on the basis of an up-to-date job description.
A job description is a brief statement on the description of the purpose and objectives of the job, and it should include: • The title of the position and the job: The title must be clear and self- implying.
65  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL • Duties to be performed: This must be unambiguous and clearly clarified with the goal that is set to be achieved.
• Responsibilities involved: What tasks has to be performed, what those tasks would demand from the officer to discharge them, as well as what resources would be required.
and • Characteristics and abilities needed: The characteristics and abilities required must be explicit to the extent that the employee would be able to appreciate the demands of such office (Aromolaran, 2000).
For these reasons, the recruitment process must ensure that the most qualified people are in fact those who are employed, and it should be continuous because of staff turnover (due to retirements, deaths etc.
).The usual source of staff recruitment for higher positions in the extension organisation is usually within the extension organisation through promotions, re-deployment and transfers.
However, for lower positions, external sources such as schools and colleges of agriculture, universities as well as other sources become important (Akinsorotan, 2007).
3.2 Factors to consider in Staff Recruitment Several factors are important in staff recruitment, but the following are most critical: • Ability to perform – This can be assessed through hypothetical interrogation of the prospective personnel in order to see how he handles the problems.
• Technical and professional competence, education and actual ability in the performance of the job, assuming that the technical professional competence and educational background inculcates the skill to perform.
• Interest in agricultural extension as an organisation, a profession and a career: This is important as it will aid the motivation of the staff.
• Working relations and attitudinal factors: Good attitude is more important than the skills needed to carry out a task as a skillful person will not be able to perform well if he/she does not have the right attitude.
• Ability to organise and plan: This is important as organisation and planning are the basis of management in agricultural extension.
• Professional interest in professional improvement and future growth: The interest of an individual will help them achieve personal development which is very important in all management 66  AEM 507 MODULE 6 activities as they are dynamic and require continuous development on the part of the officer (Aromolaran, 1998).
3.3 Staff Placement This is essentially staff deployment (Appleby, 1981).
It is important because of the need to: • Make the best use of available staff by recruiting the best right people for the right jobs.
• Proper placement helps to ensure that goals which are to be achieved are within reasonable reach of individuals placed on the job.
• When a new staff is employed in the extension organisation, he is entering a totally new work environment, and therefore he needs to be placed in a position compatible with his personal capabilities from where he can progress through promotion and increased salary, as well as through increased responsibility and authority.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has helped you to know that for staff recruitment to be effective, it has to be a planned and continuous process.
Job description should be made available for staff recruitment which must include title of the job, position of the job, duties to be performed, characteristics and abilities needed.
The most critical factors to be considered in staff recruitment are ability to perform well, technical and professional competence, interest in agricultural extension as a career and profession, working relations and professional improvement.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit must have acquainted you with: • the fact that staff recruitment has to be a continuous process because of occurrences of retirement and deaths • the relevance of recruiting staff for higher positions from within the organisation and lower positions from external sources such as schools, universities and colleges of agriculture • factors to be considered in staff recruitment.
67  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain why staff recruitment in extension establishment has to be a continuous process.
ii.
Describe what job description entails.
iii.
What are the necessary factors that will ensure a successful staff recruitment exercise?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand: Pitman Publishing.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos: Concepts Publications, p. 154.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech., p. 153.
68  AEM 507 MODULE 6 UNIT 4 STAFF APPRAISAL OR EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Purpose of Staff Appraisal 3.2 Advantages of Staff Appraisal 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Staff appraisal is the process and purpose of assessing the performance of staff on a continuous basis in a manner that the activities of such staff are evaluated.
This is with the intent of determining the performance of such staff on the job.
The purpose of appraisal and the advantages that are derivable from such appraisal needs to be understood so that effort to conduct such appraisal with yield meaningful result.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe staff appraisal • identify the purpose of staff appraisal • list the advantages of staff appraisal.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Purpose of Staff Appraisal This is the continuous process of assessing the extent to which the personnel employed to accomplish specific tasks efficiently and effectively utilise resources at their disposal to get work done.
It is the responsibility of all managers and administrators to guide this process at every level of operation for the benefit of both the extension service and the extension worker (Appleby, 1981).
It should attempt to determine present and potential performance as well as provide for motivation.
Traditionally, a negative appraisal should not be a basic reason for punitive action, but should provide a guide for correcting action, staff guidance and counselling.
Positive appraisal, of course, should be 69  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL appropriately rewarded through promotion, salary increment, letters of commendation etc.
Purpose of Staff Appraisal Staff appraisal is undertaken for several reasons in the extension service, some of which include the following: • Identify areas of employee’s weakness so as to determine the areas of training.
• It provides a basis for salary adjustments and increases.
• It helps to identify staff who should be promoted.
• It provides a basis for professional development and improvement (Aromolaran, 1998).
3.3 Advantages of Staff Appraisal a.
To the personnel or employee himself – It provides an assessment, aids motivation and provides incentives that assist the employee to attain a different level of performance, irrespective of whether the appraisal is negative or positive.
Where it is positive, it directly influences increased (higher level of) performance, and if negative, could provide an impetus or urge for change (Aromolaran, 2000).
b.
To the employer – It enhances the confidence of management in its ability to determine staff weaknesses and provide programmes for correcting them.
It also aids the identification of hidden talents and enhances overall staff development and utilisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Staff appraisal is the process of assessing the extent to which the personnel employed to accomplish specific tasks efficiently and effectively utilise resources at their disposal to get work done.
Negative appraisal should provide a guide for correcting action, staff guidance and counseling.
Positive appraisal on the other hand should follow with it promotion, salary increment, letter of recommendation and further trainings for the employee.
70  AEM 507 MODULE 6 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you should have learnt that: • staff appraisal is crucial at all levels of operation for the benefit of the extension service and extension worker • staff appraisal is undertaken for salary increment, staff promotion and professional development and improvement • both the employee and employer benefit from staff appraisal exercise.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain staff appraisal.
ii.
What are the reasons for undertaking staff appraisal?
iii.
Describe the advantages of staff appraisal both to the employer and employee.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand: Pitman Publishing Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos: Concepts Publications, p. 154.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech., p. 153.
71  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL UNIT 5 PERSONNEL TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personnel Training 3.2 Types of Training 3.2.1 Pre-Service Training 3.2.2 Orientation Training 3.2.3 On the Job Training 3.2.4 In-Service Training 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Personnel training and development is very important in effort at getting the best out of staff.
The aim to be achieved determines the type of staff development to embark on.
Staff development can be pre-service, usually to equip staff for the job before they are placed on the job.
There is also orientation training which is used to acquaint them with a job environment as well as on the job training which should be a continuous exercise.
In service training is also a form of personnel training that is used in staff development.
The type of training that is embarked upon is a function of the needs of the staff as well as the requirements of the tasks they have to perform on the job.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of personnel training and development • list types of training in agricultural extension.
72  AEM 507 MODULE 6 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Personnel Training Personnel training and development as a process of management is the continuous process of ensuring growth in the individual extension worker, both mentally and professionally.
In order for the extension personnel to perform at a high level of efficiency, he must continue to acquire information and knowledge formally and informally (Appleby, 1981).
Sometimes, the areas of training and the training needs may be determined through staff appraisal.
The purpose of training is to ensure that the individual personnel develop a feeling of belonging by getting appropriately acquainted with subject matter and knowledge base required for a given job.
Secondly, training helps him to develop desirable attitudes and work habits.
In general, training is provided to enhance staff competence and enable him carry out the functions of his position.
3.2 Types of Training Training can be classified in various ways.
The most often applied in agricultural extension includes the following: a. Pre- Service Training b. Orientation Training c. On the job Training d. In-Service Training 3.2.1 Pre-Service Training: The very first step in the development of extension service training is the pre-service training which is in essence, the training that is acquired before the individual is employed in the extension service.
This training may be provided in schools and colleges of agriculture, polytechnics, and colleges of education and similar training centres which operate curriculum in technical agriculture.
At the middle management and top levels, pre-service trainings are provided by universities’ faculties of agriculture, related faculties (those in zoology are being employed in fisheries division, and those in botany are employed in forestry division, particularly in the area of ecology), and in recent times, by the universities of agriculture.
73  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.2.2 Orientation Training The next step, usually beyond the pre-service training is orientation training.
Training provided during or through orientation is usually organised and conducted for the following purposes: (i) Getting the employee/personnel to know the organisation for which he will work through acquaintance with its staff and programmes.
This is essential in making in making him feel a part of that organisation.
(ii) To let him know, recognise and accept that his specific job in the extension service is as important as any other’s in the overall achievement of the extension goal.
(iii) To help him develop attitudes and work habit.
(iv) The most important is to outline for him a programme which covers a description of his job, his rights on the job, the services expected from him as well as he conditions of his employment.
Orientation training therefore, should provide the extension personnel with what he needs to know to be able to work for the extension service.
This is because he finds himself in a new work environment in which he is likely to get lost if he is not properly oriented.
Beyond orientation, the extension worker is placed or deployed on the job and continuous training remains imperative.
3.2.3 On the Job Training This is essentially the kind of training provided by the extension supervisor to extension personnel in order to continuously enhance their performance on the job.
It is generally best provided through close supervision, auto suggested solutions to problems, frequent extension personnel – supervisor interaction, administrative support, commendation for work well done and overall counselling (Aromolaran, 2000).
3.2.4 In Service Training Usually, in-service training is provided to personnel who are on permanent employment with the extension service.
Most extension organisations have a definite policy on extension training.
Such policy is implemented under: • In service Training without pay: This is usually for staff who are not confirmed, and therefore, are not qualified for this facility.
Also, if the particular course that a given extension personnel wants to undergo has no direct connection with the extension 74  AEM 507 MODULE 6 service delivery system, he may have approval to undertake such in-service training without pay.
• In-service training with pay: This is approved for confirmed staff of the extension service for a training which the extension service perceives as necessary and relevant in enhancing the performance of individual extension personnel on his job.
However, whether in-service training is with or without pay, it should have the following characteristics (Aromolaran, 1998): • In-service training policy must provide a clear statement of intent to train and the purpose for training, that is, to promote people when they return from in-service training or they remain where they were.
• It must assign the responsibility of training to a particular staff or unit within the extension service.
• It should specify the types of training which all recruits are expected to undergo.
• It must provide a method for determining in-service training and their priorities.
• It must provide a technique for evaluating in-service training programmes and staff.
• It must include incentives and recognition for the trained.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has been able to establish that personnel training will facilitate the growth and development in individual extension worker.
The aim of training is to ensure that employee develop a sense of belonging and desirable attitudes to his job.
It also provides staff competence in performing the functions of his position.
Trainings in agricultural extension can be done in various ways, Pre-service, Orientation, on- the job and In-service training.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you should have learnt that: • For an extension personnel to perform his duties effectively, he must get adequate information formally or informally which can be achieved through series of trainings.
• Personnel training and development is a continuous process of ensuring growth in the individual extension worker, both mentally and professionally.
75  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL • Training is essential for an extension worker so as to develop self competence and desirable attitude towards his work.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Describe the purpose of personnel training and development.
ii.
Explain the four types of training in Agricultural extension iii.
What are the characteristics of In-service training?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand: Pitman Publishing.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos: Concepts Publications p. 154.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech., p. 153.
76  AEM 507 MODULE 7 MODULE 7 FUNCTIONS OF A PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT III Unit 1 Directing and Coordinating Unit 2 Budgeting and Reporting UNIT 1 DIRECTING AND COORDINATING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Significance of Directing 3.2 Process of Directing 3.3 Concept of Coordinating 3.4 Reasons for Coordinating 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Directing is a form of supervision that makes people perform tasks to specification.
The process of directing is such that personnel are made to know what has to be done, how it is to be done and what goal is designed to be attained.
Directing can either be by exercising the authority of making people perform tasks or of directing by empowering people to direct in an effort at achieving specified goals.
Whatever method is appropriate is a function of the context in which personnel have to be directed and the facilities that can be deployed.
Coordination involves institutionalised cooperation among the personnel of an organisation through effective communication.
Coordination is done at the different levels of the organisation by facilitating team work.
These help to prevent waste and conflict, and thereby bringing about cordial working relationship among personnel in an organisation.
It helps to bring people together in a conducive working environment.
77  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the significance of directing in agricultural extension work • explain the process of directing • define the concept of coordinating • list the reasons for coordinating 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Significance of Directing Directing is an important aspect of supervision and it implies getting those over whom authority is exercised to perform tasks according to specifications.
It involves compliance with instructions, follow through acceptance of standard practice, explanation and consultative action.
It assumes that the supervisor is close to direct, instruct and where necessary, train to ensure appropriate behaviour.
Directing and controlling are two important processes of management, implying the way or how the extension manager issues instructions to his subordinates and indicates what should be done.
Without directing and proper control, nothing will happen in an organisation.
In agricultural extension, the staff occupying the lowest level of the administrative hierarchy carries the real burden of actual performance in achieving the extension objectives.
Consequently, there is the need for him or her to be guided, directed, and to some extent, controlled, if the supervisor’s expectation of performance is to be achieved.
In all situations of directing and controlling, instructions must be clear, precise and relevant to the work environment.
Directing is the process that many people relate to managing.
It is supervising, or leading workers to accomplish the goals of the organisation.
In many organisations, directing involves making assignments, assisting workers to carry out assignments, interpreting organisational policies, and informing workers of how well they are performing.
To effectively carry out this function, managers must have leadership skills in order to get workers to perform effectively (Williams, 1978).
Some managers direct by empowering workers.
This means that the manager doesn't stand like a taskmaster over the workers barking out orders and correcting mistakes.
Empowered workers usually work in teams and are given the authority to make decisions about what plans will be carried out and how.
Empowered workers have the support of managers who will assist them to make sure the goals of the organisation are being met.
It is generally thought that workers who are involved with the decision-making process feel more of a sense of 78  AEM 507 MODULE 7 ownership in their work, take more pride in their work, and are better performers on the job.
By the very nature of directing, it should be obvious that the manager must find a way to get workers to perform their jobs.
There are many different ways managers can do this in addition to empowerment, and there are many theories about the best way to get workers to perform effectively and efficiently.
Management theories and motivation are important topics and are discussed in detail in other articles.
3.2 Process of Directing The process of directing assumes that the sender of instructions has power and authority to control things the way he wants them.
The process of directing has several components, some of which include the following: • Determining the target of performance, that is, the client to be served, number of farm families to be reached and the number of assistants to employ.
This determination is essential to prevent the misdirecting of effort.
• Give details of what performance level is expected of workers and acceptable to supervisors.
• The use of sanctions should be clarified, prior to performance.
• Ascertain willingness to serve and acceptance of responsibility, that is, obtain acceptance for compliance.
• In all cases, instructions must be within the psychological levels achievable in line with the inputs given individual extension workers to motivate him to get work done.
This is because compliance is perhaps the most important single reason for non performance of the extension worker because it is explained and dismissed often as being due to inadequate administrative support and input provided to the extension worker (Newman, 1976).
• The directing activity is usually initiated by the manager or supervisor, normally one step above the actors who carry out the instructions.
Oftentimes, the step of communicating instructions between the senior and the subordinate is ignored.
The problem therefore comes from the highest level without using the former communication link.
79  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.3 The Concept of Coordination Coordination may be described as institutionalised cooperation, that is, cooperation systematised by defined roles and procedures for the avoidance of conflicting decisions and for joint planning.
It may also be concerned with the consistency of parallel decisions.
For effective coordination to occur in agricultural extension there must be effective communication which operates both as a prerequisite to and an aim of communication.
Coordination takes place at different administrative levels in the extension service in each state as well as between states and at the national level.
At the lower levels, it is commonly the coordination of work programmes and planning for work.
At higher levels, however, it focuses mainly on ensuring that adequate facilities (without excess provision of gaps) are available from where a choice can be made to meet the needs of the individual extension worker and his farmer clientele group.
In all cases, effective delegation of decision making is generally necessary to ensure effective coordination.
In agricultural extension, this means that all important duties interrelating various units and parts in a given extension structure are properly synchronised, that is, not putting the cart before the horse as in the case of fertilizer supply and application to ensure the achievement of desired goals.
In effect, everybody must be seen as working together in harmony.
3.4 Reasons for Coordination Coordination is essential in extension services because: • It prevents waste (in resources, time): Resources should be deployed in a way that waste is reduced to barest minimum through efficient appropriation.
This ensures that maximum benefit is derived from such resources as deployed (Ogunbameru, 2004).
• It prevents conflict in decision making: Coordination ensures that good lines of command are delineated such that personnel will not have to cross their paths.
This helps to prevent conflict and in the process foster good working relationship.
• It draws together personnel (staff) with different skills and interests in a systematised manner: This ensures that synergy is achieved through making individuals work together for the general benefit of the organisation.
• It enhances conducive work environment: This is achieved when personnel understand the importance of not only their task but also that of others and why they have to work together to achieve success.
Coordination ensures harmony, thereby enhancing conducive work environment.
80  AEM 507 MODULE 7 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit concluded that for an agricultural organisation to be successful, directing and control should be done, especially for lower level officers that will need to know what to do and how to do it.
For effective directing, a manager or supervisor must have leadership skills that will enhance its ability to perform to task.
Also, managers must determine the target performance, clarify the use of sanctions and details of performance level expected from workers for proper directing.
This unit emphasised that coordination is seen as institutionalised cooperation.
i.e cooperation systematised by defined roles and procedures for the avoidance of conflicting decisions and for joint planning.
It also ensures that important duties interrelating various units and parts are properly synchronised to achieve the set goals.
Coordination prevents waste of time and resources, prevents conflict in decision-making and enhances conducive work environment.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Directing is supervising or leading workers to accomplish the goals of an organisation.
• Managers or directors should interpret organisational policies, inform workers of how well they are performing and assist them to carry out assignment when there is need for it.
• Certain processes should be followed for the motive behind directing to be achieved.
• Describing coordination is important in agricultural extension work.
• Reasons for coordination need to be understood in agricultural extension work.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain directing.
ii.
Describe the processes involved in directing.
iii.
Explain Coordination.
iv.
Why is coordination necessary in agricultural extension?
81  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Newman, W. H. (1976).
The Techniques of Organisation and Management: Administrative Action.
USA: Prentice-Hall Inc. NJ, p. 486.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. p. 577 Williams, S. K. T. (1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife Press, p 98 – 104.
82  AEM 507 MODULE 7 UNIT 2 BUDGETING AND REPORTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Need for Budgeting 3.2 Reporting 3.3 Steps in Reporting 3.4 Clues for Good Report Writing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Budgeting is a process of fiscal planning that is used in the coordination of organisations.
It includes personal requirements of staff, the operational costs as well as the time needs of extension organisations.
Budgeting helps in prediction as it specifies the needs and how they are to be appropriated in organisations in order to achieve efficiency and effectiveness in the business of managing extension organisations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain budgeting • state the need for budgeting • explain reporting procedures.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT This involves the whole process of fiscal planning in the extension service, including the determination of financial releases, financial appropriation etc.
It includes all activities of the manager in which he/she requests and account for money required for the operation of the extension service.
It includes an explicit elaboration of previous commitment as well as systematic prediction of future financial needs.
Usually, budgeting includes personnel requirements such as personal emoluments (salary), operational costs as well as time needs.
83  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.1 Need for Budgeting Budgeting serves a number of purposes, some of which include the following: • Prediction and anticipation: Budgeting helps to predict and anticipate the financial and time needs of the organisation.
This helps to forge a direction for the organisation by determining what is available and what has to be mobilised in resources in order to achieve the goals of the organisation.
• Provides a reflection of actual times for each of the activities covered: The time required for the achievement of responsibilities is important as it determines the time frame for goals that are to be achieved.
• It provides a basis for controlling the purse, and in this context, sometimes, forms the basis for coordination: Budgeting assists to control the purse of the organisation and thereby assist to achieve effective coordination (Williams, 1978).
• It provides a basis for accountability: Accountability is an important virtue in achieving success by organisations.
Budgeting helps to be accountable as it specifies what resources have to be expended and how they are to be expended.
• It is a management tool because it helps in organising fiscal and financial officers and their duties in ensuring prudent management of funds.
In agric extension, budgets are usually of one year duration.
3.2 Reporting This is keeping those to whom the administrator is responsible informed as to what is going on, and thus includes keeping himself and his subordinates informed through records, research and inspection.
Reporting involves documentation of progress recorded based on feedbacks from monitoring.
Reporting is done to track progress, as a feedback tool, for buy-in of stakeholders, for corrective measures and for planning purposes.
Reporting is thus done for planning, monitoring, control, corrective inputs and as pre-emptive measures.
Reporting should be done as at when required.
Every untimely report is potentially useless.
Some reports might present the actual solution to solve a project problem (Newman, 1976).
Other reports may record historical information that will be useful to assist in future decision making.
84  AEM 507 MODULE 7 3.3 Steps in Reporting Reporting is done by considering the following points: • Determine the scope of the report: The scope of a report determines the ramifications it will take.
It is therefore important that the scope of a report to be prepared before machinery is set in motion towards its preparation.
• Consider the audience: The audience for whom a report is to be written determine the language style and depth of the report.
In agricultural extension work, a report that is to be made available to farmers is not expected to be as detailed as the one that is prepared for extension managers.
• Gather your information: Information gathering is very important in report writing.
A report must give good background for the issues and cases that are being reported.
The depth of the information that is gathered paints the picture of the problem that is being addressed (Ogunbameru, 2004).
• Analyse your information; Analysis of the information gathered gives light to how good the reporting will be.
It is therefore a good information analysis that can lead to good reporting.
The extent to which the information gathered is analysed in extension work determines the ability to which solutions are proffered to identified problems.
• Determine the solution: The acceptable solutions will have to be obtained from the available alternatives derived from information analysis.
The issue of priority setting in the face of available alternatives must therefore be considered in good reporting.
• Organise your report: Organisation is an important tool in good reporting.
The well articulated ideas in a report determines how well it will be received and the extent to which such report can serve useful purpose.
3.4 Clues for Good Report Writing A good report writing must provide identifying information as well as define the project or problem in form of the purpose of the report.
It should give the background and the supporting data.
The conclusions and recommendations must be stated in manner that makes it derivable from the body of the report.
The headings must be descriptive, parallel and ensure good transition.
Such reports should be accurate and objective.
Materials should be presented free from personal feelings or prejudice.
Ensure use of impersonal style to avoid weakening the objectivity of reporting (Akinsorotan, 2007).
85  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit explains that budgeting is a fiscal planning which entails determination of financial releases and appropriations.
It is all activities of the manager in which request and account for money required for the operations of extension services.
Budgeting is necessary for prediction/anticipation of future financial needs and basis for accountability.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • What budgeting is • The need for budgeting.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is budgeting?
ii.
Discuss the need for budgeting.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Newman, W. H. (1976).
The Techniques of Organisation and Management: Administrative Action.
USA: Prentice-Hall Inc. NJ, p. 486.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577.
Williams, S. K. T. (1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife Press, p 98 – 104.
86  AEM 507 MODULE 8 MODULE 8 PROBLEMS CONFRONTING AN EXTENSION PERSONNEL MANAGER (SUPERVISION AND CONTROL) Unit 1 Supervision Unit 2 Control Unit 3 Managerial Skills UNIT 1 SUPERVISION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Supervision 3.2 Role of the Supervisor 3.3 Basic Principles of Supervision 3.4 Elements and Processes of Supervision 3.5 Conditions Necessary for Effective Supervision 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Supervision involves working with a group of people over whom authority is exercised in such a way as to achieve their greatest combined effectiveness.
The extent to which supervision is effectively done determines the success of the extension organisation.
It is thus important that the role of the supervisor is understood so that it will be easy to perform such role.
The principles guiding supervision has to be handy for one to be effective and efficient in supervision.
A supervisor thus needs to master the art as supervision is the art of management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the concept of supervision in agricultural extension • discuss the role of a supervisor • identify the basic principles that guides supervision 87  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Supervision Supervision is the all-embracing concept that ties together the basic principles of management and administration.
Each step in the processes of administration requires supervision to succeed.
Supervision may be described as the art of working with a group of people over whom authority is exercised in such a way as to achieve their greatest combined effectiveness in getting work done.
The key words in that description include the concept of authority, combine effectiveness and coordination.
It is an art because different supervisors perform differently in different work environment.
However, as an activity, it involves the provision of administrative leadership, guidance and the delegation of authority necessary for the satisfactory accomplishment of the agency’s goal and employee objectives.
Therefore, it is the activity that helps the individual to achieve his individual objective as well as those of the organisation.
Most supervisors, therefore, tend to be work oriented by being nice to individual employees and ministering to their welfare in getting them to perform effectively on the job.
Some other supervisors are more job oriented, and consequently are more interested in getting work done and caring less about the workers’ feelings.
The successful supervisor must fuse both objectives i.e.
being both worker and job oriented (Akinsorotan, 2007).
3.2 Role of the Supervisor In most work environments, particularly in the extension service, the roles of the supervisor are to ensure that work is accomplished, instructions carried out and directives implemented in accordance with specifications.
His task ranges from that of monitoring and evaluating performance, to human relations, as well as providing support for his subordinates to implement the tasks of their various job descriptions.
Much more specifically, the role of the supervisor includes the following: • The coordination of extension personnel and work in different locations at different levels within a given area.
• Providing information and communication links between staff that he supervises and managers, ensuring that directives and instructions are clear, well understood and capable of being implemented.
• Provision of administrative and logistic support to extension personnel at lower levels of the organisation.
Administrative support implies the idea of making decision within the administration to suit the realities of lower staff position as away 88  AEM 507 MODULE 8 of shielding them and getting their confidence.
Logistic support on the other hand includes those material facilities and equipment that makes the extension personnel’s job much more pleasant and easier.
• Interpreting programme and project policies at the intermediate level and providing information for policy formulation at the management level.
• Monitoring and appraising productivity and or performance of programmes, projects and the extension personnel/workers.
• Planning staff development and training • Ensuring good work environment conducive to expected levels of performance • Applying sanctions, rewards and punishment where necessary to ensure performance and compliance, in accordance with agreed standards (Newman, 1976).
• In order for the extension supervisors to perform these roles, they need to learn and acquire specific competencies, skills and abilities in technical agriculture, human relations and conceptual content, that is, ability to look at problems and think out solutions, i.e.
seeing beyond one’s nose.
3.3 Basic Principles of Supervision Supervision is a complex activity, usually not so easy to undertake.
Therefore, its success is determined by a number of factors, often times referred to as principles.
Supervision is undertaken in the extension system as a purposeful activity which proceeds by giving a clear conception of what has to be done and prescribes how it can best be achieved.
Effectiveness within the extension service is ensured only through the application of some basic principles of supervision.
These include: • That supervision is more effective when all extension personnel in the service have a clear understanding of the purpose of supervision, of what his job consist of, and what level of performance is acceptable.
This implies that every level of the extension service has some measure of supervisory responsibility.
• Supervision is more effective when the supervisor has the authority to carry out his responsibility on the job.
This delegated authority is more effective when exercised in a democratic manner and autocratically only when the situation demands.
• Supervision is more effective when it is based on the understanding and acceptance of cooperation through shared ideas, efforts and experiences of all members of staff.
89  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL • Supervision is more effective when the supervisor is self confident, shows enthusiasm and takes initiative in directing the efforts of others in striving towards the achievement of the extension service objectives.
• Effectiveness of the supervisor is enhanced when all supervisors have common insights, understanding and willingly accept a team work approach and collaboration.
• Supervision is more effective when the supervisor recognises individual differences in extension workers’ personality as well as capability and go on to assist them in recognising same and helping them to make desired changes.
• Supervision is more effective when it provides for creative thinking and self expression of those being supervised.
• Effective supervision requires creative criticism of poor work and recognition of good work (Ogunbameru, 2004).
• Supervision is more effective when extension workers are given opportunity to show that they can accept greater responsibility.
• Effective supervision is related to the degree to which a supervisor can develop in the supervisee a spirit of loyalty to the organisation as well as to fellow workers.
3.4 Elements and Processes of Supervision The concept of supervision is associated with middle level management task.
The essential processes in enacting their role include: a.
Planning: This involves planning for self development and development of the subordinates.
It should be used by extension managers to ensure that achieving the goals of the organisation is at the will of managers and their subordinates.
Manpower development therefore becomes very important to achieve effective supervision.
It is only when everyone possess the competence to discharge the responsibilities assigned to them that the goals can be achieved.
b. Organising: Supervision is effective when there is proper use of time and the understanding of responsibilities.
There must therefore be good organisation for the management role of supervision to be effectively realised.
c. Controlling: This helps to ensure that the job is done as planned.
Good control facilitates supervision as it clearly states the reward for a job well done.
Controlling is thus an important element of supervision as it helps to ensure strict adherence to assigned tasks.
d. Communication: This involves the sharing of ideas about the goals and specific tasks earmarked for the attainment of the goals of the extension organisation.
It is effective when there is mutual 90  AEM 507 MODULE 8 understanding of the message that is communicated by both extension managers and their subordinates.
There must therefore be convergence in meaning by al role players for there to be effective communication.
Any breakdown in communication will adversely affect the organisation negatively as the goals may not be achieved.
e. Assigning responsibilities and delegating duties: duties and responsibilities must be assigned while there must be effective delegation of duties for supervision to be effective.
Delegation should also be made with authority for the goals of the extension organisation to be achieved.
f. Self appraisal and accepting responsibilities for work done: The extension manager must do self appraisal in supervision.
There must also be the grace to accept responsibilities so that there will be cohesion in role performance (Williams, 1978).
In extension services, the function of the extension supervisors should include induction of new workers into the service.
It should also include training of extension workers on the job, especially on the normal routine operations and standards on the what, how and when to do basic things.
Supervisors should train extension workers on how to secure and develop leaders, contact extension officers and train the trainers to multiply the effort of field extension officers.
They should assist extension workers in modifying and improving known extension teaching methods.
They assist extension workers and farmers by coordinating their duties with those of subject matter specialists (SMSs) and other extension personnel.
Supervisors must assist extension workers to determine progress and accomplishment through evaluation.
3.5 Conditions Necessary for Effective Supervision For supervision to be effective in extension service, Adereti et al.
(2008) indicated that the following conditions are necessary: • There must be clear understanding of the objective and role of a supervisor in the organisation • A supervisor should have the authority to carry out his responsibilities or functions.
Supervision without authority will not achieve the desired result.
It will at best result in the similitude of a toothless bulldog.
• Cooperative shared ideas, experiences and efforts between the supervisor and the supervisee is essential for effective supervision.
This can be achieved through effective communication.
91  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL • A supervisor and his team must have a common insight into understanding of the objectives and goals, and willingly accept the team work pattern to supervision.
• Supervision is enhanced where there is adequate vertical and horisontal communication between the supervisor and his supervisee.
• Opportunity to practice the task for which one is being supervised enhances supervisory activities.
• Effective supervision is related to the degree to which the supervisor has specialised knowledge, skill and understanding to perform the various supervisory functions.
• Supervision is more effective when it provides for a comprehensive and systematic evaluation of the extension organisation’s programmes and personnel.
4.0 CONCLUSION Supervision involves the provision of administrative leadership, guidance and the delegation of authority necessary for the satisfactory accomplishment of organisational and employees goals.
A good supervisor must ensure coordination of extension personnel and work in different locations at different levels in an area, plan staff training and development and ensure that work environment is conducive.
For successful supervision, principles of supervision must be well followed.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Supervision may be described as the art of working with a group of people over whom authority is exercised in such a way as to achieve their greatest combined effectiveness in getting work done.
• Supervision is more effective when extension workers are given opportunity to show that they can accept greater responsibility.
• One of the roles of a supervisor is to ensure that work is accomplished, instructions carried out and directives implemented in accordance with specifications.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss the roles of a good supervisor.
ii.
For effective supervision in extension services, some principles need to be followed.
Explain five.
iii.
Describe what supervision entails.
92  AEM 507 MODULE 8 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adereti, F. O., Torimiro, D. O., Ojo, T. F.& Okorie, V. O.
(2008).
Administration and Supervision in Extension: in Agricultural Extension.
– A Comprehensive Treatise.
Lagos : ABC Agricultural Services Ltd, Pp.
179- 199.
Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Newman, W. H. (1976).
The Techniques of Organisation and Management: Administrative Action.
USA: Prentice-Hall Inc. NJ, p. 486 Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577.
Williams, S. K. T. (1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife Press, p 98 – 104.
93  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL UNIT 2 CONTROL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Control 3.2 Types of Control 3.3 Principles of Effective Control 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Control involves the measurement and correction of the performance of subordinates.
It is used in agricultural extension services to obtain the best from the performance of such subordinates.
It involves setting standards and monitoring performance.
Control can either be budgetary or non-budgetary.
Effective control implies that some basic principles must be adhered to in order to achieve the goals of the organisation.
If control is not effective, the resources committed to the organisation can not be guaranteed to give the required result.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of control in agricultural extension services • briefly describe what control involves • discuss the two types of control • identify the principles of effective control.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Control Control is the measurement and correction of the performance of subordinates to make sure that the objective of the enterprise and the plans devised to attain them are accomplished efficiently and economically.
Control involves: 94  AEM 507 MODULE 8 a.
Setting standards b.
Measuring performance against standards c. Feedback of result d. Correcting deviations from standard.
The controlling function involves the evaluation of activities that managers must perform.
It is the process of determining if the company's goals and objectives are being met.
This process also includes correcting situations in which the goals and objectives are not being met.
There are several activities that are a part of the controlling function.
Managers must first set standards of performance for workers.
These standards are levels of performance that should be met.
For example, in the modular home assembly process, the standard might be to have a home completed in eight working days as it moves through the construction line.
This is a standard that must then be communicated to managers who are supervising workers, and then to the workers so they know what is expected of them.
After the standards have been set and communicated, it is the manager's responsibility to monitor performance to see that the standards are being met.
If the manager watches the homes move through the construction process and sees that it takes ten days, something must be done about it.
The standards that have been set are not being met.
In this example, it should be relatively easy for managers to determine where the delays are occurring.
Once the problems are analysed and compared to expectations, then something must be done to correct the results.
Normally, the managers would take corrective action by working with the employees who were causing the delays.
There could be many reasons for the delays.
Perhaps it isn't the fault of the workers but instead is due to inadequate equipment or an insufficient number of workers.
Whatever the problem, corrective action should be taken.
Standards are an expression of planning goals and may be of many kinds, including physical (numbers produced) and monetary.
Some goals cannot easily be expressed in quantitative form, such as morale of a group, and may be measured only in a qualitative manner.
The more jobs move away from the assembly lines, the more difficult and more important, their control will become.
95  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.2 Types of Control a.
Budgetary control, stated in financial and non financial terms The importance of budgets and fiscal control stem from the fact that human and physical resources cannot be utilised without funds, the sourcing, spending and records of the materials produced.
Budgeting is concerned with prediction and projection of what is likely to happen financially in an organisation.
Operating budgets include sales, production and control which is thought of as a plan or forecast of the ‘profit objective of the extension organisation’s operations.
A budget is a formulation of plans of income and expenditure for a given future period, expressed in quantitative and qualitative terms.
Financial budgets include capital and expenditure budgets.
It involves allocation of resources for the running of the establishment.
The budget converts to monetary terms, the time of the people, equipment and facilities needed to get the job done.
b. Non-budgetary control: This involves allocation of units of production such as litres of milk, meters of cloth to be produced and so on.
Non-budgetary control is the process of appropriating resources in the organisation.
In an extension organisation, the way teaching materials and communication documents are apportioned is the non-budgetary control.
How well the materials are appropriated determines how well the goals of the organisation are achieved (Williams, 1978; Ogunbameru, 2004; Akinsorotan, 2007).
3.3 Principles of Effective Control Effective control implies those that obey the following principles: 1.
Control must be set according to the nature of the job to be performed.
The job to be performed would determine the control as the control required for a small extension organisation will differ from that of a large organisation.
Thus, tertiary service organisations will require more complex control than primary organisations.
2.
Deviation should be reported immediately: This indicates that deviations discovered in the course of project monitoring should be reported immediately for effective control and necessary adjustments.
3.
Control must conform to the pattern of the organisation: The pattern of the organisation should dictate the type and level of control to be utilised.
Any control that does not conform to the pattern of the organisation that is being controlled will not achieve the goals of the endeavour.
96  AEM 507 MODULE 8 4.
Control should show exceptions at selected points: There should always be exceptions to rules and such exceptions must be identified and specified by the type of control put in place.
Also, the points at which the exceptions will hold must be clearly specified (Newman, 1976).
5.
Control should be flexible and economical in operation: Flexibility must be built into the control process to take care of changing situations as well as other contingencies.
The flexibility must be in terms of economy and operations.
The flexibility ensures that changes in situations will not derail the control process.
6.
Control should be simple to understand and should indicate corrective action: A good control is never complex.
It must be simple to facilitate comprehension by all.
This will help all the stakeholders, including the managers and supervisees to fall effectively into the control mechanism.
There must also be corrective action for discrepancies identified in order to make the control measures implementable.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit stressed the importance of setting standards of performance for workers which must be monitored by the manager to make sure that they are met.
Control is the measurement and correction of the performance of subordinates to make sure that the objective of the enterprise and the plans devised to attain them are accomplished efficiently and economically.
Also, control must be set according to the nature of the job and must conform to the pattern of the organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Control is necessary so as to be able to accomplish the objective of an organisation.
• Some basic principles like, having control that is simple to understand and economical in operation need to be followed for effective control to be actualised.
• Control involves setting standards, measuring performance against standards, feedback of result and correcting deviations from standard.
97  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i. Enumerate the principles of effective control.
ii.
Explain why control is necessary in an agricultural extension establishment.
iii.
Mention the two types of control 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577.
Newman, W. H. (1976).
The Techniques of Organisation and Management: Administrative Action.
USA: Prentice-Hall Inc. NJ, p. 486.
Williams, S. K. T. (1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife Press, p 98 – 104.
98  AEM 507 MODULE 8 UNIT 3 MANAGERIAL SKILLS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Managerial Skills Required in an Organisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Managerial skills are skills expected to be possessed by a successful manager.
Such skills must include communication, listening, report writing, human, time management and technical skills.
It is desirable that a good extension manager must possess these skills in order to be able to achieve meaningful results in executing the goals of the organisation.
The success of an extension manager is thus the extent to which these skills can be executed in the contemporary world.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the different skills that an effective manager must possess.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Managerial Skills Required in an Organisation To be an effective manager, it is necessary to possess many skills.
Not all managers have all the skills that would make them the most effective manager.
As technology advances and grows, the skills that are needed by managers are constantly changing.
Different levels of management in the organisational structure also require different types of management skills (Akinsorotan, 2007).
Generally, however, managers need to have communication skills, human skills, computer skills, time-management skills, and technical skills.
a. Communication Skills: Communication skills fall into the broad categories of oral and written skills, both of which managers use in many different ways.
It is necessary for a manager to orally 99  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL explain processes and give direction to workers.
It is also necessary for managers to give verbal praise to workers.
Managers are also expected to conduct meetings and give talks to groups of people.
b.
Listening Habit: An important part of the oral communication process is listening.
Managers are expected to listen to their supervisors and to their workers.
A manager must hear recommendations and complaints on a regular basis and must be willing to follow through on what is heard.
A manager who doesn't listen is not a good communicator (Ogunbameru, 2004).
c. Report Writing Skills: Managers are also expected to write reports, letters, memos, and policy statements.
All of these must be written in such a way that the recipient can interpret and understand what is being said.
This means that managers must write clearly and concisely.
Good writing requires good grammar and composition skills.
This is something that can be learned by those aspiring to a management position.
d. Human Skills: Relating to other people is vital in order to be a good manager.
Workers come in about every temperament that can be imagined.
It takes a manager with the right human skills to manage this variety of workers effectively.
Diversity in the workplace is commonplace.
The manager must understand different personality types and cultures to be able to supervise these workers.
Human skills cannot be learned in a classroom; they are best learned by working with people.
Gaining an understanding of personality types can be learned from books, but practice in dealing with diverse groups is the most meaningful preparation.
e. Computer Skills: Technology changes so rapidly that it is often difficult to keep up with the changes.
It is necessary for managers to have computer skills in order to keep up with these rapid changes.
Many of the processes that occur in offices, manufacturing plants, warehouses, and other work environments depend on computers and thus necessitate managers and workers who can skillfully use the technology.
Although computers can cause headaches, at the same time they have simplified many of the tasks that are performed in the workplace (Williams, 1978).
f. Time-Management Skills: Because the typical manager is a very busy person, it is important that time be managed effectively.
This requires an understanding of how to allocate time to different projects and activities.
A manager's time is often interrupted by telephone calls, problems with workers, meetings, others who just want to visit, and other seemingly uncontrollable factors.
It is up to the manager to learn how to manage time so that work can be completed most efficiently.
Good time- management skills can be learned, but managers must be willing 100  AEM 507 MODULE 8 to prioritise activities, delegate, deal with interruptions, organise work, and perform other acts that will make them better managers.
g. Technical Skills: Technical skills are more closely related to the tasks that are performed by workers and are different from computer skills.
A manager must know what the workers who are being supervised are doing on their jobs or it will be difficult for him to provide assistance to them.
For example, a manager who is supervising accountants needs to know the accounting processes; a manager who is supervising a machinist or machine operator must know how to operate the equipment; and a manager who supervises the construction of a home must know the sequence of operations and how to perform them.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is pertinent for an effective manager to have several skills that will help him to discharge his duties efficiently.
A good manager must be able to relate well with all his workers and subordinates as human skills can be developed by good interpersonal relationship.
Allocating time for different activities and tasks is the responsibility of a good manager that desires to have results for his endeavours.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Different levels of management in the organisational structure require different types of management skills.
• The manager must understand different personality types and cultures to be able to supervise his workers and subordinates • Managing time effectively will go a long way to make the manager more productive.
• It is necessary for managers to have computer skills in order to keep up with the rapid changes happening in the world.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
State the relevance of computer skills in agricultural management.
ii.
Explain any five managerial skills you have learnt.
101  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organsational Dynamics .Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577.
Williams, S. K. T. (1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife Press, p 98 – 104.
102  AEM 507 MODULE 9 MODULE 9 DUTIES OR TASKS OF A PERSONNEL MANAGER Unit 1 Tasks of a Personnel Manager Unit 2 Principles of Bureaucracy and Organisation UNIT 1 TASKS OF A PERSONNEL MANAGER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles Guiding the Task of a Personnel Manager 3.1.1 Division of Work 3.1.2 Authority and Responsibility 3.1.3 Discipline 3.1.4 Ensuring Unity of Command 3.1.5 Unity of Direction 3.1.6 Subordination of Individual Interest 3.1.7 Remuneration 3.1.8 The Degree of Centralisation 3.1.9 Scalar Chain 3.1.10 Order 3.1.11 Equity 3.1.12 Stability of Tenure of Personnel 3.1.13 Initiative 3.1.14 Esprit de Corps 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The tasks of a personnel manager include division of work, authority and responsibility, discipline, ensuring unity of command and direction, subordination of individual interest as well as remunerating the staff of the organisation appropriately.
These tasks will not only have to be performed but be seen to be performed in order for the organisation to achieve its set aims and objectives.
103  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the principles guiding the task of a personnel manager.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principles Guiding the Task of a Personnel Manager The duties or tasks of a personnel manager are fundamental.
These tasks serve as guidelines for decisions and actions of managers.
They are derived through observation and analysis of events which managers have to face in actual practice.
The principles include the following: 3.1.1 Division of Work The specialisation of the workforce, creating specific personal and professional development within the labour force and therefore increasing productivity; leads to specialisation which increases the efficiency of labour.
By separating a small part of work, the workers’ speed and accuracy in its performance increases.
This principle is applicable to both technical as well as managerial work and is therefore desirable in every extension organisation (Ogunbameru, 2004; Akinsorotan, 2007).
3.1.2 Authority and Responsibility The issue of command is followed by responsibility for their consequences.
Authority means the right of a superior to give order to his subordinates; while responsibility means obligation for performance.
This principle suggests that there must be parity between authority and responsibility.
They are co-existent and go together, and are two sides of the same coin.
3.1.3 Discipline Discipline refers to obedience, proper conduct in relation to others, respect of authority, etc.
It is essential for the smooth functioning of all organisations.
This is because discipline is the soul of any organisation, including extension organisations.
104  AEM 507 MODULE 9 3.1.4 Ensuring Unity of Command This principle states that every subordinate should receive orders and be accountable to one and only one superior.
If an employee receives orders from more than one superior, it is likely to create confusion and conflict.
Unity of Command also makes it easier to fix responsibility for mistakes.
It is important in extension organisations to ensure efficient delivery of extension services.
3.1.5 Unity of Direction All those working in the same line of activity must understand and pursue the same objectives.
All related activities should be put under one group, and there should be one plan of action for them.
They should also be under the control of one manager.
It seeks to ensure unity of action, focusing of efforts and coordination of strength in extension services.
3.1.6 Subordination of Individual Interest The management must put aside personal considerations and put company objectives first.
Therefore, the interests of goals of the organisation must prevail over the personal interests of individuals.
That is only when the objectives of every extension organisation can be effectively achieved since it is a highly social endeavour.
3.1.7 Remuneration Workers must be paid sufficiently as this is a chief motivation of employees and therefore greatly influences productivity.
The quantum and methods of remuneration payable should be fair, reasonable and rewarding of effort put into the organisation.
In extension organisations, this should include reimbursement for mobility.
3.1.8 The Degree of Centralisation The amount of power wielded by the central management depends on company size.
Centralisation implies the concentration of decision making authority at the top management.
Sharing of authority with lower levels is called decentralisation.
The organisation should strive to achieve a proper balance for effective extension delivery.
105  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 3.1.9 Scalar Chain Scalar Chain refers to the chain of superiors ranging from top management to the lowest rank.
The principle suggests that there should be a clear line of authority from top to bottom linking all managers at all levels.
It is considered a chain of command.
3.1.10 Order Social order ensures the fluid operation of an organisation through authoritative procedure.
Material order ensures safety and efficiency in the workplace.
Hence, social and material order must be maintained in every good extension organisation.
3.1.11 Equity Employees must be treated kindly, and justice must be enacted to ensure a just workplace.
Managers should be fair and impartial when dealing with employees.
An environment of fairness goes a long way to entrench job security.
3.1.12 Stability of Tenure of Personnel The period of service should not be too short and employees should not be moved from positions frequently.
An employee cannot render useful service if he is removed before he becomes accustomed to the work assigned to him.
This is important in extension work as clienteles get used to their field extension personnel and will love to take instructions from him.
Frequent movement disrupts the equilibrium.
3.1.13 Initiative Using the initiative of employees can add strength and new ideas to an organisation.
Initiative on the part of employees is a source of strength for the organisation because it provides new and better ideas.
Employees are likely to take greater interest in the functioning of the organisation if their initiatives are recognised (Newman, 1976; Williams, 1978).
3.1.14 Esprit de Corps This refers to the need of managers to ensure and develop morale in the workplace; individually and communally.
Team spirit helps develop an atmosphere of mutual trust and understanding.
These can be used to initiate and aid the processes of change, organisation, decision making, skill management and the overall view of the management function.
Fayol also divided the management function into five key roles: 106  AEM 507 MODULE 9 a.
To organise b.
To plan and forecast (Prevoyance) c. To command d. To control e. To coordinate 4.0 CONCLUSION Tasks of a personnel manager are fundamental to any establishment and they serve as guidelines for decisions and actions of managers.
An environment of fairness and equity must be encouraged in an organisation.
Also, the principle of scalar chain should be adopted which suggest that there should be a clear line of authority from the top to bottom linking all managers at all levels.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you should have learnt that: • Authority means the right of a superior to give order to his subordinates; while responsibility means obligation for performance.
• Discipline is the soul of any organisation, including extension organisations.
• Employees are likely to take greater interest in the functioning of the organisation if their initiatives are recognised.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is the importance of unity of command in agricultural extension organisations?
ii.
Describe ten principles guiding the task of a personnel manager.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Newman, W. H. (1976).
The Techniques of Organisation and Management: Administrative Action.
USA: Prentice-Hall Inc. NJ, p. 486.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577.
Williams, S. K. T (1978): Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife.
: University of Ife Press, p 98 – 104.
107  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organisation/Bureaucracy 3.2 Types of Domination in Bureaucracy 3.3 Features of Bureaucracy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Bureaucracy is seen as ‘’red tape” and inefficiency as experienced in large organisations.
However, as a sociological concept, bureaucracy refers to a type of formal organisation or administrative apparatus based upon rational principles backed up by legal sanctions and existing in a legal framework.
Domination in bureaucracy can either be charismatic, traditional, patrimonial, feudal or legal.
Bureaucracy has some characteristics which have to do with division of labour, authority structure, as well as position and role of individual members in the organisation.
These have to be effectively coordinated in order to achieve meaningful impact in an extension organisation.
It is therefore expedient that these are understood in order to achieve organisational growth and development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain formal organisation and bureaucracy • discuss types of domination in bureaucracy • explain the main features of bureaucracy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organisation/Bureaucracy A formal organisation is a social unit that is established in a more or less deliberate manner for the attainment of a specific goal.
This is in contrast to some social units such as friendship groups or neighbourhood 108  AEM 507 MODULE 9 clubs that seem to emerge in a spontaneous and unplanned manner.
It may also be defined as system of coordinated activities of a group of people working cooperatively towards a common goal under authority and leadership.
The purposive design (planned efforts) and goal specificity inherent in both definitions are two crucial criteria for differentiating formal organisations (e.g.
MANR, Universities, the ADPs, Trade Unions, Political parties etc.)
from other social groupings.
Bureaucracy in everyday usage connotes “red tape” and inefficiency as experienced in large organisations.
However, as a sociological concept, bureaucracy has a less pressurative or derogatory, and a more neutral meaning.
It refers to a type of formal organisation or administrative apparatus.
A rational legal bureaucracy is based upon rational principles backed up by legal sanctions and existing in a legal framework.
As conceptualised by Max Weber, bureaucracy is based on one of three types of domination.
Generally, there are three types of domination based on different systems of belief that legitimate the exercise of power and the resultant administrative apparatus.
3.2 Types of Domination 1 Charismatic Domination – under this type of domination, the leader is believed to have special qualities or “gifts” that form the basis of his domination or authority over a set of people.
Therefore, the belief in these qualities legitimises power in the charismatic type of domination.
2 Traditional Types of Domination - basis of legitimisation of the traditional type is the belief in the sacredness of tradition, respect for the old and established ways of doing things.
The traditional ruler commands domination by virtue of his inherited status.
His orders are personal, but bound by custom.
Subjects obey him out of respect for his traditional status or royalty.
When this domination is exercised over several people, two types of administrative apparatus may emerge i.e.
a. Patrimonial Administration: Here, the officials are the rulers’ personal servants, relatives or favourites.
They depend on the ruler for remunerations.
b. Feudal Administration: The officials here are not personal servants or dependants, but they are allies and take oath of obliging to the ruler.
This kind of arrangement is contractual.
However, the allies have their own jurisdiction and administrative domain (Olubadan and Baales).
They do not depend on the ruler for remunerations.
109  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL c. Legal Type of Domination: This is not based on possession of special qualities or inherited status.
It is based on the belief in the rightness of law.
The ruled obey the ruler because he occupies the position by following certain rules agreed upon by both the ruled and the ruler.
The typical administrative apparatus in this set up is referred to as bureaucracy.
3.3 Features of Bureaucracy From the previous discussion, it is obvious that not all organisations are bureaucratic.
Max Weber points out that there are four main issues with respect to bureaucracy, that is: a.
Division of labour b.
Authority structure c. Position and role of the individual member d. Roles that regulate the relations between organisations and organisation members.
Though several features have been attributed to bureaucratic organisations, some of the main features are: a.
Division of Labour (specialisation): A highly developed division of labour and specialisation is a paramount feature of bureaucracy.
Detailed and precise division, definitions of duties and responsibilities are spell out for each office or position.
This way, a limited number of tasks is assigned to each office (Akinsorotan, 2007).
b. Impersonal Relationship: Bureaucratic organisations have rational and impersonal relation or subordinate/super-ordinate relationship.
Loyalty is impersonal, that is, a subordinate is loyal to his superior’s position, not to the specific person who occupies the position (Newman, 1976).
These two characteristics deal with the organisation itself.
A look at the role and status of its members reveal the following: c. Qualification: Recruitment into a bureaucracy is based on formal qualifications which are used as necessary implications for the possession of adequate technical knowledge to meet the special demands of the job.
Particularistic considerations such as family position or political affiliation are not prerequisite for recruitment.
d. Promotion: This is based on elaborate system of seniority and achievement.
e. Clear-Cut Separation between Private and Public Spheres of the Bureaucrat’s Life.
110  AEM 507 MODULE 9 f. Documentation: All administrative acts, policies, roles are always in writing.
g. Scalar Principles: Bureaucracy has scalar principles, that is, chain of command or hierarchy.
Bureaucracy is therefore a system of control based on rational rules.
The rules are meant to design and regulate the organisation on the basis of technical knowledge and with the aim of achieving maximum efficiency.
Bureaucratic administration may be described summarily in this regard as an exercise of control on the basis of knowledge.
The general picture given this far is that of an ideal type of bureaucracy.
It is ideal because the characteristics are not found in concrete organisations in their extreme forms described above.
4.0 CONCLUSION Formal organisation may be defined as system of coordinated activities of a group of people working cooperatively towards a common goal under authority and leadership.
Bureaucracy is a formal organisation based upon rational principles backed up by legal sanctions and existing in a legal framework.
Red tapism is always found alongside with bureaucracy with rules and procedures guiding all form of activities.
Bureaucracy is a system of control based on rational rules and procedures but mostly its characteristics are not found in most formal organisations.
The main features of bureaucracy are division of labour, authority structure, position and role of individual member and roles that regulate the relations between organisations and organisation members.
Recruitment in bureaucracy is based on sound moral and academic qualifications.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Bureaucracy occurs in most formal organisations.
• Charismatic, traditional and legal are types of domination which are based on different systems of belief that legitimate the exercise of power and the resultant administrative apparatus.
• A formal organisation is a social unit that is established in a more or less deliberate manner for the attainment of a specific goal.
• Bureaucracy is based on formal rules and procedures.
• The main characteristics of bureaucracy are division of labour, authority structure, impersonal relationship, formal rules and procedures and strict adherence to formal instructions.
111  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain Bureaucracy and its relevance in agricultural extension services.
ii.
Discuss types of domination as evident in bureaucracy.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Newman, W. H. (1976).
The Techniques of Organisation and Management: Administrative Action.
USA: Prentice-Hall Inc. NJ, p. 486.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577.
Williams, S. K. T. (1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife Press, p 98 – 104.
112  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL MODULE 10 EXPANSION OF PERSONNEL MANAGER Unit 1 Key Components of Classical Organisational Theories Unit 2 Management Thought UNIT 1 KEY COMPONENTS OF CLASSICAL ORGANISATIONAL THEORIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Components of an Organisation 3.1.1 Scalar and Functional Process 3.2 The Concept of Centralisation and Decentralisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION An organisation has the scalar and functional process of operation.
The structure, line organisation, staff organisation, span of control and division of labour will have to be delineated for it to achieve its set goals.
This becomes expedient as the way an organisation is structured determines the maximum level of performance it can achieve.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the components of organisational chart • explain the concept of centralisation and decentralisation in agricultural extension services.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Components of an Organisation From a classical perspective, an organisation is concerned with its design and structure, not with the people.
In this regard, reference is usually made to the ever present organisational chart or organogram.
116  AEM 507 MODULE 10 The four key components inherent in this perspective are: 3.1.1 Scalar and Functional Process The division of labour is achieved by 2-processes, those are, scalar and functional.
Scalar process refers to the hierarchy or chain of command of the organisation.
Essentially, it has to do with the amount of responsibility and authority assigned to each person e.g ministry top level management i.e Commissioner, Director General; middle level management - levels 10-12; second level supervisors (Agricultural Officers and Agricultural Superintendents) - level 8 & 9 ; frontline workers, Extension Workers and Field Officers.
Functional process refers to the specific job performed by each employee in an organisation e.g.
in MANR; we have technical staff, clerical staff, finance staff, cleaners etc.
In universities, we have administrative staff, cleaners, academic staff, technicians etc (Akinsorotan, 2007).
Structure: Structure refers to the relationships and roles that exist in the organisation.
The structure enables the organisation to meet its objective effectively in an orderly manner.
There are 2 types of structures in organisations, that is, line organisation and staff organisation.
a.
The line Organisation deals with chains of command and the primary function of the organisation.
It can be identified by looking at the organisational chart.
The primary function of agricultural extension is to disseminate information and educate farmers.
The university’s primary function is to educate students and do research, while a supermarket sells objects.
b.
The Staff Organisation is a supplement to the line function.
It basically advices and services the line function.
It is mostly administrative in function (Ogunbameru, 2004).
Span of Control: This involves the number of persons supervised.
The span of control refers to the number of employees a manager can effectively supervise.
As the number of employees increases, the number of possible interrelationships increases geometrically.
Span of control influences the shape of an organisation.
A wide span leads to a squat or flat organisation.
A narrow span of control leads to a tall organisation.
Tall organisations with multiple levels increase the number of organisation channels and the possibility of information distortion.
Flat organisations on the other hand reduce the number of channels messages have to go through but also reduce the number of face to face contact.
This might result to a situation of communication overload on the manager.
117  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL Division of Labour: This refers to how the work of an organisation is divided amongst the available human resources.
3.2 The Concept of Centralisation and Decentralisation Centralisation is more likely in tall organisations, while decentralisation may result for flat organisations.
In centralisation of authority, few people are involved, so decision making may be expedited.
However, morale amongst workers may be low.
Decentralisation however may result in high morale as most employees are given the opportunity to contribute to decision making.
The decision making process may be slow as so many individuals have to interact.
Agricultural extension management/administration is an important aspect or a precondition for agricultural development efforts because it caters for the management of people and resources for the achievement of the agricultural development objectives.
It is perhaps for those reasons that the department of agricultural extension services, sometimes referred to as the technical services division of the Agricultural Development Projects is administered as separate entities within the government.
If any organisation has to succeed, it must be properly administered, managed and supervised.
All modern organisations use administrative processes to accomplish their goals.
It is for these reasons that the study of management of agricultural extension personnel becomes important for the overall development of expertise.
4.0 CONCLUSION Scalar process refers to the hierarchy or chain of command of the organisation while functional process refers to the specific job performed by each employee in an organisation.
Structure in an organisation helps in fulfillment of set goals and objectives.
The span of control refers to the number of employees a manager can effectively supervise which control and influences the shape of an organisation.
A wide span leads to a squat or flat organisation.
A narrow span of control leads to a tall organisation.
It is crucial that in agricultural extension organisations, adequate number of employees should be allotted to a supervisor or manager for effective administration and management.
118  AEM 507 MODULE 10 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Structure refers to the relationships and roles that exist in the organisation.
• Division of labour refers to how the work of an organisation is divided amongst the available human resources.
• Scalar and functional processes has to do with the amount of responsibility and authority assigned to each person in an organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the importance of span and control in organisational components.
ii.
Discuss scalar and functional processes in agricultural organisations.
iii.
Describe the components of organisational chart/structure.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A. O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd, 142pp.
Newman, W. H. (1976): The Techniques of Organisation and Management: Administrative Action.
USA: Prentice-Hall Inc. NJ, p. 486.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004): Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577.
Williams, S. K. T. (1978): Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife Press, p 98 - 104 119  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL UNIT 2 MANAGEMENT THOUGHT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classical Thought 3.2 Behavioural Management Thought 3.3 Contemporary Management Thought 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The management thought that is utilised in an organisation is a function of the goals to be achieved and the type of line of command to exploit.
The management thought can be classical, where organised methods are used in order to find solutions to problems in the workplace.
It can also be behavioural where management is viewed from a social and psychological perspective rather than being mechanistic.
Management thought can also be contemporary, where Systems theorists believe that all parts of the organisation must be related and that managers from each part must work together for the benefit of the organisation.
The type of management theory used is premised on the leaning of the managers of the organisation.
Personnel management in agricultural extension is thus an art and a science.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the theories of management from different schools of thought • identify the weakness of Classical thought that brought about behavioural management thought • explain the contemporary management thought.
120  AEM 507 MODULE 10 3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are many views of management, or schools of management thought, that have evolved over the years.
What follows is a brief discussion of some of the theories of management that have greatly affected how managers manage today (Ogunbameru, 2001).
3.1 Classical Thought The classical school of management thought emerged throughout the late 1800s and early 1900s as a result of the Industrial Revolution.
Since the beginning of time, managers have needed to know how to perform the functions discussed earlier.
The Industrial Revolution emphasised the importance of better management as organisations grew larger and more complex.
As industry developed, managers had to develop systems for controlling inventory, production, scheduling, and human resources.
It was the managers who emerged during the Industrial Revolution, many who had backgrounds in engineering, who discovered that they needed organised methods in order to find solutions to problems in the workplace.
Classical management theorists thought there was one way to solve management problems in the industrial organisation.
Generally, their theories assumed that people could make logical and rational decisions while trying to maximise personal gains from their work situations.
The classical school of management is based on scientific management which has its roots in Henri Fayol’s work in France and the ideas of German sociologist Max Weber.
Scientific management is a type of management that bases standards upon facts.
The facts are gathered by observation, experimentation, or sound reasoning.
In the United States, scientific management was further developed by individuals such as Charles Babbage (1792–1871), Frederick W. Taylor (1856–1915), and Frank (1868–1924) and Lillian Gilbreth (1878–1972).
3.2 Behavioural Management Thought It was because the classical management theorists were so machine- oriented that the behavioralists began to develop their thinking.
The behavioral managers began to view management from a social and psychological perspective.
These managers were concerned about the well-being of the workers and wanted them to be treated as people, not as part of the machines (Ekpere, 1990; Dahama, O. P (1976)).
121  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL Some of the early behavioural theorists were Robert Owen (1771–1858), a British industrialist who was one of the first to promote management of human resources in an organisation; Hugo Munsterberg (1863–1916), the father of industrial psychology; Walter Dill Scott (1869–1955), who believed that managers need to improve workers' attitudes and motivation in order to increase productivity; and Mary Parker Follett (1868–1933), who believed that a manager's influence should come naturally from his or her knowledge, skill, and leadership of others.
In the behavioural management period, there was a human relations movement.
Advocates of the human relations movement believed that if managers focused on employees rather than on mechanistic production, then workers would become more satisfied and thus more productive labourers.
Human relations management supported the notion that managers should be paternalistic and nurturing in order to build work groups that could be productive and satisfied.
The behavioural science movement was also an important part of the behavioural management school.
Advocates of this movement stressed the need for scientific studies of the human element of organisations.
This model for management emphasised the need for employees to grow and develop in order to maintain a high level of self-respect and remain productive workers.
The earliest advocates of the behavioural science movement were Abraham Maslow (1908–1970), who developed Maslow's hierarchy of needs, and Douglas McGregor (1906–1964), who developed Theory X and Theory Y.
These theories are discussed in depth in other units.
3.3 Contemporary Management Thought In more recent years, new management thoughts have emerged and influenced organisations.
One of these is the socio-technical system.
A system is a set of complementary elements that function as a unit for a specific purpose.
Systems theorists believe that all parts of the organisation must be related and that managers from each part must work together for the benefit of the organisation.
Because of this relationship, what happens in one part of the organisation influences and affects other parts of the organisation.
Another contemporary approach to managing involves contingency theories.
This approach states that the manager should use the techniques or styles that are most appropriate for the situation and the people involved.
For example, a manager of a group of Ph.D. chemists in a laboratory would have to use different techniques from a manager of a group of teenagers in a fast food restaurant.
122  AEM 507 MODULE 10 This is often the downfall of managers.
They have no plan or system.
As a result their actions seem random to the people they are managing and this leads to confusion and disappointment.
This is why it is so important for business managers to have an employee manual.
Without the employee manual providing direction, managers will struggle to be fair and balanced in their dealings with employees.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has been able to stress that classical management theorists assumed that there was one way to solve management problems in an industrial organisation and people could make logical and rational decisions while trying to maximise personal gains from their work situations.
It was because the classical management theorists were so machine-oriented that brought about the behaviourial management thought.
They are concerned about the well-being of the workers and wanted them to be treated as people, not as part of the machines.
Contemporary management thought emphasise that the manager should use the techniques or styles that are most appropriate for the situation and the people involved.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • As industry developed, managers had to develop systems for controlling inventory, production, scheduling and human resources as stressed by the classical thought.
• During the behavioural management period, there was a human relations movement that believed that if managers focused on employees rather than on mechanistic production, then workers would become more satisfied and thus more productive labourers.
• Systems theorists believe that all parts of the organisation must be related and that managers from each part must work together for the benefit of the organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Describe the three theories of management as discussed in this unit.
ii.
Explain the strength of behavioural management thought over classical thought.
123  AEM 507 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Appleby, R. C. (1981).
Management in Action.
New Zealand: Pitman Publishing.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998).
Office Administration and Management.
Lagos: Concepts Publications, p. 154.
Aromolaran, E. A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos : BLV Print Tech., p. 153.
Dahama, O. P. (1976).
Extension and Rural Welfare, India: Ram Prasad and Sons: AGRA – 3.
P. 716.
Ekpere, J.
A.
(1990).
Agricultural Extension: A Searchlight of the Nigerian Small Farmer.
University of Ibadan Lecture Series, Delivered on Behalf of the Faculty of Agriculture and Forestry.
Ibadan, University of Ibadan Press.
P. 94.
Newman, W. H. (1976).
The Techniques of Organisation and Management: Administrative Action.
USA: Prentice-Hall Inc. NJ, p. 486.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2001).
Practical Agricultural Administration.
Lagos: Kuntel Publishing House, P. 163.
Ogunbameru, B. O.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd, p. 577.
Williams, S. K. T. (1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile Ife: University of Ife Press, p 98 – 104.
124
