 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ENG 414 COURSE TITLE: SPEECH WRITING  ENG414 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Course Team Dr. Adesina B. Sunday (Developer/Writer) - UI Dr.
I. Omolara Daniel (Editor/Programme Leader) -NOUN Mr. Theodore O. Iyere (Coordinator) - NOUN ii ENG414 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria E-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-587-7 iii ENG414 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………….………………….
1 Course Aims………………………………………………................ 1 Course Objectives…………………………………………………… 1 Working through This Course……………………………………….. 2 Course Materials………………………………………………….….. 2 Study Units………………………………………………………….. 2 Course Marking Scheme...……..…………………………………… 3 Course Overview…………………………………………………….. 4 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials…………………………………….. 5 Summary…………………………………………………………….. 5 iv  Introduction ENG414 is a one-semester-three-credit-units 400 level course.
It is designed for students whose major discipline is English.
The course has 21 units, which contain a detailed study of speech writing.
Although it is an introductory course, it captures the essence of speech writing.
Examples and illustrations in this course are made relevant to local needs taking into consideration users of the materials from other climes.
This Course Guide enables you know what the course is all about, materials you will need and how to work your way through these materials.
It provides guidelines on time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course.
It also points out information on the necessity for the tutor-marked assignments.
You are advised to attend the tutorial classes to discuss your difficulties with your tutors.
Course Aims This course is designed to introduce you to speech writing.
Its aims to: • introduce you to what speech is • explain how to carry out audience analysis • expose you to how to gather materials for the speech • explain how to use the Internet materials for your speech • coach you on how to use language effectively in speech writing • analyse selected speeches from renowned individuals.
Course Objectives There are objectives outlined for each unit of this course.
You should read them before studying each unit.
It is expected that by the time you have finished studying this course, you should be able to: • define speech • identify features of a good speech and qualities of a good speechwriter • explain how to plan a speech • explain how to source for materials for the speech and use different reasoning patterns • discuss how to use language to achieve effect in speech • analyse selected speeches • compose speeches for different occasions i  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Working through This Course To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units, recommended books and other materials provided by NOUN.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at some points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
The course should take you about 20 weeks to complete.
You will find all the components of the course listed below.
You have to allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: 1.
Study Units 2.
Textbooks 3.
Assignment File 4.
Presentation Schedule Study Units There are 21 units in this course and they are arranged as follows.
Module 1 The Basics of Communication Unit 1 Language and Speech Unit 2 Communication Unit 3 Types and Purpose of Communication Unit 4 Types of Speech Unit 5 Audience Analysis Module 2 Writing Activities Unit 1 Writing Stages Unit 2 Sourcing for Information Unit 3 The Internet and Speech Writing Unit 4 Logical Issues in Speech writing Unit 5 Introduction Unit 6 Other Parts of the Speech Module 3 Language and Style in Speech Writing Unit 1 Paragraphing Unit 2 The Sentence ii  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Unit 3 Tense, Aspect, and Concord Unit 4 Concision in Speech Writing Unit 5 Fine-Tuning the speech Module 4 Review of Selected Speeches Unit 1 Review of George Washington’s Speech Unit 2 Review of Thomas Jefferson’s speech Unit 3 Review of Bill Clinton’s Speech Unit 4 Review of Musa Yar’Adua’s Speech Unit 5 Review of Goodluck Jonathan’s Speech Module one, titled ‘The Basics of Communication’, introduces you to writing and communication.
This unit discusses steps involved in speech writing.
The module reveals the qualities to look out for in a good speech and a good speechwriter.
In module two, the actual writing is discussed.
The units in this module focus on how to source and use materials for writing speech.
Particular attention is given to the resources that the Internet offers a speechwriter.
Module three concentrates on grammar in relation to speech writing.
Some of the concepts that often create problems for users of the English language are explicated with ample illustrations.
This module is designed to equip you with basic tips that will make the message of your speech clear to your audience.
Module four reviews selected speeches.
Five speeches- three from American presidents and two from Nigerian presidents are reviewed to show you what some people have achieved with their speeches.
There are 21 study units in this course.
Each study unit consists of one week’s work and includes specific objectives, directions for study, reading material, self-assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignments.
All this will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1-4 Three assignments, marked out of (the best three of all the 10% assignments submitted) Totalling 30% Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks iii  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Course Overview Unit Title of work Week Tutor- Activity Marked Assignment Course Guide 1 Module 1 The Basics of Communication 1 Language and Speech 2 TMA 1 2 Communication 3 TMA 2 3 Types and Purpose of 4 TMA 3 Communication 4 Types of Speech 5 TMA 4 5 Audience Analysis 6 TMA 5 Module 2 Writing Activities 1 Writing Stages 7 TMA 1 2 Sourcing for Information 8 TMA 2 3 The Internet and Speech Writing 9 TMA 3 4 Logical Issues in Speech writing 10 TMA 4 5 Introduction 11 TMA 5 6 Other Parts of the Speech 12 TMA 6 Module 3 Language and Style in Speech Writing 1 Paragraphing 13 TMA 1 2 The Sentence 14 TMA 2 3 The Internet and Speech Writing 15 TMA 3 4 Logical Issues in Speech writing 16 TMA 4 5 Fine-tuning the speech 17 TMA 5 Module 4 Review of Selected Speeches 1 Review of George Washington’s 18 TMA 1 Speech 2 Review of Thomas Jefferson’s 19 TMA 2 speech 3 Review of Bill Clinton’s Speech 20 TMA 3 4 Review of Musa Yar’Adua’s 21 TMA 4 Speech 5 Review of Goodluck Jonathan’s 22 TMA 5 Speech Revision 23 Examination 24 Total 24 iv  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are tutorials scheduled for this course.
Information relating to these tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and assist you on the course.
You must take your tutor-marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings; • you have difficulty with the exercises; or • you have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
Endeavour to attend these tutorials.
It is the only opportunity you have for a face-to-face interaction with your tutor to ask questions, which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary This Course Guide gives you an overview of what this course entails.
The course teaches you the techniques of writing a good speech and trains you on practical steps of being a good speechwriter.
Use the material judiciously.
You should also get some of the materials suggested for further reading.
v  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Course Code ENG414 Course Title Speech Writing Course Team Dr. Adesina B. Sunday (Developer/Writer) - UI Dr.
I. Omolara Daniel (Editor/Programme Leader) -NOUN Mr. Theodore O. Iyere (Coordinator) - NOUN vi  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria E-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-587-7 vii  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 The Basics of Communication…………………….… 1 Unit 1 Language and Speech……………………..……..…… 1 Unit 2 Communication……………………………………….
11 Unit 3 Types and Purpose of Communication……………….
22 Unit 4 Types of Speech……………………………………….
28 Unit 5 Audience Analysis…………………………………….
34 Module 2 Writing Activities…………………………………….
48 Unit 1 Writing Stages……………………………………..….. 48 Unit 2 Sourcing for Information…………………..………….
56 Unit 3 The Internet and Speech Writing……………………… 65 Unit 4 Logical Issues in Speech Writing……………..……… 74 Unit 5 Introduction……………………………………..…….
81 Unit 6 Other Parts of the Speech…………………………..… 91 Module 3 Language and Style in Speech Writing…………… 103 Unit 1 Paragraphing………………………………………….
103 Unit 2 The Sentence………………………………………… 117 Unit 3 Tense, Aspect, and Concord………………………….. 125 Unit 4 Concision in Speech Writing………………………….
137 Unit 5 Fine-Tuning the Speech……………………..……….
145 Module 4 Review of Selected Speeches……………..………….
160 Unit 1 Review of George Washington’s Speech…………….. 160 Unit 2 Review of Thomas Jefferson’s Speech……………….
169 Unit 3 Review of Bill Clinton’s Speech……………………... 178 Unit 4 Review of Musa Yar’Adua’s Speech………………… 186 Unit 5 Review of Goodluck Jonathan’s Speech…………….. 194 viii  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING MODULE 1 THE BASICS OF COMMUNICATION Unit 1 Language and Speech Unit 2 Communication Unit 3 Types and Purpose of Communication Unit 4 Types of Speech Unit 5 Audience Analysis Unit 6 Logical Issues in Speech Writing UNIT 1 LANGUAGE AND SPEECH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to Speech 3.2 Functions of Language 3.3 Speech 3.3.1 Features of a Good Speech 3.3.2 Qualities of a Good SpeechWriter 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This module focuses on some basic principles of communication.
Speech is subsumed under communication.
Therefore, we need to be familiar with the peculiarities of these concepts in order to rightly situate this course.
In view of this, we begin our discussion by examining language and speech.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define language • highlight the functions of language • define speech • identify the features of a good speech • identify the qualities of a good speechwriter.
1  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to Speech One major characteristic that distinguishes humans from other creatures is language; it is unique to humans.
Language, an arbitrary and conventional system of communication using vocal symbols (Babajide, 1996:1), plays important roles in the existence of humans.
It exists primarily in the spoken form; all languages of the world exist in this form.
It also exists in a secondary form – written.
Not all languages exist in this form.
However, the languages that are yet to be reduced to writing are in no way inferior to those that are in written form.
As long as a language satisfies the communicative needs of its users, it is an authentic language and deserves to be treated as such.
The spoken language and the written one are essentially the same.
The major difference is that, while the oral/spoken form is transient, the written form is permanent.
Thus, reference can be made to the written language later without any significant twist or misconstruction.
It is only if the spoken form is tape- recorded that it can have such a quality.
An important and interesting relationship between the two forms is that the two can be easily and readily converted to each other.
The spoken form can be transcribed, while the written form can also be read.
This interconnectivity relates to the four major language skills: speaking, writing, listening, and reading.
It is what is written that can be read; it is what is spoken or read that can be listened to.
This changeability is important for all language users.
This is why anyone who aspires to be a good speaker needs to be a good writer, and vice-versa.
There are occasions when you have to present written speeches.
If you are not good at writing but you are good at speaking, it will be difficult for people to accept that you are good at speaking, since such occasions do not allow you to express yourself extempore.
In addition, if you are a good writer but a poor orator, on occasions that require you to speak without making recourse to a written speech, you might not find it convenient to prove your stuff.
3.2 Functions of Language In Smith’s (1969:11-10) view, language learning and behaviour perform three major functions, namely: self-discovery, meaning giving and communication.
The first one is difficult to conceptualise.
In essence, we get to know whom we are through people’s evaluation of our statements, what they expect from us, and their responses to our assertions.
The second function relates to making meaning out of our environment through words.
The third one has to do with how we 2  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING manage relationship with others.
This relates to how we use language for sociability, sharing information, advocacy or persuasion, inquiry, and for sharing information.
The sociability aspect is what the anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski calls “phatic communion.” This is noticeable in inquiries about people’s health, comments on weather and climate, and affirmations of certain supremely obvious state of things (Malinowski, 1945).
The information sharing aspect reveals how sharing information relates people to one another.
Once the way information is shared is held in common by two or more people, what Hymes (1962) call a speech community is established.
The third aspect – advocacy – involves asking others to share information, certain attitudes or beliefs or making others act in a particular recommended way.
This is quite noticeable in political campaigns, legislative debates, court proceedings, sermons in churches and mosques, and counselling, among others.
The fourth mode –inquiry – in its simplest form, involves question and response.
In its more complex form, it involves debate, discussion or dialogue.
The last mode – sharing information – typically involves storytellers, creative artists – poets, novelists, and playwrights.
This kind of speech serves a consumatory but not an instrumental end, as the speaker does not expect anything from the listener after what has been said as “the way life is” (Smith, 1969:16).
Halliday sums all the aforementioned functions in three metafunctions of language: ideational, interpersonal, and textual.
The ideational function deals with the expression of content.
It focuses on an individual’s view of his/her own world and the world around him/her.
The interpersonal/transactional function relates to how language is used to interact with others in the society.
The textual function ensures that the language used is relevant.
It is the use of language to construct texts (spoken or written).
This function represents the text forming potential of the language user (Fowler 2002:104; Malmkjaer 2002:531).
The ideational function bifurcates into experiential function, that is the representation of ‘goings-on’ in the world (or elsewhere); and logical function, that is the semantic relations between experiential elements (Bloor & Bloor, 1995).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is language?
2.
Discuss the major functions of speech.
3.
What is a speech community?
3  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.3 Speech Now that we have examined language and the functions, which it performs, we now turn to speech.
Talking and speaking, though closely related, are not exactly the same.
Both are art involving using the vocal tract to produce sounds.
While every normal human being talks, not every normal human being make speech always.
Anything that proceeds out of the mouth could be regarded as talking.
Speech goes beyond this, as it involves conveying a particular message to a particular audience at a given time in such a way that the said audience gets the message clearly.
This is difficult to determine, since we do not have access to one another’s minds.
However, the kind of feedback given during and after a speech could be a gauge of this.
Speech could, therefore, be seen as a projected conversation (Welsh, 1968:12; Alimole, 2002:10).
This presupposes a speaker giving out information to an audience that has gathered specifically to listen to him/her.
Notice that a speech could be both written and spoken.
The spoken speech may be written-to-be-read or extempore.
Whichever the type, all speeches share some inalienable features, which we shall consider shortly.
A good speech requires a good speechwriter.
Speech writing has gone beyond the era when it was restricted to only few important people in the classical times.
Now, there are many ‘unseen’ speechwriters, that is, professionals who are contracted to write speech for a politician or public figure, who are making a living from the art writing speech.
Although not everybody is born a good writer however, speech writing is a skill that can be learnt.
Before examining the qualities of a good speechwriter, let us first discuss what makes a good speech.
3.3.1 Features of a Good Speech Alimole (2002:7-8) has rightly warned, “Standing ovation can sometimes be misleading.” This implies that one should not judge a speech solely by the amount of ovation that attends it.
In other words, not all speeches treated with little or no ovation are bad.
Then, there must be some other parameters to be considered in determining the effectiveness of a speech.
The major ones are examined below.
Audience-centredness A good speech gives premium to the audience.
Any writer that does not first ask the question ‘who am I writing for?’ is not likely to produce a good speech.
A speech that is higher than the linguistic level of the average audience is ineffective, just as a speech that is below the 4  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING linguistic level of the average audience is.
You may ask: “why considering the audience first?” This is because the speech is meant for the audience.
A speechwriter is like a producer of a commodity.
Any producer that satisfies only his/her own wants, but not those of the consumer, will not sell well.
This is a reason why some speakers are the delight of the audience, while some are unsought for.
Informativeness Time is precious and there are so many things competing for one’s time.
People often spend their time for what they consider beneficial.
A good speech must add value to the listener; the listener should gain something new.
If all that a listener gets from a speech are stale and easy-to-find ideas, such listener may not read the remaining part of the speech.
This is why a good speech should contain current and factual information on the topic it addresses.
Relevance Relevance is an important feature of a good speech.
Each occasion has its uniqueness.
The members of the audience are obviously from different backgrounds.
Therefore, the speech ought to address issues that are germane to the majority of the audience.
No matter how informative a speech is, if it does not have a direct bearing on the audience at that moment, it is sure ineffective.
A speechwriter should not just desire to show his/her versatility in a given speech.
If the audience finds the versatility irrelevant to their immediate needs, they will not see any value in listening to or reading the speech.
Arrest and Sustenance of the Audience’s Attention An effective speech is one that arrests easily and sustains the attention of the audience.
Good and reputable speakers do not underrate this feature.
There are many things/ideas travelling through the mind of a typical listener no matter how serene the environment is.
A speechwriter/speechmaker is in the business of making the audience see the need to first listen to him/her.
If the speechwriter/speechmaker is unable to achieve this in the first two minutes of the speech, he/she might be unable to achieve it all while the speech lasts.
The work does not stop at arresting the audience attention.
A more important task is sustaining that “arrest.” The metaphor “arrest” is important here.
It presupposes that the attention of the listener is a “wanderer”; it is unstable and fluid.
Therefore, much effort is needed to 5  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING arrest it in the first place.
Sustaining the interest of the listening/reader involves many things, some of which will be discussed later.
Language and Style Show me a good speech and I will show you a speech that has apt language and style.
Language is the dress of thought.
Good ideas can be massacred by ineffective and inappropriate language.
Many people have good ideas but lack the language with which to pass them across, and this is the major essence of speechifying.
If every other factor has been catered for but there is no effective language to do it, all amounts to nothing.
Effective language is not synonymous with bombastic, flowery and impenetrable language.
The simplicity or complexity of the language of a given speech is measured in relation to the topic, the audience and the aim, among others.
Even if the language is apt, the manner of presentation is also important; this is what is referred to as style.
Some writers are unnecessarily ambiguous, wordy and unappealing.
The speeches of such writers will definitely be effective.
More is said about language and style as they relate to speech writing in Module three.
Logicality A good speech is logical in its presentation of ideas.
If the audience finds it difficult to connect the ideas being passed across in the speech, they will be uninterested in such speech.
Even if the language is simple and the topic is relevant to them, they will find it difficult to make sense out of the speech.
Presentation This quality affects mainly a speech that is to be presented.
Actually, this is the major purpose of a speech, but there are speeches that are accessed after they have been presented.
A well-written speech may be muddled up by the manner of presentation.
This problem arises at times when the writer is not the presenter.
It could also arise if there is no proper rehearsal even if the writer is the presenter.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the things to look out for in a good speech?
6  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.3.2 Qualities of a Good Speechwriter As mentioned in the preceding section, a good speech requires a good writer.
The qualities, which a good writer should possess, will be examined in this section.
Each discipline has its requisite qualities.
Anyone who aspires to be a specialist in a field needs to be well acquainted with the basic requirements of such a field.
As hinted earlier, speech writing is also a profession.
This has serious implications for the would-be speechwriters.
Among all other things, it implies that there is competition in the market.
Thus, an intending speechwriting needs to be equipped with some qualities, to stand out among others.
The major qualities are examined below.
Masking The speechwriter has to wear the garb of another person, that of the actual deliverer of the speech.
A good speechwriter should try as much as possible to, in the speech, assume the linguistic and expressive features of the speaker.
This is an important way of making the audience think that the deliverer of the speech is also the writer.
If this is not ensured, people will begin to separate the two personalities in the speech: that of the actual writer and that of the expected writer.
This is not good for the image of the expected writer.
This is why, as much as possible, the actual writer should be able to mask himself/herself with the essential linguistic and expressive features of the expected writer.
He/she should master the linguistic mannerism of the expected speechwriter and inject them into the speech appropriately.
He/she should have carried out a stylistic analysis of the formal and informal speeches of the person he/she is writing for, and reflect such in the speech.
This is obviously a difficult task, since he/she may have to master the linguistic and expressive manners of as many people as he is writing for.
This requires diligence, as no single individual has a constantly predictable manner of speech for all occasions.
Many factors influence one’s style of speech, principal among which are the type of occasion, one’s mood, the mood of the audience, one’s familiarity with the topic, one’s linguistic prowess, and cultural and socio-political considerations.
In other words, a good speechwriter must be a good masquerader.
Versatility Closely related to masking is versatility.
A good speechwriter must be well versed in the area he/she is writing on.
He/she must crosscheck 7  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING his/her facts and figures.
Any error of fact and figure will smear the image of the expected writer.
A speechwriter should always remember that the audience is heterogeneous.
Some members of the audience are specialists in the field he/she is writing on.
Therefore, he/she must do his/her homework very well and use the most current information in the field.
A good way to begin is to try to know something about everything.
This will not make any topic entirely new.
Regular practice It is not easy to begin writing.
You just need to start somewhere and somehow.
Choose a topic to write on and do that regularly.
Practice makes perfect.
The more you write, the better you become in writing, every other thing being equal.
Make it a duty to write at least a topic a week.
This will make the task of writing on a major topic relatively convenient.
Reading A good reader is likely to be a good writer.
A major advantage of reading is that it widens one’s horizon.
Some of the ideas garnered while reading will filter in when you are writing.
First read quality materials about writing, then read the speeches of great orators and writers, such as, J.F Kennedy, Bill Clinton, Nelson Mandela, Obafemi Awolowo and Nnamdi Azikwe.
Doing this equips you with the tactics employed by these great people, which make their speeches and names evergreen.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Critically examine the qualities of a good speechwriter.
4.0 CONCLUSION Speech writing is a task that requires many efforts.
It is not meant for lazy people.
To achieve success in it, you need to consider how vital communication is among humans.
Humans are different from other creatures.
We constantly have to communicate with one another, and speech is one of the means of doing this.
It is undeniable that speech is an art and, at one time or the other, we all have to make or write speech, formally or informally, for different purposes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined the relationship between language and communication.
We have also discussed the forms a speech could take.
8  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING We have not failed to examine the connection between the written and spoken forms of language.
Our attention have also been drawn to what makes a good speech, laying particular emphasis on the need for the writer to always consider the audience in the speech writing process.
Our discussion has not also failed to consider who a good writer is.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differentiate among the following functions of language: ideational function, interpersonal function and textual function.
2.
What are the similarities and differences between written and spoken languages?
3.
How central is the audience to a speech?
4.
What are the features to look for in a speech?
5.
Discuss the qualities a good speechwriter should possess.
6.
Discuss how speechwriter can make the writer feel that the speech deliverer is the speechwriter.
7.
How is a speechwriter a ‘masquerader’?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Babajide, A.O.
(1996).
Introductory English Grammar and Composition.
Ibadan: ECFP.
Bloor, T. & Bloor, M. (1995).
Functional Sentence Analysis: A Hallidayan Approach.
London: Edward Arnold.
Fowler, R. (2002).
“Critical Linguistics/Critical Discourse Analysis.” In Malmkjær.
K.
(Ed.).
The Linguistic Encyclopedia.
London and New York: Routledge.
pp102-107.
Malinowski, B.
(1945).
“The Problem of Meaning in Primitive Languages”.
In C.K.
Ogden and I.A.
Richards The Meaning of Meaning 17th ed.
New York Harcourt, Brace and company pp313-316.
Malmkjær, K. (2002).
“Systemic-Functional Grammar”.
In Malmkjær.
K.
(Ed.).
The Linguistic Encyclopedia.
London and New York: Routledge.
Pp 520-535.
9  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Onwe, E.C.
(2005).
“Exploring the Career Dimension of Rhetorical Tradition and Modern Speech Making.” In Nwosu I.E, J.E.
Aliede and I. Nsude (Eds.)
Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions, Enugu: Prime Targets Limited.
183-194.
Smith, D. K. (1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech: New York: Dodd, Moad and Company.
Welsh, J.
(1968).
Guides to Speech Writing: The Professional Techniques for the Regular and Occasional Speakers.
New York: John Wiley and Company.
10  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 2 COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Communication Process 3.2 Noise 3.3 Communication Barriers 3.3.1 Intrapersonal Barriers 3.3.2 Interpersonal 3.3.3 Organisational 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit one, we briefly discussed communication.
Speech writing is an aspect of communication.
It is expedient for us to look at this important concept in detail.
This is because communication is a complex process, which involves so many other processes and activities.
Therefore, in this unit, we shall examine communication with a view to bringing to the fore some salient issues that will enrich our understanding of speech writing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define communication • explain the communication process • identify different types of noise • explain barriers to communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Communication Process Communication is simply the process of giving, getting, or sharing information with others (Roman & Sharma, 2004:1).
It is a dynamic and an interpersonal process, particularly when it is oral (Barret, 1987:4).
It is a process with many parts.
The root of the word communication is in 11  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING the Latin word communicare, which means to share.
Therefore, communication is “the exchange of information, ideas, and knowledge between sender and receiver through an accepted code of symbols.” (Roman & Sharma, 2004:2).
“Communication is all about giving and receiving of signs which have meanings attached to them (Dimbleby and Burton, 1998:26).
It is a process with many parts and participants.
The communication process is schematically presented below.
Communication Environment message S e n t Channel Receiv e d message Response Receiver Sender encoded m e ssage messag e decoded Feedback Fig.
1: The Process of Communication (Raman & Sharma, 2004:2) This cycle shows that there is the sender, who encodes message to the receiver via a channel, that is, language.
The receiver receives the message, decodes it, and sends a response to the sender, provided there is no breakdown of communication.
This is called feedback.
The entire process takes place in a well-defined set up called communication environment.
Let us now examine more carefully the components of the communication process.
Sender: This refers to the speaker or writer.
The success of the sender depends on the following factors: • his/her personal credibility • his/her knowledge of the subject • his/her preparation of the subject • his/her manner of speaking/writing • his/her sensitivity to the audience and the occasion.
• his/her enthusiasm about what is said or written.
(cf.
Lucas 2001:16) 12  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Message: This refers to what is communicated to another person(s).
If the intended message is the actual message received, then the communication process is successful.
Channel: This is the means by which the message is communicated.
Examples are microphones and loudspeakers.
Receiver: This is the person that receives the message.
The message of the sender is filtered through the genders frame of reference, that is “the total of his or her knowledge, experience, goals, values, and attitudes” (Lucas, 2001:17).
Feedback: This is the message sent back to the sender by the receiver.
It could be verbal on non-verbal or both.
Interference: Interference refers to anything, which impedes successful communication.
Situation: The time and place in which speech communication occurs is the situation.
Examples are funerals, wedding ceremonies, launchings, political rallies, and so on.
Communication is fully effective only when the desired response is got from the receiver.
However, communication is complete whether the response is positive or negative.
It is only if there is no feedback that communication is incomplete.
This underscores the significance of feedback in communication.
It also implies that communication goes beyond talking or speaking/writing.
It is an interactive and interpersonal process, which is never one-sided.
Once there is no feedback, positive or negative, it is no longer communication.
For instance, suppose you give an order that everybody should stand up.
If all of them stand up, your communication is effective.
If only few of them stand up, you have both positive and negative response, but the communication process is complete.
However, if none of them responds and they are not dumb, the process is incomplete.
However, it may be argued that this is a negative response.
If seen in this way, the communication process is complete.
In sum, the essentials of communication, according to Roman and Sharma (2004:3) are: 1.
A common communication environment; 2.
Cooperation between the sender and the receiver; 3.
Selection of an appropriate channel; 4.
Correct encoding and decoding of the message; 13  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 5.
Receipt of the desired response and feedback, feedback could be verbal (with words), local with utterances (such as “hmn”) or visual (involving gestures etc.)
(cf.
Barret, 1987:5).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Summarise the communication process.
2.
When is communication complete?
3.
What is the relationship between the encoder and the decoder?
3.2 Noise The transmission of information from the sender to the receiver can be hindered by noise.
Noise can be defined as “any unplanned interference in the communication environment, which causes hindrance in the transmission of the message” (Raman & Sharma (2004:4).
Broadly, there can be channel noise and semantic noise.
The former concerns any interference in the mechanics of the medium employed in sending a message.
In oral communication, it comes in form of faulty background, high volume/pitch from loudspeaker, unclear telephone lines, and so on.
In written communication, illegible handwriting and unclear font could constitute noise.
Semantic noise arises from error in the message itself.
It could be due to misspellings, incorrect grammar, ambiguity and incorrect punctuation, among others.
Thus, while channel noise is generated externally, semantic noise is generated internally (Lucas, 2001).
To emphasise the complex and dynamic nature of communication (particularly oral communication), Barret (1987:6) gives a much wider view of noise: Insufficient knowledge can constitute noise.
Irreconcilable differences in values, feelings, and experiences may enter in as noise.
Of course, noise may be actual physical noise, as a passing train, or it may be less obvious, such as listener’s dislike of a topic, the threat of a controversial proposal, a speaker’s lack of interest or withholding of vital information.
Noise refers to any physical or psychological condition that interferes with communication.
The interference may be caused by the size of room, by the airwaves that carry the message or by personal interferences of the participants.
It may be a cultural, social, religious, political, educational, or other reason.
14  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING It is not only noise that hinders communication.
Noise and all other factors that hinder communication are referred to as communication barriers.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What is noise?
2.
Differentiate between channel noise and semantic noise.
3.3 Communication Barriers Anything that inhibits or distorts the message sent is called a communication barrier.
There are three major levels of communication barriers) according to Raman and Sharma (2004:23-37).
• Intrapersonal • Interpersonal • Organisational 3.3.1 Intrapersonal Barriers Different people often interpret the same message in different ways.
This is often a major cause of misunderstanding among people.
Individual differences are the main reason for this.
Intrapersonal barriers (as identified by Raman & Sharma (2004:24) are often linked to the following causes, • Wrong assumptions • Varied perceptions • Differing background • Wrong inferences • Impervious categories • Categorical thinking Wrong Assumptions At times, the sender assumes that the receiver already knows the content of the message.
This may not be so.
In such a case, the message may be distorted, as a wrong meaning is attached to such a message.
It is not advisable to overrate or underrate the knowledge of the audience.
15  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Varied Perceptions We perceive things differently.
The same object may be perceived differently from different angles.
If the angle from which the sender has perceived an idea is different from the way the receiver receives it, a barrier may arise.
Differing Backgrounds Background plays important roles in communication.
The background of the sender is necessarily different from that of the receiver, since no two human beings have the same background.
Someone with the knowledge of a particular message finds it easier to decode the message than somebody without such knowledge.
Wrong Inferences Conclusions that are not based on what actually exists could make a speaker/writer send a wrong message; just as such conclusions can make the receiver decode the message wrongly.
“Inferences are more dramatic than facts, and for this reason they give more scope for gossip and rumour to burgeon.
Inferences supported by facts are essential for professionals when they analyse material, solve problems and plan procedure.” (Raman & Sharma, 2004:260).
If a fact has not been established, expressions, like “in my opinion,” “evidence suggests” could be used.
Impervious Categories Some people are too rigid and closed their minds to new developments.
They react negatively to unfavourable information in any or all of these ways: rejection, distortion, and avoidance.
Such people are called misoneists (Raman & Sharma, 2004:27).
They find it difficult to accept anything that contradicts their points of view.
Categorical Thinking This refers to ‘know-it-all attitude.
People with such attitude are called pansophists.
The speech of such people is dominated by words like all, always, everybody, and their opposites none/never, and nobody.
This attitude makes such people to refuse information (Raman & Sharma 2004:27).
16  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.3.2 Interpersonal Barriers These are barriers, which occur as a result of inappropriate transaction of words between two or more individuals.
Raman and Sharma (2004:28) identify the following basic interpersonal barriers.
• Limited vocabulary • Incongruity of verbal and non-verbal message • Emotional outburst • Communication selectivity • Cultural variations • Poor listening skills • Noise in the channel Limited Vocabulary The amount of one’s vocabulary determines one’s choice of words.
Somebody with limited vocabulary has limited choices to make.
This also limits the range of meanings such a one could express.
However, it is not just enough to have good and rich vocabulary; it is equally important to know how to string the vocabulary items together to suit the occasion, the topic and the audience.
This is only when such vocabulary becomes effective.
Incongruity of verbal and Non-verbal Messages For communication to be effective, there must not be mismatch of verbal and non-verbal messages, particularly in a speech to be read; both should complement each other.
If the facial expression, gesture, and other non-verbal cues of the sender are incongruous with the verbal message, communication could be hindered.
“Non-verbal cues provide a deeper insight into the sender’s message.
Ignoring non-verbal cues or misinterpreting them can result in the message being completely misunderstood” (Raman & Sharma, 2004:30).
Besides, the physical appearance of the sender can have significant impact on conversation.
Each occasion demands a particular form of appearance.
In order to improve your appearance, note the following guidelines given by Raman and Sharma (2004:30): • Dress according to the occasion • Wear neat and clean clothes • Choose an appropriate hairstyle • Wear clean and polished shoes 17  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Emotional Outburst Emotion cannot be divorced from human living.
The ability to keep one’s emotion under check is a great virtue.
Emotion could be positive or negative.
The positive ones include joy, happiness, and excitement, while the negative ones include anger and sorrow.
Emotion could both intensify and inhibit communication.
A speech made in anger is doubtlessly going to be ineffective.
Similarly, too much display of happiness in communication could be conceived as pride.
Therefore, moderation should be exercised in the display of emotion in communication.
Communication Selectivity This refers to choosing which part of communication to pay attention to.
This could break the flow of communication, as some other useful information is made to filter away.
This can affect the kind of feedback the receiver will give.
In written form of communication, this manifests in choosing which part of the material to read.
Cultural Variations This applies to interactants from different cultural backgrounds.
Some behaviour permitted in some cultures may be disallowed in other cultures.
If the sender does not take into cognizance the cultural peculiarities of the receiver(s), communication could be hindered.
Just as the sender needs to understand the cultural perspective of the receiver, so also does the receiver need to understand the cultural perspective of the sender.
Poor Listening Skills Listening is different from hearing.
The former connotes attention, while the latter does not.
If people do not listen, they may not adequately decode the message.
Some of the factors that hinder listening are wandering attention, indifference, aggressiveness, and emotional disturbances (Lucas, 2001).
Noise in the Channel Noise constitutes a major barrier to communication.
This has been discussed earlier.
18  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.3.4 Organisational Barriers Organisational barriers are barriers to communication in an organisation.
The major ones, according to Raman and Sharma (2004:34-36) are: • too many transfer stations • fear of superiors • negative tendencies • use of inappropriate media • information overload Too many Transfer Stations If there are too many intervening senders between the main sender and the receiver, there could be distortion or loss of vital information.
Transfer stations are useful but when they are too many, they may be counterproductive (Adler & Elmhorst, 2008).
Fear of Supervisors Some subordinates are so afraid of their superiors that they find it difficult to communicate effectively.
Some of these subordinates find it difficult to speak frankly to their bosses.
Some of them avoid communication with their superiors while some present all the information at their disposal.
This often leads to verbosity, and bulky reports (Raman & Sharma, 2004:35).
Negative Tendencies When there are groups or committees in an organisation, there could be conflict of ideas and interest between members and non-members.
This could inhibit communication in such an organisation.
Use of inappropriate Media The medium through which the message is sent is important in communication.
If the right information is sent via the wrong medium, communication may be hindered.
A message that should be sent through e-mail, for instance, should not be sent through telephone.
Similarly, when an officer is designated to send a message, the status of such an officer in relation to the receivers is important.
For example, if the head of department (HOD) in a higher institution wants to summon the teaching staff for a meeting and he/she sends it through the 19  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING secretary, some of the teaching staff may feel insulted that a secretary is summoning them to a meeting.
A way out is for such a secretary to end the message with the name of the HOD.
Information Overload Information overload refers to the availability of huge amounts of data, which are too much for the receiver to handle effectively (Adler & Elmhorst, 2008).
The outcomes of this include fatigue, boredom, and lack of interest.
This negatively affects information flow as vital information can be kept from the reach of the receiver.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Define communication barriers.
2.
List five intrapersonal barriers.
4.0 CONCLUSION The central concern of this unit focuses on communication process.
The unit has discussed the various barriers to communication.
This was discussed from intrapersonal, interpersonal and organisational perspectives.
These barriers have revealed that speech is influenced by many factors.
Some of these factors relate to the writer; some to the audience; and some to the organisation, in situations involving organisations.
5.0 SUMMARY Speech is a form of communication; its various components should be annexed to the benefit of all.
The barriers to communication must be well addressed in any speech situation.
If this is done most of the conflicts that arise from misconstruction of message will be reduced.
A good speechwriter will consciously address these communication barriers in other for his/her intention not to be defeated.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the connection among the components of the communication process.
2.
Explain four interpersonal barriers.
3.
How does noise affect communication?
4.
Discuss some of the communication barriers that relate to a speechwriter.
5.
How does the audience constitute a barrier in communication?
6.
What is the role of culture in communication?
7.
Explain how the channel could be a noise in communication.
20  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adler, R.B.
& Elmhorst, J.M.
(2008).
Communicating at Work.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Barrett, H. (1987).
Pactical Uses of Speech Communication.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
London: Routledge.
Calkins, L.C.
(1986).
The Art of Teaching Writing.
Portsmouth: Heinemann.
Johnson, K. (1981).
Communication in Writing: A Functional Approach to Writing through Reading Comprehension.
London: Longman.
Lucas, S.E.
(2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Raman, M. & Sharma, S. (2004).
Technical Communication: Principles and Practice: Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, D.K.
(1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech.
New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. Sommers, N. & Simon, L. (1993).
The HarperCollins Guide to Writing with Source Book.
New York: HarperCollins College Publisher.
21  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 3 TYPES AND PURPOSE OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Communication 3.2 Purposes of Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we examined the communication process and the barriers that could be encountered in communication.
In order to maximise the opportunities that communication provides, it is expedient to consider the types and purposes of communication.
This is the focus of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify types of communication • identify purposes of communication • relate types of communication to purposes of communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Communication The classification of communication has been approached from different perspectives.
The approach we shall examine here relates to the kind of the persons involved in communication.
There are six main types of communication under this criterion, namely: • Intrapersonal • Interpersonal • Extrapersonal • Group • Organisational 22  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • Mass • Teleconferencing Intrapersonal Communication This is communication within and to the self.
This could be in form of reflecting on or thinking on how to do something.
In this case, one is both the sender and receiver.
It could also be in form of writing diaries for oneself or talking to oneself (Dimbleby & Burton, 1998:7).
Self- motivation, self-determination and related activities also exemplify intrapersonal communication (Raman & Sharma, 2004:10).
There is also a negative dimension to this type of communication.
Because of life challenges, many people get involved in this type of communication than other types of communication.
They are engulfed in thinking about their problems, leading to anxiety.
This result in most cases is high blood pressure, which could precipitate stroke, with its many attendant problems.
It is good to get involved in intrapersonal communication.
However, if it is being extended to thinking about problems without proffering any meaningful solutions, one should change to interpersonal communication or other types of communication.
A problem shared is a problem almost half-solved, as the saying goes.
Interpersonal Communication This kind of communication takes place between people.
In interpersonal communication, feedback is immediate.
Because of the proximity of people in this type of communication, non-verbal cues play important roles.
Examples of interpersonal communication are conversation between people in a café, salesperson-client interaction, interview, and even telephone conversation.
(Dimbleby & Burton, 1998:7).
Extrapersonal Communication Extrapersonal communication refers to communication between humans and non-humans.
This typically involves humans communicating with pet animals.
“More than any other form, this form of communication requires coordination and understanding between the sender and the receiver as at least one of them transmits information or responds in sign language only” (Raman & Sharma, 2004:10).
In most cases, the feedback is based on the level of closeness and frequency of interaction with such animals.
Some people prefer this type of communication to 23  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING interpersonal communication.
It appears that, in this age, some people are exploring the possibility of making some animals move to the status of humans, doing some uncommon things with these animals, including sex, which involves some communication too.
Group Communication This is “communication within groups of people and by groups of people to others” (Dimbleby & Burton, 1998:7).
There are two major types: small groups and large groups.
Examples of small groups are family, group of friends and committee.
Large groups are higher and come together for purposes different from those of small groups.
Examples of large groups are audience at a concert and spectators at a sport event (Dimbleby & Burton, 1998:7-8).
Organisation Communication This is similar to group communication.
The major difference is that it involves some hierarchical levels.
There may not be direct contact between the sender and the receiver.
Raman and Sharma (2004:11-12) identify three subdivisions of organisational communication: internal operational, related to conducting work within an organization; external operational, involving work-related communication between an organisation and people outside; and personal, involving communication done in an organisation without business purposes.
Mass Communication This is communication received by or used by large numbers of people (Dimbleby & Burton, 1998:8).
It requires a mediator for transmission of information.
The approach is usually impersonal because of the heterogeneity and anonymity of the audience.
Product advertisement, press interviews; news broadcast are examples of mass communication.
Other examples are audio/video cassette, industry, telephone and postal systems, among others.
Mass communication is essentially characterised by large reach, impersonality, and presence of a gatekeeper/mediator, like the editor (Dimbleby & Burton 1998:8).
Teleconferencing Communication has gone beyond the face-to-face type.
There is now teleconferencing.
This allows participants in two or more locations to see and speak with each other (Adler & Elhorst, 2008:25).
This type of communication is common in developed nations of the world.
Some developing nations are taking advantage of this too.
Multi-nationals are 24  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING constantly trying to improve on this type of communication to make their operation more effective.
3.2 Purposes of Communication Communication is used to achieve different purposes.
The basic ones identified by Dimbleby and Burton (1998:11-15) are examined below.
i.
Survival: This refers to the use of communication for physical needs, such as renting an apartment and calling for help when in danger.
ii.
Cooperation: we use communication to work with and get along with others.
This is crucial for peace in the society.
Breakdown of communication in this regard could lead to war and even extermination of a whole race.
iii.
Personal need: Acts of communication like dressing in the right way for an occasion and giving people presents illustrate communication needs.
iv.
Relationship: We communicate to be involved with others, to form, maintain and repair relationships.
v. Persuasion: We communicate to persuade others to think or act in our own way.
vi.
Power: We communicate to exert power over others.
This may be in the form of control over what they know or how they know it.
Propaganda is a good example.
Access to and control of the channel of communication play important role in this regard particularly in organisational communication.
vii.
Social needs: We communicate to keep our society, group and organisations together.
viii.
Information: This involves giving and receiving information.
ix.
Making sense of the world: We communicate to make sense of the world and our experience of it.
According to Dimbleby and Burton (1998:14), making sense of the world involves four important things.
• What we believe in • What we think of ourselves 25  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • What we think our relationships are with people • What we think is real x. Self-expression: We communicate to express our imagination and ourselves to others through words, pictures and sounds, among others.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Why do people communicate?
4.0 CONCLUSION There is connection between the types of communication and the use to which communication is put.
The end of communication determines the type of communication one is involved in.
People adapt communication to suit their needs and purposes.
This is why communication has achieved some transformation.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed the types of communication that exist.
It has equally revealed the purposes of communication.
It is clear from this unit that communication is multifarious and the purpose cannot be left out when discussing communication types.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How does communication affect society?
2.
Discuss the relationship between communication types and why people communicate.
3.
Explain four types of communication.
4.
Assess the negative roles communication can be made to perform.
5.
Discuss the link between communication and our view of the world.
26  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adler, R.B.
& Elmhorst J.M.
(2008).
Communicating at Work: Principles and Practices of Business and the Professions.
Boston: McGraw Hill.
Barrett, H. (1987).
Practical Uses of Speech Communication.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
New York: Routledge.
Lucas, S.E.
(2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Raman, M. & Sharma, S. (2004).
Technical Communication: Principles and Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
27  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 4 TYPES OF SPEECH AND ETHICS OF SPEECH WRITING/MAKING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Speech 3.2 Ethics of Speech Writing/Making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last unit concludes our survey of communication.
We now turn to speech, a subset of communication.
Speech is also diversified, like communication.
It has peculiar features, which are worth elucidating.
This will be done by examining the types of speech that exist.
The unique features of each will also be explained so that it will be easy to identify each speech type.
The unit will also discuss the ethics that guide speech writing/making.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • highlight the various types of speech • identify the features of each type of speech • explain the connection among the speech types identified • list the ethics of speech writing.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Speech There are different types of speech.
The major ones include: 1.
Expository speech 2.
Analytical speech 3.
Speech of introduction 4.
Speech of presentation 28  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 5.
Speech of acceptance 6.
Commemorative speech/Speech of tribute 7.
After-dinner speech 8.
Persuasive speech 9.
Inspirational speech Expository Speech An expository speech aims at revealing some facts on a concept or personality.
It explains and describes its subject.
It is a speech targeted at shedding light on a subject matter that is hidden.
It uses plain terms to make whatever is to be explained clear.
Illustrations and examples are used in this type of speech to achieve effect.
This type of speech may deploy visual aids so that whatever words could not clearly convey will be made explicit through non-verbal means.
It is not strange to find features of expository speech in the other types of speech.
This is because a speech is essentially intended to make some points, which have to be well explained.
Analytical Speech In an analytical speech, attempt is made to break down a concept or phenomenon to its component parts and then explain how these parts constitute the whole.
It may involve giving reasons why a particular policy is right or wrong.
It involves ability to reason and present ideas convincingly.
This type of speech easily exposes the weakness of a writer who could not present ideas logically, as it involves breaking down and rebuilding an idea, a position or a claim.
Speech of Introduction This is a speech, which introduces the main speaker to the audience.
Citation before somebody gives a speech is also an example of this type of speech.
In this kind of speech, you do not need to play to the gallery.
Introductory speech forms an important aspect of an occasion.
It could make or mar the remaining aspects of any occasion.
It could make or mar the remaining aspects of an occasion.
If presented well, it could stimulate the interest of the audience in the topic and the speaker.
Take special note of the protocol of the occasion.
The following suggestions given by Lucas (2001:436-439) and Gregory (2002:430) are helpful.
1.
Be brief: Do not turn the speech into a major speech.
2.
Make sure your remarks are completely accurate: Get the speaker’s name correctly.
If it is an unfamiliar name, practice its pronunciation in advance.
29  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.
Adapt your remarks to the occasion.
4.
Adapt your remarks to the main speaker: Avoid revealing embarrassing details about the personal life of the speaker.
5.
Adapt your remark to the audience.
6.
Try to create a sense of anticipation and drama.
7.
Avoid exaggeration.
8.
Ask the speaker ahead of time the kind of introduction he or she would like.
9.
Set the proper tone.
10.
Find out whether the speaker wants you to discuss the topic.
11.
Never steal the speaker’s material.
Speech of Presentation This is a speech used when, which presenting someone a gift, an award, or some other form of public recognition (Lucas, 2001:440).
In this kind of speech, the focus is on the personality to be honoured.
Therefore, it emphasises the achievements and qualities of the person, to show that he/she actually deserves the honour.
A speech of presentation should incorporate the following features.
1.
Background information that would help the audience to understand the purpose of the award.
2.
Background information on the parameters used to select the awardee.
3.
The achievements of the awardee (Gregory 2002:432) Speech of Acceptance This speech shows appreciation for an honour or award or any form of recognition.
It is usually short and shows that the recipient values what has been done for him/her.
Commemorative Speech/speech of Tribute It is a speech written to eulogise a person, a group of people, an institution or an idea.
It informs and inspires, the audience to appreciate the entity being praised.
It should go beyond biography, if it concerns a person; it should generate a deep sense of respect in the audience.
(Gregory, 2002:433).
30  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING After-Dinner Speech This is a speech meant to entertain, making a thoughtful point about its subject in a lighthearted way.
It is not expected to be technical or argumentative.
At the same time, it should not be treated with frivolity (Lucas, 2001:446).
Adequate attention should be given to the audience.
The speech should complement whatever has transpired earlier.
It should not make the audience that has come for such a dinner dejected or unhappy.
It should create a lasting impression of the occasion and the speaker/writer on the audience.
Persuasive Speech This is a speech that attempts to convince others to accept the writer /speaker’s view of the way things are.
It involves articulating your views, packaging it in such a way that can be understood.
Inspirational Speech This is a speech, which tries to stimulate listeners to a high level of feeling or activity (Gregory 2002:432).
This speech targets particularly the psyche of the audience.
It studies their present situation and tries to push them to do what they feel they could not do.
It is essentially optimistic in approach.
Some Christian daily devotionals often take this form.
3.2 Ethics of Speechwriting/Speechmaking Each profession is backed up by ethics.
Speech writing/making is guided by the following ethics as identified by Powers (1993:72): 1.
No one should knowingly promote something as true that they honestly believe to be fake 2.
No one should suggest a greater degree of certainty about their beliefs than their evidence will actually support.
3.
No one should misuse the available facts to support their cause.
4.
No one should withhold information that might be relevant to the issue under discussion.
5.
No one should distort information to make it conform to his or her own position.
These are the ethics guiding each occasion for which the speech is meant.
Each gathering has what it permits and what it forbids.
Therefore, a speechwriter should take note of these too, as they could determine the reception of his/her speech.
31  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the types of speech discussed so far.
4.0 CONCLUSION The types of speech identified above are the basic ones.
There could be some other minor ones, depending on the purpose of classification.
Speech has been broken done in this way for us to see how diversified speech could be and to underscore the need for the speechwriter not to generalise but to consider the uniqueness of each occasion and prepare the most suitable speech for it.
The ethics of speech writing show that it is an art guided by principles.
Although there may not be any professional body to punish violators of these ethics, the audience is enough to do this.
It can give the speechwriter the treatment he/she deserves immediately.
The verdict of the audience could be worse than that of any professional body.
Therefore, each speechwriter should be conscious of these ethics while writing.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has examined types of speech.
It has also considered the ethics guiding speech writing/making.
The discussion in this unit has been geared towards equipping the speechwriter with some seemingly minor issues that could determine the success or otherwise of his/her speech.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the relevance of the ethics of speech writing to a speechwriter.
2.
Explain the features of four types of speech.
3.
What are the steps a speechwriter needs to take to make a speech of introduction effective?
4.
List the ethics of speech writing a writer must take note of.
32  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Barrett, H. (1987).
Practical Uses of Speech Communication.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Beebee, S.A & BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An introduction to communication.
London: Routledge.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking for Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas, S.E.
(2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J.H.
(1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers Raman, M. & Sharma, S. (2004), Technical Communication: Principles and Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, D.K.
(1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech.
New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. Sommers, N. & Simon L. (1993).
The HarperCollins Guide to Writing with Source Book.
New York: HarperCollins College Publisher.
Welsh, J.
(1968).
Guides to Speech Writing: The Professional Techniques for the Regular and Occasional Speakers.
New York: John Wiley and Company.
33  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 5 AUDIENCE ANALYSIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Audience 3.2 Audience-Centredness 3.3 Issues in Audience Analysis 3.3.1 Types of Audience Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There previous units have given background information on communication and speech.
In this unit, we shall examine a concept that is central to successful speech writing.
It is a concept which determines the kind of language to be used for the speech and the content of the speech.
The concept is audience.
Speech takes place in a context.
Issues surrounding the context of speech could be best understood if we consider the audience.
This unit focuses particularly on how to carry out audience analysis for any speech.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define audience • identify types of audience analysis • explain demographic audience analysis • explain psychological audience analysis • explain situational audience analysis.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Audience You may wonder why some seemingly fantastic speeches and some eloquent speakers fail to make impressive impact on their audience.
Could it be that they have fallen out of favour with the audience?
You 34  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING may also wonder why a speaker is applauded after a speech and the same speech by the same speaker, presented in another place is treated with scorn.
All these show that speech writing and speech delivery are not a mere display of vocabulary or any elegance.
There is a fundamental component of communication that must first be catered for even before the task of writing a speech is embarked upon.
This is the audience.
Why is the audience more important than the topic?
How does a writer cater for all necessary variables in relation to the audience?
These and related issues form the focus of this unit.
The audience is the receiver or target of a particular speech.
The audience varies in size, from one person to millions of people.
The audience may be located in a single place or scattered all over the globe.
3.2 Audience-Centeredness Any speaker/writer that has little or no regard for the audience is bound to fail in his/her speech endeavour.
A good speechwriter must be audience-centred.
This means that such a writer keeps the audience foremost in his/her mind at every stage of the speech preparation and presentation.
Such a writer asks himself/herself the following basic questions.
• To whom am I writing/speaking?
• What do I want them to know, believe, or do because of my speech?
• What is the most effective way of writing and presenting my speech to accomplish this aim?
• What is my audience’s relevant demographic involvement?
• What are my audience’s social involvements?
• What are my audience’s relevant topical involvements?
(Powers, 1993:61).
The above show that good writers will definitely want to make contact with their audience because of their desire to inform, persuade entertain, or inspire them, or make them go with warm feelings (Gregory, 2002:67).
This involves many efforts.
These efforts, if painstakingly executed, reflect in the speech and its reception by the audience is often overwhelming.
The efforts have to be undertaken for each speech, as “every audience is different” (Gregory 2002:67).
3.3 Issues in Audience Analysis Audience analysis is “the process of examining about the expected listeners of a speech.” (Beebee & Beebee, 1994:64).
This implies that 35  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING the writer needs to gauge the belief and knowledge of the audience and at the same time get familiar with the peculiarities of the audience.
It involves the writer/speaker trying to assess the way the audience has previously constructed the portion of reality which is germane to the success of the speech (Powers 1993:58).
In essence, audience analysis is: The process of determining your audience’s prior knowledge, interests, and feelings relative to your topic.
As such, audience analysis is the process of trying to construct a coherent picture of your audience – a picture that has implications for how you shape and present your speech.
Although audience analysis for public speaking is a somewhat larger and more self-conscious task, the general principle of audience analysis and adaptation is the same…: You select what you are going to say and how you are going to say it based on your best evaluation of your audience’s prior constructions concerning the topic (Powers, 1993:59).
There are two basic manners of audience analysis: spontaneous and self-conscious.
The former involves focusing on “what is unique about the other person as an individual.” The latter focuses on what is common to the audience members as a group (Powers, 1993:59).
3.3.1 Types of Audience Analysis The different pieces of information needed about the audience could be grouped under the following types of audience analysis: • Demographic analysis • Psychological analysis • Environmental/Situational analysis Demographic Analysis Demography refers to information relating to the biodata of an individual or a group of people.
Demographic analysis of the audience, therefore, concerns seeking information about age, religion, gender, educational background ethnic background, and cultural background, among others, of the audience.
Age Age and experience are inseparable.
This informs the Yoruba saying “B’omode ba laso bi agba, ko le lakisa bi agba” (If a child has as many 36  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING clothes as an elder, it cannot possess as many rags as an elder).
This presupposes that there is direct relationship between age and experience.
However, this is relative in some cases.
For instance, today’s children have better technological exposure than some older ones.
Thus, if a topic dealing with the Internet is to be discussed, for example, the writer needs not equate old age with Internet exposure.
In other words, the writer needs to ascertain the knowledge of each age group.
Age also determines the linguistic choice a writer makes.
In most cases, not many younger ones could easily interpret proverbs.
Conversely, a good number of adults understand same proverbs with relative ease.
Once the age of the audience is known, the writer can conveniently choose the most appropriate topic and the best approach to use in presenting it.
Gender Gender is a social construct.
It deals with how the society assigns roles to individuals based on their sexes.
This varies from one culture to another.
Besides, there is now a shift in professional demarcations.
Some jobs once seen as exclusive preserves of men are now being undertaken by women.
For instance, there are now women tanker drivers and women cab drivers in some places or cities in Nigeria.
In doing audience gender analysis, it is important to ascertain the ratio of males to females.
Generally, take note of the following points: • Avoid making sweeping judgements based on gender stereotypes.
• Ensure that your speech relates to both genders.
• Avoid jokes and other tactics, which are derogatory to either gender.
• In your illustrations and stories, do not cast either gender in stereotypical roles.
• Take care of the similarities and differences between the two sexes.
• Avoid sexist language.
• Do not cast aspersion on some seemingly deviant groups, such as gays, lesbians, and shemales.
(cf.
Beebee & Beebee, 1994:67-68; Lucas 2001:104).
Ethnic, Racial and Cultural Backgrounds Each ethnic group, race and culture has its own unique features, although there are some features, which cut across all of them.
A good writer should find out the ethnic, racial and cultural peculiarities of the segments of the audience.
This will help him/her to know how not to say 37  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING what will put off a particular ethnic group.
For example, among the Tiv in Benue State, Nigeria, the wife of the host is used to show hospitality to the guest.
This means, among others, that the guest is free to have sexual intercourse with such a woman.
There may be cultural justification for this, although the tradition is becoming unpopular and unacceptable.
This is unacceptable among some other cultures even in Nigeria, for example Yoruba and Igbo.
An audience that is made up of many Tiv who do not frown at such a cultural practice will not be pleased with a writer who condemns it based on his/her cultural views.
In addition, there are some ethnic groups where people go about naked.
A speech that outright condemns such groups is likely going to be badly received by members of the audience from such communities or people who differentiate between nudity and nudism.
While nudity may be a cultural practice, nudism is anti-cultural and anti-social, because the related culture frowns against being nude.
No speech that discriminates, implicitly or explicitly, against a race will achieve the desired effect.
A good speechwriter should eschew any form of racial, ethnic, or cultural prejudice.
Neutrality and respect for all the cultures represented in the audience will endear a writer/speaker to every member of the audience.
This can only be achieved if the writer has got information on the audience and made necessary research on each culture before writing the speech.
This can be done by reading relevant materials on the cultures or making enquiries from sources familiar with them.
Religion Currently, religion is one of the most divisive factors all over the world.
It is so powerful that, on a slight provocation on religious issues, whether wittingly or unwittingly done, some religious bigots are ready to foment trouble.
There is mutual suspicion among the various religious sects.
Since a writer belongs to or is endeared to a particular religion, he/she needs to exercise caution so that he/she will not be seen as unduly religious in his/her speech.
The audience is seldom homogeneous.
Even among the same religion, there are different denominations or sects.
For instance, among the Christians, there are divisions into Orthodox, Pentecostal and Evangelicals.
Even among the Orthodox, there are different sub-groups.
In the same denomination, there are also groups.
For example, among the Nigerian Catholics, there are those who are called Catholic Charismatic Church.
This sect does not practise some of the beliefs of the other Catholic group.
Therefore, a speechwriter should know the various religious interests present in the audience and plan his/her speech to meet the audience.
38  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Group Membership Members of the audience may belong to some groups that have certain values they cherish.
Such groups may be social, professional or voluntary.
The group affiliation of the audience may inform the writer on what to emphasise, what to de-emphasise, and what not to mention at all.
Other Demographic Variables Apart from the demographic variables discussed above, there are some other ones that could shape the speech and its reception.
They include academic qualification, social status, economic position, marital status and intelligence, among others.
As much as possible, the writer should be familiar with all of these so as not make wrong assumptions.
How to Gather Demographic Information There are both formal and informal ways of gathering demographic information about the audience.
The informal way entails simply observing them and asking information about them.
For instance, you can determine the female and male components of your audience by merely looking at them if it is a spoken speech situation.
You can also get information about their ethnic groups by observing them, if some of them display ethnic loyalty through dressing; but not many people often do this.
Therefore, observation may not be reliable here.
You can also ask the person who has invited you to give the speech some information about the likely audience.
The formal method of gathering demographic information deploys mainly questionnaire.
This questionnaire should be brief but it must address what you need.
It should be administered before you begin to write the speech.
Below is a sample: Name: (optional) ____________________________________ Sex: Male Female Age: _____________________ Educational qualification: ______________________________ Occupation: _________________________________________ Marital status: _______________________________________ State of origin: _______________________________________ Language(s) spoken: ___________________________________ Nationality: __________________________________________ Religion: ____________________________________________ 39  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING The two methods should be used because where one is inadequate, the other will complement it.
The information gathered should be taken as a means to an end.
This is because “inferences based on generalised information may lead to faulty conclusions” (Beebee & Beebee, 1994:72).
For instance, the fact that an audience is made up of only Moslems does not mean that such an audience will not be interested in a topic discussing homosexuality.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is audience?
2.
Define audience-centredness.
3.
Mention some of the things to note in demographic audience analysis.
Psychological Audience Analysis The psychology of the audience is very crucial to speech writing and delivery.
The audiences have different frames of mind because they are made up of people from different worlds of experience.
This manifests in their disposition to a topic and to a speaker/writer.
What interests A may not interest B; one man’s food is another man’s poison.
To understand the psychology of the audience, Gregory (2002:82) suggests assessing the audience’s level of interest, needs and desires and attitudes.
Interest Level In order to avoid making your speech boring to the audience, the following steps should be taken.
(i) Assess the interest of the audience in your topic: An average human being pays attention to topics that are of interest to him/her.
For instance, some younger Nigerians are likely to be more interested in discourses around Hip-Hop music than those around Apala or Juju music.
You can carry out interviews or surveys on whether the audience will be interested in your topic (Gregory, 2002:83).
(ii) Maintain interest throughout the speech: It is one thing to get the interest of the audience and stimulate it; it is another thing to maintain it.
You can maintain the interest of the audience by using examples, visual aids and other illustrations.
As much as possible “avoid getting bogged down with technical material that will bore the audience” (Gregory, 2001:83) 40  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING (iii) Create interest: While it is essential to discuss topics that are of interest to the audience, you may have occasions to discuss topics that the audiences are not interested in.
In such a situation, you can create interest in such topics.
“One of the best ways to do this is to relate the topic to the needs and desires of the audience (Gregory, 2002:83).
Needs and Desires The psychologist Abraham Maslow (1954) has attempted presenting human needs hierarchically, as presented below: Self- Actualization Needs Self-esteem needs Social Needs Safety Needs Physiological Needs Fig 2: Abraham Maslow’s Hierarchy of Human Needs (cf.
Powers, 1993:67) This pyramid indicates that the most basic need is at the base: physiological needs.
The pyramid implies that most or many people are affected by this need.
At the peak of the pyramid is self-actualisation; not many people get these needs met.
A good speech should try to meet most of these needs.
There are certain topics that deal with how to get food, clothing, and shelter.
Such topics deal with physiological needs.
Topics that treat safety precautions address safety needs.
Topics that treat reaching peak of one’s career address self-actualisation needs.
A 41  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING single topic can also discuss ideas and points that relate to these needs.
“The more needs and desires you can help listeners satisfy, the stronger your speech” (Gregory, 2002:85).
Generally, audiences are interested in the following, as stated by Powers (1993:68): • What other people are doing and how they live their lives • Things that improve their competence • Things that give them a greater appreciation of commonplace things in their world, particular new insights into their everyday world • The unusual and the extraordinary, such as adventure tales, you can include the mysterious, strange or unusual about your topic • Something now.
Attitudes Another important component of psychological audience analysis is attitudes.
According to Beebee and Beebee (1994:72): Attitudinal or psychographic audience analysis explores an audience’s attitudes toward a topic, purpose, and speaker, while at the same time probing the underlying beliefs and values that might affect those attitudes.
Gregory (2002:83) avers that: Attitudes are the emotional inclinations – the favorable or unfavorable predispositions that listeners bring to a speech.
Each listener’s attitudes are derived from a complex inner web of values, beliefs, experiences, and biases.
Beebee and Beebee (1994:72) distinguish among attitudes, beliefs, and values.
They argue that an attitude focuses on an individual’s like or dislikes; a belief is “the way an individual structures reality to determine what is true and false”; while value refers to “enduring concepts of good and bad, right and wrong”.
Attitude towards the Writer/Speaker The reader/writer may have either a positive or a negative attitude toward the writer/speaker.
Each attitude is informed by different reasons, such as: 42  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • Previous knowledge of the writer/speaker: The audience based on what they have heard or read about the writer/speaker forms some biases.
If a speaker/writer is known for using difficult language, the audience may lose interest in his speech.
Conversely, a writer or speaker that has been known to always make his/her audience feel at home is likely going to have the attention of the audience.
• The name of the writer/speaker: Some people have some stereotypes on some names.
Certain names are easily identified with some tribes, religions, and ideologies.
Without having had any previous contact with the writer/speaker, some people would have already formed some attitudes on the writer/speaker based on this criterion.
• Spontaneous and unwarranted views: Some people just develop some attitudes, love or hate, toward people without any particular obvious reasons • Appearance: This affects only speakers.
The way the speaker appears during speech presentation may influence the attitude of the audience.
If the attitude of the audience to the speaker/writer is negative because they feel that he/she is unqualified to speak on a particular subject, the person introducing the speaker (in case of delivery) could present his/her credentials and expertise before the audience.
The writer/speaker can establish his/her own credibility at the beginning of the speech, by mentioning the related books he/she has read or the people he/she has interviewed on the topic.
“This is not bragging; it is simply a way to let the audience know that your information is based on solid research” (Gregory, 2002:84).
Attitude toward the Goal There are three main attitudes toward the goal: favourable, unfavourable and neutral.
There are ways a speaker/writer should react to each attitude.
If the audience shows a favourable attitude, you need to reinforce their positive views and even motivate them to take necessary actions.
If their attitude is unfavourable, you should attempt to buy them over to your side or bring them close to you.
If they are neutral/apathetic, try to win them over to your side (Gregory, 2002:83- 84).
43  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING There is some link between the attitude of the audience to the speaker/writer and their attitude towards the goals: one could affect the other.
Beebee and Beebee (1994:73) capture it thus: An audience’s positive attitude toward you as a speaker can overcome negative or apathetic attitudes they may have toward your topic or purposes.
If your analysis reveals that your audience does not recognize you as an authority on your subject, you will need to build your credibility into the speech.
Attitude toward the occasion Each occasion has some expectations attached to it.
If the audience expects to hear motivational speech but they are given a sermon, they will be disappointed.
This affects their attitude toward the speaker.
Subsequent speech occasions involving such a person may be shunned.
A good speechwriter should try to meet the expectations of the audience concerning the occasion.
Information on the attitudes of the audience can be got by asking people who are familiar with the audience.
This can also be got from the person who invited you to give a speech (Beebee & Beebee, 1994:74).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention the forms attitude could take in relation to speech.
2.
Define attitude.
3.
What are the three major points to consider while doing psychological audience analysis?
3.3 Environmental/Situational Analysis Environmental/situational audience analysis refers to that analysis which “focuses on situational factors such as the size of the audience, the physical setting for the speech, and the disposition of the audience toward the topic, the speaker, and the occasion.” This implies that this analysis also involves doing some attitudinal analysis.
Since the aspect of attitudes has been discussed earlier, in this section, we shall concentrate mainly on the other aspects of situational analysis.
Size You need to have some idea of the size of your audience.
If the audience is expected to be 1000 people but you have 100 people in mind, in the 44  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING case of delivery, you might be thrown off balance initially because the kind of mind frame needed for each audience differs.
Even in writing, the size of the audience could influence the choice of the linguistic items and visual aids to be used.
Time limit It is not common to find speakers who keep to the time scheduled for a speech.
Some speakers elongate their speeches unnecessarily.
As much as possible, get information on the time allotted to your speech.
Make attempt not to exceed the time limit.
There is even greater reward in finishing your speech before the specified time.
In some situations, you may have to adjust your speech to suit the prevalent situation.
If you are not the only speaker, consider the other speakers and the audience.
If you are the first to speak among the speakers do not take undue advantage of the privilege and eat into the time of the other speakers.
If you are the last speaker, sample the attitude of the audience.
If you notice that they are fagged out, try to summarise your speech.
The fact that you do not have time to explain all your points does not mean that they will not enjoy you.
Most people often value speakers who are time conscious and considerate.
There are some steps you need to take to keep to time when delivering your speech.
• Consider the time limit while writing your speech.
• Rehearse the speech after writing it.
• Cut out the excess.
• Leave out some time for unforeseen contingencies.
If you appear to be a garrulous speaker, Gregory (2002:86) suggests that you follow the wise speech making formula of President Franklin D. Roosevelt of the United States: • Be sincere • Be brief • Be seated Physical Setting This also affects only the delivery aspect of the written speech.
The seating arrangement may influence your delivery.
If the venue is too small for the audience, it may result in rowdiness, and lack of concentration.
You need to check the sitting arrangements and the position of the lectern for you to be sure that your audience can see you 45  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING properly.
(Lucas, 2001:107).
Beebee and Beebee (1994:77) suggest that while preparing for a speaking assignment, you need to keep the following environmental questions in mind: 1.
What are the physical arrangements for the speaking situation?
2.
How will the audience seating be arranged?
3.
How many people are expected to attend the speech?
4.
Will I be expected to use a microphone?
5.
Will I speak from a lectern?
6.
Where will I appear on the program?
7.
What is the room lighting like?
Will the audience seating area be darkened beyond a lighted stage?
8.
Will I be on a stage or a raised platform?
9.
How close will I be to the audience?
10.
Will I have adequate equipment for my visual aids?
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Define environmental audience analysis.
2.
How best can environmental audience analysis be carried out?
4.0 CONCLUSION You could now see that there is more to speech writing than what is seen as the output.
Successful speeches are those that cater adequately for the audience.
The writers of such speeches carried out thorough audience analysis, since the audience is at the centre of the speech.
Any speech that does not cater for the context of the speech will definitely fail.
To write any type of speech, audience analysis must be carried out before writing commences.
5.0 SUMMARY The context of speech has been the focus of this unit.
This has been examined subsumed under audience analysis.
The three major ways of approaching audience analysis have been critically examined.
These are demography, psychology, and environment/situation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How does Maslow’s hierarchy of needs relate to speech writing?
2.
Discuss how demographic audience analysis aid speech writing?
3.
What are the aspects of attitude that should attract the attention of a speech- writer?
4.
Explain the role of the environment in speech writing.
46  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 5.
How can gender consideration affect speech?
6.
What are the contributions of need and desires to a speech?
7.
To what extent does religion influence speech?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adler, R. B.
& Elmhorst, J.M.
(2008).
Communicating at Work: Principles and Practices of Business and the Professions.
Boston; McGraw Hill.
Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Beebee, S.A. & BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Calkins, L.C.
(1986).The Art of Teaching Writing.
Portsmouth: Heinemann.
Coe, N.; Rycott, R. & Ernest, P. (1983).
Writing Skills: A Problem- Solving Approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
London: Routledge.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas, S.E.
(2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Maslow, A.
(1954).
Motivation and Personality.
New York: Harper and Row.
Powers, J. H. (1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers Smith, D. K. (1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech.
New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. 47  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING MODULE 2 WRITING ACTIVITIES Unit 1 Writing Stages Unit 2 Sourcing for Information Unit 3 The Internet and Speech Writing Unit 4 Logical Issues in Speech Writing Unit 5 Introduction Unit 6 Other Parts of the Speech UNIT 1 WRITING STAGES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Writing 3.2 Stages in Writing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous module, our discussion centered on communication and speech.
It is now time to go to speechwriting proper.
We shall begin by examining the stages involved in writing.
This is targeted toward making the speechwriting endeavour meaningful and easy.
In this unit, you will be exposed to the activities involved in writing meaningful speeches.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the writing stages • discuss the activities involved in each stage • explain what an outline is • write an outline.
48  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Writing Writing is an acquired skill.
It is an art, which involves great efforts.
A scholarly paper goes beyond scribbling anything down; it needs the ability to present ideas, findings, and views in a clear and an unambiguous away.
For the audience to be able to decode the writer’s message, some mechanics and techniques are essential.
Some writers write what they do not mean.
This has sometimes resulted in misconstruction, misrepresentation, and misunderstanding.
It is sad that some people have brilliant ideas but they do not know how to present them.
This, to some extent, hampers individual and societal development, as some useful and innovative ideas lie dormant.
3.2 Stages in Writing The stages involved in writing could be broadly categorised into three: pre-writing, writing, and post-writing.
Each of the stages is discussed below.
Pre-writing Stage The pre-writing stage involves many activities.
One of such activities is finding a subject, that is, what to write on.
There are different types of subjects.
• Assigned subjects • Subjects developed from reading • Subjects which find the writer; this could be through dream, thinking intuition, etc.
The next step is to focus or narrow the subject, if it is too broad.
Note that you do not necessarily need to do this before you start writing; it may be midway into the writing or even after the first draft.
After this step, you then need to gather materials.
This could be done in different ways, such as: • Reading • Consulting some experts • Observation • Personal feelings • Personal experiences • Feelings and experiences of others 49  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • Experiment/Research • The audience Planning This stage involves organising the materials to be used in writing in the order and manner in which they are to be presented.
Preparing an outline will make writing easy.
It is not in all cases that a writer should make an elaborate outline.
It is not also compulsory to adhere strictly to the outline.
The outline can provoke better ideas; there may be the need to add or delete any item in the outline.
The outline could be either sentence or topic type.
We shall discuss outline further in the subsequent section.
Choosing a Topic In case you are given the liberty to choose a topic for speech, you need to do some brainstorming in relation to the general purpose of the occasion.
Put down all topics that come to your mind; do not discard any topic.
Even if you do not use a topic today, you may need it later.
Ideas are volatile; you can tie them down by writing them down.
The following guidelines should be followed when choosing a topic.
• Select one that relates more closely to the occasion • If it is broad, narrow it down • Relate it to the occasion Whichever topic you choose, let it be one you are interested in and one that will also interest the audience.
Outlining An outline is like a building plan.
To achieve success in building a house, a plan is essential.
It serves as a guide to the nature of the building and stages to be followed in the building process.
Similarly, to have a good and meaningful speech, you need to have an outline.
A good outline should possess the following features.
• Brevity • Focus on the audience • Show paragraph division 50  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Brevity An outline is neither a speech nor a pseudo-speech.
It is not expected to be another speech.
Present the points in words or phrases.
Focus on the Audience The outline is expected to guide you systematically in the writing process.
If you spend quality time to prepare the outline, writing speech will not be cumbersome.
Ensure that the outline addresses all the major points of the speech.
Show Paragraph Division The major essence of the outline is to show you each stage in writing.
This is why it is advisable that the major divisions represent a paragraph.
This will make your speech to achieve coherence.
If the outline is properly done, the problem of irrelevance would have been eliminated.
Let us consider how a typical outline should be for the topic: “How to Achieve Electoral Sanity in Nigeria.” Outline Topic: How to Achieve Electoral Sanity in Nigeria 1.
Introduction 1.1 Definition of election 1.2 What sanity means 1.3 How elections have been in Nigeria 2.
Steps to achieving electoral sanity 2.1 Making appropriate laws 2.1.1 Laws on the conduct 2.1.2 Laws handling post-electoral issues 2.1.3 Repackaging existing laws 2.2 Punishing electoral offenders 2.2.1 Jail 2.2.2 Banishment from future elections 2.2.3 Confiscating their ill-gotten wealth 2.3 Empowering and re-orientating law enforcement agencies 2.3.1 Civic education 2.3.2 Introduction of electoral studies at all levels of education 51  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 2.3.3 Awareness through the media 2.4 Reviewing public office holders’ remuneration 2.4.1 Downward review 2.4.2 No pension 2.4.3 Rewarding honesty in all spheres of the nation 3.
Conclusion 3.1 Taking urgent actions on the step This is just a prototype outline.
There could be different contents, depending on the perspective of the writer.
Instead of using the Arabic numerals, you could use Roman figures.
Just ensure that sub-topics are indented to show their connection to some other aspects of the writing.
If you want to use letters or a combination of letters for the outline, use different cases.
You can also use dashes or bullets.
Be as flexible as possible.
Just ensure that the points are clear for you to understand and decode easily.
If you want to use other patterns, take note of the samples below.
We shall use 2 and 2.1 above to illustrate.
(i) B.
Steps to achieving electoral sanity I.
Making appropriate laws i.
Laws on the conduct ii.
Laws handling post-electoral issues iii.
Packaging existing laws (ii) Steps to achieving electoral sanity • Making appropriate laws • Laws on the conduct • Laws handling post-electoral issues • Packaging existing laws (iii) Steps to achieving electoral sanity • Making appropriate laws • Laws on the conduct • Laws handling post-electoral issues • Packaging existing laws The introduction and the conclusion are usually one paragraph each.
The body of the speech could be approached from different perspectives, depending on the amount of information you want to pass across.
For instance, you may discuss everything under 2.1 (2.1.1-2.1.3) in one paragraph or take each component of 2.1 to be a paragraph each.
52  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Writing stage Starting a piece of writing is not all that easy.
Some people claim that they need to be inspired before writing.
However, the reality of the situation is that such inspiration may not come at all or may not come when it is most needed.
A good way of overcoming inertia is by just writing anything related to the subject.
This could be re-ordered later.
Another method is using a tape recorder to go through what Winterowd (1975:29) calls the talk-retalk-write-rewrite process.
This means that you talk into the tape, listen to it; then talk into it again to add new ideas; then you write out what you have recorded; lastly, you rewrite the speech to ensure that the ideas are coherent.
Post-writing stage This is typically the revision stage.
However, revision takes place at every stage of writing; it is a continuous process.
The stage involves editing the entire piece of writing.
You may give the write-up to other people for editing of ideas, logic, and language.
However, you must accept full responsibility for the write-up.
While revising, note that the write-up is not inconclusive; it must achieve the purpose for which it is meant.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What are the stages of writing?
2.
What is an outline?
4.0 CONCLUSION Writing involves some forward and backward movements; it involves writing and rewriting.
It is a composite process.
The writer gets ideas from different sources and weaves them together to present something new.
All the three stages discussed above are crucial to the overall effect of the speech.
You should not jump any of them or treat any of them as trivial.
A meticulous execution of the stages will make your speech an object of admiration to the audience.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, stages involved in writing speech were discussed.
This unit highlighted the need to carefully plan your speech before writing it.
The unit also presented a summary of the activities involved in writing.
Some of the issues raised here will be expatiated on in subsequent units.
53  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Prepare an outline on “How to Curb Incessant Strike Actions in Nigeria” 2.
List the possible sources of topic of speech.
3.
Discuss how to gather information for speech writing.
4.
Explain what the pre-writing stage entails.
5.
Discuss the basic activities at the writing stage.
6.
How important is the post-writing stage?
7.
What are your impressions about writing?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Babajide, A. O.
(1996).
Introductory English Grammar and Composition.
Ibadan: ECFP.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
New York: Routledge.
Hefferman, J.
A. W. & Lincoln, J.E.
(1982).
Writing: A College Handbook.
New York and London: W.W. Norton and company Hennesy, M. (1988).
The Random House Practice Book for Writers.
New York: Random House.
Johnson, K. (1981).
Communication in Writing: A Functional Approach to Writing through Reading Comprehension.
London: Longman.
Lucas S. E. (2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Mills, P. (1996).
Writing in action.
London and New York: Routledge.
Palmer, R. (1993).
Write in Style: A Guide to Good English.
London: EQFN SPON.
Powers, J. H. (1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers Raman, M. & Sharma, S. (2004).
Technical Communication: Principles and Practice: Oxford: Oxford University Press.
54  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Smith, D. K. (1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech.
New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. Sommers, N. & Simon, L. (1993).
The HarperCollins Guide to Writing with Source Book.
New York: HarperCollins College Publisher.
Welsh, J.
(1968).
Guides to Speech Writing: The Professional Techniques for the Regular and Occasional Speakers.
New York: John Wiley and Company.
Winterowd, W. R. (1975).
The Contemporary Writer.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Withrow, J.
(1987).
Effective Writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
55  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 2 SOURCING FOR INFORMATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sources of information 3.2 Using the Library 3.2.1 Major Types of Library Resources 3.3 Locating Materials 3.4 Catalogues 3.5 E-resources and Databases 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We discussed how to gather information for writing a speech in the previous unit.
There, we only listed some sources, like reading, observation, and personal observation.
Getting a topic is not enough.
You need to get current and useful information.
Because of the strategic position sourcing for information occupies in speech writing, this unit examines in some details how to source for information.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able: • list sources of information for writing • highlight library resources • explain e-resources • explain how to use sources effectively.
56  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sources of Information Information for writing a speech can be obtained from many sources.
The schema below shows the primary sources of gathering information.
Specific purpose statement Experiences Interviews Television Internet Library report and and survey investigation Electronic Library Wo rld Wide Expert site and indexes of catalogue We b discussion articles forums Web page Full text Books and articles Printouts Magazines, reference Audio newspapers works Visual Fig.
3: Sources of information Source: Lucas, (2002:117) The bi-directional arrow between Internet and libraries shows that many libraries provide access to the Internet, while the Internet can also be used to gain access to some libraries.
57  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.2 Using the Library The library is a repository for storing information.
3.2.1 Major Types of Library Resources The Card Catalogue This is a list of all books and major reference works in the library (Powers, 1993:270).
Card catalogue is arranged alphabetically by author, title and subject.
Any of these access points can be used to get the necessary material from the library collection.
The Periodical/Serial Catalogue This is a master list of all the magazines and professional journals, which the library currently has (Powers, 1993:270).
It is arranged based only on title rather than by subject.
General and Specialised Encyclopedias An encyclopedia is a collection of articles summarising the general knowledge on some area of study.
There are two major types: general and specialised.
The former surveys important topics from all areas of human knowledge; the latter focuses on a narrower area of specialisation with greater depth.
The articles in both are arranged alphabetically.
Examples of General Encyclopedia • Encyclopedia Britannica • World Book Encyclopedia • Encyclopedia Americana • Collier’s Encyclopedia • New Columbia Encyclopedia • Catholic Encyclopedia • Encyclopedia of Philosophy • Encyclopedia of Education • Encyclopedia of Popular music • Encyclopedia of World History • Encyclopedia of Banking and Finance • Encyclopedia of World Art 58  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING The articles in encyclopedia should not be seen as sufficient.
They should be supplemented with other sources.
At least, they give direction of further research.
General and Specialised Indexes and Abstracts These are lists of recent magazine and journal articles, organised alphabetically by subject matter and author (Powers, 1993:271).
They are useful means of knowing the state of knowledge on a subject matter.
Since encyclopedias are not often revised every year, it is difficult to know the latest information on subject matters through them.
This is why it is helpful to consult indexes and abstracts.
Through them, you will access the titles of all the articles in the periodicals covered, organised according to the topics covered in the article.
General indexes survey mainly popular magazines, which contain articles that have broad appeal.
Specialised indexes list articles that appear only in professional journals for the discipline covered by the index.
Examples: • Communication Abstract • Social Science Citation Index • Humanities Index • Psychological Abstracts • Sociological Abstracts Bibliographies Bibliographies are published lists of articles, chapters, and books on highly specialized or widely studied topics.
Examples are A World Bibliography of Bibliographies and an index called The Bibliographic Index (Powers, 1993:272).
Almanacs and Yearbooks These are summaries of statistical and general facts published yearly.
Because of the subject areas they cover, they change frequently: Examples: • Whitaker’s Almanac • Catholic Almanac • Britannica Book of the Year • Statistical Abstract of the United States 59  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Biographical Collections These are brief biographies of notable persons.
Examples: • Makers of Modern Africa • International Who’s Who • Who’s Who in America Computerised Search Services These are automated bibliographic research aids.
They save time and could generate extensive bibliographies in a short time by using key terms as a guide to do electronic search of the published indexes in related fields (Powers, 1993:272).
3.3 Locating Materials There are some strategies you can employ to get adequate materials for writing a speech.
Gregory (2002:117) suggests the following steps.
1.
Start research far in advance 2.
Begin with purpose statement 3.
Establish a research strategy 4.
Stay focused Start research far in advance A stitch in time saves nine.
Gathering research materials for a given topic well on time saves you problem of writing a poor speech.
Note that the quality of your material determines, to some extent, the quality of your speech.
Begin with purpose statement You need to be focused when gathering materials for your speech.
A quick way to do that is to identify your purpose.
This should be your guide in selecting the materials that come your way.
Make explicit your purpose statement.
60  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Establish a research strategy Since there are many things competing for your time and attention, among which is your speech writing, have a schedule for the gathering of materials for your writing.
Try to stick to the schedule.
Stay focused Being focused will help you a lot.
When there are many materials beckoning for your attention, you need to set priorities right so that you will not waste precious time.
Many people waste time, without planning to do so, when surfing the Internet.
The best solution is to stay focused and ignore some other materials that are not of immediate relevance to the topic on which you are searching for materials.
3.4 Catalogues Catalogues are the indexes of library resources; it contains the lists of library collection.
They are directional signposts for retrieving materials.
They contain bibliographic information like physical and subject descriptions (Ola, 2010:169).
Special catalogues These refer to catalogues, which serve as indexes to specific/special collections of distinct features and characteristics in the library.
Maps and manuscript, theses, government documents and publications ordinance exemplify these (Ola, 2009:173).
Classified/Shelf List Catalogue This is mainly used by librarians.
It is arranged based on the classification marks used to organise the materials (Ola, 2009:173).
Dictionary Catalogue In a dictionary catalogue, the author, subject and title entries are collapsed into a single filling/listing and are arranged alphabetically.
This is usually done in libraries with small collection (Ola, 2009:173).
Union Catalogue This card shows where a particular material could be found in the collaborating libraries.
In other words, it is used by more than one library.
The libraries collaborating may be independent or branches of a 61  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING main library.
A major advantage of this catalogue is that it narrows down the search area of the user (Ola, 2009:173).
3.5 E-resources and Databases These are materials packaged in electronic format.
Ola (2009:176) gives examples of CD-ROM (Compact Disc Read Only Memory) databases to include • Applied Science and Technology Abstract • Commonwealth Agriculture Bureau (CAB) Abstract • ERIC (Education Resource Information Centre • Humanities Abstract • Life Sciences • Social Science Index Some electronic databases that provide full texts instead of abstracts and bibliographic information include: • AGORA (Access of Global Online Resources in Agriculture • AJOL (African Journal Online) • BIOMED • EBSCOHOST • E-Granny Digital Library • HINARI (Health Information Network and Research initiative • JSTOR (Joint System To Order Resources) • Lan TEEAL (Local area network version of The Essential Electronic Agricultural Library) • OARE (Online Access to Research Environment) • Online Public Access Catalogue (OPAC) (cf.
Ojo, 2010:51-52) OPAC is the electronic counterpart of the card catalogue.
There are author and subject search options in it.
An advantage, which it has over the card catalogue, is that it gives more field options for searching.
A card catalogue cannot accommodate more than three authors in a single entry, whereas a book with more than three authors can be retrieved under any of the authors in OPAC (Ola, 2009:177).
Websites A website is a global Internet system for delivering and displaying documents, which may contain images, sound, video and text.
It is a linkage of thousands of far-flung sites.
Each site contains web pages or documents, that is, the file seen on the screen when visiting a website.
A 62  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING website is a location on the World Wide Web, but some people use it interchangeably with Web page.
You can be transported from one Web page to another related Web page through Hyperlinks (Gregory, 2002:120).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Draw the chart of sources of information.
2.
List six electronic databases that give full text.
4.0 CONCLUSION The speechwriter has so many sources from which to derive materials to use.
A careful selection of these sources and a productive use of them will enhance the quality of the speech.
A thorough research on the topic is the beginning of success in speech writing.
Harness all the resources at your disposal to enrich your speech.
Try to crosscheck the information you have from one source with the one from other sources.
As mentioned earlier, speech writing is a demanding activity.
However, it is a worthwhile endeavour.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have considered sourcing for information.
More will be said about the Internet in the next unit.
The major sources of information and their usefulness have been examined.
Since the major aim of a speech is passing information, a speechwriter needs to make a thorough research so that the audience will be furnished with appropriate information.
This is the beauty of speech writing.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is a website?
2.
What is hyperlink?
3.
Discuss four sources of information.
4.
Explain four major types of library resources 5.
How do you find materials efficiently?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Barrett, H. (1987).
Practical Uses of Speech Communication.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Beebee, S. A & BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
63  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Dimbleby R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
London: Routledge.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas, S. E. (2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J. H. (1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers Raman, M. & Sharmar, S. (2004).
Technical Communication: Principles and Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Welsh, J.
(1968).
Guides to Speech Writing: The Professional Techniques for the Regular and Occasional Speakers.
New York: John Wiley and Company.
64  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 3 THE INTERNET AND SPEECH WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Internet 3.2 Basic Steps to Accessing the Internet 3.2.1 Some Other Sites 3.3 Evaluating Internet Resources 3.3.1 Evaluating Website Sponsor 3.3.2 Determining Objectivity and Motivation of Domains 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Scientific development has brought many meaningful changes to the world.
The computer and the Internet are innovations that have turned the world over for good.
There are different aspects of the Internet that could be explored to facilitate speech writing.
In this unit, we shall consider some of the aspects of the Internet that a speechwriter can used to have a good output.
Some of the issues that engage the attention of this unit are useful for other researchers too.
A proper understanding of the Internet and its resources will definitely add value to your speech.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the Internet • explain how to access the Internet • define search engine • highlight search engines • discuss how to evaluate Internet materials • explain the features of Internet resources.
65  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Internet The Internet is a global super network, which links thousands of computers in order to get information.
The Internet has become a popular means of getting information all over the world.
There are also social networks, such as Twitter and Facebook, through which current information about individuals and organisations can be got.
The Internet contains any imaginable kind of information.
However, some people have taken this to mean that the Internet is a replacement of traditional library resources, particularly, hard copies of materials.
The Internet can never replace the traditional library.
Lucas (2002:119-120) captures it succinctly thus: Printed materials in libraries are superior to the Internet in many ways.
Take books, for example.
The Internet has a relatively small number of books, most of them literary classics whose copyrights have expired; the novels of Jane Austen, the plays of William Shakespeare … Libraries, in contrast, have thousands of books, including expensive reference works that are not on the Internet.
Books offer greater depth and elaboration than you can find on the Internet… The Internet also lags behind libraries in the availability of articles, while it is true that many newspaper and journal articles are available on the internet, most publications do not place all of their printed material on the Internet.
To do so might put them out of business.
Besides, do not think that once you have a personal computer and Internet access, you do not need the electronic services of a library.
This is because there are some electronic materials that only libraries could get under terms of contract.
Only library users are allowed to use such through an access code (Lucas, 2002:120).
66  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.2 Basic Steps for Accessing the Internet To access the Internet, take the following steps.
1.
Connect to the Internet.
2.
Click on the “Open” button and type in an address, the URL (Uniform Resource Locator).
When typing the URL, you do not need to add spaces.
You should not use capital letters if they are not part of the address.
An example is the website of the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) – www.nou.edu.ng (old) or www.noun.edu.ng (new).
3.
If you do not know the address, use a search engine.
This allows you search for keywords on web pages throughout the world.
The results it displays are called hits.
Click on one of the hits to get transported to it.
Most sites offer basic and “refined”/”advanced” searches.
In the former, you just enter a keyword without sifting through any pull down menus of additional options.
The latter allows search on more than one word, to give more weight to one search term than another, and to exclude words that are likely to make the results muddy.
It also allows searching proper names, phrases and words that are close to other search terms.
Examples of search engines are: • Google (http://www.google.com) • Yahoo (http://www.yahoo.com) • Google scholar (http://www.googlescholar.com) • Looksmart (http://www.looksmart.com) • Ask Jeeves (http://www.askjeeves.com) • Webcrawler (http://www.webcrawler.com) • Excite (http://www.excite.com) • Atla Vista (http://www.altavista.com) • InfoSeek (http://www.infoseek.go.com) • About.com (http://www.about.com) • Northern Light (http://www.northernlight.com) • FastSearch (http://www.alltheweb.com) • HotBot (http://www.hotbot.com) • (cf.
Gregory 2002:125; Ola 2009:178; Ojo 2010:29) There also metasearch engines.
These search engines send a researcher’s request to several search engines at the same time 67  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Examples • Dogpile (http://www.dogpile.com) • Inference Find (http://www.infind.com) • InvisibleWeb (http://www.invisibleweb.com) • lxquick Metasearch (http://www.lxquick.com) • MetaCrawler (www.metacrawler.com) • SavySearch (www.savyserach.com) • ProfuFusion (http://www.profusion.com) Cyber 411(http://www.cyber411.com) (cf.
Lucas, 2002: 138) 4.
To visit sites of related interest, look for hyperlinks.
Hyperlinks are always underlined and sometime printed in a colour that is different from that of the surrounding text.
5.
To return to Web pages that you have just visited, click on the “Back” button at the top of your screen.
Click on the “Forward” button to move to the Web page visited before you clicked the “Back” button.
6.
To create a permanent list of sites that you like and may want to visit again bookmark them.
To do this, go to the “Bookmarks” or “Favourites” menu at the top of your screen and click on add Bookmark (or Add to favourites).
7.
Choose “Print to File” under the print menu do download pages onto a hard drive or a flash drive.
If it is graphic, click on it and choose “Save as …”from the file menu (Gregory 2002:120-121).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What do you understand by the Internet?
2.
List the basic steps you need to take to access the Internet.
3.2.1 Some Other Sites Expert sites: An expert site is a website that offers expertise on requested topics.
Examples • Ask Me Com (www.askme.com) 68  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • Abuzz (www.abuzz.com) • Yahoo (www.yahoo.com) (Gregory 2002:124).
Discussion Forum This is a message centre for people that have a common interest.
Examples • Google Groups (www.googlegroups.com) • Yahoo!
Groups (www.yahoogroups.com) (Gregory 2002:124).
The Invisible Web The invisible web is the part of the Internet that search engines could not reach.
This includes specialized resources, for example immigration law, and collection of full-text articles.
Some of the addresses that could be used to access these resources include.
1.
Libraries index to the internet (created by librarians at the University of California.
(www.lii.org) 2.
Internet Public Library (Operated at the University of Michigan (www.i.pl.org/ref) 3.
Virtual library – a catalogue run by volunteers in areas such as science and engineering (www.vlib.org).
(Gregory, 2002:125, 128) Virtual Libraries A virtual library is “a search engine which combines Internet technology with traditional library methods of cataloguing and accessing data” (Lucas, 2002:138).
Examples: • Librarian’s Index to the Internet (http://lii.org) • Infomine (http://infomine.ucr.edu) • ArgusClearinghouse (http://www.clearinghouse.)
• Internet Public Library (http://www.ipl.org) • Social Science Information Gateway (http://www.soisg.ac.uk) • Britannica.com (http://www.britannica.com) • Virtual library (www.vlib.org) 69  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.3 Evaluating Internet Resources It is advisable to evaluate the Internet resources as some of them could contain inaccurate information.
Crosscheck the material you find with some other reliable sources.
There are some websites designed to be intentionally misleading.
However, there are also some websites addressing the issue of misleading information.
Examples given by Ojo (2010:31-32) include: • Snopes – the best source for factual information about rumours • Hoaxbusters • Hoax-slayer – email hoaxes and current Internet scams • Urban Legend and Folklore • Truth or Fiction – for checking email before sending it out • Straight Dope – focuses on fighting ignorance.
In order to evaluate the information from the web, Ojo (2010:32-33) suggests checking the information for the listed characteristics.
1.
Authority 2.
Objectivity 3.
Authenticity 4.
Reliability 5.
Timeliness 6.
Relevance 7.
Efficiency Authority Try to find out the credibility of the author.
Determine whether the author is stating his/her opinion or a fact.
You may not take seriously an author that does not recognise the opinion of others.
Objectivity Check if the information contained is prejudiced.
Find out if the sponsorship influences the perspective of the information, because some sites promote only the interest of their sponsors.
Authenticity You should find out the origin of the information.
Part of what to do here is to see if the information has been reviewed, and if original 70  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING sources are documented.
Also, check if the site is a primary or secondary source of information.
Reliability The reliability of the information could be determined by finding out the sponsors of the publication, a school, business, company, government agency and so on.
Timelessness This has to do with how current the information is.
To do this, find out the date the information was published and the recency of the sources cited.
Relevance Ask if the information contained in it is relevant to your need.
Efficiency Ask yourself if the information is quick to access and if it is well organised.
In all, you should separate scholarship from propaganda.
The two are completely different and serve different ends.
The major differences between them, as identified by Ojo (2010:36), are examined below.
1.
Scholarship describes limits of research data, while propaganda claims certainty excessively.
2.
While scholarship presents accurate description of alternative viewpoints, propaganda relies on personal attacks and ridicule.
3.
Scholarship encourages debate, discussion and criticism, whereas propaganda uses inflammatory language.
4.
Propaganda devalues critical appraisal but scholarship encourages it.
5.
Propaganda transforms words and statistics to suit purpose, while scholarship admits ignorance.
6.
Scholarship uses generally accepted parameters for evaluating data, while propaganda suppresses contrary views.
7.
Scholarship seeks counter-examples but propaganda appeals to popular prejudices.
8.
While scholarship relies on critical thinking skills, propaganda presents information out of context.
71  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING As a good speechwriter, strive to be scholarly in your presentation.
This earns you the respect of your audience.
3.3.1 Evaluating Website Sponsor You can also evaluate Internet resources by browsing on the integrity of the website sponsor.
You can do this by clicking on “About” link.
If everything else fails, go to Allwhois.com (www.allwhois.com); type in the URL but do not include ‘www’.
The name, address and phone number of the person or organisation that registered the Website will be found (Lucas, 2002: 138).
3.3.2 Determining Objectivity and Motivation of Domains You can determine the objectivity and motivation of a domain by checking the domain name.
A domain is a group of computers on a network that operates under common rules.
The suffix at the end of the name shows the “top-level domain,” which indicates the owner of the address.
Commercial web pages (.com) appear to be the least object domain.
However, this does not mean that all.com addresses are unreliable.
Other domains are: • .org non-profit organisation • .net networks • .gov government • .edu educational and research institutions (Lucas, 2002) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Differentiate between scholarship and propaganda.
2.
What is a domain?
4.0 CONCLUSION It is evident from our discussion so far that the Internet is a plus to scholarship.
The resources that the Internet provides are meant to make speech writing easier.
However, caution must be exercised while using the Internet.
It is meant to complement other resources that have been mentioned earlier.
You also need to monitor the amount of time you spend on Internet search, hence you end up wasting precious time on gathering materials while you are left with little time to do the writing.
72  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has introduced you to the Internet.
There is more to the Internet than what has been considered here.
However, what you have been exposed to here is enough to meet your basic needs.
By constant use of the Internet, you will discover other interesting things about the Internet.
Just ensure that you take note of whatever you see in the dialogue boxes that come to the screen of the computer.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the advantages a speechwriter can gain from the Internet.
2.
How can a speechwriter sieve the resources got from Internet search?
3.
Write explanatory notes on the following: a. bookmark b. virtual library c. hyperlink 4.
How do you ascertain the objectivity of a domain?
5.
Discuss the peculiarities of search engines.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Beebee, S.A. & BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Calkins, L.C.
(1986).
The Art of Teaching Writing.
Portsmouth: Heinemann.
Coe, N.; Rycott, R. & Ernest, P. (1983).
Writing Skills: A Problem- Solving Approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ojo, R.O.
(2010).
“Optimizing Internet Access and Use.” Manual for ICT-Related Training for Staff of University of Ibadan: Module 11: ICT In Teaching Research & Administration.
Ibadan: ICT- Related Training.
Pp 24-54.
Ola, C.O.
(2009).
“Assessing Library Resources”.
In Oyeleye L. (Ed) Use of English: A Tertiary Coursebook.
Ibadan: Agbo Areo Publishers pp164-184.
73  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 4 LOGICAL ISSUES IN SPEECH WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Use of Evidence in Speechwriting 3.2 Reasoning in Speechwriting 3.2.1 Types of Reasoning 3.3 Fallacies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Writing involves reasoning.
The way the writer’s ideas are arranged and presented influences the subject matter of the speech and how it is received by the audience.
If the language of a writer is impeccable but his/her ideas are illogically presented, the outcome of his/her effort will be worse than that of the one who is deficient in language skills but logical in his/her presentation.
In this unit, we shall examine how ideas can be logically presented so that the speech will achieve its purpose.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define evidence • explain how to use evidence in speechwriting • list types of reasoning • define fallacy • explain the roles of fallacy in speechwriting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Use of Evidence in Speechwriting Evidence is any supporting material used in a speech, particularly in a persuasive speech.
This could be statistics, examples, or testimony (Lucas 2001:407).
In using evidence, take note of the following points.
74  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Use new/current Evidence The audience expects more than what they already know.
You have done nothing significant if you supply them with what they already know.
Therefore, use novel and accurate evidence to buttress your points.
As much as possible, give them up-to-date information – the most current information on the topic.
Use reliable Sources Do not depend on hearsay.
It is not enough to give current information; credibility of the source of your information is also important.
If it is a national data, it is more reliable to cite information of the federal government.
For instance, if it is figures related to population of Nigeria, the most reliable source is the National Population Commission’s figures.
You can also rely on international agencies, like the United Nations (UN), World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), Transparency International, and so on, for figures that relate to nations of the world.
Relate the Evidence to your Thesis Ensure that your evidence points clearly and unambiguously to the point you are making.
Any irrelevant material will mar your speech and distract the audience rather than enhance the quality of your speech.
3.2 Reasoning in Speechwriting Aristotle calls the logical appeal of a speaker and, by extension, writer logos.
It has two elements, namely evidence and reasoning.
The second aspect is often erroneously associated with philosophers.
This is not correct.
Every one of us gets involved in reasoning daily, as reasoning is the process of drawing a conclusion based on evidence (Lucas, 2001:409).
3.2.1 Types of Reasoning Lucas (2001:406-422) identifies four main types of reasoning relevant to speechwriting/speechmaking 1.
Reasoning from specific instances/inductive reasoning 2.
Reasoning from principle/deductive reasoning 3.
Causal reasoning 4.
Analogical reasoning 75  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Reasoning from Specific Instances/Inductive Reasoning This involves progressing from some particular facts to a general conclusion.
It is also known as inductive reasoning.
General conclusions such as Yoruba cities are neat; Nigerian politicians are corrupt; our leaders are insensitive; dogs are reliable companions, are all instances of such reasoning.
They are derived from some facts.
Let us consider the examples below: • Fact 1: Ibadan is neat • Fact 2: Lagos is neat • Fact 3: Osogbo is neat Conclusion: Yoruba cities are neat.
• Fact 1: Biology is difficult.
• Fact 2: Mathematics is difficult.
• Fact 3: Chemistry is difficult.
• Fact 4: Physics is difficult.
Conclusion: Science subjects are difficult.
• Fact 1: He slept throughout yesterday.
• Fact 2: He has never done any assignment given to him.
Conclusion: Therefore, he is an unserious person.
In reasoning from specific instances, avoid hasty generalisations; avoid jumping to conclusion without sufficient evidence.
Lucas (2001) advises that you need to “make sure your sample of specific instances is large enough to justify your conclusion.
Also make sure the instances you present are fair, unbiased, and representative.” Often times, you hear people say “women are not trustworthy”, “men are wicked”, “lawyers are liars” and the like.
If you ask people who make such statements the number of women, men, and lawyers, that they sampled before coming to such conclusions, they might not be able to tender basis for their conclusion.
In most cases, they base their conclusions on one or few instances that fit into their stereotypes.
You need to watch out for the kind of conclusions that you make when you write.
If you are not sure of your conclusions, word your expressions carefully.
You can say: “As it is often said by some…”, As we can see…” Be careful with the use of quantifiers, such as “most”, “all”, “some”, “many”, “majority”, and so on.
A more rewarding approach is to use specific and authentic statistics or testimony.
This will show how genuine your claims are.
76  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING There are two ways of using this type of reasoning in speech.
First, you can state your conclusion and then give the specific instances on which such is based.
Second, you can give the specific instances and then draw your conclusion (Lucas, 2001: 412).
Reasoning from Principle/ Deductive Reasoning According to Lucas (2001:412), reasoning from principle is reasoning that moves from a general principle to a specific conclusion.
It is the opposite of reasoning from specific instances.
It is from general to particular.
It is otherwise known as deductive reasoning.
Let us consider these examples: • Fact 1: All dogs bark • Fact 2: Bingo is a dog Conclusion: Therefore, Bingo barks.
• Fact 1: No man is immortal.
• Fact 2: George is a man.
Conclusion: George is mortal.
It could also be in this form: “All dogs bark that is why Bingo barks.” The effectiveness of this reasoning pattern lies in the general principle.
It must be faultless, that is without exception.
If the general principle you are using needs evidence, endeavour to give it.
Causal Reasoning This type of reasoning seeks to establish the relationship between causes and effects (Lucas, 2001:414).
In using this reasoning pattern, be sure that the cause and the effect are naturally linked.
This link is not always a matter of temporal sequence.
It is not in all cases that an event is always caused by what precedes it.
The error that arises from this non- connectedness is called post hoc, ergo procter hoc, that is “after this, therefore because of this”.
Analogical Reasoning This involves comparing two similar cases and inferring that what is true for the first case is true for the second one (Lucas, 2001:415).
In essence, it involves drawing analogy.
Once the two cases being compared are not essentially alike, the analogy is invalid.
Analogical reasoning is particularly useful when handling topics that have to do with defending a new policy.
A former president of Nigeria, in 77  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING justifying the increase in the pump price of petrol, compared the proposed price of petrol with the price of a bottle of Coke, since both of them were almost the same.
He reasoned that if Nigerians could buy a bottle of Coke at the said price, it should not be difficult for them to buy a litre of petrol at his proposed price.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List four types of reasoning.
2.
What is evidence?
3.3 Fallacies A fallacy refers to an error in reasoning.
There are many fallacies identified by logicians.
The basic ones that relate to our present purposes will be examined here: 1.
Hasty generalisation: This is a conclusion that is based in inadequate evidence and is too broad to be fair.
2.
Invalid/false analogy: This is a type of reasoning in which the analogy is not logically connected to the issue at hand.
3.
False cause: This is a situation in which the cause has no link with the effect.
4.
Bandwagon: This fallacy assumes that because something is popular, it is therefore good, correct, or desirable.
5.
Argumentum ad hominem: Ad hominem is a Latin expression, which means “against the man.” This refers to attacking the person rather than focusing on the real issue.
This is often noticed in political discourses.
6.
Red herring: This is a fallacy, which introduces an extraneous issue to divert attention from the subject matter under discussion.
This trick is common in political debates.
Some legal practitioners too use it and some of them could win cases through this.
7.
Either-or: This fallacy refers to a situation in which the speaker/writer forces listeners/readers to choose between two alternatives when more than two alternatives exist.
78  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 8.
Slippery slope: This fallacy assumes that taking a first step will lead to subsequent steps that cannot be prevented.
9.
Straw man: A straw man is a ridiculous caricature of what the opponents believe.
This is done to make it easy for them to argue against such a belief.
(cf.
Gregory, 2002:412-415).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss five forms of fallacies.
4.0 CONCLUSION Evidence is an important component of speechwriting.
An effective use of evidence in a speech makes the message of the speech clear.
It is good for a writer to pay adequate attention to logic in his/her speech.
Failure to do so may make the audience to misconstrue the message of the speech.
Logical errors could be avoided or reduced by going over the speech several times after it has been written.
You can also give it to some people, who will pay particular attention to your reasoning.
If there is any issue that reads differently from what you intend it to read, try to reword it.
Make necessary efforts to make your speech clear in message, apt in language, and logical in reasoning.
The reward of such efforts is great.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has been preoccupied with logic in speech writing.
It has considered how your reasoning can be presented in a convincing way.
The unit has also considered common fallacies in speaking and writing.
Some of these must be avoided but some of them could be stylistically used in some situations to achieve some effects.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Examine the relevance of evidence in speech.
2.
Discuss three reasoning types.
3.
Explain the effects of fallacy on speech.
4.
How can evidence be judiciously used in speech writing?
5.
How does reasoning aid the audience in decoding the message of a speech?
79  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Beebee, S. A.
& BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
London: Routledge.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas, S. E. (2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J. H. (1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
Raman, M. & Sharma, S. (2004).
Technical Communication: Principles and Practice: Oxford: Oxford University Press.
80  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 5 THE INTRODUCTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Description of the Introduction 3.2 Guidelines for writing Introduction 3.3 Hints on How to Write the Introduction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We now turn to writing specific segments of the speech.
The speech is one but it has many parts.
There must be some synergy among the constituting parts for the speech to achieve its goals.
This unit is devoted to the first part of the speech that is introduction.
Here we shall consider the effective ways of writing the introduction.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what introduction is • discuss introduction strategies.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Description of the Introduction Immediately after the title of the speech, the next item in a speech is the introduction.
It is a window through which the audience can peep into the entire speech.
It is at this point that the writer can either win or lose the interest and attention of the audience.
3.2 Guidelines for Writing Introduction There is no rigid pattern of introducing a speech; the ingenuity of each writer determines the quality of the introduction.
However, there are basic components of the introduction.
A good speechwriter will not disregard the following points when writing an introduction.
81  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • Make it inviting.
• Make it pungent.
• Avoid unnecessary preamble.
• Make your focus clear.
• Let it lead to the body of the speech.
• Create rapport between you and the audience.
• Establish your credibility and competence to handle the topic.
• Give necessary background information.
• Give some hints on the structure of the speech.
• Relate the topic to the audience.
Make it inviting Without the audience, your speech cannot achieve its purpose.
The speech is prepared to be read to an audience or by an audience.
Whatever the nature of the audience, your introduction should be like the aroma of a meal, which invites the passers-by.
If you believe that it is until they have tasted the meal that they will enjoy it, they may not even have the patience to taste it.
Let the aroma invite them to taste the food.
Make it pungent After securing the attention of the audience, you need to sustain it.
One of the ways of doing this is to make sharp and pungent comments that will engage the thinking faculty of the audience, a form of suspense that will soon be unfolded.
Avoid unnecessary preamble Your attempt to make the introduction inviting and pungent should not lead to unnecessary preamble.
Any material that does not have direct bearing on the subject should not be included.
The introduction should not take more than 10% of the entire speech.
Make your focus clear The essence of the introduction is to set the tone for the work.
You should not be carried away by your attempt to capture the attention of the audience and forget to state what your aim in the speech is.
All components of the introduction should lead to making clear the ultimate goal of the speech.
Let it lead to the body of the work 82  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING The introduction is a part of a whole and the speech itself is an organism.
This means that the various parts of the speech should complement one another.
The introduction should lead naturally to the body of the speech.
In other words, there should be coherence in the speech.
Create rapport between you and the audience Since a good speechwriter should be audience-centred, you need to create good rapport with your audience right from the outset.
Identity with them; do not distance yourself from them.
Enter into their world while the speech lasts.
However, you have to begin this right from the introduction.
According to Powers (1993:117), this quality is also called goodwill bond, common ground, and audience identification.
They all emphasise making mental contact with the audience, howbeit in different ways.
Goodwill bond stresses the positive nature of the feeling one seeks to create; common ground stresses searching for a shared starting point between the writer and the audience; identification is concerned with the need for developing a common way of thinking about the topic; and rapport focuses on the similarity between the writer and the audience.
Establish your credibility and competence to handle the topic The introduction is an avenue to sell your credentials to the audience.
From the introduction, the audience should know that you are qualified to handle the topic.
If they discover that you are not more qualified than they are, they may not give you the required attention.
This does not mean you should appear arrogant before the audience, as this may put them off.
Give necessary background information If the topic requires that you intimate the audience with some background information, do not hesitate to do so in the introduction.
This will prepare their minds for what is to come in the rest of the speech.
83  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Give some hints on the structure of the speech Giving some hints on the structure of the speech is an appetizer.
Let the audience know how the speech is structured.
This will make them flow with your style.
Relate the topic to the audience The audience has interests and needs.
They will want to pay attention to a speech that meets such interests and needs.
Right from the introduction, indicate that the speech adequately caters for these things.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is the introduction?
2.
List six things a speechwriter should take note of while writing the introduction.
3.3 Hints on How to Write the Introduction Some common approaches to the introduction are still relevant.
The major ones are discussed below.
1.
Ask questions 2.
Tell a story/an anecdote 3.
Give proverbs/idioms 4.
Give statistical facts/figures 5.
Quote a reputable source 6.
Make analogy 7.
Define some concepts Ask Questions Asking question is a veritable means of engaging the audience in the discourse.
If you open the speech with questions, the audience will be made to connect to the speech.
Any or a combination of question types could be employed; each has its own merits and limitations.
“Wh”-question This is a question that begins with a “wh” element, such as what, when, where and why, for example, “Why women are educationally endangered?” This kind of question does not require a yes or a no response.
Some of its advantages are: 84  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 1.
It makes the audience to start thinking of possible answer(s).
2.
It does not require a uniform or definite answer; and so allows both parties to express their opinions.
Polar (yes/no) question This type of question requires either a yes or a no response.
For example: • Do the masses have hope?
• Are we obligated to pray for corrupt leaders?
This type of question has the following effects: 1.
It makes the audience to wittingly or unwittingly respond aloud or through shaking their heads or other para-lingusitic manners.
2.
It ensures a definite response, which makes them take a position before the writer make known his/her own views.
The writer then has the task of reinforcing their response or debunking it.
Rhetorical question This is a question asked only for dramatic or emphatic purposes; it is not meant to elicit any response.
It is a way of affirming what is a generally accepted fact.
It achieves the following effects: 1.
It shows that you identify with the feeling and interest of the audience.
2.
It establishes what the audience already knows.
Tell a story/an anecdote Stories have the power to touch the minds of humans.
Beginning your speech with a story/an anecdote could adjust the minds of the audience to the message of the speech.
Nevertheless, caution must be exercised in doing this.
The story should be short and straight to the point.
It should also relate to the topic for it to be effective.
Commenting on the relevance of story as an introductory strategy, Powers (1993:123) avers that: Everyone has a story to tell, a story than can be used to make a point.
Opening your speech with a story accomplishes many things.
It humanizes your topic (a story has characters); its (sic) activates your speech (a story has plot: starting, rising, culminating, and closing 85  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING action); it essentializes your speech’s content (a story has a central theme or point).
Give proverbs/idioms Because they are witty expressions, proverbs and idioms could give the summary of what your speech addresses.
Another major advantage of this opening style is that it shows your thoroughness and versatility.
Give statistical figures Statistical figures help authenticate whatever claim you want to make, especially if they are from reliable sources.
Powers (1993:85-89) gives the following uses of statistics.
1.
They are used to report absolute magnitude.
2.
They are used to make quantitative comparisons.
3.
They are used to chart trends of events.
4.
They are used to suggest relationship between magnitudes of two or more different phenomena.
5.
They are used to report averages.
However, your statistics should not confuse the audience.
You should try to interpret the statistics and relate it to the topic and the audience.
Quote a reputable source Quotations refer to the expressions of another person used in a piece of writing without editing it.
The introduction can begin by quoting a reputable source.
Such a person should be an authority in the topic you are discussing.
This is a way of lending credibility to your views.
It also shows to the audience that you have done a thorough research before your writing.
Ensure that you do not quote the person out of context.
Also, make sure that you relate the quote to your topic.
Beginning a speech with a quotation is a way of arresting the attention of the audience, particularly if that source is somebody well known to the majority of the audience.
Make analogy Analogy is the use of an incident or an occasion related to another one to draw inference and establish a link between them.
It is often most appropriate when the concept for which analogy is to be used is strange or complex.
It is what the audience is familiar with or could relate easily with that should be used as analogy.
For an analogy to be effective, 86  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING make sure that the link is not far-fetched.
Using analogy in the introduction sets the right tone for the speech and creates a permanent image in the minds of the audience.
It is good that the analogy relates directly to the topic, as people tend to remember analogies faster than the things they are meant to illustrate.
If the analogy relates well to the topic, they will be able to remember the message as soon as they remember the analogy.
However, ensure that the analogy does not take the place of the speech; it is meant to play introductory roles alone.
Define some concepts You can also begin the speech by operationalising some concepts.
This is a way of simplifying the speech and ensuring that the audience does not rack their brains unnecessarily on some concepts.
Defining can be done in the following ways, according to Powers (1993:79): 1.
Classification and differentiation 2.
Example 3.
Comparison and contrast 4.
Synonym and antonym 5.
Etymological origins 6.
Negation Classification and Differentiation This is otherwise called “logical” method.
It involves three phases 1.
Mention the word to be defined.
2.
Identify the general class it belongs to.
3.
Distinguish it from other members of the class.
This approach involves giving tokens that illustrate the particular concept being defined.
From these examples, the meaning of the concept can be gleaned.
Comparison and Contrast This type of definition reveals the similarities and the differences between the concept being defined and other related concepts.
This approach is useful especially when handling concepts that are apparently strange to the audience, concepts that are often mistaken for one another, or when a word has other meaning attached to it.
87  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Synonym and Antonym Synonyms are words that are similar in meaning or have the same sense relation.
However, there are no two words that are exactly the same or that can replace each other in a given.
An antonym is a word that means the opposite of another word.
By using synonyms and antonyms in definition, you show the relationship between a particular word and other more familiar words.
Use this approach when the word to be defined is relatively unfamiliar to the audience.
Etymological Origins This approach traces the root of a word.
At times, a word that now has positive connotation might have had a negative connotation along the line of its development and vice-versa.
This approach is historical.
One of the advantages of defining a word using its etymological origin is that it enriches the audience’s understanding of the word and makes the task of explaining the word easier.
It is a useful means of clearing doubts as to the actual meaning of a word and the meaning now associated with it.
Negation This method tells what a thing is not.
It is a stylistic way of arguing some points on the entity being defined.
You may want to emphasise the opposite of a concept as a way of making some points.
Consider this definition of democracy.
Democracy is not demonstration of craze.
It is not attacking the person and not the issue when campaigning.
It is equally not playing on the weakness of the electorate to siphon public funds.
I mean democracy is not enriching oneself at the expense of the masses.
This definition focuses on what many Africans have taken democracy to mean.
This definition is an attempt to lambast those who are fake democrats.
The audience is being called upon to see democracy as the opposite of what is presented in this definition.
In essence, the introduction is a fourfold process.
• Announcing the subject • Limiting the subject • Indicating the play of the paper • Engaging the reader’s interest or attention (Kane & Peters 1966:73) 88  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING However, this is not a fixed order.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List four ways of writing an introduction.
2.
Discuss what you think analogy means.
4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of introduction to the speech has been stressed in this unit.
The introduction can determine whether the audience will continue their engagement with the speech or not.
This is why a speechwriter needs to give the introduction full attention.
A good writer will vary his/her pattern of introduction in different speeches, depending on the audience, among other factors.
The points raised in this unit are just meant to guide the writer.
Each writer could design the introduction that best suits his/her purpose.
5.0 SUMMARY The peculiarities of the introduction have been examined in this unit.
This is intended to expose you to how to lay a good foundation for the speech.
In the next unit, we shall consider the other segments of the speech.
This will equip you with basic information on the way to present each of these segments.
a. TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why does the writer need to create rapport with the audience?
2.
Explain four ways of writing the introduction.
3.
Discuss five ways defining can be used for the introduction.
4.
Discuss the things to take note of while writing the introduction.
5.
What is the usefulness of negation in writing the introduction?
6.
Explain the relevance of the question approach to writing the introduction.
7.
Use three different patterns to write the introduction for this topic: “Lessons from the 2007 General Elections in Nigeria.” 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Beebee, S.A & BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An audience- Centered approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An introduction to communication.
New York: Routledge.
89  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Kane, T.S.
& Peters, L. J.
(1966).
A Practical Rhetoric of Expository Prose.
Oxford University Press.
Lucas, S.E.
(2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J.H.
(1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
90  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 6 OTHER PARTS OF THE SPEECH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organising the Body of the Speech 3.1.1 Thought-Flow Pattern 3.1.2 Assisting the Reader 3.2 The Conclusion 3.2.1 Additional Hints on the Conclusion 3.3 References 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Each segment of the speech is unique, although there are some features that cut across some segments.
In this unit, we shall examine the other segments of the speech.
These are the body, the conclusion, and the works cited (title and introduction were examined in the previous unit).
The manner in which each of these is to be handled will be discussed so that you will have a broad knowledge of the speech as an entity.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain techniques of writing the body of the speech • discuss thought-flow patterns/orders • explain how to assist the reader • discuss the features of the conclusion • mention different style sheets • document different materials using both the APA and MLA style sheets.
91  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organising the Body of the Speech All other paragraphs after the introduction excluding the conclusion constitute the body of the speech.
The body contains a full discussion of the focus of the subject matter.
There is no limit to the number of sentences that should constitute the body of a speech.
The purpose of the speech and the time allotted to the speech are among the major determinants of the length of the body of a speech.
3.1.1 Thought-flow Pattern/Order The way the ideas in the mind of the speechwriter are presented is termed thought-flow pattern/order.
There are different thought flow patterns that could be employed to enrich the speech.
The basic ones are: 1.
Chronological order 2.
Spatial Order 3.
Topical Order 4.
Cause-to-Effect Order 5.
Simple-to-Complex Order 6.
Comparison and Contrast Order Chronological Order: This arranges events sequentially, that is the order of their occurrence in turn.
This is very useful when explaining how to do something, such as a process or a recipe or a historical happening, how to make an instrument.
Powers (1993:98) avers that: Using chronological order effectively involves at least two steps: dividing the continuum of events into from two to five major time periods, and ordering those major events so that they seem to exhibit the events so that they seem to exhibit the qualities of internal preparation, forward motion, climax, and closure.
Doing the above involves identifying the peaks of the activity being discussed.
These peaks can be grouped into four periods.
• Preparatory events • Developmental events • Culminating events • Concluding events 92  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Spatial Order: This is the presentation of the relative location of things in comparison to one another.
This is used for giving direction or describing a place.
There are principles involved in this order.
Powers (1993:101) gives the following principles.
1.
North to south; east to west, and so forth 2.
Right, centre, left 3.
Near to far; far to near 4.
Front to back; back to front 5.
Top, middle, bottom, middle, top 6.
Around a circle or semicircle Topical Order: This involves organising the speech around some set of categories that are the required or standard for the topic or the one that is suitable for the occasion.
It involves breaking the speech into significant sections.
This approach is useful for overview of a subject.
Topical order is painstaking, involving analysis and classification.
The former is breaking a subject into its component parts.
The latter involves grouping the parts into meaningful units, a kind of sorting to see topics that are closely related (Powers, 1993:101).
The analysis and classification should be systematically done, considering the subject.
The classification should cater for all possible and related topics.
It must also exclude all forms of redundancy.
Items that are mutually exclusive should be well catered for.
Cause-to-Effect Order: This involves giving the causes of a particular event and stating the effects.
It involves stating why something occurred.
However, not just any cause should be given.
The effect must naturally be linked to the cause.
The logicality of the cause and the effect should be ensured.
It is not only what has happened that this order is suitable for.
It can also be employed for policies that are yet to be adopted.
You can state the likely effects a particular course of action would precipitate, even if such cause does not seem to have any effect at present.
Simple-to-Complex Order: This order first presents the simple part of a concept before going to the complex part.
The intention is to elucidate the concept and make it easy for the audience to comprehend.
This is particularly useful for treating principles or devices.
Comparison and Contrast Order: This order involves organising the speech in such a way that the similarities and/or differences between some concepts are presented.
This is particularly useful when discussing new concepts or when justifying a particular idea to make the audience takes a definite position.
Powers (1993:105) claims that there are at least 93  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING two ways of using this order.
First, the similarities (comparisons) are first discussed, followed by the differences (contrasts).
Second, the similarities and the differences are presented simultaneously.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is thought flow pattern?
2.
List four thought-flow order/pattern.
3.1.2 Assisting the Reader You can help the reader follow your speech with these techniques: • Leitmotifs • Signposts • Inter-paragraph transition (Kane & Peters, 1966:97) Leitmotifs This is a term was borrowed from music.
It means a recurrent pattern that is important to the subject.
Repeating some structures helps the speech to achieve unity.
However, leitmotifs do not usually reveal very much about the organization of the speech (Kane & Peters 1966:98).
Signposts There are words and structures that point to the structure of the speech.
They tell the reader what the writer has just done, is about to do next, or will do later on.
They are different from topical development.
While topical development asserts something about the subject, signposts reveal something about the organization of the speech (Kane & Peters, 1966:98).
Signposts could be extrinsic or intrinsic.
The extrinsic type includes table of contents and paragraphing indicators, subsections and numbering of paragraphs.
These are not part of the actual speech; this is why they are described as extrinsic.
The intrinsic type, on the other hand, refers to actual expressions that are incorporated into the speech.
They remind the audience of the plan of the speech suggested in the introduction.
Signposts could also anticipate later section of the speech (Kane & Peters, 1966:101).
Examples include listing strategy such as “first(ly)”, “second(ly);” and expressions like ‘in addition to”, “moreover”, “furthermore”, “so”, “besides”, and so on.
94  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Inter-paragraph Transitions These are expressions that link successive paragraphs.
Most of them occur at the beginning of the new paragraph.
Transitions could be full or partial.
The former has three elements • A summary of the old topic • An introductory statement of the new • An indication of the relationship between the two topics The relationships in the thought a writer expresses are of three main types, according to Kane and Peters (1966:106): • Adversative • Causal • Addictive Adversative This occurs when a paragraph contradicts or qualifies the topic or the focus of the preceding one.
This often involves using adverbs of concession, such as although, even though, though, however, but, in spite of, and despite.
Causal This involves showing that what a paragraph expresses is a result of what is expressed in the preceding paragraph.
This may be achieved by using two main clauses.
The first one sums up, while the second one is introduced by adverbs like therefore, thus, hence, consequently, and as a result (Kane & Peters, 1966:108).
Additive In this logical relationship, the new topic may be similar to or parallel with the one expressed earlier.
Its signals include: “not only … but also”, “similarly”, “besides”, “likewise” and so on.
In partial transition, the new topic may be introduced without giving summary of the old topic.
Another approach is to pick up a key concept at the end of a preceding paragraph and repeat it at the beginning of the new one (Kane & Peters, 1966:111).
95  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.2 The Conclusion The conclusion is as equally important as the introduction and the body of the speech.
The conclusion should do, among others, the following: 1.
Summarise the main points; 2.
Suggest solutions or new directions; 3.
Move the audience to action; and 4.
Be related to the topic Summarise the main points The conclusion can summarise the main points in the speech without necessarily repeating them.
This approach helps the audience to remember what the speech centres on.
Suggest solutions or new directions A speech is like a research, which is expected to solve a particular problem.
Depending on the topic, you may conclude by suggesting some solutions to the problem addressed in the speech.
Whatever the topic, you can give new directions on the topic.
Ask thought-provoking questions You can conclude by asking the audience some thought-provoking questions.
These questions should b e tied to the issues raised in the speech.
By doing this, the audience can process in their minds the ideas raised in the speech.
Move the audience to action In the Classical times, speech was an important means of propelling the populace to action.
Even in the contemporary times, some people have used speech to instigate people to action.
The conclusion of your speech is expected to make the audience take some actions either immediately or later.
The action can be toward themselves or others.
Be relevant to the topic The conclusion, just like the introduction, should not be detached from the other parts of the speech.
It is supposed to be a unifying portion.
All the loose ends of the speech should be tied together by the conclusion.
Even if the audience has not been able to make much sense of the 96  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING speech, the conclusion could be a way of reiterating the kernel of the speech.
The points discussed above are just some of the basic functions the conclusion is expected to perform.
There is no fixed formula to ending a speech.
In fact, some of the strategies employed in the introduction can be used for the conclusion.
Just allow ideas to flow naturally.
The conclusion should follow from the preceding paragraph.
3.2.1 Further Hints on the Conclusion The conclusion could achieve its major aims of summarising, judging and guiding to action in these four main ways: 1.
Terminal words 2.
Cyclic return 3.
Rhythmic variation 4.
Built-in closing (Kane & Peters, 1966:121) Terminal words These words signal closing.
The signposts include in conclusion, lastly, finally, concluding, to conclude, to in sum, then, and so, thus Cyclic Return In this strategy, the writer repeats an important expression mentioned in the introduction.
However, such expressions must have been mentioned again sometime in the speech so that the audience will be able to link the word to the conclusion.
Such expression also needs to relate directly to the focus of the speech.
Rhythmic variation Kane and Peters (1966:124) sum up the essence of this approach thus: …such a variation often takes the form of a slowing down and regularizing of the rhythm of the last sentence.
The closing sentence is likely to contain interrupting constructions; its stressed syllable will be somewhat more regularly spaced; and the five or six last syllables may fall into one of the rhythmic patterns called “cursus”… 97  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING They identify some other ways of achieving rhythmic variation: Thus by repeating connectives and modifiers, by using the same syntactic patterns, employing cursus, spacing stressed syllables more regularly, and inserting interrupters, a writer can slow down and regularize the movement of his final sentence and so say to the reader: “This is all”.
Less commonly he may take the opposite tack and signal closing by making the final sentence relatively quick and straightforward (p. 125).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention some ways the writer can assist the audience to understand the message of the speech.
2.
What are the features of the conclusion?
3.3 References There are different widely used style sheets.
Some of them are APA (American Psychological Association), MLA (Modern Language Association), Chicago Manual of Style, CSE (Council of Science Editors) Style, ASA (American Sociological Association) Style, AAA (American Anthropological Association) Style, and so on.
You can visit the website of each of the manual of style to get more information on citation.
For our purpose in this book, we will only consider the APA and the MLA styles, which appear to be the most commonly used styles across disciplines.
1.
Book with one author APA: Giegerich, H.J.
(1992).
English phonology: An Introduction.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MLA: Giegerich, Heinz J. English Phonology: An Introduction.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
2.
Book with more than one author APA: Goodglass, H. & Kaplan, E. (1983).
The assessment of aphasia and related disorders.
Philadelphia: Lea.
MLA: Goodglass Harold and Edith Kaplan.
The Assessment of Aphasia and Related Disorders.
Philadelphia: Lea, 1983.
98  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.
Edited book APA: Malmkjær, K. Ed.
(2002).
The linguistic encyclopedia.
London and New York: Routledge.
MLA: Malmkjær, Kirsten, Ed.
The Linguistics Encyclopedia.
London and New York: Routledge, 2002.
4.
Article in encyclopedia APA: Liberman, P. (1997).
“Speech.” Collier’s Encyclopedia.
17.
430-432.
MLA Liberman, Prince.
“ Speech”.
Collier’s Encyclopedia.
17: 430-432.
5.
Magazine/newspaper article APA: Nwachukwu, C. (2007 September) “Much ado about new Fuji king”.
The Guardian, p.39.
MLA: Nwachukwu, Cletus.
“Much Ado about New Fuji King” The Guardian, 1 September 2007:39.
6.
Scholarly journal article APA: Sunday, A.B.
(2011) “Verbal assault in Fuji music.
The case of Sikiru Ayinde Barriser and Kolilington Ayinla” Journal of Pragmatics, 43:5; 1403-1421 MLA: Sunday, Adesina B.
“Verbal Assault in Fuji Music: The Case of Sikiru Ayinde Barrister and Kollington Ayinla.” Journal of Pragmatics 43:5 (2011): 1403-1421.
7.
Articles with no author listed APA: Earth movement (2008, July 12).
The Nation.
7 MLA: “Earth movement” The Nation 12 July 2008:7 99  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 8.
Article reproduced in CD-ROM database APA: Chambers, V. (2000, July).
“The secret latina,” Essence (p. 102 in original publication).
Retrieved January 20, 2001 from EBSCO Host CD-ROM database.
MLA: Chambers, Veronica.
“The Secret Latina” Essence July 2000 (p.102 in original publication) EBSCO Host CD-ROM database.
Retrieved 20 Jan. 2001.
(Adapted from Gregory 202:145).
9.
Article in electronic journal APA: Sunday A.B.
(2009) “Ideologies on display: A Nigerian Election Petition Tribunal ruling”.
California Linguistic Notes.
Volume xxxiv No.
2 Spring.
Pp 1-21.
(California State University, U.S.A) MLA: Sunday A.B.
“Ideologies on Display: A Nigerian Election Petition Tribunal Ruling.” California Linguistic Notes.
Volume xxxiv No.
2 Spring.
(2009) 1-21.
15.
Feb. 2011 http://hss.fullerton.edu/linguistics/cln/.
10.
Chapter in edited book APA: Bamgbose, A.
(1995).
“English in the Nigerian environment.” In A.Bamgbose, A.
Banjo, A. Thomas.
Eds.
New Englishes: A West African Perspective.
Ibadan: Mosuro, 1995.9-33.
MLA: Bamgbose, Ayo.
“English in the Nigerian Environment.” New Englishes: A West African Perspective.
A. Bamgbose, A.
Banjo, A. Thomas.
Eds.
Ibadan: Mosuro, 1995.9-33.
11.
Personal interview APA: Oyeleye, Lekan.
(2011 Jan.17).Personal Interview.
MLA: Oyeleye, Lekan.
Personal Interview.
Jan.17 2011.
100  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 12.
Dissertation and Thesis APA: Akinjobi, A.
(2004).
“A phonological investigation of vowel weakening and unstressed syllable obscuration in Educated Yoruba English”.
Ph.D. Thesis.
Department of Linguistics and African Languages.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
MLA: Akinjobi, Adenike.
“A phonological investigation of vowel weakening and unstressed syllable obscuration in Educated Yoruba English.” Ph.D. Thesis.
Department of Linguistics and African Languages.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan, (2004) 4.0 CONCLUSION Speech writing is not a casual activity.
For the message to be well passed to the audience, the writer has to incorporate different techniques.
There is no aspect of the speech that is not important.
The same vigour should be expended on all the segments.
If an aspect of the speech is neglected, it may mar the other aspects of the speech.
When documenting the materials that you have used in the speech, try to be consistent in the manual of style you use.
If the occasion demands a particular style sheet, adhere to it strictly.
If it is a style sheet that you are not familiar with, make adequate research on it, to use it correctly.
5.0 SUMMARY With this unit, we have come to the end of our discussion on all the major segments of the speech.
You will learn more about these segments by practice writing essays and speeches even when you do not have occasions to deliver them.
You learn to write by writing.
In the next module, you will learn about some steps to take to perfect your speech.
a. TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Use both the APA and the MLA styles to document five different materials.
2.
Discuss the major techniques of writing the conclusion.
3.
State different ways in which the writer assists the audience in understanding the body of the speech.
4.
Explain five thought-flow patterns.
5.
Identify some of the techniques for the body and the conclusion that can be used for the introduction.
6.
Use three different thought flow pattern to write a paragraph on “The evil in money laundering” 101  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas, S.E.
(2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J.H.
(1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers Winterowd, W.R. (1975).
The Contemporary Writer.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Oyeleye, A.L.
(2009).
“Academic Style Guidelines and the Gathering of Research Information”.
In Oyeleye L. Ed.
Use of English: A Tertiary Course Book: Ibadan: Agbo Areo Publishers.
Pp 125- 133.
102  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING MODULE 3 LANGUAGE AND STYLE IN SPEECH WRITING Unit 1 Paragraphing and Punctuation Unit 2 The Sentence Unit 3 Tense, Aspect and Concord Unit 4 Concision in Speech Writing Unit 5 Fine-tuning the speech Unit 6 Effective Diction UNIT 1 PARAGRAPHING AND PUNCTUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Paragraph 3.1.1 Types of Paragraph 3.1.2 Features of a Good Paragraph 3.3 Punctuation Marks 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are some mechanical issues that a speechwriter must take into consideration when writing.
Even if the language of the speech is good and the logic and reasoning patterns are flawless, if the speech is not well arranged into paragraphs, the overall message can be distorted.
Similarly, even if the speech is well paragraphed, but it is badly punctuated, the effects can be catastrophic.
Paragraphing and punctuation are two important mechanical issues that this unit considers.
There are adequate illustrations to make the points raised clear.
103  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define paragraph • discuss the features of a good paragraph • list punctuation marks • explain the appropriate use of the punctuation marks.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Paragraph A paragraph is a division of writing that expresses a single thought (Babajide, 1996:40).
It is an integral unit of composition.
It is a group of sentences, which are unified by their common relation to a general conception (Kane & Peters, 1966:135).
3.2 Types of Paragraph There are three main paragraph types.
• Introductory paragraph • Transitional paragraph • Concluding paragraph The introductory paragraph gives a general overview of the speech.
A major component of this paragraph is thesis statement.
This refers to the umbrella statement for the entire speech.
It reveals the overall concerns of the speech and indicates the attitude of the writer toward the speech (Babajide, 1996:44).
The transitional paragraph(s) may be one or many.
Any paragraph in between the introduction and the conclusion is called transitional.
It constitutes the body of the speech.
The concluding paragraph ends the speech.
The introductory and concluding paragraphs are like signature tunes.
They should appeal to the audience’s interests.
The introductory paragraph opens the door to the speech while the concluding paragraph closes it.
It must do it in such a way that the points raised in the speech are not allowed to escape the attention of the audience.
104  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.3 Features of a Good Paragraph A good paragraph must possess the following features.
• Coherence • Unity • Inclusiveness/ Completeness • Emphasis: The ideas must be pungently pursued Coherence Coherence requires that the ideas/sentences in a paragraph must be arranged logically.
For a paragraph to be coherent, it should not put the cart before the horse.
This means that the writer will supply information in the best order that will not twist the message or task the brains of the audience unnecessarily.
Unity A good paragraph must have unity of thought and unity of form.
There must not be any extraneous idea.
A paragraph may be coherent but it may lack unity.
Such a paragraph contains sentences that are logically arranged, but one or more of the sentences in it are not relevant to the general focus of that paragraph.
Similarly, a paragraph may have unity but lack coherence.
Such a paragraph contains relevant sentences but the sentences are not logically arranged.
Inclusiveness/Completeness This feature requires that the paragraph does not leave out any essential detail.
The details here are related to the specific focus of the paragraph.
This is why it is necessary to have a good outline before beginning the speech.
The outline will help you not to miss out any essential detail.
Emphasis Another important feature of a good paragraph is emphasis.
This has to do with the way the content of the paragraph is pursued.
For a paragraph to be emphatic, it has to pungently and seriously pursue its focus.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is a paragraph?
2.
List the features of a good paragraph.
105  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.3 Punctuation Marks While speaking, we observe some pauses at some points and adjust the tone of our voices to achieve different ends.
In writing, these processes are indicated by some marks.
These are called punctuation marks.
Thus, punctuation marks are those symbols that indicate the manner in which the voice is adjusted to make communication meaningful.
The appropriate, or otherwise, use of punctuation marks could affect the meaning of your speech.
This is why it is important for you to master the various ways these punctuation marks should be used.
They are not just marks meant to adorn your speech.
There are specific rules guiding their use.
1.
Full stop (.)
The full stop is used for the following purposes.
• To signal the end of a sentence.
a. I don’t need sycophants.
b.
See all of them.
c. I have to go now.
d. Take it easy.
e. We have seen you.
• To indicate abbreviation: a. etc.
b. Oct. c. e.g.
d. a.m. e. p.m.
However, in some of the examples above, particularly c, d, e, full stop is optional.
• In Internet and email addresses.
http://www.ui.edu.ng 2.
Question Mark (?)
This mark is used in the following ways.
• To indicate the end of a direct question: 106  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING a.
What have you prepared?
b.
Can we meet tonight?
c. Will you come for the service?
d. Is it ready?
e. Do you know what to do?
• To express doubt, particularly with a date: Obafemi Awolowo (?
1908-1987) 3.
Exclamation Mark (!)
It is used at the end of a sentence that shows strong emotion: a.
This is it!
b.
How wonderful it was!
4.
Comma (,) The comma is used for the following functions.
• To separate words in a list: a. I have four friends: Tola, Hannah, Kemi and Jummy.
b.
The man, his wife and their children stole the goat.
c. Maize, rice and yam are now scarce.
d. Red, blue, pink and white are my favourite colours.
e. One table, two chairs and four stools have been made.
• To separate a tag question from the other parts of the sentence.
a.
She is ready, isn’t she?
b.
They didn’t come, did they?
c. We have served them well, haven’t we?
d. She can do it, can’t she?
e. You are loved by her, aren’t you?
• To separate phrase or clauses: a.
Having redeemed his battered image, he decided to run for the presidency.
b.
If you know the truth, say it.
c. Go in, sit down, and eat your food.
d. If I meet you here again, you’ll be in the soup.
e. Because of his carelessness, he lost the contract.
107  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • To separate long main clauses linked by a conjunction such as but, and, or, for, as.
a.
We thought all of them would come to receive us, but only their leader came.
b.
He relies only on the people that come to his house, as there is no one left with him.
c. Do all that is in your power to help others, as there are rewards for doing so.
d. They controlled the people and their assets kept in their care, but one day the people revolted.
e. The man and his wife didn’t wait to get the reply, but they assured us of their willingness to assist us.
• To separate an introductory expression that applies to the entire sentence.
a.
For now, we can’t accept you.
b. Disgraced, he left hurriedly.
c. Yes, we can do it!
d. By God’s grace, I will pass this examination.
e. As for you, however, I will not change the rule.
• To separate a non-defining phrase or clause from the rest of the sentence: a.
The man, who nearly died because of her, has left her finally.
b. Adewole, our faithful friend, gets married next week.
c. The handset, which I actually did not request for, has been stolen.
d. Chief Alaseju, our governor, has lost the ticket.
e. The dog, which is more faithful than some humans, deserves to be honoured.
• To separate short quotation from the rest of the sentence: a.
The pastor said, “Do your best and leave the rest”.
b.
He exclaimed, “I have got her”.
c. James declared, “I am more than conqueror”.
d. The woman lamented, “He carted away everything”.
e. Joseph said, “I will not contest for that post again”.
• To separate written conversation from the other parts of the sentence; it could come before or after ‘said’ or any reporting verb: 108  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING a.
“See me immediately,” she shouted.
b.
“Help them,” requested the man.
c. “Try more,” he said.
d. He inquired, “Where is she?” e. They pledged, “We shall trace them.” 5.
Colon (:) The colon is used in the following ways.
• To introduce a list of items.
a.
The following people are performing today: Adekanmi, Adekemi, and Adeyemi.
b.
She has four children: Peju, Pelumi, Pemisire, Ponmile.
c. I want to travel to three places: Oluponna, Ikire, and Isoko.
d. Adeseke has these virtues: honesty, sincerity, gentleness and diligence.
e. These are our aims: to help others and to serve God.
• To introduce indented quotation: According to Sunday (2011:1403-1404): In the past, some Nigerian musicians went to any extent to express their grievances and rivalry.
There were reported cases of musicians using diabolical means (particularly witchcraft) to make the engines and instruments of the rival musicians to malfunction when they met at occasions.
(Some very rich Nigerians often invite two or more musicians to play simultaneously at their ceremonies.)
• To introduce a phrase or clause that gives more information about the main clause: a.
The woman is dejected: she needs a companion.
b.
We have to go now: it is getting dark.
c. Nobody can deceive me any longer: I am wiser now.
d. Be careful: humans are dangerous.
e. I will succeed: God is on my side.
109  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 6.
Semicolon (;) • The semicolon is used to separate parts of a sentence that already contains comma: a.
Listen to this: watch, pray and help others; take care of your health; and eat sleep, and play well.
b.
Believe in God; trust no one, if you want peace.
c. I am ready; I will help you, as long as I am able.
d. Help us, Oh Lord; we need you, even now.
e. The man will not listen to you; even if you are a prophet, he will snub you.
7.
Apostrophe (’) This mark is used in the following manners: • To indicate letters or figures that have been omitted: i. Can’t (Cannot) ii.
She’s (she is/ it is) iii.
It’s (it is/ it has) iv.
The January of ’77(1977) v. I’m (I am) • It is used with s to indicate possession: i.
My daughter’s friend.
ii.
Saint James’s Church or Saint James’ Church iii.
In Jesus’s name/ In Jesus’ name (Notice that this’s may not be pronounced; that is, the name may also be pronounced as if it does not indicate possession) iv.
The boy’s dress v. Nobody’s problem • Sometimes, with s to form the plural of a figure, an abbreviation, or a letter: i. in the 1960’s/1960s ii.
His t’s are not clear.
iii.
Dot your i’s iv.
Cancel all the p’s.
v. He is in his early 40’s/40s.
110  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 8.
Hyphen (-) It is used in the following ways.
• To form a compound from a prefix and a proper name: i. Pro-Jonathan ii.
Anti-Christ iii.
Pre-Obasanjo era iv.
Pro-Nigeria • To form a compound from two or more words: i. half-hearted ii.
open-ended iii.
easy-going iv.
hot-tempered v. father-in-law • To write compound numbers between 21 and 99 words: i. thirty-four ii.
forty-four iii.
seventy-nine iv.
one hundred and sixty-two v. one million, two thousand, five hundred and eight-one.
• Used after the first part of a word that is divided between one line and the next: We should not be in a hurry to leave this place; so let us be ready to misconstrue issues.
• To separate a prefix ending in vowel from a word beginning with the same vowel: i. co-ordinate ii.
co-operative iii.
pre-eminence iv.
de-emphasise 111  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 10.
Dash (–) The dash is used for the following purposes.
• It is used to separate a comment or an afterthought from the rest of the sentence.
a.
Driving carefully – which is a necessary for safety – should not be taken lightly.
b. I want you – if you care – to listen to this.
c. The man – in my own estimation – is incompetent.
d. Serving God – which I see as a privilege – should not be abused.
e. We shall – in view of his attitude – set up a panel of enquiry.
• It is also used in informal discourses, instead of a colon or a semicolon, to show the summary of what has gone before.
a.
Nobody passed – they all failed.
b.
We have money – we can sponsor you.
c. I got the award today – I am a victor.
d. He doesn’t respect anybody – he is arrogant.
e. Carry out a thorough investigation – the initial report may be wrong.
11.
Quotation marks (“”/ ‘’) It is used in the following ways.
• To enclose words and punctuation in direct speech: a.
“What is your problem?” he asked.
b.
“If I don’t come, what will happen?” he inquired c. “I won’t do it,” he vowed.
d. “I know the way,” he said.
e. “I will repent later,” she promised.
• To enclose the titles of articles, songs, poems, short stories, etc.
a. J.P. Clark’s “Abiku” b. Wole Soyinka’s “Telephone Conversation” c. He wrote, “Now is our time.” d. I like Ebenezer Obey’s “Womanhood.” e. I know “I believe I can fly.” 112  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • To draw attention to a word being used in a special way: a.
We want our share of the “national cake”.
b.
He is looking for “orijo.” c. I know her “source.” d. Seun is not ready for that “gift” e. Many people have “caring” leaders.
• To enclose short quotation and saying: a.
The man said “tough times never last.” b.
He assured us that “the sky is not our limit.” c. I now know that “when the going is good, you will have many friends.” 11.
Dots/ Ellipsis (…) It is used to indicate omission from a quotation or conversation.
a.
…no controversy.
b.
Do it if….
c. We honoured them but….
d. She can read it… we are ready e. Today history is made… our president has confessed to his offences….
12.
Slash/Oblique • This mark is used to separate alternative words or phrases: a.
You and/or your friend b. He/she must be cruel.
c. Male/Female d. Present/Absent e. Yes/No • To separate the different elements in Internet and email addresses: http://www.google.com http://www.yahoo.com 113  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 13.
Brackets/Parentheses These are used in the following ways.
i.
To separate extra information or a comment from the rest of a sentence: a. NTA Ibadan (first television station in Africa) is crying for attention.
b.
Cocoa House (the highest building in Ibadan) is a masterpiece.
c. He feels that Nigerian young politicians (those born after 1960) are incompetent.
• To enclose numbers or letters in a text: The winners are (i) Ademoyewa, (ii) Adeseke and (iii) Adetoke.
• To enclose cross-references.
The law is unambiguous on this (see Section 2.4) 14.
Square Brackets ([ ]) (i)This punctuation mark is used to enclose words inserted to make a quotation grammatically correct: In [those] areas, watch what you do ….
• It is also used in referencing to insert authorial intrusion or additional information.
According to Lucas (2002:119-120), “Printed materials [books in particular] in libraries are superior to the Internet in many ways.” 15.
Italics/Underline i.
It is used to indicate emphasis I will come but you will stay.
• It is also used to indicate title of books, magazine, newspapers, films, paintings, operas, etc.
114  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Shakespeare’s Hamlet.
The Guardian.
Newswatch Opera Wonyosi • It is also employed to indicate foreign words: a.
He does have skonsko.
b. Ebo are kept there every Friday.
4.0 CONCLUSION Good paragraphing, coupled with good use of punctuation marks, facilitates easy understanding of a speech.
A good paragraphing pattern can be achieved through good outlining and close monitoring of the presentation of points.
Ensure that a paragraph contains only one major idea.
A paragraph does not have a specific length.
The purpose and content of the idea expressed are the major determinants of the length of a paragraph.
Unless when they achieve particular effects, avoid constructing one-sentence paragraphs.
5.0 SUMMARY The major features of the paragraph have been examined in this unit.
Various punctuation marks have also been considered.
Constant practice and reading of good materials contribute to proper use of these marks.
Ability to delineate paragraphs is an art that all speechwriters should strive to possess.
This should be supported with appropriate use of punctuation marks.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention the major types of paragraph.
2.
Discuss the features of the major types of paragraph.
3.
Explain the qualities of a good paragraph.
4.
With the aid of appropriate constructions, discuss how to use the following punctuation marks: a. semi-colon b. comma c. full stop d. quotation marks e. exclamation marks f. dash g. hyphen 115  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Babajide, A. O.
(1996).
Introductory English Grammar and Composition.
Ibadan: ECFP.
Mills, P. (1996).
Writing in Action.
London and New York: Routledge.
Sommers, N. & Simon, L. (1993).
The HarperCollins Guide to Writing with Source Book.
New York: HarperCollins College Publisher.
Welsh, J.
(1968).
Guides to Speech Writing: The Professional Techniques for the Regular and Occasional Speakers.
New York: John Wiley and Company.
Komolofe, O. E. & Anurudu, S. (2010).
“Mechanics of Writing”.
In Alo M.A.
and Ogunsiji A. Eds.
English Language Communication Skills: For Academic Purposes.
Ibadan: GSP University of Ibadan.
Pp 115-132.
Oxford Advanced Leaner’s Dictionary (2010).
Oxford: Oxford University Press 8th Edition.
116  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 2 THE SENTENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sentence 3.2 Types of Sentence 3.2.1 Classification Based on Structure/Form 3.2.2 Classification Based on Function 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The sentence is crucial to a successful execution of the speech.
A proper understanding of the types and uses of the sentence will enhance clarity and explicitness.
What some take to be a sentence is actually not a sentence.
Therefore, in this section, we shall examine sentence in some details.
The major types of sentence shall be discussed and illustrated.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the sentence • identify types of sentence • give types of sentence types.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definitions of Sentence There are different parameters used in defining the sentence.
Using the perspective of orthography, a sentence is a group of related words that begin with a capital letter and ends with a full stop.
This definition is inadequate as there are some structures that follow this format but are not regarded as sentences, perhaps, due to the error of the writer.
Another perspective from which a sentence can be considered is its position in the grammatical hierarchy.
A sentence is the highest 117  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING grammatical unit of a language.
Below it is the clause.
From the angle of meaning, a sentence is the unit of grammar that expresses a complete thought/idea.
It could be a word or a group of words.
This definition is more appropriate than the others, as it focuses on idea and thought.
3.2 Types of Sentence There are two major approaches to classifying a sentence: form/structure and function.
3.2.1 Classification Based on Structure/Form Sentence classification based on form/structure considers two parameters: 1.
Number of clauses 2.
Types of clauses There are four types of sentence based on structure or form: a.
Simple b.
Compound c. Complex d. Compound-complex Simple Sentence A simple sentence has a main clause and no subordinate clause.
This means that it has only one finite verb.
Examples: 1.
Cocks crow at dawn.
2.
I am not ready for that now.
3.
The man in that room is not committed to thorough scholarship.
4.
I have experienced a lot of disappointment in life.
5.
The man and his concubines are waiting for the man of God.
Compound Sentence A compound sentence consists of at least two main clauses and no subordinate clause.
This implies that it has at least two finite verbs.
The clause could be joined by coordinating conjunction, comma, or semi- colon.
118  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Examples: 1.
We have fought and won.
2.
Deborah accepted her fault but she did not apologize.
3.
Molade peeped, saw them, and screamed.
4.
Man proposes; God disposes.
5.
The man has arrived but his wife is yet to come.
Complex Sentence A complex sentence comprises at least two main clauses and at least a subordinate clause.
Examples: 1.
If you dare me, I will deal with you.
2.
Don’t go into marriage unless you are fully prepared.
3.
Because she knew her right, she did not succumb to the man’s threat even though nobody encouraged her.
4.
Appreciate people whenever you have the opportunity.
5.
Except you rely on God, your life may be miserable.
Compound-complex sentence This sentence contains at least a main clause and at least a subordinate clause.
In other words, it is a combination of a compound sentence and a complex sentence.
A simple way of forming a compound-complex sentence is to add at least a subordinate clause to a compound sentence.
Examples: 1.
We entered and sat down although she didn’t expect us.
2.
Provided you are serious, I will come and teach you if you invite me.
3.
I can accept you into the group and groom you for the next competition if you are ready to cooperate with us.
4.
Since you have disappointed me once, I am neither willing to partner with you nor recommend you to anybody.
5.
Today I have known the truth and I am eager to change if the conditions on ground are favourable.
3.2.2 Classification Based on Function This parameter considers the communicative role a sentence plays.
There are four types based on this criterion: 119  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING a. Declarative b.
Imperative c. Interrogative d. Exclamatory Declarative Sentence A declarative sentence makes a statement of fact, which may be true or false, in the negative, or in the positive.
Such a sentence may structurally conform to any of the patterns discussed above.
Examples: 1.
We are all gullible.
2.
Nobody knows tomorrow.
3.
We can’t rely on people like you.
4.
All of us will soon see that you are a sellout.
5.
The teacher is not to blame for his lack-lustre performance.
Imperative sentence This sentence gives a command, makes an entreaty or a request.
It does not have a covert subject because its subject, which is usually “you,” is often deleted because it is understood.
Structurally, it could have any of the forms discussed above.
Examples: 1.
Get out of my sight.
2.
Don’t ever tell me that again.
3.
May God save us from exploiters.
4.
Let’s get out of here immediately.
5.
Never trust a man like him.
Interrogative sentence This sentence is used for asking questions.
It usually ends with a question mark (?).
There are different types of interrogative sentence.
1.
Polar (yes/no) question 2.
“Wh”-type question 3.
Rhetorical question 4.
Polite question/mild imperative 120  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Polar (yes/no) question This question requires a yes or a no response.
Examples: 1.
Is she ready to marry a poor man?
2.
Does she know where you are?
3.
Are we safe here?
4.
Can you do the work next week?
5.
Have we seen this car before?
“Wh”-type question This type of question begins with any of the interrogative pronouns: “what”, “why”, “when”, “where”, “whose”, “how”.
Examples: 1.
What can I do for you?
2.
How far can your strength carry you?
3.
Where did you go yesterday?
4.
Whose daughter is she?
5.
Why is she not here now?
Rhetorical question This type of question is used for only dramatic or emphatic purpose; it does not require any response.
It is asked only to establish what is already known or accepted.
It is a way of stating the obvious.
Examples: 1. Who does not want peace of mind?
2.
How can one please humans?
3. Who is that person that will betray himself?
4.
Where else can we find refuge?
5.
What is it that God has not done for us?
Polite question (mild imperative) This is a command that disguises like a request before disguising as a question.
It is an imperative that has been redressed so that it is not bald.
It could contain “please”.
121  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Examples: 1.
Could you please shut the door?
2.
Shall we pray?
3.
Shall we be on our feet?
4.
Could you post this letter for me?
5.
Shall we proceed to the Vice Chancellor’s office?
Exclamatory Sentence This sentence expresses the strong feeling of a person.
It looks like a question because it often begins with interrogative pronoun, but they are different both in form and in function.
An exclamatory sentence does not have subject-verb inversion.
Besides, it ends with an exclamation mark.
Examples: 1.
What a beautiful lady you are!
2.
How fortunate we are!
3.
What a powerful message it was!
4.
How exceptional you were on that day!
5.
What a disappointment to this generation she is!
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Differentiate between an exclamatory sentence and an interrogative sentence.
2.
How is a complex sentence different from a compound-complex sentence?
4.0 CONCLUSION The sentence is the highest grammatical unit.
The various types of sentence can be employed to add flavour to your speech.
Try to vary the sentence types you use to prevent the speech from being monotonous.
The length of a grammatical structure is not what makes it a sentence.
The essentials of a sentence discussed above should be looked out for in the sentences in your speech.
The quality of the sentences used in the speech influences the meaning-decoding process.
This is why it is important to properly edit the speech before it is delivered.
122  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 5.0 SUMMARY Speech thrives on good sentence construction to have impact.
The major classifications of sentence considered in this unit should guide you in determining the status of your constructions.
By now, it should be easier for you to crosscheck your speech for accuracy of constructions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give two sentences to illustrate the following types of sentence: a. compound sentence b. imperative sentence c. declarative sentence d. compound-complex sentence e. complex sentence 2.
Discuss the features of the following sentence types a. complex sentence b. compound-complex sentence c. simple sentence d. compound sentence 3.
Identify the sentences in the conclusion of the unit (Section 4.0 above) based on structure.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Babajide, A.
(2010).“Tense, Aspect and Concord”.
In Alo M.A.
and Ogunsiji A. Eds.
English Language communication skills: For Academic Purposes.
Ibadan: GSP University of Ibadan.
Pp 218-237.
Babajide, A.O.
(1996).
Introductory English Grammar and Composition.
Ibadan: ECFP.
Bloor, T. & Bloor, M. (1995).
Functional Sentence Analysis: A Hallidayan Approach.
London: Edward Arnold.
Kane, T.S.
& Peters, L. J.
(1966).
A Practical Rhetoric of Expository Prose.
Oxford University Press.
Ogunsiji, A.
& Sunday, A.
(2010) “Grammatical units”.
In Alo M.A.
and Ogunsiji A. Eds.
English Language Communication Skills: For Academic Purposes.
Ibadan: GSP University of Ibadan.
Pp 133-161.
123  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Oyeleye, A.L.
(2009) “Academic Style Guidelines and the Gathering of Research Information”.
In Oyeleye L. Ed.
Use of English: A Tertiary Coursebook: Ibadan: Agbo Areo Publishers.
Pp 125- 133.
Oyewo, O.O.
(2009) “The Paragraph”.
In Oyeleye L. Ed.
Use of English: A Tertiary Coursebook: Ibadan: Agbo Areo Publishers.
Pp 134-140.
Sunday, A.B.
(2009a).
“Concord and Agreement”.
In Oyeleye L. Ed.
Use of English: A Tertiary Coursebook: Ibadan: Agbo Areo Publishers.
Pp 58-81.
Sunday, A.B.
(2009b).
“Adverbs and Adverbials”.
In Oyeleye L. Ed.
Use of English: A Tertiary Coursebook: Ibadan: Agbo Areo Publishers.
Pp 98-114.
Winterowd, W.R. (1975).
The Contemporary Writer.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Withrow, J.
(1987).
Effective Writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
124  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 3 TENSE, ASPECT AND CONCORD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Aspect 3.2 Tense 3.2.1 Present Tense 3.2.2 Past Tense 3.2.3 Future Tense 3.3 Concord 3.3.1 Subject-Verb Agreement 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Tense, aspect and concord are important concepts in any language.
They are pivotal to appropriate use of language.
Many users of English as a second language (L ) often encounter some problems in finding the most 2 appropriate expressions to use in some contexts.
A good number of L 2 English users construct expressions that fall far below the required standard.
This is because they do not understand the principles guiding the use of concepts such as tense, aspect and concord.
In this unit, these three concepts are examined.
The principles guiding the use of each are also discussed; the interconnection among them is also examined.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define aspect • define tense • identify types of tense • explain concord.
125  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Aspect Aspect is a grammatical category of verbs that considers the quality of the action of the verb independent of the tense.
Simply put, aspect means the range of meanings expressed by the verb.
In English, aspect is broadly categorised into progressive and perfective aspects.
The progressive aspect takes the affix ‘ing’, while the perfective aspect takes ‘have’ (or its derivatives – has and had.
These aspectual expressions combine with other verbal elements to produce different tenses.
3.2 Tense Tense means the linguistic way of expressing time dimensions.
Each language has its own peculiar way of doing this.
There are three main time dimensions: past, present, and future.
English has three tenses: past, present, and future.
However, some scholars have argued that English does not have future tense.
They premise their argument on the fact that English does not morphologically show the future tense.
We will not go into the argument for or against this view.
We will adopt the traditional view that holds that English has three tenses, because it serves well our intension in this course.
Each of these tenses could be expressed in four different ways: simple, progressive/continuous, perfect, and perfect progressive.
To realise these different forms, the verb often takes some inflections, auxiliary verbs, and aspectual markers, as the case may be.
Before considering these tenses in some detail, let us examine “aspect.” 3.2.1 Present Tense Simple Present Tense This tense uses the infinitive (without to) form of the verb.
If the subject is third person singular, s, es, and ies are added, as appropriate.
This tense is used to express the following: • Present habitual action i.
She comes here weekly.
ii.
They pray every night.
iii.
He fast weekly.
iv.
Deborah sings daily.
v. These people plan evil.
126  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • Present occurrence/state of being i. I know Wumi.
ii.
The boy is insolent.
iii.
Paul and Peter are diligent.
iv.
Nike is humble.
v. They seem confused.
• Document literary works, holy books, and constitution.
i.
In The Road, Soyinka emphasizes communication.
ii.
The Bible presents God from different angles.
iii.
Our constitution is defective.
iv.
This poem has enjambment.
v. The novel makes a good reading.
• Run commentary i.
Now Okocha is ready to fire a shot.
ii.
Kanu gets the ball; passes it to Aghowa; Aghowa dribbles one, dribbles two; aims at the post; oh no, over the bar!
iii.
The President goes to the lectern to read his address.
• Future occurrence i. Lawale gets married next month.
ii.
The programme begins tomorrow.
iii.
The spies leave for the place tonight.
iv.
My examination holds soon.
v. Our review end next year.
Present Progressive Tense This tense uses a present auxiliary verb with the present participle form of the main verb.
It is used to express the following.
• An ongoing action/event i.
We are reading our books.
ii.
Osarume is waiting for you.
iii.
Olusayo is writing the memo.
iv.
Pelumi and Yetunde are dancing naked.
v. Nobody is cooking your food.
127  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • A future occurrence i.
They are going to the altar soon.
ii.
Our boy is coming back next year.
iii.
My friend is doing the work tomorrow.
iv.
We are planting the seeds next month.
v. Juliana is presenting next.
Present Perfect Tense The present perfect tense uses the perfective aspectual marker have (or has) with the past participle form of the verb.
This tense is used to express: An event that has started and has been completed but has not been overtaken by another event i.
We have done the work.
ii.
Ogazie has eaten your food.
iii.
Ozioma has written her dissertation.
iv.
Chioma and Chuka have not seen the man.
v. This is the first time that I have come here.
Present Perfect Progressive Tense This tense is a combination of the present progressive tense and the present perfect tense.
Therefore, it uses have/has + been + past participle verb to express an event/action that has started and is still in progress as at the time of speaking/writing.
i.
The men have been praying for you.
ii.
Jumoke has been cooking your food.
iii.
Samson has been reading the wrong thing.
iv.
They have been deceiving you.
v. Tolulope has been expecting Temitayo.
3.2.2 Past Tense Simple Past Tense This tense uses the past form of the verb to show: • Past action i.
Joke read the address.
128  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING ii.
Those boys brought the car.
iii.
They hit the right mark.
Iv.
Joshua went there.
v. She did the evil • Past habitual action i.
He used to go there everyday.
ii.
She often played the guitar.
iii.
He often did it.
iv.
Damilola usually served us.
v. Kate always followed that lady.
• Impossible wish i.
If I were you, I won’t marry her.
ii.
If I were God, I will kill all evil people.
iii.
If you were that boy, you wouldn’t have returned that money.
iv.
If she were your daughter, she would have catered for you.
v. They will hoard the air, if they controlled life.
Past Progressive Tense The past progressive tense combines a past auxiliary verb with the present participle form of the main verb to indicate the following.
• An event/action that was going on at a particular time in the past i.
He was singing when I saw him.
ii.
They were shouting when we caught them.
iii.
As I was reading, they were planning how to escape.
iv.
While she was grinding the pepper, Yomi was washing the pot.
v. Nifemi and Abiodun were sweeping the floor while Tunde and Bidemi were playing.
• Past habitual action/relationship i. Sayo and Gbemisola were always reading together last year.
ii.
He was always taking that lady out last month.
iii.
Kunle was usually singing that anthem.
iv.
The boys were always waiting for you there.
v. I was always praying for two hours daily 129  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • Impossible wish i.
If pen were talking yours would have protested.
ii.
If humans were flying, I would have got home now.
iii.
If doors were crying, that door would have cried uncontrollably Past Perfect Tense This tense makes use of had and the past progressive form of the main verb to express the following.
• Indicate a past action that took place before another past action i.
No sooner had he gone than I arrived.
ii.
She had slept before I prayed.
iii.
I thought you had paid her.
iv.
Nobody had attempted this before your arrival.
v. When I arrived they had slept.
• Express regret i.
If I had known I would have stayed.
ii.
Had he come, we would have protected him.
iii.
If you had been told, you wouldn’t have left.
iv.
She would have not married you if she had known your secret.
v. The girls wouldn’t have undressed if they had known you plan.
Past Perfect Progressive Tense This tense uses had + been + past participle verb to show an action/event that had started and was in progress before another past action.
i.
They had been singing before they joined our choir.
ii.
We had been praying here before you built your church.
iii.
They had been packing the belongings before we stopped them.
iv.
Everybody had been writing the play before you met them.
v. Similolu had been laughing before you came in.
3.2.3 Future Tense Future occurrences can be expressed using either the simple present tense or the present progressive tense, as mentioned earlier.
However, by a combination of will/shall and other auxiliary verbs with the main verb different future tenses can be derived.
130  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Simple Future Tense This tense uses will/shall with the main verb to express an incident or action that is expected to take place in the future.
i. I will not go there.
ii.
She will meet us.
iii.
They shall help us.
iv.
Dayo will try that option.
v. The boy will run away.
Future Progressive Tense This tense employs will/shall and ‘be’ as auxiliary verbs before the main verb.
The tense expresses an event or action that is expected to be taking place at a given time in the future.
i. I shall be going to Lagos next week ii.
She will be addressing the press tomorrow.
iii.
Tomipe will be completing her programme next year.
iv All of them shall be waiting for you there.
v. My sister will be getting married next Saturday.
Future Perfect Tense The future perfect tense deploys shall/ will+have+been as auxiliary verb before the past participle form of the main verb.
It indicates an event or action that is expected to have been completed at a particular time in the future.
i.
The guilty lawyers will have been derobed by this time next month.
ii.
Yemi shall have been given the award by 7:30 pm tomorrow.
iii.
Tofunmi will have been crowned the queen by this time today.
iv.
Our lecturer shall have been appointed by this time next week.
v. Those ladies will have been discovered by this time next year.
Future Perfect Progressive Tense The future perfect tense deploys shall/ will+have+been as auxiliary verb before the present participle form of the main verb.
It indicates an action or event that is expected to have started and be in progress at a given time in the future.
131  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING i. Tricia will have been taking her final examination by this time next month.
ii.
The students shall have been clearing your office by 9.00 am tomorrow.
iii.
We shall have been discussing with the president by 2.00pm next Monday.
iv.
Funke shall have been feeding the chicken by this time tomorrow.
v. Those boys will have been doing the assignment by this time on Wednesday.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is tense?
2.
What is aspect?
3.
Differentiate between tense and aspect.
3.3 Concord Concord is the grammatical notion used to denote the agreement among the components of a sentence.
3.3.1 Subject-Verb Agreement There are two main types of concord: grammatical concord and notional concord.
Grammatical Concord This is the concord that strictly adheres to the principle of the verb agreeing with the subject.
• A singular subject takes a singular verb.
i.
The leader of the boys is around.
ii.
She knows me.
iii.
Theophilus cares.
iv.
The man sings well.
v. Bolu fights a lot.
• A plural subject takes a plural verb.
i.
The minutes have been adopted.
ii.
We are ready.
iii.
Our governors are corrupt.
iv.
Many people deceive themselves.
v. We need a good leader.
132  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • A compound subject that is plural in meaning takes a plural verb.
i.
The man and his wife are around.
ii.
Seun and Sola follow us.
iii.
The boy and the girl are unserious.
iv.
That man and his friend control the children.
v. Our teacher and his daughter play the keyboard.
• Indefinite pronouns used as subjects take singular verbs.
i.
Nobody cares for you.
ii.
Everybody sees them.
iii.
Something is missing.
iv.
Everything is wrong with you.
v. Nothing stops you from going there.
Notional Concord This is concerned with the idea being expressed; grammatical markers are set aside in this case.
• “A number --- ” takes a plural verb.
i.
A number of boys are missing.
ii.
A number of us are insensitive.
iii.
A number of books were lost last week.
iv.
A number of magazines are biased.
v. A number of ladies want good husbands.
But “The number ---” takes a singular verb.
i.
The number of my cars is now twenty-two.
ii.
The number of his enemies has increased.
iii.
The number of our departments has reduced.
iv.
The number of her grammatical errors has not decreased.
v. The number of their friends is three.
• “One of ---” takes a singular verb.
i.
One of the ladies is beautiful.
ii.
One of the men is around.
iii.
One of the cars has been stolen.
iv.
One of the eggs is rotten.
v. One of the rogues has apologized.
133  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • “One of --- who/whom/that etc.
---” takes a plural verb after the relative pronoun and a singular verb for the main clause.
i.
One of the girls who follow him is a Ghanaian.
ii.
One of the women who respect us has travelled.
iii.
One of the cars which are red belongs to me.
iv.
One of our sisters who tell stories is in London.
v. One of your friends who believe in hard work knows you.
• “Many a/an ---” takes a singular verb.
i.
Many a teacher is lazy.
ii.
Many a politician is corrupt.
iii.
Many a lady is gullible.
iv.
Many a pastor is fake.
v. Many a driver is incompetent.
• Measurements of time, weight, capacity take a singular verb, because each measurement is seen as a unit.
i. Thirty minutes is enough for this exercise.
ii.
Four litres of petrol was wasted.
iii.
Seventy kilogrammes of pork has been brought.
iv.
Twelve kilogrammes of garri is in your cupboard.
v. Thirty-four litres of palm oil is missing a.
A compound subject that is singular in meaning takes a singular verb.
i.
Rice and beans is good for lunch.
ii.
Bejide and Sons is selling shares.
iii.
Akinola and Associates is handling the case.
iv.
Dambaba and Sons helps northerners.
v. Agnes and Co. is ready to assist us.
b.
When “in collaboration with”, “together with” etc.
are used after a subject, the verb still agrees with the subject.
i.
The president, in company of his ministers, comes here today.
ii.
Our church, in collaboration with NTA and AIT, organizes a two-day marriage seminar.
iii.
The man, in company of his friends, is going to the pastor.
iv.
James, alongside the three of us, is planning the reception.
v. The pastor, in conjunction with the media houses in the state, is planning the rally.
134  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING c. When a premodifier is used for a coordinated subject, a singular verb follows.
i.
The founder and pastor of the church is too dubious.
ii The father and mentor of Kunle is a disciplinarian.
iii.
My friend and confidant knows you.
iv.
Her teacher and sponsor hates her.
v. Your trainer and captain trusts you.
d. When a correlative conjunction is used, the subject close to the main verb dictates the verb to be used.
i.
Neither you nor I am guilty.
ii.
Either the man or his concubines have contracted that disease.
iii.
Either the boys or the girl keeps the record.
iv.
Neither the commissioners nor the governor has seen this.
v. Neither Thomas nor his antagonists speak the truth.
4.0 CONCLUSION Paying closer attention to the principles guiding the use of certain linguistic concepts will help us express our views in an intelligible way.
As a good speechwriter, get acquainted with how to use concepts like tense, aspect, and concord.
This will enrich your speech.
There are other types of agreement in language, such as pronoun- antecedent agreement.
We have focused on only subject-verb agreement in this unit because most of the principles that apply to subject-verb agreement could assist other types of agreement.
Understanding aspect, tense and concord is crucial for effective language use.
When the right tense is not used, different interpretations can be given to the sentence.
Pay particular attention to tense shift in the same sentence and the same paragraph.
If the shift is inappropriate, avoid it.
5.0 SUMMARY Three cardinal concepts: tense, aspect, and concord, have engaged the attention of this unit.
The discussion centres on the way aspect assists tense, and how both influence concord.
Some rules of concord have also been given.
These rules are not to be memorised.
Rather, they are to guide you in the way you construct sentences.
The next unit will show you how to use language effectively.
135  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differentiate between grammatical concord and notional concord.
2.
Discuss the various ways future occurrences can be expressed in English.
3.
Explain how the knowledge of concord can assist a speechwriter.
4.
Explain the concord rules that address singular subjects.
5.
Discuss the use of the present tense.
6.
How is the past tense used?
7.
Discuss the concord rules that treat plural subjects.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Babajide, A.O.
(1998).
Aspects of Grammar in the Use of English.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden.
Quirk, R.; Greenbaum, G.; Leech, G. & Svartvik, J.
(1972).
A Grammar of Contemporary English.
London: Longman.
Babajide, A.
(2010).“Tense, Aspect and Concord”.
In Alo M.A.
and Ogunsiji A. Eds.
English Language Communication Skills: For Academic Purposes.
Ibadan: GSP University of Ibadan.
Pp 218-237.
Ogunsiji, A.
& Sunday, A.
(2010).
“Grammatical units”.
In Alo M.A.
and Ogunsiji A. Eds.
English Language Communication Skills: For academic purposes.
Ibadan: GSP University of Ibadan.
Pp 133-161.
Sunday, A.
B.
(2009a).
“Concord and Agreement”.
In Oyeleye L. Ed.
Use of English: A Tertiary Coursebook: Ibadan: Agbo Areo Publishers.
Pp.
58-81.
Sunday, A.B.
(2009b).
“Adverbs and Adverbials”.
In Oyeleye L. Ed.
Use of English: A Tertiary Coursebook: Ibadan: Agbo Areo Publishers.
Pp 98-114.
136  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 4 CONCISION IN SPEECH WRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concision 3.1.1 Deadwood 3.2 Achieving Emphasis in the Sentence 3.2.1 Other Ways of Achieving Emphasis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is not enough to know sentence types and construct appropriate sentences.
Some activities should be performed while the speech is being written and even after it has been written.
These activities are meant to make the speech suitable for the audience.
A good speechwriter will say exactly what he/she want to say in the clearest and most economical manner.
In this unit, we shall consider concision in speech writing, paying particular attention to things to achieve concision in speech.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define concision in speech • explain what deadwood is • explain how to achieve emphasis in speech.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concision According to Kane and Peters (1966:3), communication occurs when one successfully uses words (or some other set of signs) to reveal one’s mind to other people, honestly and clearly.
Communication must be distinguished from manipulation, which is using words in order to make people do what one wants without revealing what is really in one’s mind.
137  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Concision and brevity are closely related but they are different.
Brevity is absolute, while concision is relative.
Concision is therefore brevity relative to purpose.
If the number of the words in a sentence could be reduced without changing the substance of its meaning, such a sentence is not concise (Kane & Peters, 1966:281).
3.1.1 Deadwood This refers to any structure that is not essential to the meaning the writer has in mind.
According to Kane and Peters (1996:284), deadwood arises through the following.
1.
The fallacy of verbal profundity: This is the notion that just because an expression looks profound it must say something.
This is a false sense of what is significant.
2.
The desire to endow a mundane subject with a heightened dignity or elegance/false elegance.
3.
Confusion about what one’s point really is.
4.
Ignorance or vocabulary limitation, particularly as regards registers.
5.
Excessive caution; not being certain: This reflects in expressions like ‘it seems’; it ‘appears’.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is concision in speech?
2.
Define deadwood.
3.2 Achieving Emphasis in the Sentence A speechwriter needs to construct his/her sentences in such a way that his/her emphasis is clear.
This will help the reader not make mistakes concerning the emphasis of the speech.
Emphasis in sentence could be general or special.
General emphasis could be achieved in the following ways.
1.
Imperative sentence 2.
Short sentence 3.
Inverted sentence 4.
Convoluted sentence 5.
Participatory construction 6.
Period sentence 7.
Fragment 8.
Rhetorical question 9.
Syntactic repetition 138  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 10.
Negative – positive restatement 11.
Parataxis (Kane & Peters, 1966:312-330) Imperative sentence Imperative sentences are inherently emphatic.
However, a major problem with them is that if they are not redressed, they are impolite and may thus affect the relationship between you and your audience.
• Do not follow corrupt leaders.
• Do not accept that offer.
• Keep away from them.
• Do not defend her.
The imperative sentences above may be seen as impolite some people.
However, by adding please to them, they could be made less bald.
• Please, do not follow corrupt leaders.
• Please, do not accept that offer.
• Please, keep away from them.
• Please, do not defend her.
Short sentence Short sentences are easier to comprehend and often stay in the mind of the reader longer.
They are more effective when they contain vivid imagery.
However, the entire speech should not be made up of only short sentences.
Vary the sentences, depending on your audience and the purpose of the speech.
Inverted sentence This could be in form of rearranging the subject-verb-object (SVO) order, and/or moving the adverbial forward.
• In front of you lies the answer.
• Tomorrow, done is the deed.
• This I will do.
• In God, we rely.
• Faithful I will remain until my husband comes back.
139  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Convoluted sentence This involves inserting a subordinate construction into the middle of a main clause.
The inserted element is like an afterthought.
• By helping you, even though you don’t deserve it, we have proved our love for you; • Reading their countenance, he left hurriedly.
• You, among all other things, should learn to appreciate God.
• She will, every other thing being equal, survive your schemes.
Anticipatory construction The sentence begins with structure, which anticipates the actual subject, which is pushed to the end (Kane & Peters, 1996:318).
• It was our undoing – giving them the code • It was your aloofness that we targeted.
Periodic sentence This is a sentence in which the thought is not completed until the end of the sentence (Kane & Peters, 1966:318).
It does not demand inversion, anticipation or interruption.
It may involve delaying the action of the subject by giving full details of the subject.
• Considering your unseriousness, which has seriously affected your progress in life, we cannot help you.
• Our plan, which has jolted our enemies, will be unravelled soon.
Fragment This construction does not satisfy the conventional definition of a sentence.
• Desperate.
Bold.
Unrepentantly committed to the vision.
As he moved toward the hillside, he fired several shots to the air.
This kind of construction is often found in literary text.
However, they can be used in speech to achieve some stylistic effects.
This does not, however, mean that the speech should be full of such kind of construction.
140  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Syntactic repetition This is repetition of the same sentence or clausal construction.
It is akin to parallelism.
- He has seen the inexplicable.
He has tasted the uneatable.
He has approached the unapproachable.
He has done the unfathomable.
Negative-positive restatement This involves saying that something “is not X but is Y.” - It is not that we are tired but rather that we are unwilling.
- She is not the leader but she is ready to champion the cause.
Parataxis This is the putting together of words or constructions instead of using a conjunction to join them.
- They are hungry; they didn’t ask for help - To err is human; to forgive is divine.
- Man proposes; God disposes.
- United we stand; divided we fall.
3.2.1 Other Ways of Achieving Emphasis Apart from these general ways of achieving emphasis, there are some special ways of achieving emphasis.
Kane & Peters (1966:320-334) identifies the following forms of special emphasis.
1.
Positioning 2.
Isolation 3.
Repetition 4.
Balance and antithesis 5.
Use of modifiers 6.
Polysyndeton and asyndeton 7.
Ellipsis Positioning This involves putting the item to be emphasised in the sentence-initial or sentence-final positions.
This is to make it conspicuous, but they could also be in any part of the sentence 141  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING - Certainly, I will see you.
- You will get the job, definitely - I agree with you, absolutely.
- She will not greet somebody here, Faderera.
Isolation This involves cutting an item from the movement of the sentence.
It could be at any position in the sentence.
The major difference between isolation and positioning is that isolation, in most cases, results from interrupted movement.
- Nobody, disciplined and focused, will marry such a lady.
- We know what we they want, a bribe.
Repetition This has to do with repeating the important idea in the sentence.
The main intention is to make the idea last in the memory of the audience.
• Gentlemen are no longer gentle.
• Our honourables must behave as honourables.
• He is a speaker that cannot speak for himself.
Balance and Antithesis A balanced sentence splits into two roughly equal halves.
When the balanced terms form a sharp contrast, they are called antithesis.
(Kane & Peters, 1966:328).
- We worked, but they slept.
- Honesty pays; dishonesty ruins.
Use of modifiers Modifiers serve as intensifiers.
Examples are great, so, very, much, terribly furiously.
They assist in giving the degree of the action being described by the verb.
- We were so astonished that we lost concentration.
- She was terribly hurt by his former lover.
- Seun furiously left the occasion.
- Timothy likes women too much.
Polysyndeton and Asyndeton 142  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Polysyndeton is a method of listing items and separating each item by and (with or without a comma before each and).
The emphasis thus falls equally and heavily on each item.
Asyndeton is a method of using no coordinating word between the items; they are separated only by a comma or semicolon.
The stress is lighter here than in polysyndeton.
- He came and read and disappeared.
- He came, read, disappeared.
Ellipsis This is omission of some word.
The words removed must be recoverable from the rest of the sentence, particularly before the word omitted.
This is the only way by which the audience can make meaning of the sentence.
- The man helped the girls and the woman the boys - They were honoured and we disgraced.
Mechanical Devices Device like capitalisation, italicisation, underlining, emboldening can be used to foreground some items in the sentences.
This will make the attention of the audience to be quickly drawn to such expression.
- You have to monitor them.
- The boy has a FATHER.
- The men and women here know nothing.
4.0 CONCLUSION Concision is not easy to achieve for a verbose writer.
It is not the number of words used in a speech that makes it effective.
Shortness of sentences relative to purpose is a virtue in speech writing.
Conscious efforts need to be made to cut out irrelevant items from the speech.
This can also be achieved by enriching your vocabulary, so that you can say many things with few words.
This is what most poets do.
This does not, however, mean that you turn the speech to a poem.
Read good materials and learn new words to make you have many alternative ways of expressing the same thing.
Effectiveness in speech writing comes in different ways, one of which is concision in language use.
It is not only good points that make good speech.
Appropriate language, concisely deployed, makes the ideas easy 143  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING for the audience to identify.
The audience must be borne in mind at every stage of the writing endeavour.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed ways of achieving concision in speech.
It emphasises the need to avoid deadwoods in speech.
The major claim of this unit is that wordiness adds no value to a speech.
Word economy relative to purpose is the hallmark of good speech.
The next unit will address issues related to this.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the effects of deadwood on speech.
2.
Discuss what constitute deadwood in writing.
3.
List and explain six way of achieving emphasis in a speech.
4.
Explain the ways of achieving special emphasis in speech.
5.
Discuss the effectiveness of fragments and periodic sentences.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alo, M.A.
(2010).“Understanding Lexical Structure”.
In Alo, M.A.
& Ogunsiji, A. Eds.
English Language Communication Skills: For academic purposes.
Ibadan: GSP University of Ibadan.
Pp 115-132.
Babajide, A.O.
(1996).
Introductory English grammar and composition.
Ibadan: ECFP.
Bloor, T. & Bloor, M. (1995).
Functional Sentence Analysis: A Hallidayan Approach.
London: Edward Arnold.
Kane, T.S.
& Peters, L. J.
(1966).
A Practical Rhetoric of expository prose.
Oxford University Press.
Winterowd, W.R. (1975).
The Contemporary Writer.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Withrow J.
(1987).
Effective Writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
144  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 5 FINE-TUNING THE SPEECH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Techniques of Fine-Tuning the Speech 3.2 Features of Effective Diction 3.2.1 What Makes Effective Diction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Effectiveness in speech relies on the linguistic choices made by the writer.
Language is made up of many systems.
This affords the language users the opportunity of making choices out of the alternatives that the language provides.
The choices made should be informed by many factors.
Most prominent of these are the audience and the topic.
Before the speech is written and after it has been written, some steps can be taken to fine-tune it.
This is a form of packaging, which could influence the reception of the speech.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the techniques of fine-tuning the speech • explain how to achieve effectiveness in diction.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Techniques of Fine-Tuning the Speech The speech can be fine-tuned using the following techniques.
1.
Use parallel structure: These are grammatical structures that have similar structure/patterns.
Examples: - He believes in fighting injustice and ensuring decency.
- Boys will help you on the farm.
Girls will stay at home.
Both of them will assist you in life.
145  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 2.
Use active verbs: Except you want to deliberately obfuscate the agent, use active verbs to state your points, particularly on topic sentence.
This is because “the main points should be a key source of forward motion throughout your speech” (Powers 1993:109).
3.
Use key word labels: To make the audience remember easily the points that are associated with the key words, use brief key word names to each of the main points.
4.
Use mnemonic devices: A mnemonic device is a formula or pattern meant to help aid memory.
Acronyms, alliteration, alphabetical succession are useful mnemonic devices (Powers, 1993:111).
Acronyms are the initial letters of a name that could be pronounced as a single word.
Examples include the characteristics of living things shortened to NIGER D (Movement, Respiration, Nutrition, Irritability, Growth, Excretion, Reproduction, Death) and NOUN (National Open University of Nigeria).
Alliteration is the repetition of the initial sounds in a line.
Below are further examples: a.
Acronyms Operation PUSH Pray Until Something Happens b. Alliteration These are the three F’s of his life: Fame Favour Faith c. Alphabetical succession These are the ABC of success: ASPIRE to greatness.
BELIEVE in yourself.
CONCENTRATE on your plans.
146  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 5.
Avoid using sexist pronouns: Some people now see the use of masculine pronouns he/him/his as male linguistic domination and a form of male chauvinism.
This has often created confusion.
Although some people who use these masculine pronouns claim that they use them in the generic sense, many feminist do not agree with this.
There are three main alternatives: 1.
Using she/he, s/he, or he/she: Some female writers prefer mentioning she before he.
For example, “Everyone should mind her/his business.” 2.
Use of plural third person pronoun: they, them, their Everyone should mind their business.
Even Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (2010) use them, their, and they for indefinite pronouns.
3.
Use of you When you are ready, you can take your portion.
4.
Use of one, one’s, and oneself One should cater for one’s family.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is fine-tuning the speech?
2.
What is the relevance of fine-tuning the speech?
3.2 Effective Diction Words are building blocks for both spoken and written communication.
The words an individual chooses constitute that persons diction.
The effectiveness of verbal communication depends on the effectiveness of diction.
Some people say or write what they do not mean, while some people mean what they do not say or write.
Any natural and living language has countless words from which utterances are made.
These words have different meaning relations, such as synonymy, antonymy, and hyponymy, among others.
A language user faces the task of choosing the words that adequately capture his/her ideas.
This task is not as simple as it appears, as language is not a perfect vehicle for conveying human thoughts; there are certain thoughts that words in the language cannot sufficiently represent (Kane & Peters, 1966:518).
This being the situation, a language user has to carefully choose words that adequately convey his/her intention.
This choice depends on the temperament of the writer, the context, purpose of writing, and the audience (Kane & Peters, 1966:518; Winterowd1975:396; Mills, 1996:207).
147  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.2.1 What Makes Effective Diction Effective diction has certain features.
Some of them are examined below.
Clarity Kane and Peters (1967:518) claim that if a reader understands a word in the sense in which the writer has used it, such a word is clear.
A language user must avoid ambiguity as much as possible.
If you lack adequate knowledge of the subject you are addressing, you are likely to make the whole issue unclear.
If you do not have adequate knowledge of the subject, do not write on it.
If you have already commenced writing on such a subject, stop and make further research before you continue writing.
As much as the subject permits, a language user should use concrete terms instead of abstract terms to express such subject.
Always consider your audience.
Any word that will unduly task the brain of the decoder should be avoided.
There is no sense in using big words that will obscure the meaning being conveyed.
A good writer will revise his/her writing many times, using the dictionary when necessary, to ensure that obscurity is virtually non-existent.
Let us consider the structures below.
i.
The incongruity and inexplicability of your points jarred and astonished me.
ii.
They were flabbergasted, scandalised and inundated by her overtures.
The sentences above could be said in clearer ways, such as: iii.
The strangeness of your points worried me.
iv.
Her overtures shocked them.
Except when it is necessary, do not use euphemism.
If plainer words will not hurt the feeling of the audience, you do not need to use euphemism.
For instance, it is better to address prostitutes as commercial sex workers, and disabled people as physically challenged people.
The most important thing is to ensure that the truth is not concealed.
This requires tact and the ability to determine when a word should be used.
148  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Suitability It is not every word that is suitable for every context.
There are no two words that are exactly the same in meaning, just as there are no two words that are exactly opposite in meaning.
It is, therefore, necessary to consider the collocation of a word before using it.
Some people just use the thesaurus, thinking that they can just substitute one word for another and still retain the original meaning of the text.
This is not always the case.
Some sets of synonyms are given below to illustrate this point.
A entertainment relaxation pleasure amusement fun play recreation enjoyment B effect result consequence outcome repercussion C essential vital crucial critical decisive indispensable All the words in set A could be used for activities or things meant for entertaining people when they are not working.
However, they are used in different contexts.
Fun is rather informal; amusement contains pleasure and entertainment; both recreation and relaxation have some enjoyment; play is usually used for children; while entertainment combines interest with amusement.
The five words in set B could be used to indicate a thing that is caused because of something else.
However, consequence and repercussion have negative connotations.
The others could be used to indicate both positive and negative effects.
149  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Anybody or anything that is extremely important and completely necessary because a particular activity or situation depends on such could be described using any of the words in set C. Essential and vital have roughly the same meaning and could be used with the same nouns and structures.
However, there is difference in the tone of each.
“Essential” is better used when stating a fact or an opinion with authority.
“Vital” is better used when there is a need to persuade somebody that an opinion or a fact is essential, or when there is anxiety about something.
Besides, vital is seldom found in negative structures.
Critical and crucial also have virtually the same meaning and could be found in the same structures.
However, crucial is particularly tied to matters that may lead to anxiety and other emotions, while crucial is particularly tied to technical matters of science and business.
Decisive is linked with the result of a given situation, while indispensable is not tied to any stage of the existence of any concept.
The foregoing explanation also holds for antonyms.
It is, therefore, essential to know the denotation and connotation of a word before using such a word.
The denotation of a word refers to the specific entity or concept it signifies or names, while its connotation refers to the feelings, attitudes, or associations it conveys (Hefferman & Lincoln, 1982:136-137).
Simplicity Being simple is different from being simplistic.
To be simple means to be plain and natural, while to be simplistic means to try to make something appear less complicated than it actually is.
The subject, tone, purpose, and audience determine the simplicity of diction.
Even a highly technical subject could be presented in a way that people outside the professional or disciplinary enclave of the subject will still be able to decode the message without having to unnecessarily strain their brains.
A good writer/speaker does not have to use words because s/he does not want to be seen as a naive writer/speaker.
The genius in you is shown by your ability to simplify complex ideas.
Complex writing is a celebration of self.
It is more sensible to use simple language to express either simple or complex ideas than to use complex language to express either simple or complex ideas.
If the meaning of your message will not be watered down, use few jargons.
You impress no one, except ordinary minds, by using gobbledygook.
There are occasions when you just have to use some technical terms.
The excerpts below from Sam Ejike Okoye’s “Scientists achieve revolutionary breakthrough in remote control of brain” illustrate the ability to simplify a technical subject and still maintain the technicalities of the profession.
150  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Excerpt A You see the image in your brain; you do not directly see the sky outside the window.
In practice, light from the sky must reach the eyes from outside.
This light passes to the small sight centre located at the back of the brain after the cells in the eyes transform it into electrical signals.
It is these electrical signals which form the picture in the brain.
A nerve cell is an electrical entity.
Its membrane is normally charged like a battery, to about a tenth of a volt.
Nerve cells communicate using electric pulses, which arise when the voltage across the membrane briefly leaps from minus 0.07 volts to around plus 0.04 volts.
Excerpt B That spike of excitation races down the tendrils of the neuron until it reaches the ends, where it jumps across synapses to set up new waves of excitement in neighbouring cells.
(The Guardian, Thursday, August 9, 2007) In the first excerpt, the writer describes how light the eye perceives rays.
He does this without mentioning medical jargons such as retina, iris, pupil, and cerebrum.
Yet the passage retains the features of a scientific description.
However, in the second excerpt, he has to use some neurological terms, such as neuron and synapses.
Let us try to present these terms as they appear in the passage in other ways: That spike of excitation races down the tendrils of the basic unit of the brain until it reaches the ends, where it jumps across the junctions between neurons to set up new waves of excitement in neighbouring cells.
This rendition is unnecessarily wordy and does not make the two concepts explained any way better understood by anybody who does not already know what neurons and synapses mean.
It is, thus, more sensible to retain them the way the writer has done.
Simplicity in diction enhances the understanding of a text.
It also shows intelligence, ability to sieve the lexicon to pick the right word, diligence, and ultimately, consideration of the audience.
A good language user knows that there is no how elusive or challenging a concept is that it “cannot be rendered reasonably clear and enjoyable for an audience.
The failure to do so means only one thing ultimately: the writer does not care about his audience being enclosed in a mere ego-trip” (Palmer, 1993:6).
151  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Economy Wordiness characterises the speech and writing of many people.
Just as wasting resources is bad, so is wasting words.
If there is the need to write a long sentence, for it to be effective, it must not contain any dead weight (a short sentence too should not contain dead weight).Verbosity comes in different ways.
The major ones are examined below.
Tautology: This is a structure which contains at least a redundant word.
Examples include: 1. most unique 2. more faster 3. armed bandit 4. reverse back 5. should in case 6. letter-headed paper 7. night vigil 8. wake keep(ing) We hear these expressions in day-to-day conversations.
Let us examine each of them carefully to see the superfluous item(s).
1.
A unique entity is the only one of its kind.
This implies that it is incomparable.
Therefore, the use of the superlative marker ‘most’ is redundant.
• Our school is unique.
Not - Our school is the most unique.
This explanation also applies to ‘most superior’.
It cannot be compared; what is superior is superior.
- He is superior to you.
Not - He is more superior than you/he is most superior to you.
152  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 2.
The comparative form of some disyllabic and polysyllabic adjectives and adverbs is derived by adding the word more, for example, ‘more faithful’, ‘more beautiful’.
However, many adjectives and adverbs form their comparative forms by adding ‘er’.
One of such words is fast.
Its comparative form is faster.
Adding ‘more’ to it is saying “more more fast.” - Kola is faster than Lola.
Not - Kola is more faster than Lola.
3.
Bandit means a member of an armed group of thieves who attack travellers.
The use of armed to pre-modify it is unnecessary.
This error arises, perhaps, from treating ‘bandit’ like ‘robber’.
A robber may not necessarily be armed.
This is why it is pre- modified if it involves some violence.
- The bandit has been arrested.
Not • The armed bandit has been arrested.
4.
Reverse means to move backwards; it already contains back.
• You need to reverse Not • You need to reverse back.
5.
Both should and in case are used to indicate the possibility of something happening.
• In case I arrive late, you can start the service.
Not • Should in case I arrive late, you can start the service.
6.
A letterhead is the name and address of a person, a company or an organization printed at the top of writing paper; or stationery printed with such a heading.
153  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • I need two copies of your letterhead.
Not • I need two of your letterhead papers.
7.
Vigil is a period of time when people stay awake, especially at night, to pray or to keep watch.
The use of night with it is often unnecessary.
• My mother kept a vigil at Tolu’s bedside Not • My mother kept a night vigil at Tolu’s bedside.
• Our prayer vigil holds next week Not • Our night vigil holds next week.
8.
Wake means night spent keeping watch over a dead person’s body before it is buried.
• The Christian wake for the man was successful Not • The Christian wake-keep(ing) for the man was successful Clichés Clichés are expressions that have lost their potency and currency because they have been over-used.
The use of clichés in speech or writing shows laziness and lack of innovativeness.
Language is living and dynamic.
There are new combinations of words that could better express whatever ideas we want to express with clichés.
The list of clichés is inexhaustible, as new ones join the list regularly.
Below are some examples.
• Overemphasized • More often than not • Every nook and cranny 154  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING • All hands must be on deck • By and large • Epoch-making occasion • Leave no stone unturned Try to inject liveliness into your speech/writing; do not bore your audience with clichés.
Circumlocution This involves using more words than necessary.
At times, it involves using a phrase for a single word.
Consider these examples: 1a.
Chinyere did it in a careful manner.
b. Chinyere did it carefully.
2a.
Just give me a call.
b.
Just call me.
3a.
The reason for his marrying her is his desire to satisfy his sexual urge.
b.
He married her because of sex.
4a.
To say that good road networking is essential for national development is to say the obvious.
b.
It is obvious that good road networking is essential for national development.
5a.
The first citizen of our country advocates equality before the law.
b.
Our president advocates equality before the law.
The second structure in each example is shorter and more pungent than the first.
While it is true that circumlocution has some stylistic effects, it should be used only if there is no other effective way of expressing your ideas.
Relative Clauses Relative clauses that have better and shorter alternatives should be avoided; they make the expression in which they occur avoidably long and boring.
Consider these structures: 155  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 1a.
The man who appointed himself the leader of the club has arrived.
b.
The self-appointed leader of the club has arrived.
2a.
He does not want to be the only one who will be duped.
b.
He does not want to be the only dupe.
This does not mean that using relative clauses is bad; if the relative clause is indispensable in a particular construction, you may retain it.
Dummy Subjects Dummy subjects, like the referential there and the existential it make sentences unnecessarily long.
They should be avoided as much as possible.
However, they are sometimes effective as the opening of paragraphs.
Some examples are given below.
1a.
There are few students who are indolent.
b.
Few students are indolent.
2a.
There were many politicians who felt cheated.
b.
Many politicians felt cheated.
3a.
It was that man who raped Titi.
b.
That man raped Titi.
4a.
It is this house that I want.
b. I want this house.
The second structure in each example above is better.
Fake Introduction Some expressions make your language unattractive.
Some of them show lack of nerve in expressing one’s intention.
It is better to go straight to what you intend to say.
Trying to be needlessly modest achieves no meaningful effect.
One should not be arrogant or too blunt in language use.
However, one should not add burden to one’s expressions in the name of modesty.
The expressions below illustrate perambulating in language use.
1a.
It is note-worthy that we are suffering.
Simply say: b.
We are suffering 156  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 2.
From some points of view This expression is indefinite; state the exact point of view.
3a.
What is being said is that we need your assistance.
Simply say: b.
We need your assistance.
4a.
It can be concluded that the car is bad.
Simply say: b.
The car is bad.
Some of these expressions are unspecific; they do not show that the writer is serious.
4.0 CONCLUSION The four features of effective diction (clarity, suitability, simplicity and economy) discussed above help to make any text emphatic and pungent.
Effective communication is not a mere show of your vocabulary; it involves a careful selection of words, bearing in mind their collocations, and the syntagmatic and paradigmatic relationships they have with one another.
Any language user that has no consideration for his/her audience will not be able to communicate effectively.
Much of the misunderstanding people have arise from misconstruction, which is a product of ineffective diction.
Never think that the more complex your diction is the more the respect you command from your audience.
A writer that specialises in using complex diction will not enjoy wide readership.
The situation is even worse for a speaker who uses such diction.
Diction that lacks any of these features can be said to be deficient.
It affects the subject and the audience.
It can render the subject meaningless, just as it can bore the audience.
Enshrouding your language in mystery is counter-productive.
It defeats the primary purpose of communication: effective conveyance of ideas.
No matter how lofty your ideas are you can sacrifice them on the altar of bad diction, if care is not taken.
What has been presented here is meant to guide the writer.
In whatever you write, ensure that your ideas are clearly presented to your audience; you do not write for its sake.
Writing is meant to be consumed; therefore, cater well for the consumer.
Always bear this in mind that: No subject is so elusive or challenging that it cannot be rendered reasonably clear and enjoyable or an audience.
The failure to do so means only one thing ultimately: the 157  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING writer doesn’t care about his audience, being enclosed in a mere ego-trip.
(Palmer, 1993:6) Proper editing is very useful in language use.
Spend quality time on the editing of your work.
You may also contract a professional editor to do this for you.
Good ideas can be slaughtered on the altar of bad expressions.
There is no excuse for using bad language.
No matter how urgent it is to prepare a speech, do not present an unedited speech.
If you do, you may lose your reputation and most people will not accept the excuse that the errors are due to the short time you have.
It is better to present something short but well edited than to present a long but unedited speech.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been exposed to the need to fine-tune your speech.
You have also been presented with some practical ways of doing this.
Some expressions used to illustrate the points made are targeted towards making you see the need to be a meticulous writer.
In the next module, you will be exposed to some remarkable speeches in order to see how some of the points we have been discussing relate to actual speeches.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differentiate between being simple and being simplistic in language use.
2.
Discuss how to ensure economy in language use.
3.
How can a writer ensure clarity of expression?
4.
What does suitability of language mean?
5.
How can a speech be fine-tuned?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alo, M. A.
& Ogunsiji, A.
(2010).“From Grammar to Discourse”.
In Alo M.A.
and Ogunsiji A.
(Eds.).
English Language Communication Skills: For Academic Purposes.
Ibadan: GSP University of Ibadan.
Pp 238-248.
Alo, M. A.
(2010).
“Understanding Lexical Structure”.
In Alo M.A.
& Ogunsiji A. Eds.
English Language Communication Skills: For Academic Purposes.
Ibadan: GSP University of Ibadan.
Pp 115-132.
Babajide, A. O.
(1996).
Introductory English Grammar and Writing Skills.
Ibadan: Enicrownfit.
158  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Hefferman, J.
A. W. & Lincoln, J. E. (1982).
Writing: A College Handbook.
New York and London: W.W. Norton and company Kane, T. S. & Peters, L. J.
(1966).
A Practical Rhetoric of Expository Prose.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Malmkjaer, K. (2002).
“Semantics.” In Malmkjaer K.
(Ed.).
The Linguistics Encyclopedia.
London and New York.
Routledge.455-465.
McCarthy, M. J.
(2002).
Lexis and Lexicology.
In Malmkjaer K.
(Ed.).
The Linguistics Encyclopedia.
London and New York: Routledge.
pp 339-347.
Mills, P. (1996).
Writing in Action.
London and New York: Routledge.
Okoye, S. E. (2008, August 9).
“Scientists Achieve Revolutionary Breakthrough in Remote Control of Brain.” The Guardian.
pp 33, 39.
Palmer, R. (1993).
Write in Style: A Guide to Good English.
London: EQFN SPON.
Sunday, A.
B.
(2009b) “Adverbs and Adverbials”.
In Oyeleye L.
(Ed.).
Use of English: A Tertiary Coursebook: Ibadan: Agbo Areo Publishers.
pp 98-114.
Winterowd, W. R. (1975).
The Contemporary Writer.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
159  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING MODULE 4 REVIEW OF SELECTED SPEECHES Unit 1 Review of George Washington’s Speech Unit 2 Review of Thomas Jefferson’s Speech Unit 3 Review of Bill Clinton’s Speech Unit 4 Review of Musa Yar’Adua’s Speech Unit 5 Review of Goodluck Jonathan’s Speech UNIT 1 REVIEW OF GEORGE WASHINGTON’S SPEECH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 George Washington: First Inaugural Address (April 30, 1789) 3.2 Review of the Speech 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION An important way to being a good speechwriter is by listening to and reading good speeches.
This will enable you discover the strategies used by a good speechwriter.
You can adapt some of these strategies and still be yourself.
In this unit, we shall review the first inaugural speech of George Washington, the first American president.
The speech was delivered on April 30, 1789.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the strategies used by Washington in this speech • evaluate the quality of the speech.
160  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 George Washington: First Inaugural Address (April 30, 1789) Washington calls on Congress to avoid local and party partisanship and encourages the adoption of a Bill of Rights, without specifically calling them by name.
The first President demonstrates his reluctance to accept the post, rejects any salary for the execution of his duties, and devotes a considerable part of the speech to his religious beliefs.
Transcript Fellow Citizens of the Senate and the House of Representatives: Among the vicissitudes incident to life, no event could have filled me with greater anxieties than that of which the notification was transmitted by your order, and received on the fourteenth day of the present month.
On the one hand, I was summoned by my Country, whose voice I can never hear but with veneration and love, from a retreat which I had chosen with the fondest predilection, and, in my flattering hopes, with an immutable decision, as the asylum of my declining years: a retreat which was rendered every day more necessary as well as more dear to me, by the addition of habit to inclination, and of frequent interruptions in my health to the gradual waste committed on it by time.
On the other hand, the magnitude and difficulty of the trust to which the voice of my Country called me, being sufficient to awaken in the wisest and most experienced of her citizens, a distrustful scrutiny into his qualification, could not but overwhelm with despondence, one, who, inheriting inferior endowments from nature and unpractised in the duties of civil administration, ought to be peculiarly conscious of his own deficiencies.
In this conflict of emotions, all I dare aver, is, that it has been my faithful study to collect my duty from a just appreciation of every circumstance, by which it might be affected.
All I dare hope, is, that, if in executing this task I have been too much swayed by a grateful remembrance of former instances, or by an affectionate sensibility to this transcendent proof, of the confidence of my fellow-citizens; and have thence too little consulted my incapacity as well as disinclination for the weighty and untried cares before me; my error will be palliated by the motives which misled me, and its consequences be judged by my Country, with some share of the partiality in which they originated.
Such being the impressions under which I have, in obedience to the public summons, repaired to the present station; it would be peculiarly improper to omit in this first official Act, my fervent supplications to 161  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING that Almighty Being who rules over the Universe, who presides in the Councils of Nations, and whose providential aids can supply every human defect, that his benediction may consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the People of the United States, a Government instituted by themselves for these essential purposes: and may enable every instrument employed in its administration to execute with success, the functions allotted to his charge.
In tendering this homage to the Great Author of every public and private good, I assure myself that it expresses your sentiments not less than my own; nor those of my fellow- citizens at large, less than either.
No People can be bound to acknowledge and adore the invisible hand, which conducts the Affairs of men more than the People of the United States.
Every step, by which they have advanced to the character of an independent nation, seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency.
And in the important revolution just accomplished in the system of their United Government, the tranquil deliberations and voluntary consent of so many distinct communities, from which the event has resulted, cannot be compared with the means by which most Governments have been established, without some return of pious gratitude along with an humble anticipation of the future blessings which the past seem to presage.
These reflections, arising out of the present crisis, have forced themselves too strongly on my mind to be suppressed.
You will join with me I trust in thinking, that there are none under the influence of which, the proceedings of a new and free Government can more auspiciously commence.
By the article establishing the Executive Department, it is made the duty of the President "to recommend to your consideration, such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient."
The circumstances under which I now meet you, will acquit me from entering into that subject, farther than to refer to the Great Constitutional Charter under which you are assembled; and which, in defining your powers, designates the objects to which your attention is to be given.
It will be more consistent with those circumstances, and far more congenial with the feelings which actuate me, to substitute, in place of a recommendation of particular measures, the tribute that is due to the talents, the rectitude, and the patriotism which adorns the characters selected to devise and adopt them.
In these honorable qualifications, I behold the surest pledges, that as on one side, no local prejudices, or attachments; no separate views, nor party animosities, will misdirect the comprehensive and equal eye which ought to watch over this great assemblage of communities and interests: so, on another, that the foundations of our National policy will be laid in the pure and immutable principles of private morality; and the pre- eminence of a free Government, be exemplified by all the attributes 162  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING which can win the affections of its Citizens, and command the respect of the world.
I dwell on this prospect with every satisfaction which an ardent love for my Country can inspire: since there is no truth more thoroughly established, than that there exists in the economy and course of nature, an indissoluble union between virtue and happiness, between duty and advantage, between the genuine maxims of an honest and magnanimous policy, and the solid rewards of public prosperity and felicity: Since we ought to be no less persuaded that the propitious smiles of Heaven, can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right, which Heaven itself has ordained: And since the preservation of the sacred fire of liberty, and the destiny of the Republican model of Government, are justly considered as deeply, perhaps as finally staked, on the experiment entrusted to the hands of the American people.
Besides the ordinary objects submitted to your care, it will remain with your judgment to decide, how far an exercise of the occasional power delegated by the Fifth article of the Constitution is rendered expedient at the present juncture by the nature of objections which have been urged against the System, or by the degree of inquietude which has given birth to them.
Instead of undertaking particular recommendations on this subject, in which I could be guided by no lights derived from official opportunities, I shall again give way to my entire confidence in your discernment and pursuit of the public good: For I assure myself that whilst you carefully avoid every alteration which might endanger the benefits of an United and effective Government, or which ought to await the future lessons of experience; a reverence for the characteristic rights of freemen, and a regard for the public harmony, will sufficiently influence your deliberations on the question how far the former can be more impregnably fortified, or the latter be safely and advantageously promoted.
To the preceding observations I have one to add, which will be most properly addressed to the House of Representatives.
It concerns myself, and will therefore be as brief as possible.
When I was first honoured with a call into the Service of my Country, then on the eve of an arduous struggle for its liberties, the light in which I contemplated my duty required that I should renounce every pecuniary compensation.
From this resolution I have in no instance departed.
And being still under the impressions which produced it, I must decline as inapplicable to myself, any share in the personal emoluments, which may be indispensably included in a permanent provision for the Executive Department; and must accordingly pray that the pecuniary estimates for the Station in 163  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING which I am placed, may, during my continuance in it, be limited to such actual expenditures as the public good may be thought to require.
Having thus imparted to you my sentiments, as they have been awakened by the occasion which brings us together, I shall take my present leave; but not without resorting once more to the benign parent of the human race, in humble supplication that since he has been pleased to favour the American people, with opportunities for deliberating in perfect tranquility, and dispositions for deciding with unparalleled unanimity on a form of Government, for the security of their Union, and the advancement of their happiness; so his divine blessing may be equally conspicuous in the enlarged views, the temperate consultations, and the wise measures on which the success of this Government must depend.
(http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0878602.html) 3.2 The Review of the Speech The Introduction This speech has seven paragraphs of unequal lengths.
The first paragraph, which is the introduction, is rather long.
In it, the first American president recognises the supremacy of God.
He hints on the American struggle for independence.
He sees his election as a call to service, specifying how he got the news, seeing it as an anxiety- generating event but a call that he cannot reject.
The introduction contains too long sentences.
One of the disadvantages of this is that, following the trend of the speech might be difficult.
An example is given below.
On the one hand, I was summoned by my Country, whose voice I can never hear but with veneration and love, from a retreat which I had chosen with the fondest predilection, and, in my flattering hopes, with an immutable decision, as the asylum of my declining years: a retreat which was rendered every day more necessary as well as more dear to me, by the addition of habit to inclination, and of frequent interruptions in my health to the gradual waste committed on it by time.
We should however not be too quick to condemn this style; we need to relate this speech to the peculiarities of the audience.
The primary audience of the speech consisted of lawmakers who were expected to be 164  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING people of great learning who could reason fast and concentrate whenever a discussion was going on.
Throughout the introduction, he emphasises his desire to rule his country well.
This paragraph thrives on the use of vivid description of state of mind.
The language is not difficult to access; the points are pungently made; and there is no digression.
The president does not waste his words.
The Body The second paragraph smoothly and naturally flows from the introduction.
Note the way it begins: Such being the impressions under which I have, in obedience to the public summons, repaired to the present station; it would be peculiarly improper to omit in this first official Act, my fervent supplications to that Almighty Being who rules over the Universe, who presides in the Councils of Nations, and whose providential aids can supply every human defect, that his benediction may consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the People of the United States, a Government instituted by themselves for these essential purposes: and may enable every instrument employed in its administration to execute with success, the functions allotted to his charge.
The first subordinate clause at the beginning of the paragraph is a summary of what the President has said in the introduction.
Without giving any overt indicator of the transition, he carefully links the first paragraph to the second paragraph.
The President shows his reverence for God at the beginning of this part of the speech.
He presents himself as a religious person, although he does not indicate his particular religious affiliation.
The audience already knows this.
This is, perhaps, why he is not explicit about it.
He addresses God as Almighty Being, Great Author…, and so on, as shown below: In tendering this homage to the Great Author of every public and private good, I assure myself that it expresses your sentiments not less than my own; nor those of my fellow-citizens at large, less than either.
165  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING The President does not directly make some points.
The audience then possibly knew how to decode what he meant.
He calls on Congress to avoid local and party partisanship and encourages the adoption of equal rights.
He sees leadership as an avenue to better the lots of the people.
In the speech, he rejects any salary for the execution of his duties: When I was first honoured with a call into the Service of my Country, then on the eve of an arduous struggle for its liberties, the light in which I contemplated my duty required that I should renounce every pecuniary compensation.
From this resolution, I have in no instance departed.
And being still under the impressions which produced it, I must decline as inapplicable to myself, any share in the personal emoluments, which may be indispensably included in a permanent provision for the Executive Department; and must accordingly pray that the pecuniary estimates for the Station in which I am placed, may, during my continuance in it, be limited to such actual expenditures as the public good may be thought to require.
He only requests that what he receive “be limited to such actual expenditures as the public good may be thought to require.” The Conclusion The last paragraph, which is the conclusion, is shorter than the introduction.
The President does not use signalling expressions, such as “finally” and “in conclusion”, yet we notice that he is about to end the speech.
He uses a participial phrase to indicate the conclusion.
Having thus imparted to you my sentiments, as they have been awakened by the occasion which brings us together, I shall take my present leave….
The independent clause “I shall take my leave” clearly shows that the speech is over.
Unlike some writers, the President does not include any other main discussion after this expression.
Some writers will still continue to raise other ideas after indicating that they are about to end.
This shows lack of adequate outlining and no consideration for any need to assist the audience to sense the stages of the speech.
The President ends by praying to the “benign parent of the human race” to assist his country.
This shows his love for his country.
166  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 4.0 CONCLUSION In this speech, Washington clearly makes his points.
The speech reveals the type of the primary audience.
It is tailored toward addressing the peculiarities of the audience.
The president does not conceal his religiosity, but he does not present himself as a bigot.
5.0 SUMMARY This speech from the first President of the world’s oldest democracy reveals some of the virtues that ensured the nurture and growth of American democracy, namely love for the nation, fear of God, lack of interest in monetary gain, and equal treatment of all.
These are conspicuously missing in many democracies now.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Comment on the sentence patterns of this speech.
2.
List the major points raised in the speech.
3.
Discuss how easy it is to understand this speech.
4.
Does the writer consider the audience in the content of the speech?
Give reason(s) for your answer.
5.
Identify some strategies used by this writer.
6.
As a newly elected president of your country, prepare an inaugural speech to be presented to your citizens.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Beebee, S.A. & BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
London: Routledge.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas S.E.
(2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J.H.
(1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
167  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Raman, M. & Sharma, S. (2004).
Technical Communication: Principles and Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, D.K.
(1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech.
New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0878602.html.
Accessed on 7/3/2011.
168  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 2 REVIEW OF THOMAS JEFFERSON’S SPEECH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Thomas Jefferson: First Inaugural Address (March 4, 1801 3.2 Review of the Speech 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we reviewed the inaugural speech of a notable American president.
The speech was presented toward the end of the 18th century.
In this unit, we shall examine the speech of another American president, Thomas Jefferson, which was presented in the 19th century.
He was the third American president.
Although we are not interested in a strictly comparative exercise, we can still identify what the two speeches have in common and where they differ.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the strategies used in this speech • evaluate the stylistic quality of this speech.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Thomas Jefferson: First Inaugural Address (March 4, 1801) After a particularly bitter and divisive campaign and election, Jefferson focuses on unifying the country, especially Republicans and Federalists.
The President enumerates his ideas of the principles of government, which include equal rights, preservation of the constitution, and civil control of the military.
169  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Transcript FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS, Called upon to undertake the duties of the first executive office of our country, I avail myself of the presence of that portion of my fellow- citizens which is here assembled to express my grateful thanks for the favor with which they have been pleased to look toward me, to declare a sincere consciousness that the task is above my talents, and that I approach it with those anxious and awful presentiments which the greatness of the charge and the weakness of my powers so justly inspire.
A rising nation, spread over a wide and fruitful land, traversing all the seas with the rich productions of their industry, engaged in commerce with nations who feel power and forget right, advancing rapidly to destinies beyond the reach of mortal eye -- when I contemplate these transcendent objects, and see the honor, the happiness, and the hopes of this beloved country committed to the issue and the auspices of this day, I shrink from the contemplation, and humble myself before the magnitude of the undertaking.
Utterly, indeed, should I despair did not the presence of many whom I here see remind me that in the other high authorities provided by our Constitution I shall find resources of wisdom, of virtue, and of zeal on which to rely under all difficulties.
To you, then, gentlemen, who are charged with the sovereign functions of legislation, and to those associated with you, I look with encouragement for that guidance and support which may enable us to steer with safety the vessel in which we are all embarked amidst the conflicting elements of a troubled world.
During the contest of opinion through which we have passed the animation of discussions and of exertions has sometimes worn an aspect which might impose on strangers unused to think freely and to speak and to write what they think; but this being now decided by the voice of the nation, announced according to the rules of the Constitution, all will, of course, arrange themselves under the will of the law, and unite in common efforts for the common good.
All, too, will bear in mind this sacred principle, that though the will of the majority is in all cases to prevail, that will to be rightful must be reasonable; that the minority possess their equal rights, which equal law must protect, and to violate would be oppression.
Let us, then, fellow-citizens, unite with one heart and one mind.
Let us restore to social intercourse that harmony and affection without which liberty and even life itself are but dreary things.
And let us reflect that, having banished from our land that religious intolerance under which mankind so long bled and suffered, we have yet gained little if we countenance a political intolerance as despotic, as wicked, and capable of as bitter and bloody persecutions.
During the throes and convulsions of the ancient world, during the agonizing 170  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING spasms of infuriated man, seeking through blood and slaughter his long- lost liberty, it was not wonderful that the agitation of the billows should reach even this distant and peaceful shore; that this should be more felt and feared by some and less by others, and should divide opinions as to measures of safety.
But every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.
We have called by different names brethren of the same principle.
We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists.
If there be any among us who would wish to dissolve this Union or to change its republican form, let them stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.
I know, indeed, that some honest men fear that a republican government can not be strong, that this Government is not strong enough; but would the honest patriot, in the full tide of successful experiment, abandon a government which has so far kept us free and firm on the theoretic and visionary fear that this Government, the world's best hope, may by possibility want energy to preserve itself?
I trust not.
I believe this, on the contrary, the strongest Government on earth.
I believe it the only one where every man, at the call of the law, would fly to the standard of the law, and would meet invasions of the public order as his own personal concern.
Sometimes it is said that man cannot be trusted with the government of himself.
Can he, then, be trusted with the government of others?
Or have we found angels in the forms of kings to govern him?
Let history answer this question.
Let us, then, with courage and confidence pursue our own Federal and Republican principles, our attachment to union and representative government.
Kindly separated by nature and a wide ocean from the exterminating havoc of one quarter of the globe; too high-minded to endure the degradations of the others; possessing a chosen country, with room enough for our descendants to the thousandth and thousandth generation; entertaining a due sense of our equal right to the use of our own faculties, to the acquisitions of our own industry, to honor and confidence from our fellow-citizens, resulting not from birth, but from our actions and their sense of them; enlightened by a benign religion, professed, indeed, and practiced in various forms, yet all of them inculcating honesty, truth, temperance, gratitude, and the love of man; acknowledging and adoring an overruling Providence, which by all its dispensations proves that it delights in the happiness of man here and his greater happiness hereafter -- with all these blessings, what more is necessary to make us a happy and a prosperous people?
Still one thing more, fellow-citizens -- a wise and frugal Government, which shall restrain men from injuring one another, shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement, and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned.
This is the sum 171  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING of good government, and this is necessary to close the circle of our felicities.
About to enter, fellow-citizens, on the exercise of duties which comprehend everything dear and valuable to you, it is proper you should understand what I deem the essential principles of our Government, and consequently those which ought to shape its Administration.
I will compress them within the narrowest compass they will bear, stating the general principle, but not all its limitations.
Equal and exact justice to all men, of whatever state or persuasion, religious or political; peace, commerce, and honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none; the support of the State governments in all their rights, as the most competent administrations for our domestic concerns and the surest bulwarks against anti republican tendencies; the preservation of the General Government in its whole constitutional vigor, as the sheet anchor of our peace at home and safety abroad; a jealous care of the right of election by the people -- a mild and safe corrective of abuses which are lopped by the sword of revolution where peaceable remedies are unprovided; absolute acquiescence in the decisions of the majority, the vital principle of republics, from which is no appeal but to force, the vital principle and immediate parent of despotism; a well-disciplined militia, our best reliance in peace and for the first moments of war till regulars may relieve them; the supremacy of the civil over the military authority; economy in the public expense, that labor may be lightly burthened; the honest payment of our debts and sacred preservation of the public faith; encouragement of agriculture, and of commerce as its handmaid; the diffusion of information and arraignment of all abuses at the bar of the public reason; freedom of religion; freedom of the press, and freedom of person under the protection of the habeas corpus, and trial by juries impartially selected.
These principles form the bright constellation which has gone before us and guided our steps through an age of revolution and reformation.
The wisdom of our sages and blood of our heroes have been devoted to their attainment.
They should be the creed of our political faith, the text of civic instruction, the touchstone by which to try the services of those we trust; and should we wander from them in moments of error or of alarm, let us hasten to retrace our steps and to regain the road which alone leads to peace, liberty, and safety.
I repair, then, fellow-citizens, to the post you have assigned me.
With experience enough in subordinate offices to have seen the difficulties of this the greatest of all, I have learnt to expect that it will rarely fall to the lot of imperfect man to retire from this station with the reputation and the favor which bring him into it.
Without pretensions to that high confidence you reposed in our first and greatest revolutionary character, 172  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING whose preeminent services had entitled him to the first place in his country's love and destined for him the fairest page in the volume of faithful history, I ask so much confidence only as may give firmness and effect to the legal administration of your affairs.
I shall often go wrong through defect of judgment.
When right, I shall often be thought wrong by those whose positions will not command a view of the whole ground.
I ask your indulgence for my own errors, which will never be intentional, and your support against the errors of others, who may condemn what they would not if seen in all its parts.
The approbation implied by your suffrage is a great consolation to me for the past, and my future solicitude will be to retain the good opinion of those who have bestowed it in advance, to conciliate that of others by doing them all the good in my power, and to be instrumental to the happiness and freedom of all.
Relying, then, on the patronage of your good will, I advance with obedience to the work, ready to retire from it whenever you become sensible how much better choice it is in your power to make.
And may that Infinite Power which rules the destinies of the universe lead our councils to what is best, and give them a favorable issue for your peace and prosperity.
(see http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0878602.html) 3.2 The Review of the Speech The Introduction Jefferson begins his speech on a note of appreciation and humility, expressing his weakness.
This is a strategy to win the sympathy and support of the Congress and the entire nation.
As the third president of a growing nation, he had the task of leading the nation to greater heights, building on the foundation of the founding fathers.
He specifically states that his talent could not match the leadership demands of a nation that was eager to achieve greatness.
Called upon to undertake the duties of the first executive office of our country, I avail myself of the presence of that portion of my fellow-citizens which is here assembled to express my grateful thanks for the favor with which they have been pleased to look toward me, to declare a sincere consciousness that the task is above my talents, and that I approach it with those anxious and awful presentiments which the greatness of the charge and the weakness of my powers so justly inspire.
173  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Utterly, indeed, should I despair did not the presence of many whom I here see remind me that in the other high authorities provided by our Constitution I shall find resources of wisdom, of virtue, and of zeal on which to rely under all difficulties.
To you, then, gentlemen, who are charged with the sovereign functions of legislation, and to those associated with you, I look with encouragement for that guidance and support which may enable us to steer with safety the vessel in which we are all embarked amidst the conflicting elements of a troubled world.
He uses the introduction to quickly appeal to the Congress for support.
This is a political tactic targeted toward preventing unnecessary rancour with the Congress.
By doing this, he makes the audience feel important and relevant.
Once he gets their support, his weaknesses will not be laid bare before the populace: The Body President Thomas Jefferson is good at making everybody feel important.
He particularly stresses the significance of the minority.
His is not the- winner- takes-it-all.
His own idea of democracy is equality before the law, which is the cardinal point of the rule of law.
By presenting himself as the president of both the majority and the minority, he tries to make everybody feel a sense of relevance in his administration.
He advocates tolerance, which is a virtue long removed from the lexicon of many African leaders: …that the minority possess their equal rights, which equal law must protect, and to violate would be oppression.
Let us, then, fellow-citizens, unite with one heart and one mind.
Let us restore to social intercourse that harmony and affection without which liberty and even life itself are but dreary things.
And let us reflect that, having banished from our land that religious intolerance under which mankind so long bled and suffered, we have yet gained little if we countenance a political intolerance as despotic, as wicked, and capable of as bitter and bloody persecutions.
One could contextualise this speech as one produced after there had been some disagreement or some keen contest in which some people still felt aggrieved.
It can be construed as a speech focusing on healing wounds and bruises.
This is the only way by which the country can 174  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING remain indivisible.
He obviously knew that without unity he cannot achieve anything.
Jefferson devotes the speech to enumerating his own views about what good governance should entail.
These are equal rights, preservation of the constitution, and civil control of the military.
He stresses the need to respect the opinions of others: “But every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.” Before writing the speech, Jefferson probably perceived that some people already had some qualms concerning his party.
In this speech, he does not dodge this fact; he acknowledges it.
He addresses the fear of weakness that some people have concerning his party.
Once a leader is seen as weak, there could be anarchy, as people will behave as if there is nobody to be accountable to.
Jefferson makes it clear to the audience that he is going to be strong in leadership.
He carefully draws a line of demarcation between humility and weakness.
Notice that at the beginning of the speech, he presents himself as one whose talent could not meet the demands of the office.
However, he uses the body of the speech to allay the fear that people might have about his person.
He is smart at selling his resolve to make America great to the audience: I know, indeed, that some honest men fear that a republican government cannot be strong, that this Government is not strong enough; but would the honest patriot, in the full tide of successful experiment, abandon a government which has so far kept us free and firm on the theoretic and visionary fear that this Government, the world's best hope, may by possibility want energy to preserve itself?
I trust not.
I believe this, on the contrary, the strongest Government on earth.
I believe it the only one where every man, at the call of the law, would fly to the standard of the law, and would meet invasions of the public order as his own personal concern.
Sometimes it is said that man cannot be trusted with the government of himself.
Can he, then, be trusted with the government of others?
Or have we found angels in the forms of kings to govern him?
Let history answer this question.
In the last part of this excerpt, taken from paragraph 2, Jefferson recognises his human nature.
He uses rhetorical questions to remind the audience that, no matter how feeble humans are, they will continue to govern themselves; an angel will never be delegated to do so.
This is meant to make the audience acknowledge the fact that there is no 175  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING superhuman.
He is undoubtedly optimistic that he will lead well.
He leaves history to do the judgement of his administration.
He uses the remaining part of the speech to canvass for the support of the audience.
One notable thing about the speech is the factual approach the writer adopts.
He does not pretend to be a super human at all.
He emphatically states that he is going to make mistakes, but the mistakes will not be intentional.
His speech is not ‘political’.
Nowadays, political statements are separated from factual statements.
Political statements are often deceitfully packaged for the often gullible masses.
Let us consider this excerpt taken from the penultimate paragraph: I shall often go wrong through defect of judgment.
When right, I shall often be thought wrong by those whose positions will not command a view of the whole ground.
I ask your indulgence for my own errors, which will never be intentional, and your support against the errors of others, who may condemn what they would not if seen in all its parts.
The Conclusion The last paragraph, which concludes the speech, does two major things.
One, it solicits for the support of the audience.
Two, it asks for the hands of God, that Infinite Power, in the affairs of the nation: And may that Infinite Power which rules the destinies of the universe lead our councils to what is best, and give them a favorable issue for your peace and prosperity.
4.0 CONCLUSION This speech thrives on simplicity of language, which is informed by the simplicity of the writer.
Jefferson has tactically or, perhaps, unconsciously injected his simple nature into the speech.
The sentences are not usually long, unlike the speech of Washington reviewed above.
The paragraphs are moderate in length and well delineated.
The major ideas are pungently pursued, without being repetitive.
5.0 SUMMARY The message and the language of a speech are supposed to be complementary.
In this speech, Jefferson has done well to blend his nature and his language.
His revelation of his weakness would have been seen as unnecessary because the audience could take this for 176  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING granted, but he displays maturity in making the audience know that he is not going to be slack in leadership.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare and contrast the speeches of Washington and Jefferson.
2.
Identify the predominant sentence structures in this speech.
3.
How does this speech achieve its effects?
4.
What impression do you have about Jefferson from the speech?
5.
As the newly-elected president of your club, write an inaugural address.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Beebee, S.A. & BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
London: Routledge.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas, S.E.
(2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J.H.
(1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
Raman M. & Sharma, S. (2004), Technical Communication: Principles and Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, D.K.
(1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech.
New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0878602.html.
Accessed on 7/3/2011.
177  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 3 REVIEW OF BILL CLINTON’S SPEECH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Bill Clinton: First Inaugural Speech (January 20, 1993) 3.2 Review of the Speech 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The whole world, including America, has undergone some development.
We now examine the inaugural speech of Bill Clinton, the 42nd American president, a man who enjoyed significant respect while in office.
His inaugural speech, presented on January 20, 1993, is the focus of this unit.
The speech is reviewed to bring to the fore what makes it a good or a bad speech.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the peculiarities of this speech • assess the effectiveness of the speech.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Bill Clinton: First Inaugural Speech (January 20, 1993) Full Text of the Speech As the first President elected in the post-Cold War era, Clinton stresses that it is a time for a renewal of America.
This transcript contains the published text of the speech, not the actual words spoken.
There may be some differences between the transcript and the audio/video content.
178  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Transcript My fellow citizens, today we celebrate the mystery of American renewal.
This ceremony is held in the depth of winter, but by the words we speak and the faces we show the world, we force the spring, a spring reborn in the world's oldest democracy that brings forth the vision and courage to reinvent America.
When our Founders boldly declared America's independence to the world and our purposes to the Almighty, they knew that America, to endure, would have to change; not change for change's sake but change to preserve America's ideals: life, liberty, the pursuit of happiness.
Though we marched to the music of our time, our mission is timeless.
Each generation of Americans must define what it means to be an American.
On behalf of our Nation, I salute my predecessor, President Bush, for his half-century of service to America.
And I thank the millions of men and women whose steadfastness and sacrifice triumphed over depression, fascism, and communism.
Today, a generation raised in the shadows of the cold war assumes new responsibilities in a world warmed by the sunshine of freedom but threatened still by ancient hatreds and new plagues.
Raised in unrivaled prosperity, we inherit an economy that is still the world's strongest but is weakened by business failures, stagnant wages, increasing inequality, and deep divisions among our own people.
When George Washington first took the oath I have just sworn to uphold, news traveled slowly across the land by horseback and across the ocean by boat.
Now, the sights and sounds of this ceremony are broadcast instantaneously to billions around the world.
Communications and commerce are global.
Investment is mobile.
Technology is almost magical.
And ambition for a better life is now universal.
We earn our livelihood in America today in peaceful competition with people all across the Earth.
Profound and powerful forces are shaking and remaking our world.
And the urgent question of our time is whether we can make change our friend and not our enemy.
This new world has already enriched the lives of millions of Americans who are able to compete and win in it.
But when most people are working harder for less; when others cannot work at all; when the cost of health care devastates families and threatens to bankrupt our enterprises, great and small; when the fear of crime robs law-abiding citizens of their freedom; and when millions of poor children cannot even imagine the lives we are calling them to lead, we have not made change our friend.
179  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING We know we have to face hard truths and take strong steps, but we have not done so; instead, we have drifted.
And that drifting has eroded our resources, fractured our economy, and shaken our confidence.
Though our challenges are fearsome, so are our strengths.
Americans have ever been a restless, questing, hopeful people.
And we must bring to our task today the vision and will of those who came before us.
From our Revolution to the Civil War, to the Great Depression, to the civil rights movement, our people have always mustered the determination to construct from these crises the pillars of our history.
Thomas Jefferson believed that to preserve the very foundations of our Nation, we would need dramatic change from time to time.
Well, my fellow Americans, this is our time.
Let us embrace it.
Our democracy must be not only the envy of the world but the engine of our own renewal.
There is nothing wrong with America that cannot be cured by what is right with America.
And so today we pledge an end to the era of deadlock and drift, and a new season of American renewal has begun.
To renew America, we must be bold.
We must do what no generation has had to do before.
We must invest more in our own people, in their jobs, and in their future, and at the same time cut our massive debt.
And we must do so in a world in which we must compete for every opportunity.
It will not be easy.
It will require sacrifice, but it can be done and done fairly, not choosing sacrifice for its own sake but for our own sake.
We must provide for our Nation the way a family provides for its children.
Our Founders saw themselves in the light of posterity.
We can do no less.
Anyone who has ever watched a child's eyes wander into sleep knows what posterity is.
Posterity is the world to come: the world for whom we hold our ideals, from whom we have borrowed our planet, and to whom we bear sacred responsibility.
We must do what America does best: offer more opportunity to all and demand more responsibility from all.
It is time to break the bad habit of expecting something for nothing from our Government or from each other.
Let us all take more responsibility not only for ourselves and our families but for our communities and our country.
To renew America, we must revitalize our democracy.
This beautiful Capital, like every capital since the dawn of civilization, is often a place of intrigue and calculation.
Powerful people maneuver for position and worry endlessly about who is in and who is out, who is up and who is down, forgetting those people whose toil and sweat sends us here and pays our way.
Americans deserve better.
And in this city today there are 180  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING people who want to do better.
And so I say to all of you here: Let us resolve to reform our politics so that power and privilege no longer shout down the voice of the people.
Let us put aside personal advantage so that we can feel the pain and see the promise of America.
Let us resolve to make our Government a place for what Franklin Roosevelt called bold, persistent experimentation, a Government for our tomorrows, not our yesterdays.
Let us give this Capital back to the people to whom it belongs.
To renew America, we must meet challenges abroad as well as at home.
There is no longer a clear division between what is foreign and what is domestic.
The world economy, the world environment, the world AIDS crisis, the world arms race: they affect us all.
Today, as an older order passes, the new world is more free but less stable.
Communism's collapse has called forth old animosities and new dangers.
Clearly, America must continue to lead the world we did so much to make.
While America rebuilds at home, we will not shrink from the challenges nor fail to seize the opportunities of this new world.
Together with our friends and allies, we will work to shape change, lest it engulf us.
When our vital interests are challenged or the will and conscience of the international community is defied, we will act, with peaceful diplomacy whenever possible, with force when necessary.
The brave Americans serving our Nation today in the Persian Gulf, in Somalia, and wherever else they stand are testament to our resolve.
But our greatest strength is the power of our ideas, which are still new in many lands.
Across the world we see them embraced, and we rejoice.
Our hopes, our hearts, our hands are with those on every continent who are building democracy and freedom.
Their cause is America's cause.
The American people have summoned the change we celebrate today.
You have raised your voices in an unmistakable chorus.
You have cast your votes in historic numbers.
And you have changed the face of Congress, the Presidency, and the political process itself.
Yes, you, my fellow Americans, have forced the spring.
Now we must do the work the season demands.
To that work I now turn with all the authority of my office.
I ask the Congress to join with me.
But no President, no Congress, no Government can undertake this mission alone.
My fellow Americans, you, too, must play your part in our renewal.
I challenge a new generation of young Americans to a season of service: to act on your idealism by helping troubled children, keeping company with those in need, reconnecting our torn communities.
There is so much to be done; enough, indeed, for millions of others who are still young in spirit to give of themselves in service, too.
In serving, we 181  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING recognize a simple but powerful truth: We need each other, and we must care for one another.
Today we do more than celebrate America.
We rededicate ourselves to the very idea of America, an idea born in revolution and renewed through two centuries of challenge; an idea tempered by the knowledge that, but for fate, we, the fortunate, and the unfortunate might have been each other; an idea ennobled by the faith that our Nation can summon from its myriad diversity the deepest measure of unity; an idea infused with the conviction that America's long, heroic journey must go forever upward.
And so, my fellow Americans, as we stand at the edge of the 21st century, let us begin anew with energy and hope, with faith and discipline.
And let us work until our work is done.
The Scripture says, "And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not."
From this joyful mountaintop of celebration we hear a call to service in the valley.
We have heard the trumpets.
We have changed the guard.
And now, each in our own way and with God's help, we must answer the call.
Thank you, and God bless you all.
(See http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0878602.html) 3.2 The Review of the Speech The Introduction Of particular interest in this speech is the manner in which Clinton uses the weather condition of the country at the time of the inauguration to introduce his message.
This shows a meaningful study of the psyche of the audience and an appropriate use of such to stress the message: My fellow citizens, today we celebrate the mystery of American renewal.
This ceremony is held in the depth of winter, but by the words we speak and the faces we show the world, we force the spring, a spring reborn in the world's oldest democracy that brings forth the vision and courage to reinvent America.
In this introductory remark, some words are of significance: winter, spring, and force.
Winter is often an inclement weather because of cold, whereas spring is more friendly, a period when most planting activities are done.
Clinton is of the opinion that through “the words we speak and 182  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING the faces we show the world”, the American people can make changes to happen, forcing inclement situations to become clement.
President Clinton also uses the introduction to remind them of American pride, a nation with the oldest democracy.
This is to make them proud of their country.
He deliberately targets their psyche, try to make it ready to absorb the message that he wants to pass across.
The second paragraph should actually be part of the first paragraph.
However, he has made it a separate paragraph to foreground his appreciation of his predecessor.
This is a political tactic meant to show that he appreciates what George Bush has done.
However, if we consider the rest of the speech, we will notice that he is opposed to most of the things that his predecessor did.
The Body The overall message of the speech is the need for change.
Clinton stresses this by the use of repetition.
The word change is repeated several times.
The repetition is deliberate and effective.
It is as if he wants them to remember nothing else but change.
He wants it to keep ringing in their brains.
The happenings around the world and the perception of American policies by other nations when he assumed office must have informed his hammering on change.
He was the first elected American president after the post-Cold War era.
The President reminds Americans that globalisation has its implication for American interaction with the entire world; whatever happens in American is known in the whole world almost instantly.
He also subtly indicts previous administrations for drifting from the parts their forefathers toed, although he use the pronoun we to include himself.
This is meant to veil the indictment: We know we have to face hard truths and take strong steps, but we have not done so; instead, we have drifted.
And that drifting has eroded our resources, fractured our economy, and shaken our confidence.
He presents America as a nation that needs healing.
He does not believe that there is a policy that cannot be reversed.
He continually clamours for renewal: There is nothing wrong with America that cannot be cured by what is right with America.
And so today we pledge an 183  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING end to the era of deadlock and drift, and a new season of American renewal has begun.
President Clinton uses the problem-solution approach in the entire body of the speech.
He devotes the first few paragraphs to identifying what is wrong and what needs to be done.
As he was about concluding the speech, he proffers some solutions.
He encourages the audience to strive for the general good of the nation, and not selfish interests: Let us resolve to reform our politics so that power and privilege no longer shout down the voice of the people.
Let us put aside personal advantage so that we can feel the pain and see the promise of America.
Clinton displays his versatility and familiarity with the speeches of some of his predecessors.
He alludes to relevant comments made by Franklin Roosevelt and George Washington.
This is a way of making Americans remember what they are known for and retrace their steps.
He challenges them to continue to play leadership roles in world affairs, attributing the development in the world to American influence: “Clearly, America must continue to lead the world we did so much to make.” The Conclusion He concludes by calling on Americans to answer the call to salvage some situations and people.
In the usual way most American presidents acknowledge God, Clinton pleads for God’s help in the renewal mission.
He quotes a Bible passage to strengthen his points: The Scripture says, "And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not."
From this joyful mountaintop of celebration we hear a call to service in the valley.
We have heard the trumpets.
We have changed the guard.
And now, each in our own way and with God's help, we must answer the call.
4.0 CONCLUSION This speech is quite explicit in its purpose.
The writer unambiguously indicates that he is an agent of change; he does not want to continue with the old tradition.
He shows clearly that he has the mission of making America return to the part of honour.
He uses repetition and allusion predominantly to stress his point.
184  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 5.0 SUMMARY This speech departs significantly from the ones earlier reviewed.
The writer uses what the audience is familiar with to make his message clear.
He works on the values of America to make the audience see the need to redeem the image of America.
The paragraphs are not too long and the points are easy to find.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify the sentence patterns that predominate in this speech.
2.
Assess how the writer presented “change” in his speech.
3.
Compare and contrast this speech with that of Jefferson reviewed earlier.
4.
Comment on the paragraphing pattern in relation to the message of the speech 5.
Which thought-flow patterns are predominant?
6.
Write a speech to present as the new president of the students’ union government of your school.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Beebee, S. A.
& BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
London: Routledge.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas, S. E. (2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J. H. (1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
Raman, M. & Sharma, S. (2004), Technical Communication: Principles and Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University press.
Smith, D. K. (1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech.
New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0878602.html.
Accessed on 7/3/2011.
185  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 4 REVIEW OF MUSA YAR’ADUA’S SPEECH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Umaru Musa Yar’Adua’s Inaugural Speech 3.2 Review of the Speech 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The speeches reviewed so far are by American presidents.
We now turn to the speech of a Nigerian president, Umaru Musa Yar’Adua.
This speech is symbolic because the occasion of the delivery marked the first civilian-civilian transition in the country.
It was delivered on May 29, 2007.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the tactics used in the speech • assess the effectiveness of the speech.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Umaru Musa Yar'Adua's Inaugural Speech The Challenge is Great; The Goal is Clear: Umaru Musa Yar'Adua's Inaugural Speech This is a historic day for our nation, for it marks an important milestone in our march towards a maturing democracy.
For the first time since we cast off the shackles of colonialism almost a half-century ago, we have at last managed an orderly transition from one elected government to another.
We acknowledge that our elections had some shortcomings.
Thankfully, we have well-established legal avenues of redress, and I urge anyone aggrieved to pursue them.
I also believe that our experiences represent 186  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING an opportunity to learn from our mistakes.
Accordingly, I will set up a panel to examine the entire electoral process with a view to ensuring that we raise the quality and standard of our general elections, and thereby deepen our democracy.
This occasion is historic also because it marks another kind of transitional generational shift when the children of independence assume the adult responsibility of running the country at the heart of Africa.
My fellow citizens, I am humbled and honored that you have elected me and Vice President Jonathan to represent that generation in the task of building a just and humane nation, where its people have a fair chance to attain their fullest potential.
Luckily we are not starting from scratch.
We are fortunate to have been led the past eight years by one of our nation's greatest patriots, President Obasanjo.
On behalf of all our people, I salute you, Mr. President, for your vision, your courage and your boundless energy in creating the roadmap toward that united and economically thriving Nigeria that we seek.
Many of us may find it hard to believe now, but before you assumed the presidency eight years ago, the national conversation was about whether Nigeria deserved to remain one country at all.
Today we are talking about Nigeria's potential, to become one of the 20 largest economies in the world by the year 2O2O.
That is a measure of how far we have come.
And we thank you.
The administration of President Obasanjo has laid the foundation upon which we can build our future prosperity.
Over the past eight years Nigerians have reached a national consensus in at least four areas: to deepen democracy and the rule of law; build an economy driven primarily by the private sector, not government; display zero tolerance for corruption in all its forms, and, finally, restructure and staff our government to ensure efficiency and good governance.
I commit myself to these tasks.
Our goal now is to build on the greatest accomplishments of the past few years.
Relying on the 7-point agenda that formed the basis of our compact with voters during the recent campaigns, we will concentrate on rebuilding our physical infrastructure and human capital in order to take our country forward.
We will focus on accelerating economic and other reforms in a way that makes a concrete and visible difference to ordinary people.
187  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Our economy already has been set on the path of growth.
Now we must continue to do the necessary work to create more jobs, lower interest rates, reduce inflation, and maintain a stable exchange rate.
All this will increase our chances for rapid growth and development.
Central to this is rebuilding our basic infrastructure.
We already have comprehensive plans for mass transportation, especially railroad development.
We will make these plans a reality.
Equally important, we must devote our best efforts to overcoming the energy challenge.
Over the next four years we will see dramatic improvements in power generation, transmission and distribution.
These plans will mean little if we do not respect the rule of law.
Our government is determined to strengthen the capacity of law enforcement agencies, especially the police.
The state must fulfill its constitut ional responsibility of protecting life and property.
The crisis in the Niger Delta commands our urgent attention.
Ending it is a matter of strategic importance to our country.
I will use every resource available to me, with your help, to address this crisis in a spirit of fairness, justice, and cooperation.
We have a good starting point because our predecessor already launched a master plan that can serve as a basis for a comprehensive examination of all the issues.
We will involve all stakeholders in working out a solution.
As part of this effort, we will move quickly to ensure security of life and property, and to make investments safe.
In the meantime, I appeal to all aggrieved communities, groups and individuals to immediately suspend all violent activities, and respect the law.
Let us allow the impending dialogue to take place in a conducive atmosphere.
We are all in this together, and we will find a way to achieve peace and justice.
As we work to resolve the challenges of the Niger Delta, so must we also tackle poverty throughout the country.
By fighting poverty, we fight disease.
We will make advances in public health, to control the scourge of HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases that hold back our population and limit our progress.
We are determined to intensify the war against corruption, more so because corruption is itself central to the spread of poverty.
Its corrosive effect is all too visible in all aspects of our national life.
This is an area where we have made significant progress in recent years, and we will maintain the momentum.
188  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING We also are committed to rebuilding our human capital, if we are to support a modern economy.
We must revive education in order to create more equality, and citizens who can function more productively in today's world.
To our larger African family, you have our commitment to the goal of African integration.
We will continue to collaborate with fellow African states to reduce conflict and free our people from the leg chains of poverty.
To all our friends in the international community, we pledge our continuing fidelity to the goals of progress in Africa and peace in the world.
Fellow citizens, I ask you all to march with me into the age of restoration.
Let us work together to restore our time-honored values of honesty, decency, generosity, modesty, selflessness, transparency, and accountability.
These fundamental values determine societies that succeed or fail.
We must choose to succeed.
I will set a worthy personal example as your president.
No matter what obstacles confront us, I have confidence and faith in our ability to overcome them.
After all, we are Nigerians!
We are a resourceful and enterprising people, and we have it within us to make our country a better place.
To that end I offer myself as a servant-leader.
I will be a listener and doer, and serve with humility.
To fulfill our ambitions, all our leaders at all levels whether a local government councilor or state governor, senator or cabinet minister must change our style and our attitude.
We must act at all times with humility, courage, and forthrightness.
I ask you, fellow citizens, to join me in rebuilding our Nigerian family, one that defines the success of one by the happiness of many.
I ask you to set aside negative attitudes, and concentrate all our energies on getting to our common destination.
All hands must be on deck.
Let us join together to ease the pains of today while working for the gains of tomorrow.
Let us set aside cynicism and strive for the good society that we know is within our reach.
Let us discard the habit of low expectations of ourselves as well as of our leaders.
Let us stop justifying every shortcoming with that unacceptable phrase 'the Nigerian Factor' as if to be a Nigerian is to settle for less.
Let us recapture the mood of optimism that defined us at the dawn of independence, that legendary can-do spirit that marked our Nigerianess.
189  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Let us join together, now, to build a society worthy of our children.
We have the talent.
We have the intelligence.
We have the ability.
The challenge is great.
The goal is clear.
The time is now.
Inaugural Address of Umaru Musa Yar'Adua, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and Commander-In-Chief of The Armed Forces, May 29, 2007.
(See http://www.nigeriansinamerica.com/articles/1811/1/The- Challenge-is-Great-The-Goal-is-Clear-Umaru-Musa-YarAduas- Inaugural-Speech/Page1.html) 3.2 The Review of the Speech The Introduction Yar’Adua, the first Nigerian president handed over to by a civilian, begins his inaugural speech by first addressing the issue of legitimacy of his administration, after thanking God for smooth civilian-civilian transition.
Like the American President Thomas Jefferson, who acknowledges his weakness in the speech reviewed earlier, Yar’Adua, confesses that the election that brought him to office was flawed.
This public confession is a way of winning the sympathy of Nigerians.
He, however, does not fail to warn aggrieved individuals not to take the law into their own hands: We acknowledge that our elections had some shortcomings.
Thankfully, we have well-established legal avenues of redress, and I urge anyone aggrieved to pursue them.
I also believe that our experiences represent an opportunity to learn from our mistakes.
The Body He devotes a substantial part of the speech to acknowledging the efforts of his predecessor, assuring the nation that he will build on the foundation laid by Obasanjo.
He repeatedly eulogises Obasanjo.
This is a way of appreciating the roles Obasanjo played in his emergence as the president.
Out of reverence, he still addresses him as Mr. President, before later addressing him as predecessor.
The writer did not waste time in declaring his determination to solve the urgent problems of the nation, namely security.
He calls on people to allow dialogue instead of violence: 190  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING …we will move quickly to ensure security of life and property, and to make investments safe.
In the meantime, I appeal to all aggrieved communities, groups and individuals to immediately suspend all violent activities, and respect the law.
Let us allow the impending dialogue to take place in a conducive atmosphere.
He targets particularly the Niger-Delta region, giving assurance on ending the crisis.
He also tries to meet the expectation of other African countries that look up to Nigerian as a big brother, promising to continue to work for the progress of Africa To our larger African family, you have our commitment to the goal of African integration.
We will continue to collaborate with fellow African states to reduce conflict and free our people from the leg chains of poverty.
To all our friends in the international community, we pledge our continuing fidelity to the goals of progress in Africa and peace in the world.
A notable feature of this speech is its short paragraphs.
One of them has only one sentence; another one has two sentences.
Although these patterns achieve some effects here, they should not be used often.
In most cases, the writer uses them when he wants to make promises or request the audience to take a step.
This style is a way of foregrounding the points made, as seen below.
“I will set a worthy personal example as your president.” The Conclusion The concluding paragraph is very short.
The writer uses it to correct the erroneous view that there is a Nigerian Factor.
He admonishes the audience to go back to what made Nigeria great in those days when optimism characterised the Nigerian struggle for independence.
Let us recapture the mood of optimism that defined us at the dawn of independence, that legendary can-do spirit that marked our Nigerianess.
4.0 CONCLUSION Simple and direct, this speech is an epitome of sincerity, a rare quality in politicians.
The writer does not mince word in asking the audience to collaborate with him in his desire return the country to the path of honour.
His approach is akin to that of Bill Clinton.
191  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 5.0 SUMMARY President Yar’Adua in his speech has shown that it is not all African leaders that are economical with the truth.
The speech uses a combination of short and moderately long paragraphs to pass its message across.
There is, however, unnecessary larger-than-life homage-paying to his predecessor.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is the predominant sentence patterns used in this speech?
2.
Evaluate the effectiveness of President Yar’Adua’s speech.
3.
Does this speech cater for the audience?
Give reason(s) for your answer.
4.
Compare and contrast President Yar’Adua’s speech with that of Bill Clinton.
5.
After a keenly contested election in your state, you emerged the winner; write an address for broadcast on your state radio after you inauguration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Beebee, S.A. & BeeBee, J.B. (1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
London: Routledge.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas S.E.
(2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J.H.
(1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
Raman, M. & Sharma, S. (2004).
Technical Communication: Principles and Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, D.K.
(1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech.
New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. 192  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING http://www.nigeriansinamerica.com/articles/1811/1/The- Challenge-is-Great-The-Goal-is-Clear-Umaru-Musa-YarAduas- Inaugural-Speech/Page1.html .
Accessed on 7/3/2011.
193  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING UNIT 5 REVIEW OF GOODLUCK JONATHAN’S SPEECH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Full Text of the Speech 3.2 Review of the Speech 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall review the address of President Goodluck Jonathan.
The speech is significant because it was delivered on the nation’s 50th independence anniversary celebrations, which was celebrated on October 1, 2010.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the specific features of this speech • evaluate the effectiveness of the speech.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Full Text of the Speech President Goodluck Jonathan’s Address to the Nation on Nigeria’s 50th Independence Anniversary Fellow Citizens.
Today, 1st October, 2010 marks the 50th Anniversary of our independence from Britain.
It is with a deep sense of humility and gratitude to the Almighty that I address you this morning.
On this day in 1960, the heroes of the nationalist struggles and all Nigerians were full of hopes and dreams.
The citizens of the new country danced in colorful celebration of the newfound freedom.
Nigerians were filled with expectations as the Union Jack was lowered and the green-white-green flag was raised in its place.
194  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING A new country was born.
A new journey had started on a road never taken before.
The future was pregnant with promise.
With patriotism and pragmatism, our founding fathers charted a course for the greatness of this country.
While there were differences and disagreements, they did not waver in their desire to build a country that future generations would be proud of.
They made compromises and sacrifices.
They toiled night and day to build a viable country where progress and peace would reign supreme.
Our independence was gained by men and women who envisioned a land of freedom and one of opportunity.
Our founding fathers sought a government of character that seeks justice to her citizens as our national anthem so eloquently describes: One Nation Bound in Freedom, Peace and Unity.
However, today, the opinion of many Nigerians is that these dreams and expectations have not been fulfilled.
Not only have people despaired about the slow pace of progress, some have in fact given up on the country.
Some believe that if the colonial masters had stayed longer, Nigeria may have been the better for it.
All these postulations, we must admit, are borne out of a somewhat justifiable sense of frustration.
Our troubles and failures are well catalogued.
For a country that was, in terms of development, on a similar, if not better level with many countries at independence, it is discomforting that we are lagging behind as the economic indicators among nations now show.
In the midst of these challenges, it is easy to forget our unusual circumstances.
We have actually been moving from one political instability to the other such that we have barely been able to plan long- term and implement policies on a fairly consistent basis.
This instability has also impacted negatively on institutional development, which is necessary for advancement.
The structures of governance had barely been developed when we ran into a series of political obstacles shortly after Independence.
While we were at it, the military took over power and this fuelled a different kind of political instability which ultimately led to the unfortunate 30-month Civil War.
This was certainly not the dream of our founding fathers who sacrificed so much to give us Nigeria.
They did not dream of a country where brothers would be killing brothers and 195  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING sisters killing sisters.
They did not dream of a country where neighbors and friends would exchange bullets in place of handshakes.
Military rule and the Civil War were major setbacks for our nationhood.
They produced a polluted national landscape.
This did not offer the best atmosphere for national development.
It impacted negatively on Nigeria socially, politically and economically, a situation which further undermined our aspiration as a stable nation.
Without political stability, it has been very difficult to plan and build our institutions like other countries that were our peers.
Dear compatriots, despite the serious challenges that we have been living with; we cannot ignore the fact that we have cause to celebrate our nationhood and even a greater cause to look forward to a brighter future.
This is a historic occasion when we need to pause and appreciate who we are, what we have, and to reflect on the encouraging possibilities ahead.
There is certainly much to celebrate: our freedom, our strength, our unity and our resilience.
This is also a time for stock-taking, to consider our past so that it will inform our future.
This is a time to look forward to the great opportunities and challenges that lie ahead for Nigeria.
In fifty years, we have in several respects, attained heights that we should be very proud of as a nation.
In the fields of science and technology, education, the arts, entertainment, scholarship, and diplomacy, Nigerians have distinguished themselves in spite of the enormous hurdles they encounter every day.
If we could achieve so much under tough conditions, we are capable of achieving even much more in our journey to the Promised Land.
Our strides in medical science are hardly celebrated.
Recently a team of Nigerian scientists led by Dauda Oladepo of the International Institute for Pharmaceutical Research and Development (NIPRD) discovered CD4 Lymphocyte baseline for testing people living with HIV/AIDS.
The effort is all the more remarkable because it was funded by the Federal Ministry of Health and its findings are particularly useful to the Nigerian environment.
The discovery is very vital to monitoring and managing the disease progression in infected people.
Also, a Nigerian scientist, Dr. Louis Nelson, has made significant progress in his research to find a permanent cure for diabetes, which afflicts over 123 million sufferers worldwide.
The vaccine that has made Yellow Fever disease manageable was developed in our shores!
While we may not have landed a spaceship on the moon or developed nuclear 196  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING technology, our inventors and innovators have made globally acknowledged contributions.
Clearly, these are indications that within us are potentials that can be harnessed for greatness.
Nigerian writers have won numerous awards on the global stage.
Professor Wole Soyinka gave Africa its first Nobel Prize in Literature.
Professor Chinua Achebe pioneered the most successful African novel in history.
Ben Okri won the Booker prize.
Helon Habila, Sefi Attah and Chimamanda Adichie, among several others, are internationally renowned.
In the movie industry, Nollywood is rated second biggest in the world.
Nigerians have by themselves defied all that is negative around them to build a billion dollar film industry from the scratch.
This is a major landmark worth celebrating.
Today our actors and artistes are household names in Africa and parts of the world.
The future can only be brighter as competition in this sector breeds improved quality and better creativity.
Our leading professionals – lawyers, scientists, economists, doctors, diplomats and academics are celebrated all over the world.
They occupy prestigious positions in the leading institutions across the developed world.
Most of them were born and bred in Nigeria.
Most of them schooled here before they travelled abroad.
This should tell us something: that daunting as our circumstances have been, we are still full of ability and capability.
We are blessed with talented and patriotic Nigerians at home and in the Diaspora, many of whom are willing and ready to return home to be part of the drive to turn Nigeria around for good, so that the country can take its pride of place in the comity of nations.
My brothers and sisters, as we begin the journey to another fifty years of nationhood, we have two choices to make.
We can choose to focus on the imperfections and problems that easily beset us as a nation or we choose to focus on the unlimited possibilities that we have.
I urge us all to choose the latter.
I prefer to see the silver lining in the dark cloud rather than the dark cloud in the silver lining.
Today, we need to celebrate the remarkable resilience of the Nigerian spirit.
We need to appreciate, that even though the road has been bumpy; we have trudged on, in hope.
We may not have overcome our challenges, but neither have our challenges overcome us.
Whenever we are completely written off, we always bounce back from the edge to renew our national bond for the benefit of our progress.
That is the Nigerian spirit.
This is what has kept us together as a country even when other countries with far less challenges have fallen apart.
197  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING Our recovery from the scars of the Western Region Crisis, the Civil War, and the June 12, 1993 election annulment has convinced me more than anything else that Nigeria is destined for greatness.
It has proved that in our differences, tough circumstances and diversity, what binds us together is far stronger more than what divides us.
We have a glorious future awaiting us.
I am convinced that North or South, East or West, Muslim, Christian or other faiths, majority or minority, we are all bound by our common humanity and mutual aspirations.
We are not sworn enemies.
We are not irreconcilable foes.
We are neighbors who sometimes offend each other but can always sit down to talk over our differences.
We are one people and one family.
There are clear examples across the country where, in one family, you have people of different faiths and convictions living peacefully under the same roof.
The father could be a Muslim, the mother a Christian and the children professing different faiths.
Yet, they do not draw the sword against one another in the name of religion.
Fellow compatriots, one of the greatest achievements of our union this past fifty years are our togetherness.
The late Sardauna of Sokoto, Alhaji Ahmadu Bello once said: “Let us understand our differences.” I identify fully with these words of wisdom.
Our faith may be different.
We may not speak the same language.
We may not eat the same kind of food.
But we are in a plural society where we have continued to accommodate one another and integrate without reservations.
This we must build on!
This we must strengthen!
We have the opportunity of imitating our forefathers by envisioning a new society where our children and children’s children will live in peace and harmony and enjoy good quality of life comparable to the best the world can offer.
Today marks the dawn of a new era.
It is in our hands to decide what we want to make of it.
We must reawaken in ourselves the hunger and aspirations of our founding fathers for a strong, united and prosperous nation that shall be the pride of future generations.
To do this, we must change the old ways of doing things.
The core values of patriotism, hard work, integrity and commitment to good governance must henceforth take precedence.
It seems to me that the consensus of most Nigerians is that the time has come for us to break from the past and progress into a better future.
We should not allow Nigeria to be pulled back again by those who believe it is either they have their way or the country should fall to pieces.
The new Nigeria ahead of us, the new Nigeria we have to build together, is a society where everybody must feel at home.
It must be a place we can all be happy, comfortable and confident to call our country.
It is not just 198  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING enough for us to talk about how Nigeria can be great; it is our duty to make Nigeria great.
We can change Nigeria from our communities, cubicles and desks.
The task to make Nigeria great is a task for everyone.
My fellow citizens, we stand at a cross road.
Our forefathers did not achieve our freedom by doing what was easy or convenient.
We have not sustained our independence and built our democracy by wishful thinking.
We must not allow our future to pass us by.
We must grasp it and shape it, drawing on the same spirit and vision that inspired our founding fathers fifty years ago.
On my part, I promise visionary and committed leadership.
I promise to give my all, my best, to our great country.
I am committed to ensuring public safety and security.
Government is fully aware of the ugly security situation in Abia State.
We are determined to confront it with even greater vigor.
For our present and our future, I am committed to improving the quality of education and to give Nigeria the edge in human capital development.
We will rebuild our economy by continuing the implementation of the reforms in the banking and other sectors to ensure economic progress.
I will fight corruption and demand transparency so that we can all take pride in our government.
Through various policies, we shall continue to seek ways to grow the economy further, give our citizens greater opportunity so that we can compete better in the global market place.
I am committed to the implementation of a national fiscal policy that will encourage growth and development.
We will give priority to wealth creation and employment generation.
I am focused on addressing our infrastructure needs, especially power, as this is the biggest obstacle to our economic development and wealth creation.
I am determined to implement to the letter the recently launched power sector roadmap, and I am confident that we will soon be able to provide the power that we need today as well as the resources to meet the needs of tomorrow.
All the issues bordering on peace, justice and stability in the Niger Delta are being addressed and will continue to receive attention as we consolidate on the Amnesty Programme.
When God gives you an opportunity, you must use it to His glory and to the glory of His creations.
I promise to use the opportunity given to me by God and the Nigerian people to move Nigeria forward.
We must therefore pay special attention to the advancement of our democracy through credible elections.
I have said this and I will say it again, with 199  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING all the conviction in me: Our votes must count!
One man, One Vote!
One woman, one vote!
One youth, one vote!
The future of Nigeria and generations yet unborn is at stake.
We must start the journey to the next fifty years with credible elections, with a clean break from the past.
We must show the whole world that we can do things the right and the equitable way.
This is my pledge and I will never deviate from it.
The Nigeria of the next fifty years must be a land of delight.
The signs are not difficult to see.
We have a hardworking population, a growing sense of Nigerianness and a new generation of leaders with new ideas.
We must have a new sense of purpose and a determination to make things work.
WE MUST COLLECTIVELY TRANSFORM NIGERIA.
The ultimate result of all these, Fellow Citizens, is that a new Nigeria is in the making.
The worst is over.
Our latest democratic dispensation has defied all the odds.
Since Independence, we have never had 11 years of unbroken civilian rule as we have today.
This is a new experience for us.
With this comes stability.
With this comes the building of strong institutions.
With this comes the ability to plan and pursue our plans.
The great people of Nigeria, I implore all to join in the renewed efforts to remake Nigeria.
It is a task for everyone.
Pray for our country; wish our country well; do things that will make our country great; see and tap into opportunities for greatness that are everywhere around you and take pride in Nigeria.
These are the ideals that I embrace.
These are the issues that I am committed to.
In conclusion, I will like to speak to Nigeria’s greatest resource: our young men and women.
I say you have the greatest stake in transforming our nation.
It is time for this generation of Nigerians to answer the call and contribute to Nigeria’s foundation of freedom.
That is how this generation will make its mark.
That is how we will make the most of these opportunities.
That is how we will ensure that five decades from now, as our children and grandchildren celebrate our nation’s independence centenary, we will be remembered as having contributed to the great history of Nigeria.
On my part I commit myself to doing my very best and to call on your intellect, wisdom and commitment to bring this dream to fruition.
May God Almighty bless you all!
200  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING May God bless the Federal Republic of Nigeria!
Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, GCFR, President and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
BUILDING ON THE FOUNDATIONS OF UNITY AND PROGRESS: BEING AN ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT GOODLUCK JONATHAN ON THE OCCASION OF THE NATION’S 50TH INDEPENDENCE ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS TODAY 1ST OF OCTOBER 2010.
(See http://www.theinfostrides.com/index.php?topic=6389.0) 3.2 The Review of the Speech The Introduction President Jonathan uses the first paragraph to do two things: appreciate the Almighty and show his humility.
The paragraph is short and direct.
The second paragraph could be seen as part of the introduction.
It explains the nation’s mood at Independence.
The Body About one third of the speech (paragraphs 3-10) is devoted to tracing the history of Nigeria from Independence.
The writer mentions some of the harrowing experiences the nation has passed through, particularly the Civil War.
He attributes the Nation’s setback to The Civil War and military incursion.
Military rule and the Civil War were major setbacks for our nationhood.
They produced a polluted national landscape.
This did not offer the best atmosphere for national development.
It impacted negatively on Nigeria socially, politically and economically, a situation which further undermined our aspiration as a stable nation.
Without political stability, it has been very difficult to plan and build our institutions like other countries that were our peers.
The use of the expression ‘despite’ in the 11th paragraph marks a shift in the message: he has been addressing the history and setbacks of the country, but he wants to claim that the setbacks are not enough to prevent the nation from celebrating: Dear compatriots, despite the serious challenges that we have been living with; we cannot ignore the fact that we 201  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING have cause to celebrate our nationhood and even a greater cause to look forward to a brighter future.
The second part of the body is devoted to cataloguing the name of Nigerians who have made impact in their different professions.
This is an attempt to show that Nigeria is a country of great people with remarkable potential.
He mentions names that are known in many parts of the world, such as Wole Soyinka, Chinua Achebe and Chimamanda Adichie: Nigerian writers have won numerous awards on the global stage.
Professor Wole Soyinka gave Africa its first Nobel Prize in Literature.
Professor Chinua Achebe pioneered the most successful African novel in history.
Ben Okri won the Booker prize.
Helon Habila, Sefi Attah and Chimamanda Adichie, among several others, are internationally renowned.
Like most leaders do, he appeals to the sense of patriotism of the audience, to show that, with collective will, the nation can achieve greatness.
Nigerians are popularly known for the ability to survive under unimaginably terrible conditions.
He sees this as an advantage that should be deployed to make the nation great.
The reverence made to the June 12, 1993 election is to make the audience believe once again in the corporate existence of Nigeria, because the crises that attended that annulment of that election almost tore that nation apart: Our recovery from the scars of the Western Region Crisis, the Civil War, and the June 12, 1993 election annulment has convinced me more than anything else that Nigeria is destined for greatness.
It has proved that in our differences, tough circumstances and diversity, what binds us together is far stronger more(sic) than what divides us.
He uses the remaining part of the speech to reiterate his commitment to good leadership.
He mentions some issues that were of national interest: Amnesty to Niger Delta militants, free and fair election, and power project, among others I am determined to implement to the letter the recently launched power sector roadmap, and I am confident that we will soon be able to provide the power that we need today as well as the resources to meet the needs of tomorrow.
All the issues bordering on peace, justice and stability in the Niger Delta are being addressed and will 202  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING continue to receive attention as we consolidate on the Amnesty Programme.
The Conclusion President Jonathan concludes his speech by calling on the audience to join him in transforming the nation.
He promises them good governance.
On my part I commit myself to doing my very best and to call on your intellect, wisdom and commitment to bring this dream to fruition.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this speech, President Jonathan does not make many promises.
He mainly appeals to the audience to continue to be patriotic.
The historical approach adopted in this speech is meant to make the audience remember their past, part of which was glorious and part of which was unpalatable.
The speech combines short and long paragraphs effectively.
The language is simple and direct.
There is also attempt to identify with the audience.
The writer begins some of the paragraphs by calling on the audience (fellow compatriots, fellow citizens).This is an attention- gaining and identification strategies.
5.0 SUMMARY The speech reveals the use of historical events as a means of appealling to the audience.
The writer is not oblivious of the yearnings of the nation as at the time of the occasion.
He addresses the mind of the audience.
He pays particular attention to making them see the virtues they possess.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare and contrast President Jonathan’s speech with that of President Yar’Adua reviewed in the previous unit.
2.
What are the strengths of this speech?
3.
Do you notice any weakness in the speech?
Justify your answer, 4.
Assess the thought-flow pattern of the speech.
5.
Comment on the sentence patterns used in the speech.
6.
Your company is marking the 10th anniversary of its establishment.
Write a speech to be delivered as the Managing Director before the board of management of the company to mark the occasion.
203  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alimole, O.
(2002).
Speechwriting: A Guide for Diplomats and Public Officers.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Beebee, S. A.
& BeeBee, J.
B.
(1994).
Public Speaking: An Audience- Centered Approach.
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Dimbleby, R. & Burton, G. (1998).
More than Words: An Introduction to Communication.
London: Routledge.
Gregory, H. (2002).
Public Speaking: For Colleges and Career.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lucas, S. E. (2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Powers, J. H. (1993).
Public Speaking: The Lively Art.
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
Raman, M. & Sharma, S. (2004), Technical Communication: Principles and Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, D. K. (1969).
Man Speaking: A Rhetoric of Public Speech.
New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. http://www.theinfostrides.com/index.php?topic=6389.0.
Accessed on 7/3/2011.
204  ENG414 SPEECH WRITING 205
