 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ISL 402 COURSE TITLE: MODERN REFORM MOVEMENTS 1  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ISL402 COURSE TITLE: Modern Reform Movements in Islam 2  COURSE MATERIAL ISL402: Modern Reform Movements in Islam Course Team: Prof. Asif Folarin Ahmed (H.O.U.
Islamic Studies) NOUN Dr. Adejoro Raheem Mustapha (Course Developer/Writer, NOUN) Dr. Kahar Wahab Sarumi (Course Developer/Writer, NOUN) 3 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16, Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Abuja Annex 245, Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street, Central Business District, Opposite Arewa Suites, Abuja.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2013 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….
For National Open University of Nigeria 4  Module One: Unit 1: The Concept of Tajdīd and its Development 1.0 Introduction There is a strong tradition of revival and reform in Islam.
The concept of Tajdid (renewal/revival) is a fundamental concept within Islam, based on the Qur'an and Sunnah of the Prophet.
The preaching of Islam itself is presented in the Qur'an as the revival of the true religion of God and reform of corrupt practices that had crept into the practices of religion by earlier peoples.
Islam regards itself as both the corroboration and the purification of the original faith as held by prophet Ibrahim, father of monotheism.
Thus, Islam is not a new religion but a re-affirmation and renewal of the ancient Ibrahimic belief.
This unit attempts to examine the concept of Tajdid and its development in Islam.
2.0 Objectives The objectives of this unit include the following: - To delineate the meaning of the term Tajdid - To trace the origin of the term Tajdῑd - To examine the concept of Tajdid linguistically and in the light of Quran and Hadith - To investigate the development of the concept of Tajdid.
3.0 Main Content: The Concept of Tajdīd and its Development The responsibility of regenerating the Muslim community and returning it to the path of Islam anew has been obviously handed down to individuals within the community in the declaration of the Prophet that: "اهنيدّالهّدد يُجّنمّةنسّةئامّلكّسأرّىلعّةم لأاّهذلهّثعبيّللهاّّن إ" 5 Meaning “Certainly Allah will raise for this community, at the head of every hundred years, one (s) who will renew her religion for her.”This suggests to us that the Muslim community after the prophet will in reality go through some stagnation.
This quote also contains an assurance that the community will certainly be revived and put back on track.
The key word in this quote is yujaddid, the present form of the verb jaddada, whose verbal noun is tajdid.
The one(s) who carry out tajdid are thus guided "mujaddid(un)” revivalists.
In its linguistic sense the word jaddada means “to renew something”.
The word in its various grammatical forms has been used in the Qur’anand featured in some sayings “ahadith” of the prophet.
Since then, it has acquired a somewhat technical meaning.
It means returning something afresh exactly as it originally was.
In the context of the hadith quoted above, the word tajdid refers to renewing or better still reviving the application of Islam in the Muslim community.
Since the religion of Islam, as contained in the Quran and Hadith, has already been revealed and will remain intact, needing neither addition nor subtraction but only interpretation and application, definitely it is the application - which tends to wane with time – that needs revivals.
The word tajdid therefore, means the renewal of the application of Islam in society, revitalizing the Muslim community and returning it to the path of Islam afresh.
Though the words jaddada and tajdid cannot be found anywhere in the Qur'an, the concept of tajdid as well as the roots of the hadith are firmly embedded in the Qur'an.
The advent of the Qur'an, could be said to have represented the “tajdid” renewal of previous messages sent through earlier messengers.
Allah likens this tajdid of the Qur'an to bringing the earth back to life, when He says: Has not the time arrived for the believers that their hearts in all humility should engage in the remembrance of God and of the truth which has been revealed (to them) and that they should not become like those to whom was given revelation aforetime, but long ages passed over them and their hearts grew hard?
For many among them are rebellious transgressors.
Know you 6 (all) that God gives life to the earth after its death!
Already have We shown the signs plainly to you, that you may learn wisdom.
(Qur’an 57:16-17).
Turabi has persuasively argued that the coming down of messages as well as their frequent remembrance, revitalizes the community just in the same way the rain rejuvenates the earth.
These Quranic verses therefore, according to him, point to the necessity of receiving messages or remembrance thereof in order to prevent the drying of hearts to revitalize the community.
Being the last of the divinely revealed messages, the Qur'an had gone further to embed the culture of Tajdid in its message to ensure the continuity of the tradition of revitalization.
In addition to this, by choosing to start its message with the command to "Read: In the name of thy Lord Who created.
Create man from a clot"…Read: And thy Lord is the most bounteous.
Who teaches by the pen, teaches man that which he knew not”.
(Qur’an 96: 1-5).
The Qur’an with this is proclaiming an era of learning, encouraging the spirit of inquiry and closing the door of blind imitation (Taqlid).
In the revelations that followed, the Qur'an made its position very clear, condemning the blind followership of fore fathers: “When it is said to them: Follow what Allah has sent down.
They say: Nay!
We shall follow what we found our fore fathers following.” (Would they do that!)
even though their fathers did not understand anything nor were they guided?” (Qur’an 2:170).
The Qur’an in numerous passages encouraged critical observation and reflection and, and thus kept asking the question “afalaa ya' qilun" will they not reason?
In course of their long history, Muslims seem to forget this reality and went back into taqlid.
This has prompted the ahl al-Sunna (the Orthodox Muslims) to close the door of ijtihad, which is forever open according to the Quran.
Infact, the Qur'anic condemnation of taqlid touches all kinds of conservatism including Muslim conservatism in view of the fact that the Islamic faith should be held by conviction and not by convention since conviction is always personal and requires constant renewal.
7 In the Qur'an, the first step towards tajdid seems to be to prevent stagnation through constant renewal and strengthening of Iman.
The Prophet had informed that “certainly Iman (faith) wears out inside one of you just like cloth, so ask Allah to renew your the Iman, in your hearts” (al-Suyuti, Al-Jami’ al Saghir).
It is in the light of this prophetic saying that Turabi perceived the significance of those Qur’anic verses which call on those who believe to believe again; those who do good deeds to do again and again; those who fear God to fear Him again.
And When men ignore such appeals, as they often do, and therefore fail to prevent stagnation, then, the Qur’an assures that Allah Himself causes a party of the faithful to rise up to the challenge so that the agents of corruption and injustice would not have their way.
It is found in the Quran: “And did not God check one set of people by means of another, the earth would indeed be full of mischief: but God is full of bounty to all the worlds” (Q2: 251).
Renewal of the religion of Islam or revitalization of the Muslim community means the restoration of the Islamic order in that society.
As Islam is holistic in its approach and comprehensive in nature, it therefore neither admits of any spiritual-mundane dichotomy, nor leaves any aspect of human endeavor outside its purview.
The restoration of this order therefore must entail every facet of society, the intellectual and spiritual as well as the socio-economic and political aspects of the society.
In the fourth century of Hijrah, the Sunni scholars, as we mentioned earlier closed the door of ijtihad and encouraged the imitation (taqlid) of earlier jurists.
As taqlid gained pre-eminence, the Sharia, lost its dynamism and the Muslim community gradually began to stagnate.
The restoration of ijtihad, thus become an essential step towards the regeneration of the Muslim community.
Returning to the hadith on tajdid quoted above one observes that the word yab'ath, the present form of the verb ba'atha, meaning to raise, sheds more light on the issue of tajdid (revitalization).
Though the word ba'atha has been used in the Qur'an in reference to the prophets raised, this notwithstanding does not equate a mujaddid (a revivalist) with the prophets nor does it mean that the mujaddid is directly appointed in the way 8 Prophets were.
However, it surely suggests a relationship of a kind: that of continuity of role; a sharing in the divine blessing.
The mujaddid is a mujaddid simply because his efforts in this regard surpassed those of other scholars and brings about the desired transformation of society.
In the Arabic construction, the letter ْن مَ “who” in the hadith could mean both singular and plural, implying the meaning that the mujaddid can be one person or several other persons.
Many Muslim scholars have tended to see the mujaddid as a single person often unrivaled in his time and exceptional in his contributions.
4.0 Conclusion Tajdid, is a process of change within the Muslim community.
It seeks to revitalize the community and return it to the just order of Islam by restoring the vitality and supremacy of the Shari’a.
This process, in the Islamic world-view, is the natural substitute for or successor to Prophet hood.
While every Muslim individual has a responsibility to partake in this process, the Islamic scholars within the community justifiably bear the bigger part of this responsibility.
5.0 Summary This unit opened by introducing to you the concept of tajdid whereby it delineates the meaning of the term Tajdid and traces its origin.
It then proceeded to examine the linguistic and technical meanings of the concept.
It explained the term in the light of the Quran and Hadith, thus quoting some verses and sections of the Quran and the Hadith.
It identified the first step towards tajdid, which seems to be to prevent stagnation through constant renewal and strengthening of Iman.
It also investigated the development of the concept of Tajdid and how it has come to carry its modern connotation in Islamic Theology.
6.0 Tutor– Marked Assignment 9 Examine the term, tajdid and discuss how it metamorphosed to its modern connotation.
7.0 References / further Reading Sunan Abi Dawud No.
4291 Dar al-Hijra, Syria, 1973 vol.
4 Qur’an 57:16-17 H. Turabi, “al-Din wa al-Tajdid” in Mujallat al-Fikr al-Islami, No.
2 Khartoum Qur’an 96: 1-5 Qur’an 2:170 Qur’an 2:251 Al-Suyuti, Al-Jami’ al Saghir Usman Muhammad Bugaje, The Tradition of Tajdid in Western Bilad Al- Sudan: A Study of The Genesis, Development and Patterns of Islamic Revivalism in The Region 900 -1900 AD.
PhD Thesis,University of Khartoum, Sudan, 1991 S.H.H.
Nadvi, Islamic Legal Philosophy and the Qur’anic origins of Islamic Law, Academica, Durban.
10  Unit 2: The Position of Islam and the Muslims in World Politics during the 18th Century 1.0 Introduction Islam has a triumphant past.
During its early period, Muslim zeal sparked rapid religious and political expansion by peaceful conversion and violent conquest.
This drive was led at first by Arabs, then by Ottoman Turks and other Muslim dynasties.
At their farthest, the boundaries of Muslim domination encompassed the Middle East, North Africa, southwestern Asia to the Ganges River, Spain, and central Europe to just south of Vienna.
Conflict with Christian powers, especially those of Europe, is a second element of Muslim political heritage.
This unit examines the role of Islam in the political process at state, regional and international levels especially in the 18th century world politics.
2.
Objectives At the end of this course, students will be able to: - Know the Position of Islam and the Muslims in World Politics during the 18th Century.
- Assess Islam during the period of its rapidly growing empire.
- Identify the rival dynasties and competing capitals such as Baghdad, Cordoba, and Cairo in earlier world politics.
- Appreciate the position of two great Islamic powers: The Ottomans and the Moguls.
- Discuss the role of two examples of the coming of Islam in frontier areas: Indonesia and West Africa.
- Examine the place of Islam in Modern History.
3.0 Main Content 11 3.1 Islam and its Rapidly Growing Empire (632-750) After the death of Muhammad, a successor (khalifa, or caliph) was chosen to rule in his place.
The first caliph, the Prophet's father-in-law, Abu Bakr (r. 632-34), initiated an expansionist movement that was carried out most successfully by the next two caliphs, Umar I (r. 634-44) and Uthman (r. 644-56).
By 656 the Caliphate included the whole Arabian peninsula, Palestine and Syria, Egypt and Libya, Mesopotamia, and substantial parts of Armenia and Persia.
Following the assassination of Uthman, the disagreements between those upholding the rights of the fourth caliph, ALI (r. 656-61), the Prophet's son-in-law, and their opponents led to a division in the Muslim community between the Shiites and the Sunnites that still exists today.
When the governor of Syria, Muawiya I, came to power after the murder of Ali, the Shiites refused to recognize him and his successors.
Muawiyah inaugurated an almost 90-year rule by the Umayyads (661 -750), who made Damascus their capital.
A second wave of expansion followed.
After they conquered (670) Tunisia, Muslim troops reached the northwestern point of North Africa in 710.
In 711 they crossed the Strait of Gibraltar, rapidly overran Spain, and penetrated well into France until they were turned back near Poitiers in 732.
On the northern frontier Constantinople was besieged more than once (though without success), and in the east the Indus River was reached; the Islamic empire now bordered China and India, with some settlements in the Punjab.
3.2 Rival Dynasties and Competing Capitals (Baghdad, Cordoba, Cairo), 750-1258 In 750, Umayyad rule in Damascus was ended by the Abbasids, who moved the caliphate's capital to Baghdad.
The succeeding period was marked more by an expansion of horizons of thought than by geographical expansion.
In the fields of literature, the sciences, and philosophy, contributions by such Muslim scholars as al-Kindi, al-Farabi, and Ibn Sina (Avicenna) far surpassed European accomplishments of that time.
12 Politically, the power of the Abbasids was challenged by a number of rival dynasties.
These included an Umayyad dynasty in Cordoba, Spain (756-1031); the Fatimids, a dynasty connected with the Ismailis (a Shiite sect), who established (909) themselves in Tunisia and later (969-1171) ruled Egypt; the Almoravids and the Almohads, Muslim Berber dynasties that successively ruled North Africa and Spain from the mid-11th to the mid-13th century; the Seljuks, a Muslim Turkish group that seized Baghdad in 1055 and whose defeat of the Byzantines in 1071 led indirectly to the Christian Crusades (1096- 1254) against the Islamic world; and the Ayyubids, who displaced the Fatimids in Egypt and played an important role in the later years of the Crusades.
The Abbasids were finally overthrown (1258) in Baghdad by the Mongols, although a family member escaped to Egypt, where he was recognized as caliph.
While the brotherhood of faith remained a reality, the political unity of the Muslim world was definitely broken.
3.3 Two Great Islamic Powers: The Ottomans and the Moguls, 15th-18th Century The Ottoman Turkish dynasty, founded by Osman I (c.1300), became a major world power in the 15th century, and continued to play a very significant role throughout the 16th and 17th centuries.
The Byzantine Empire, with which Muslim armies had been at war since the early days of Islam, came to an end in 1453 when Ottoman sultan Mehmed II conquered Constantinople.
That city then became the capital of the Ottoman Empire.
In the first half of the 16th century, Ottoman power, already firmly established over all Anatolia and in most of the Balkans, gained control over Syria, Egypt (the sultans assumed the title caliph after deposing the last Abbasid in Cairo), and the rest of North Africa.
It also expanded significantly northwestward into Europe, besieging Vienna in 1529.
The defeat of the Ottoman navy in the Battle of Lepanto in 1571 was not, as many in Europe hoped, the beginning of a rapid disintegration of the Ottoman Empire; more than one hundred years later, in 1683, Ottoman troops once again besieged Vienna.
The decline of the empire becomes more visible from the late 17th century onward, but it 13 survived through World War I.
Turkey became a republic under Kemal Ataturk in 1923, and the caliphate was abolished in 1924.
The Moguls were a Muslim dynasty of Turko-Mongol origin who conquered northern India in 1526.
The Mogul Empire reached the climax of its power in the period from the late 16th century until the beginning of the 18th century.
Under the emperors Akbar, Jahangir, Shah Jahan, and Aurangzeb, Mogul rule was extended over most of the subcontinent, and Islamic culture (with a strong Persian flavor) was firmly implanted in certain areas.
The splendor of the Moguls is reflected in a special way in their architecture.
In the 18th century Mogul power began to decline.
It survived, at least in name, however, until 1858, when the last sultan was dethroned by the British.
3.4.
Two Examples of the Coming of Islam in Frontier Areas: Indonesia and West Africa While there may have been sporadic contacts from the 10th century onward with Muslim merchants, it was only in the 13th century that Islam clearly established itself in Sumatra, where small Muslim states formed on the northeast coast.
Islam spread to Java in the 16th century, and then expanded, generally in a peaceful manner, from the coastal areas inward to all parts of the Indonesian archipelago.
By the 19th century it had reached to the northeast and extended into the Philippines.
Today there are 140 million Muslims in Indonesia, constituting about 85 percent of the population.
Islam penetrated West Africa in three main phases.
The first was that of contacts with Arab and Berber caravan traders, from the 10th century onward.
Then followed a period of gradual Islamization of some rulers' courts, among them that of the famous Mansa Musa (r. 1312-27) in Mali.
Finally, in the 16th century the Sufi orders (brotherhoods of mystics), especially the Qadiriyya, Tijaniyya, and Muridiyya, as well as individual saints and scholars, began to play an important role.
The 19th century witnessed more than one Jihad (holy war) for the purification of Islam from pagan influences, while later in the 14 19th century and in the first half of the 20th century, Muslims formed a significant element in the growing resistance to colonial powers.
In the post-colonial period Islam plays an important role in Nigeria, Senegal, Guinea, Mali, and Niger, while there are smaller Muslim communities in the other states in West Africa.
3.5 Islam in Modern History Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt in 1798, followed three years later by the expulsion of the French troops by the combined British-Ottoman forces, is often seen as the beginning of the modern period in the history of Islam.
The coming to power of Muhammad Ali (r. 1805-49) and the modernization of Egypt under his leadership was the beginning of a long struggle throughout the Muslim world to re-establish independence from the colonial powers and for Muslim countries to assume their place as autonomous states in the modern world.
Resistance to foreign domination and an awareness of the need to restore the Muslim community to its proper place in world history are integral parts of the pan-Islamic efforts of Jamal Al-Din Al-Afghani as well as the nationalist movements of the 20th century.
The political, social, and economic developments in the various countries with Muslim majorities show significant differences.
For example, Turkey and many of the Arab countries have become secular republics, whereas Saudi Arabia is virtually an absolute monarchy, ruled under Muslim law.
Iran was ruled from 1925 to 1979 by the Pahlavi dynasty, which stressed secularization and westernization.
Growing resistance from the Muslim community, which is overwhelmingly Shiite, culminated in the forced departure of the Shah and the establishment of an Islamic Republic under the leadership of the Ayatollah Khomeini.
Pakistan too is an Islamic Republic of some kind in which the constitution provides for the enforcement of Muslim law by the state.
However, despite differences, the great majority of Muslims hold fast to the idea of the comprehensive character of Islam as well as to its basic theological doctrines.
15  4.0 Conclusion The position of Islam and the Muslims in world politics of the 18th century is distinct: they were more or less the major world power in the 15th century, and continued to play a very significant role throughout the 16th and 17th centuries through the Ottomans and the Moguls.
The decline of the empire becomes more visible from the late 17th century onward, but it survived through World War I.
Turkey became a republic under Kemal Ataturk in 1923, and the caliphate was abolished in 1924.
5.0 Summary This unit focused on the Position of Islam and the Muslims in World Politics during the 18th Century.
As a way of prelude it considers Islam during the period of its rapidly growing empire.
Rival dynasties and competing capitals including Baghdad, Cordoba, and Cairo were re-examined considering their position in earlier world politics.
Also the position of two great Islamic powers: The Ottomans and the Moguls were investigated before moving to assess the role of two examples of the coming of Islam in frontier areas: Indonesia and West Africa.
The unit culminated at discussing the place of Islam in Modern History.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment - What was the position of Islam and the Muslims in World Politics during the 18th Century?
- Assess the position of the Ottomans and the Moguls during the 18th century world politics.
7.0 References / further Reading http://utminers.utep.edu/ajkline/islam Retrieved 13th January, 2014 Cragg, K., and Speight, R. M., (1988) The House of Islam, 3d ed.
16 Lapidus, I. M., (1988) A History of Islamic Societies Schacht, J., and Bosworth, C. E., eds., (1974) The Legacy of Islam, 2d ed.
Esposito, J., ed., (1991) Islam and Politics, 3d ed.
Nasr, S. H., (1987) Traditional Islam in the Modern World.
Smith, W. C., (1959) Islam in Modern History.
Watt, W. M., (1988) Islamic Fundamentalism and Modernity.
Al Faruqi, I., and Lamya, L., (1986) The Cultural Atlas of Islam.
17  Unit 3: Emergence of Reform Movements among the Muslims 1.0 Introduction From the beginning of the Islamic era Muslim societies have experienced periods of renewal (tajdid).
Since the eighteenth century Muslim societies across the world have been subject to a prolonged and increasingly deeply felt process of renewal.
This has been expressed in different ways in different contexts.
Amongst political elites with immediate concerns to answer the challenges of the West, it has meant attempts to reshape Islamic knowledge and institutions in the light of Western models, a process described as Islamic modernism.
Amongst ‘ulama and sufis, whose social base might lie in urban, commercial or tribal communities, it has meant the re-organisation of communities or the reform of individual behavior in terms of fundamental religious principles - a development known as reformism.
This unit examines the emergence of reform movements among the Muslims.
2.0 Objectives The objectives of this unit include the ones listed hereunder: - To investigate the evolution of reform movements among the Muslims; - To trace the precedents of modern reform movements in Islam; - To recognize what the process of revival and reform entail.
- Appraise the role of the ulama and sufis in Islamic reformism.
3.0 Main Content 3.1.
Emergence of Reform Movements among the Muslims Islam regards itself as both the corroboration and the purification of the original faith of Prophet Abraham, not a new religion but a re-affirmation of the ancient Abrahamic faith and its renewal.
Islah (reform) is a Qur'anic term occurring in the following chapters of the Quran: “And as to those who hold fast to the Book and perform As-Salat (prayer), 18 certainly We shall never waste the reward of those who do righteous deeds”.
(Quran 7:170); “And your Lord would never destroy the towns wrongfully, while their people were right-doers” (Quran 11:117).
All these verses refer to the reformist activities of all the prophets throughout time, who were sent by God to warn their communities of their sinful ways, by calling on them to return to God's path.
The notion of tajdid (renewal) is based on the prophetic saying quoted in the previous unit.
From the beginning of the Islamic era, Muslim communities have experienced periods of renewal (tajdid) and reform.
Islamic scholars, thus, have declared that ‘Umar ibn Adul Azeez (‘Umar the second) and Imam Abu Hamid al-Ghazali were the reformers/revivalists of Islam for the 12th century.
They have identified the components of the tajdid to be mainly two, as listed hereunder: 1.
The process of renewal advocates that calls for a return to the basic moral and religious principles contained in the Qur'an and Sunnah.
2.
The right to practice ijtihad; that is to use independent reasoning in interpreting and re-interpreting the sources of Islam.
This two-edged process of renewal is based, primarily, on the assumption that the righteous community established and led by the Prophet Muhammad at Medina should be imitated by later Muslims.
Secondly, that the additions and innovations (bid‘a) that have crept into the practices of Islam by Muslims over the centuries, have to be removed, and thirdly, one must critically examine the interpretation of the medieval commentators and scholars of Islam.
Therefore, those who are regarded as re-newer of the faith, like Imam al-Ghazali, claimed the right to exercise ijtihad to re-interpret Islam in order to purify and revitalize their societies or communities.
As someone who exercised his right to re- interpret Islam and who had the credentials of a well-known scholar and theologian, al- Ghazali was able to make Sufism a part of mainstream Islam and instill new life into Islamic thought.
Ibn Taymiyya (d. 1328), was another famous re-newer/reformer of Islam, who interestingly, as part of his campaign to reform Islam, spoke against some 19 Sufi practices, such as visiting the shrines of famous mystics and the (blind) following of Sufi leaders, which he regarded as dangerous innovations within Islam and compromise of its basic principles.
Islamic reform movement reached its peak at the end of the 19th century, close to the end of the imperialist era.
And most of the modern pioneers of Islamic reform lived at the end of the 19th century.
There were major reformers and Modernists.
The first real pioneers were the Wahhabiyyah and the Sanussiyyah Movements.
The Wahhabi movement in particular tried to purge Islam of the accretions that had become attached to Islam and therefore wanted to go back to a fundamentalist interpretation of the Quran.
They revived the Hanbali school of thought, and adopted its dictates and writings.
Ibn Taymiyah, the 13th century reformer had earlier considered the Hanbali School as the right interpretation of Islam.
3.2.
Precedents of Modern Reform Movements The Islamic movements of the 18th and 19th centuries have their predecessors in earlier movements of religious renewal and political action.
The Hanbali movement in Baghdad and Syria in the 9th and later centuries was opposed to any other Muslim options.
With its strict insistence on acceptance and literal interpretation of hadith, suppression of popular Sufi practices, and strong criticism of corrupt Muslim states, Hanbalism was an active reformist force.
In the 13th century, Ibn Taymiya was particularly important as the leader of a local struggle against Christian invaders, Shi'i minorities, and the perpetrators of corrupt religious practices.
His writings became an important source for reform and revival from the 18th century to the present.
Revivalist movements were also available in North Africa where the Almoravids and the Almohads attempted to restructure a Caliphal type of government; define Islamic doctrinal purity; and integrate ethnic peoples into Islamic societies.
Reformist stances also emerged in Mughal India.
While elaborate forms of Sufism flourished, the syntheses of Muslim and Hindu practices were plentiful, and the Mughal state pursued a policy of conciliation among Muslims and Hindus.
Shaykh Ahmad Sirhindi, who claimed to be 20 the mujaddid, the renewer of Islam in his century, waged a serious struggle to persuade the Mughal authorities to adopt policies suitable for an Islamic state.
He opposed the insinuation into Islam of Sufi and Hindu practices such as veneration of saints, sacrifice of animals, and religious festivals.
Thus he represented the Sunni consensus viewpoint against several levels of syncretism, aristocratic and popular, then current in Indian Islam.
His successor, Shah Waliallah (1702- 1763) set in motion a series of reform movements including the Delhi, Patna and Deoband schools, the Barelwis, the Jamaa’at Tableegh and other movements, lasting to the present.
In the Ottoman Empire reform-minded religious scholars opposed popular ceremonies for the dead, Sufi dancing and singing, and the consumption of coffee and tobacco.
The legists, with the support of madrasa students and tradesmen, won political stand for a narrow definition of Islamic learning and practice.
Qadizade Mehmed Efendi (d.1635) formed a party to persuade the authorities to enforce a Shari’a-oriented form of Islamic practice.
Under the influence of this party, sufi tekkes (camps/circles) were closed, and Sufis were imprisoned.
By the late 17th and early 18th centuries these earlier religious and political tendencies - Hanbalism, North African Sufism, Indian Naqshabandi, and Ottoman conservative religious views - found a common forum in Mecca and Medina.
Here a group of important seventeenth and eighteenth century teachers including Ahmad al-Qushashi, Ibrahim ibn Hasan al-Kurani, Muhammad Tahir ibn Ibrahim al-Madani, Abu'l Hasan Muhammad 'Abd al- Hadi al-Sindi and Muhammad Hayya al-Sindi made Mecca and Medina the capital cities of the reform teaching.
In the eighteenth century, Cairo, under the influence of the Haramayn (Mecca and Medina) and with direct inputs from travelers and pilgrims coming from Yemen, North Africa, and other places, also became an important center of hadith studies and of the Sufi brotherhoods committed to reform struggle.
From these places, reform influences spread out throughout the Muslim world.
Many of the movements discussed above were led by people who had studied in these places.
21 However in these earlier periods the connection of revivalist or reformist ideology to political activism was not steady.
Many of the early religious reformers such as Sirhindi, Shah Waliallah and Qadizade Mehmed still worked within the framework of existing states, trying to persuade their rulers to adopt pro-Islamic policies rather than creating independent political movements.
In India, Indonesia, and sub-Saharan Africa reformist movements were sometimes aimed at inculcating newly converted peoples with the true teachings of Islam.
In other cases, Sufi led political movements, such as the post-Saljuq Sufi movements in Iran, symbolized by the Safavids, did not adopt a reformist position but adhered to syncretic Sufi and Shi'i beliefs.
Also in many early cases it is hard to find a convincing connection between reformism and modernization though more general connection between political and social tension and the rise of religious movements can be widely demonstrated.
Fundamental to all of these movements was the example of the Prophet whose life and teachings became the model of Islam.
In a cultural atmosphere predominant with competing pagan, shrine based, and monotheistic religious views, he brought a clarifying religious vision.
As a response to the political and economic stresses of the time he organized the first of the Islamic ‘reform’ movements, set the precedent for defensive war and formed an Islamic state according to Islamic ideals and in the interests of Muslim peoples.
The example of the Prophet is explicitly recognized and absolutely underlies all revivalist tendencies throughout Islamic history.
The revivalist movements of the present era therefore, are a response to and an expression of Muslim modernity; even as they are rooted in a deep historical and cultural standard for how Muslim peoples should cope with changing political, economic and cultural realities.
4.0 Conclusion The notion of tajdid (renewal) is based on the prophetic saying.
From the beginning of the Islamic era, Muslim communities have experienced periods of renewal (tajdid) and reform.
Islamic scholars, thus, have declared that ‘Umar ibn Adul Azeez (‘Umar the second) and Imam Abu Hamid al-Ghazali were the reformers/revivalists of Islam for the 22 12th century.
Ibn Taymiyya is regarded as another famous re-newer/reformer of Islam, who interestingly, as part of his campaign to reform Islam, spoke against some Sufi practices.
5.0 Summary This unit investigated the emergence of reform movements among the Muslims.
It tracked the precedents of modern reform movements in Islam and identified the earliest reform movements.
It also showed what the process of revival and reform is deeply rooted in Islam.
The unit proceeded to appraise the role of the ulama and sufis in Islamic reformism.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment - Track the origin of modern reform movements in Islam.
- Did the ulama and sufi saints have any role in the development of Islamic reform movements?
Substantiate your answer.
7.0 References / further Reading Afsaruddin, A.(2006).
“Revivalism and Reform” Retrieved October 24, 2013, from http://ocw.nd.edu/arabic-and-middle-east-studies/islamic Ira M. Lapidus, (1997) Islamic Revival and Modernity: The Contemporary Movements and the Historical Paradigms in Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, Vol.
40, No.
4 Cole, Juan.
(1998).
Modernity and the Millennium.
The Genesis of the Baha’i Faith in the Nineteenth-Century Middle East.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Ira M. Lapidus, (2002) A History of Islamic Societies 2nd ed., (Cambridge Publishing).
Barbara Daly Metcalf, (1982) Islamic Revival in British India: Deoband, 1860-1920 .
Princeton.
M. Iqbal, (1954) The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam.
Lahore, Pakistan.
23  Unit 4: The Wahhābiyyah 1.0 Introduction The first reform movement of significance in the 18th century is called the Wahhabiyyah from what is known as Saudi Arabia today.
This movement is also called Wahhabism in western coinage.
Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab was the brain behind this movement and by training was a jurist and a theologian.
He studied Sufism in the two principal cities of Mecca and Medina.
He was greatly influenced by the writings of the 13th century reformer Ibn Taymiyyah.
The movement has gone beyond its birth place and has spread into various continents.
This unit focuses on Wahhabiyyah as one of the earliest reform movements of the modern time.
2.0 Objectives The objectives of this unit include the following: - To investigate the origin of the Wahhabiyyah movement; - To peruse the history of the movement; - To know the doctrines of the Wahhabiyyah and to; - Examine their commandments and prohibitions.
3.0 Main Content: Wahhabiyyah (Wahhabism) 3.1.
Origin of the Name of the Movement The term Wahhabism is an English designation for the religious movement within Islam founded by Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab (1703-1792).
The name Wahhabiyyah derived from the name of the founder.
Members of the movement describe themselves as Muwahhidun (Unitarians), those who firmly uphold the doctrine of the oneness of God.
This self designation points to the movement’s major characteristic, its opposition to any custom and belief threatening and jeopardizing the glorification of the one God.
It views as un-Islamic and therefore condemns such practices as using the name of any prophet, 24 saint, or angel in a prayer; calling upon any such beings for intercession and making vows to them; and visitations to tombs of saints.
Adherents of this movement insist on a literal interpretation of the Qur’an and a strict doctrine of predestination.
Muhammad Abd al - Wahhab, spent some years in Medina and various places in Iraq and Iran.
He won the support of Ibn Saud, ruler of the Najd province (now part of Saudi Arabia), in the year 1744, after being expelled from his native city of Uyayna, because of controversial teachings of his Kitab al-Tawhid (Book of Unity).
Between about 1763 and the year 1811 Saudi Arabia nationals, who were members of the Wahhabiyyah movement established control over most of Arabia.
Though pushed back by the then ruler of Egypt, Muhammad Ali, they recovered part of their first empire between 1821 and 1833.
A long period of decline followed, but, in 1932, Ibn Saud succeeded in establishing the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
3.2.
History Wahhabiyyah emerged in the middle of the 18th century in Arabia as both a religious and political movement responding to the decline of the Ottoman Empire and the increasing strength of Shi'ah in Iran.
Its founder, Muhammad Ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab (1703-1792), had witnessed many examples of laxity, superstition, and blind allegiance to Sufi saints during his travels through Iraq and Arabia.
The political character of the movement took the form of opposition to the ruling Ottoman empire.
In 1744 Ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab formed an alliance with a local chieftain, Muhammad Ibn Sa'ud (1765), who accepted his doctrine and undertook its defence and propagation.
The demolition of shrines, tombstones and the capture of Mecca caused alarm in the Ottoman government which dispatched an army to crush the movement.
The decisive defeat of the Bedouin troops in 1818 brought the first Sa'udi-Wahhabi venture to an end.
A remnant of the Wahhabi movement survived in a part of Central Arabia.
In 1902 Abd al-Aziz Ibn Sa'ud, a member of the Sa'udi family and a follower of the Bedouin faith of the Wahhabiyyah, took Riyadh.
This event led to his gradual conquest of the interior of the Arabian Peninsula.
In 1927, Ibn Sa'ud signed a treaty with the British (who at that 25 time were controlling parts of the Arabian Peninsula).
The signing of the treaty gave him full independence in exchange for his recognition of British suzerainty over the Gulf sheikdoms.
The reformist movement of Ibn Abd Al-Wahhab acquired a political dimension when he joined forces with a local tribal chief, by the name of Muhammad ibn Saud.
Religious revivalism was now combined with military power to create a religion- political movement that was highly successful in achieving political power.
Finally in 1932, he named his state the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Wahhabiyyah then became the official doctrine of the state.
And today, the Saudi State remains firmly rooted in the Wahhabi creed.
The Wahhabi movement thus coalesced with the Saud family and together developed the ruling ideology for Saudi Arabia.
Wahhabiyyah is therefore the official ideology of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab was by training a jurist or a lawyer and a theologian who had also studied Sufism in the two principal cities of Mecca and Medina.
He was greatly influenced by the writings of the 13th century Islamic reformer, Ibn Taymiyya, who also condemned popular Sufi practices such as the visitation of tombs, and veneration of Sufi mystics, which he said are more or less like and reminds of idolatry and superstition.
Like other revivalists, Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, therefore, maintained that the moral decline of the Muslim community was due to deviation from the original practices of the earlier Ummah.
For the community to regain its vitality and moral vigor, these practices had to be uprooted and replaced with a society that resemble the early Muslim community set up by Muhammad.
3.3.
Prohibitions and Commandments of Wahhabiyyah Since the appearance of this movement from mid-18th century, they have been calling for a renewal of the Muslim spirit, with cleansing of the moral, and removal of all innovations into Islam.
The movement has played an important role in the funding of Saudi Arabia.
Wahhabiyyah is known for its conservative regulations which have impact on all aspects of life.
It has been recognized as being in accordance with Ibn Hanbali doctrine.
The term 'wahhabism' is not used by them; they call themselves “muwahhidun”.
26 Wahhabism is a term given to them by their opponents, and is now mostly being used by both European and Arab scholars to refer to them.
They started in 1912 to establish agricultural colonies, where people from different tribes lived together.
The inhabitants of these colonies were known as 'brothers' (ikhwân).
Each colony could house from 1,000 to 10,000 inhabitants.
The colonies were established near water sources, and were defended by arms.
Mud huts were built in place of traditional tents.
Prohibitions of Wahhabiyyah include the following: 1.
No other object for worship than God.
2.
Holy men or women must not be used to win favours from God.
3.
No other name than the names of Allah may enter a prayer.
4.
No smoking of tobacco.
5.
No shaving of beard.
6.
No abusive language.
7.
Rosaries are forbidden.
8.
Mosques must be built without minarets and all forms of ornaments.
The commandments of Wahhabiyyah include the following: 1.
All men must attend public prayer, Salat.
2.
Alms, Zakat, must be paid from all income .
3.
Butchers slaughtering animals according to halal (lawful) must have their life styles scrutinized.
It is not sufficient that they perform the basic rituals correctly.
3.0 Conclusion Wahhabiyyah understanding of ijtihad is not that ijtihad should lead to a rei-nterpretation of Islam but rather a return to the exact state of affairs during the time of the Prophet and his four caliphs.
No deviation whatsoever should be tolerated.
They denounced what appeared to them as saint worship.
Wahhabism is a majoritarian school of thought that somehow remains restricted to Saudi Arabia; no other Muslim country has adopted their 27 point of view on a large scale, although sizable number of people who consider themselves as Wahhabis are found in certain countries.
5.0 Summary This unit was able to relate the history of the origin of the Wahhabiyyah movement.
It perused the characteristics of the movement and highlighted its doctrines.
It also examined the commandments and prohibitions of the Wahhabiyyah.
We also considered the political achievements of the movements, whose impact is felt till this day in Saudi Arabia.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment - Trace the history of the origin of Wahhabiyyah and examine its revival/reform activities.
- Enumerate and explain the commandments and prohibitions of Wahhabiyyah.
7.0 References / further Reading Dobbin, C. (1983) Islamic Revivalism in a Changing Peasant Economy: Central Sumatra, 1784- 1847 (London: Curzon Press).
John Esposito and Ibrahim Kalin (Eds.)
(2009) The 500 Most Influential Muslims Georgetown University: The Royal Islamic Strategic Studies Centre.
Ahmad Zayni Dahlan al-Makki, “Fitnatul Wahhabiyyah” Accessible at: www.islamiceducation.com H. S. Philby, (1955) Saudi Arabia (n.p.)
H S Philby, (1982) Arabia of the Wahhabis (n.p.)
J. Sabini, (1981) Armies in the Sand (n.p.)
28  Unit 5: The pan-Islamist movement of al-Afgānī 1.0 Introduction Sayyid Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani was a prominent pan-Islamist of the nineteenth century.
His appeal of Muslim unity as a common front against the West and call for a regeneration of Islamic societies opened up the way for a new type of politics in Muslim lands and constituted a model for the Islamist discourse.
This unit will focus on the pan- Islamist movement of Sayyid Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani.
2.0 Objectives The objectives of this unit include the following: - To investigate the pan-Islamic programme of Sayyid Jamal ad-Din al- Afghani.
- To assess his religious reformist activities in the last quarter of the 19th century.
- To see how he was able to harness Western science, technology and contemporary political principles, for reform and regeneration of Islamic religion.
3.0 Main Content One of the prominent pan-Islamist figures of the nineteenth century hailed today as a precursor by contemporary Islamists is Sayyid Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani.
Sayyid Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani (1838/1839-1897) was a Muslim thinker, religious reformer and political agitator, who stands out as the major ideologist of pan-Islamism during the last quarter of the nineteenth century.
With his effortful propagation of the ideas of Islamic unity, that Muslim states should come together under the banner of religion as a common front against the West, and of an internal revival that Muslim societies needed to achieve 29 through a combined adaptation of Western science, technology and contemporary political principles, and a reform and regeneration of Islamic religion; he became the foremost figure influential in transforming Islam to a political factor.
Throughout his life he also championed the idea of nationalism in Muslim lands, sometimes equated with religion and sometimes defined in linguistic terms.
In both ways, he is considered to have opened the way for a novel type of politics in the Middle East; and he either trained as his pupils or prepared the ground for the ideas of many pan-Islamists, religious revivalists, nationalists, liberals and constitutionalists in Egypt, Syria, the Ottoman Empire, and Persia in the beginning of the 20th century.
During the course of his life Afghani travelled extensively and stayed in Afghanistan, India, the Ottoman Empire, Persia, Egypt, Britain, France and Russia.
Through these trips and residences he established contacts with prominent figures from diverse groups including religious reformers; early Arab nationalists; British, Russian, Ottoman and Persian government officials; Persian constitutionalist oppositionals, exiles, and dissidents; Shii jurisprudents (mujtahids); Babis and Bahais; members of the Young Ottomans, and, then, the Young Turks; and European intellectuals and political theoritsts.
While his oratory skills and personal magnetism both as a learned man of religion and as a man of politics enabled him to gather around himself many devoted followers wherever he stayed, he also managed or attempted on many occasions to work with statesmen to realize his desired ends.
He engaged in journalistic activities and intellectual debates; wrote political, social and religious tracts and articles; and acted on his own inititative as an agent in the conjuncture of Middle Eastern politics.
Though Afghani was never the originator of pan-Islamic and reformist ideas for the Muslim world, what made his reputation as the foremost nineteenth century Pan-Islamist was that he conveyed the message of the indispensability of Islamic unity against growing Western encroachments repeatedly and towards various audiences, suiting his appeal at any particular time to the specifities of the country that he operated in.
On the one hand, his message was essentially anti-Western, while on the other hand he conceded 30 that Islamic societies, in trying to achieve internal regeneration and revival, should borrow and benefit from European science, technology and philosophy, and adopt the values of modern Western polity.
The fact that Afghani had to work in different political environments forced him to switch his tone to match the particular circumstances leading to apparent inconsistencies in his thought throughout his personal history: at times he advocated parliamentary politics, but at other times he was ready to work with absolutist rulers; he sometimes saw the Ottoman Caliph as legitimate and tried to configurate a Muslim union centered around it, while on other occasions he seemed to support the claims for Arab Caliphate; even though he was notoriously anti-British he was on particular cases ready to cooperate with British officials and agents; and moreover, it seemed hard to follow when he would put forward Islamic religion as the only possible nationalistic bond for Muslim ummah or otherwise when he would be favoring local nationalist tendencies.
Afghani‟s reputation as the best known Muslim thinker of the nineteenth century comes from the fact that he championed anti-imperialist pan-Islamic ideas in the political context of the nineteenth century imperialism when there was the perceived threat and popular and intellectual reaction to growing Western pressures.
He was also an early critic of orientalism challenging the notion held by Europeans that Muslim Middle East was backward because of the “essential” features of Islam.
On the one hand, he sought to glorify the earlier achievements of the Islamic civilization; and on the other hand, he was apologetic in trying to explain the downfall of Muslim societies.
In many ways, he laid out the arguments and the rhetoric to be used by later nationalists and anti-imperialist Islamists in the Middle East.
Beside his ideas on Muslim unity, Afghani was also influential regarding his thoughts on Islamic revival, involving both reform and purification of religion, and borrowing from the West for the improvement of Muslim societies.
In this respect, he desired that Islamic societies develop their own philosophical reasoning referring to their own sources and traditions.
In that, he assigned central place to Islamic religion and sought to transform religion into 31 a social and political force.
Thus, while he was a remarkable man during his life Afghani became a legendary figure after his time, with his call for Islamic regeneration through solidarity remaining as a model.
Today he continues to maintain his reputation among contemporary political Islamists who regard him as a precursor.
It is under the light of the ideas, reputation and personal history of this pan- Islamist figure that his arrival in Istanbul to spend the last five years of his life, 1892- 1897, becomes a case deserving profound analysis, especially when one considers that these years coincided with Abdulhamid II‟s regime which was fundamentally one that sought centralization and legitimation centered around Islamism with pan-Islamic overtones.
These concepts, Islamism and pan-Islamism, are used as two distinct but interrelated concepts throughout this thesis.
Whereas the extensive and variational usage of these concepts does not allow precise and standard definition, the former refers to the ascension of the role of religion in social and political spheres so as to make Islam a dominant and decisive factor as ethics, politics and system of thought, whilst standing against Western domination.
The latter refers to organized activity to achieve, in practical terms, the ideology of Islamic unity toward the political union of Muslims eveywhere – around the central position of the Caliph.
4.0 Conclusion The 19th century witnessed some famous reformers and revivalists and are now forever associated with Islamic reform and modernism.
Among them is Jamal al-Din al-Afghani (d. 1897).
He had a disciple by name Muhammad ‘Abduh (d. 1905).
Both men stressed the importance of ijtihad as their main tool of effecting reform, and they advocated using ijtihad to arrive at new interpretations of Islam, rather than slavishly following the interpretation of the medieval scholars.
5.0 Summary This unit investigated the pan-Islamic programme of Sayyid Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani.
It assessed his religious reformist activities in the last quarter of the 19th century.
We also 32 showed how he was able to harness Western science, technology and contemporary political principles, for reform and regeneration of Islamic religion.
Afghani was a man with a vision for Islam and the Muslims.
This vision consisted primarily of a reform of Islam and a revival of a purified religion.
Some of the conversations of Afghani make it clear that Afghani's interest in a religious reformation was primarily instrumental.
Religious reform, he thought, had been the key to subsequent European progress and power, and such a reformation was also needed for the Islamic world to achieve the same goals.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment - Assess the pan-Islamist movement of Sayyid Jamal ad-Din Afghani.
- Al-Afghani borrowed from the West for the improvement of Muslim societies.
Expatiate.
7.0 References / further Reading Elie Kedourie, (1966) Afghani and 'Abduh: An Essay on Religious Unbelief and Political Activism in Modern Islam.
London Afsaruddin, A.
(2006) Revivalism And Reform.
Retrieved November, 30, 2013, from http://ocw.nd.edu/arabic Jacob M. Landau, (1952) Al-Afghani’s Pan-Islamic Project, Islamic Culture, XXVI, 3 Bernard Lewis, (1964) The Middle East and the West.
London.
33  Module Two: Unit 6: Muhammad Abduhu 1.0 Introduction The contributions of Muhammad Abduhu (d.1905) to modern Islamic movement was outstanding, and his role in the formation of the 20th century Islamic reform was unique, for according to Gibb, “he had inaugurated a new temper of religion and scholarship in Egypt to which ‘more than any other single man (he) gave…a centre of gravity and created…a literature inspired by definite ideas of progress within an Islamic framework.” ‘Abduh was one of the Egyptian thinkers, who is considered as the pioneer and prime advocate of Islamic modernism in Egypt during his lifetime.
He introduced Islamic modernism to overcome the backwardness of Muslims in Egypt and in other countries.
However, his Islamic modernism was unable to surmount the backwardness of Muslims in Egypt due to political and religious factors.
2.0 Objectives The objectives of this unit are to: - Examine Islamic modernism as advocated by Muhammad ‘Abduh in Egypt.
- Identify the aims and characteristics of ‘Abduh’s Islamic modernism.
- Discuss Abduh’s contribution to modernity and his dynamic influences throughout the Muslim society.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Muhammad ‘Abduh and Islamic Modernism Abduh’s Views on Modernity 34 Abduh favorably embrace the ideas of modernity which principally geared to the advancement of Muslim society.
The basic foundation of modern ideal proposed by him was largely grounded in rationalism, liberalism, nationalism and universalism of Islam.
“Abduh believed the rigid structures of Islamic culture were holding back what was essentially a logical and fluid religion.” The practice of Islam is essentially rooted in ontological premise of rational and logical truth and its teaching is lucid and clear for common understanding and comprehension.
He crafted essential framework for reform clamoring for change and “advocating a more modern conception of Islam”, making significant effort to enlighten classical tradition and ideas.
The struggle represents his ground for revival of Islamic ideals in modern society, and the expansion of freedom and the renaissance of political Islam.
Some scholars including Adams are of the view that Islamic modernism of Muhammad ‘Abduh represents an attempt to free the religion of Islam from the shackles of an excessively rigid orthodoxy, and to accomplish reforms which will render it adjustable to the complex demands of modern life.
The prevailing character of ‘Abduh’s Islamic modernism is that of religious reform; it is inspired and dominated mainly by theological considerations.
He embarked on a theological exercise to purge Islamic doctrine of traditional interpretations which are inconsistent with the original ethical and religious message of Islam.
His desire was to introduce a reformed Islam by asking Muslims to return to “the true Islam”, but his reformist call was by no means a simple one due to the grave backwardness of Muslims in many fields.
The Muslim were politically, for the most part subject to non-Muslim powers, and where they were not directly under foreign rule, they were subject to foreign influence…Their social, moral, and intellectual condition was terrible; they fell in many weaknesses and ills and were victims of many degrading customs, which are no part of the religion of Islam.
All these are observed to be the result of their ignorance of the true Islam and their failure to practice what they knew.
‘Abduh therefore believed that the cure for these many ills of Muslims is to return to “the true Islam”.
The true Islam as perceived by ‘Abduh is Islam that is free from all 35 the accretions which have originated from the customs of those who profess it, and the matters which they have added to it and which may have derived from some other religions.
‘Abduh also believed that the true Islam is that one practiced by the early generations of Muslims before the emergence of division among them.
He is quoted to have said: “I raise my voice…to summon to two important matters.
The first was, to free the mind from the chains of belief on authority, and to understand the religion (of Islam) as the early generation understood it, before the appearance of divisions among them, and to return to the original sources of the branches of the sciences (of Islam) in order to attain a proper knowledge of thing.
According to him, Islam is a religion of understanding and thought, not of imitation (taqleed); the study of the (Islamic) sciences becomes a service of God; veneration of prophets and saints is to be opposed; exclusive adherence to one school of Islamic Jurisprudence is the source of rigidity and backwardness in Islam; independent investigation (ijtihad) is the solution to all the problems of any time,…‘Abduh was a devout Moslem, who believed that Islam is in harmony with modern science and thought, and it satisfies the needs of modern life.
The truths of Islam according to him could be found in the primary sources, where lies the faith in its pristine form.
3.2 The Influence of Muhammad Abduhu in Modern Religious Movements The significant influence and pervasive impact of Muhammad Abduh has reflected in the modern religious movements around the world.
Example could be cited of such Malaysian movements as Muhammadiyah, al-Irsyad, Pensyarikatan Ulama, Hizbul Muslimin, Pertubuhan al-Islah (al-Islah Organization), Persatuan Islam, Sarekat Islamand Sumatera Thawalib.
These institutions had remarkably develop and extended Abduh’s decisive effort to advocate reform and renewal and challenge the obsolete and naivety of conservative old guard and demand radical transform in Muslim society and its worldview.
36 Generally speaking, Muhammad Abduh has great influence and contributions to Islamic reform in the Muslim world.
He made significant impact and major influence in diverse and wide spectrum of modern undertaking ranging from tafsir, journals, press, newspapers, magazines, Islamic institutions, schools and movements.
The fundamental aim of his reform was to reconstruct the modern worldview of Islam and adapt to modern requirement of dynamic civilization.
He had manifested greatest impact in the reform and tajdid movement due to several factors including (1) the dynamic aspiration for Islamic reform and renewal (2 inclusive approach to reconstruct religious idealism and scientific thought (3) defining method to reclaim the dynamic position of the umma (4) high aspiration to proclaim the power of reason and definitive ijtihad (independent reasoning) (5) rational approach and strong emphasis onislah (reform), maslahah (general welfare), wasatiyah (moderation)and the principle of maqasid shari‘ah(the higher objective of Islamic law )(5) the great commentary, al-Manar that provide viable solution to current challenge and malaise of the ummah.
4.0 Conclusion Based on the time of its rise and emergence in Muslim societies, Islamic modernism is a religious response from Muslims who do not see the political and national responses as suitable and attainable against the foreign powers ruling over Muslim societies and countries.
In case of Egypt, the British ruled the Egypt during the lifetime of Muhammad `Abduh.
His Islamic modernism can be seen as his reaction to the British rule in Egypt.
He co-operated with the British to make his Islamic modernism work and survive in Egypt.
5.0Summary In this unity, we were able to examine Islamic modernism as advocated by Muhammad ‘Abduh in Egypt.
We also investigated his Views on Modernity, identified the aims and characteristics of his Islamic modernism and discussed his contribution to modernity and his dynamic influences throughout the Muslim society.
37 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment - Examine the views of Muhammad Abduhu on modernism and identify its characteristics.
- What is Muhammad Abduhu’s view of true Islam?
7.0 References / further Reading Adams, C. Charles, 1968.
Islam and Modernism in Egypt A Study of the Modern Reform Movement Inaugurated by Muhammad `Abduh.
New York: Russell & Russell.
Izzeddin, Nejla, 1953.
The Arab World Past, Present, and Future.
Chicago: Henry Regnery Company.
Vatikiotis, P. J., 1985.
The History of Egypt.
Third edition.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Badawi, M.A.
Zaki, 1978.
The Reformers of Egypt.
London: Croom Helm.
Nasr, Seyyed Vali Reza, 1990.
Reflections on the Myth and Reality of Islamic Modernism.
Hamdard Islamicus, Xiii(1) 38  Unit 7: Hasan Ridā and the Sanūsiyyah 1.0 Introduction Sanūsīyah is a Muslim Ṣūfī (mystic) brotherhood established in 1837 by Sīdī Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī as-Sanūsī.
In modern history, the head of the Sanūsī brotherhood was king of the federal kingdom of Libya from its creation in 1951 until it was superseded by a Socialist republic in 1969.
The Sanūsīyah brotherhood was a reformist movement aimed at a return to the simple faith and life of early Islām.
As a missionary order it sought to reform the lives of the Bedouins and convert the non-Muslim peoples of the Sahara and Central Africa.
The vast majority of people called Sanūsī did not practice Sanūsī rites but were personal followers of as-Sanūsī al-Kabīr, the Grand Sanūsī, and his family.
By the turn of the 20th century the order was well-established among most of the Bedouins and the oasis dwellers of Cyrenaica and the Sirtica, the Libyan Desert of Egypt, southern Tripolitania, Fezzan, central Sahara, and the Hejaz.
The order was strongest in Cyrenaica, where it integrated its religious lodges (zāwīyahs) with the existing tribal system to such an extent that it was able to marshal its members against the Italians in World War I.
After the war the Sanūsīs emerged as political spokesmen for the people of Cyrenaica in the negotiations with the British and the Italians and maintained this role throughout World War II.
On December 24, 1951, Idris, the head of the Sanūsīyah movement, was proclaimed king of an independent United Kingdom of Libya.
He was overthrown by a military junta led by Colonel Muammar al-Qaddafi on September 1, 1969.
2.0 Objectives Some of the objectives of this unit include the following: 39 - To study the evolution of the Sanusiyyah movement; - To look at the structure of the movement; - To examine its activities within the context of the Sunni Islam; - To assess its success in its call to Traditional Islam.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of its Evolution Ever since the Suez Canal was opened in 1869, North-Eastern Africa and the Middle East have attracted a great deal of attention,.
As a consequence of this event the unavoidable process of rivalry has emerged; mainly between France, Great Britain, Italy and then Germany, after this country had been unified in 1871.
The purchasing by the British government 44% shares of the Suez Canal from Egyptian khedive Isma'il in November 1875 brought another significant factor which accelerated the challenge for these regions of the world.
However, having established its domination over Egypt in 1882, Great Britain intensified the creation of its famous 'Imperial route', which facilitated better connections of the Mother country with her vast and remote colonies in India, Australia and the Far East.
Having achieved a political domination over the Suez Canal region, the British initiated another significant process, a new stage of rivalry over the African territories.
Thus, the so called "scramble for Africa" had begun.
What also needs to be mentioned are the social processes that began to take place among the Arab tribes at the turn of the 19th century.
Mainly, the ruling sheiks and tribal elders, embarked on breaking off the ties with Constantinople with a view to creating an Arab state, or some states when the decaying Ottoman Empire was expected to collapse.
The above factors and the approaching turmoil of war, which involved the whole region in 1914-1918, was to determine the objectively existing background of the al-Sanusiyah question.
a movement with religious, political and military aspects yet a warlike and influential religious Order.
40 The Sanusiyah is a sufi brotherhood based in Libya and the central Sahara founded by Muhammad bin Ali al-Sanusi (1787-1859).
The Sanusi brotherhood is well known for its role in the resistance movement against French and Italian colonialism, but it was formed as a strictly religious brotherhood based on the doctrine of the Shadhiliyah order.
Muhammad bin Ali al-Sanusi was born near Mostaganem in Algeria.
In his early life he studied Sufism and Islamic sciences including law and tradition in the reformist environment of Fez.
In 1823 he moved to Cairo and later to Hijaz to continue his studies.
In Mecca he studied under the guidance of Ahmad bin Idris, a well known sufi teacher.
Soon afterward, when Ibn Idris left for Yemen, al-Sanusi was in charge of his students and built the first lodge at Abu Qubays outside Mecca in 1827.
In 1841 he returned back to North Africa settled in Cyrenaica and founded his new organization.
The Sanusiyah is commonly known as a “revivalist” brotherhood but its doctrine is not different from other traditional Sufism.
It disapproves of excess in ritual, such as dancing or singing.
Its great emphasis is on the role of the prophet and on following his example.
Al-Sanusi wrote several books arguing for the right of ijtihad.
He put this into practice by incorporating elements usually found in Shafi’i school but still maintaining his way to be a Maliki one.
3.2.
Structure of the Movement The structure of the organization was simple and centralized.
The local lodge had very little autonomy and was ruled by three or four officials appointed by the center.
The core area of the organization was a desert that of the Bedouin of Cyrenaica.
The order also had a number of urban lodges and into non-Bedouin areas like Tripolitania and Fezzan in western Libya as well as in Hijaz.
It spread across the Sahara to the east of Lake Chad.
The brotherhood was not at all militant; rather, it promoted learning and piety among its adherents.
It also had a strong work ethic, particularly to the building and upkeep of new lodges and development through agriculture.
The brotherhood became an important factor in the development of Trans-Saharan trade.
The center of the order was established in Jaghbub, on the Libyan-Egypt border, but later on moved to Kufa in the middle of Libyan desert in 1895.
The French, who were moving toward Lake Chad saw the 41 Sanusiyah as an activist and inimical force and opened hostilities at the Bir Ali Lodge in Kanem in 1901.
The Sanusiyah were caught unaware and withdrew but they quickly took up arms, and the population in the region fought the French in the name and under the leadership of the brotherhood, until the Sanusiyah were forced to withdraw around 1913- 14.
When Italians invaded Libya in 1911, the Sanusiyah order was not targeted as enemies, but when Turkey withdrew from Libya the following year, the Sanusi leader Ahmad al- Sharif raised the call for jihad and led a large Bedouin force against the invaders.
The Sanusi held the Italians at bay for several years, but an attack on the British forces in Egypt led to the brotherhood’s defeat.
Al-Sharif was replaced by his cousin, Muhammad Idris.
After the rise of fascism in Italy, the struggle became a more purely Bedouin one led by tribal leaders like Omar Mukhtar, while the Sanusi led by Idris was in exile in Egypt.
During this time, which lasted until 1932, the Sanusi organizational structure of lodges was largely destroyed.
When the modern state of Libyan was created and in 1951 was made king of Libya.
He was removed by the coup of Mu’ammar Qadhdhafi in 1969.
Later on the religious Sanusiyah brotherhood had become a monarchical order.
Today the order is not tolerated in Libya, and outside Libya only a few lodges remain, including the oldest one at Abu Qubays near Mecca.
4.0 Conclusion Sanusiyah was founded in 1837 by Sidi Muhammad ibn Ali az-Sanusi al-Mujahiri al- Hasani al-Idrisi as a response to the corruption of the Gimel empire and the increasing encroachment of European ideology and expansionism.
His radical ideas caused him to be identified with Saint Francis of Assisi.
He ruled the country until a modern Islamic revolutionary: Colonel Muammar al-Qaddafi, instigated the military Gimel on September 1st 1969 to subdue the power and influence of the movement.
5.0 Summary Acting in the sphere of Sunnism, the Sufis fraternity al-Sanusiyah preached the necessity of returning to the human "pure" principles of conduct which should conform to 42 Wahhabi’s ideology created in 18th century.
Soon, ideas of this militant mystical movement began to catch up among the Bedouin tribes dwelling in the Hajaz.
Therefore, the Ottoman authorities, supported by jealous Muslim spiritual leaders of Mecca, expelled the Sanusis from there.
Muhammad Ibn Ali As-Sanusi and his ardent followers moved to Cairo and then to Siwah oasis.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Examine the history of the evolution of the Sanusiyyah movement and discuss its activities before its decline.
7.0 References / further Reading Yaser Amri, “Brief history of Sanusiyah movement” Retrieved from: Islam in modern world on: http://modernislam.blogspot.com/ 14/01/2014 The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica, “The Sanusiyyah” Retrieved from: http://www.britannica.com/Sanusiyah on 14/01/2014 Zalewski, Zygmunt Stefan, (2008) “The Activity of the Islamic Order Al-Sanusiyah at the Turn of the 19th Century” in Forum on Public Policy: A Journal of the Oxford Round Table.
Accessible from: www.questia.com 43  Unit 8: The Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt 1.0 Introduction The Muslim Brotherhood is probably the most powerful political force in Egypt in the modern time.
It began as a religious and anti-colonialist movement and became the “wellspring of Islamist ideologies around the world”, according to the New York Times.
Today, it has metamorphosed into a freely-affiliated global movement and its ideology and methodology as envisioned by its founder, Hassan al Banna, has profoundly influenced generations of Muslim activists in their objective of spreading Islam throughout the world.
While united in this goal, the Muslim Brotherhood has taken different forms, adjusting to the local political conditions in which it operates.
This unit will briefly address the history of Muslim Brotherhood, its ideology and organizational structure.
2.0 Objectives The objectives of this unit include the following: - To quickly review the history of the Muslim Brotherhood of Egypt; - To examine its ideology and ideologues; - To study its organizational structure; - To consider the status of the Muslim Brotherhood around the globe today.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of the Muslim Brotherhood 44 In 1453 the successful conquest of Istanbul by the Ottomans solidified the Ottoman Empire’s predominance, headed by the Islamic Caliphate, in the region until 1923.
After World War I the Ottoman Empire was dissolved as a state and the nation of Turkey was formally established.
Mustapha Kemal Ataturk was the founder and first President of Turkey.
He was a war hero and a national figure.
He quickly sought to abolish all Islamic influence in Turkey in favour of European influences, including secular rule.
Ataturk abolished the Caliphate, which had existed in varying forms since Islam began in the seventh century C.E.
He banned the growing of beards by men and wearing of scarves by women.
He banned the call to prayer by Muezzins.
He abolished Arabic script and replaced it with Latin and made the Turkish military the custodians of secular tradition.
The abolishment of the caliphate in 1923 was viewed negatively by the global Muslim community.
In response, Hassan al Banna formed the organization called “The Society of Muslim Brothers, or al-Ikhwan al-Muslimun, in Egypt in 1928.
Al-Banna was convinced that the Islamic community was at a “critical crossroads” and insisted that Muslims would find strength in the total self-sufficiency of Islam.
The Muslim Brotherhood began as a twofold movement for the reform of both the individual as well as societal morality.
In order to achieve their goals, they advocated: 4.0 Moving away from secularism and 5.0 Moving towards a political and civil society organized by the principles of the Qur’an which includes the implementation of Sharia law.
Since the early 1930s, the Muslim Brotherhood has long viewed social outreach as a way to demonstrate its ideological commitment to alleviating poverty, reducing inequality and increasing social responsibility.
Through the creation of medical clinics, hospitals, charitable societies, cultural associations and schools, they seek to integrate the Islamic principles taught in the Qu’ran into the fabric of daily life.
In the 1920s and 1930s, when the Muslim Brotherhood rejected Western imperialism, the movement grew quickly and established branches in other countries.
Within its first two decades, it boasted a membership of two million people and had established approximately 2,000 branches across Egypt.
Throughout the 1940’s and during World 45 War II, the Brotherhood continued to advocate and work for a society that followed Sharia law while adamantly calling for the removal of British forces occupying Egypt.
3.2 Hassan al Banna, Founder of the Muslim Brotherhood The Muslim Brotherhood (al-Ikhwan al-Muslimun) was founded as an Islamic revivalist movement in the Egyptian town of Isma’iliyaa in March 1928 by school teacher Hassan al-Banna (1906-1949).
Hassan al-Banna derived his definition of an ideal Islamic state through his interpretation of the Qur’an.
He asserted that the only way to create a genuine Islamic State would be the banning of Western ideas and influences on Shar’ia doctrinal laws.
In general, Al-Banna did not propose using violence as a means of creating an Islamic State.
While Article IV, section 2 of the Muslim Brotherhood’s basic regulations of 1945 stated that, “the Brethren will always prefer gradual advancement and development ...” Several statements by the leadership of the Muslim Brotherhood showed that it was inclined to resort to violence under certain circumstances.
Al-Banna, for example, clearly asserted that he would not hesitate to use violence if he were forced to do so, or when the Brotherhood was ready to “seize power”.
The idea of political Pan- Islam was less central to his thinking than that of religious Pan-Islam.
Al-Banna sought the union of Islamic nations around the precepts of the Qur’an and he saw political organization, propaganda and activism as the means to achieve his goals.
He declared that the mission of his organization was to accomplish two objectives: the independence of the Muslim land from foreign domination, and the establishment of an Islamic socio- political system.
He believed that reviving and resurrecting the ummah must inevitably begin with the individual, stressing that those able to rebuild the Muslim community must have three qualities: spiritual strength manifested through the determination of the individual and his integrity and self-sacrifice, knowledge of the principles of Islam, and the ability to relate the Islamic principles to real life and apply them effectively to practical circumstances.
There was no room in their thinking for compromise with other manners or customs; Islam had presented to them a unified and perfect system and the introduction of foreign elements on a large scale into Muslim society were to be avoided.
46  3.3 Ideology and Ideologues The Muslim Brotherhood seeks to restore the historical Caliphate and then expand its authority throughout the world with the intent of dismantling all non-Islamic governments.
Historically, their objectives have been pursued by a combination of political and violent warfare.
According to the American Defamation League’s International Terrorist Symbols Database, the early ideologues of the Muslim Brotherhood provided the ideological framework for almost all modern Sunni Islamic terrorist groups.
The Muslim Brotherhood ideology has largely been influenced by a few primary intellectuals including Hassan al Banna, its founder, Sayyid Qutb and Hassan al- Hodaybi.
3.4 Present Day Muslim Brotherhood The Muslim Brotherhood’s “federated structure” grants individual branches a certain degree of autonomy that allows for independent operation in case of a state crack-down.
The organization has used activism, mass communications and sophisticated governance to create an impressive base of support within the lower class and professional elements of Egyptian society.
By leveraging existing social networks associated with mosques, welfare associations and neighborhood groups, the Muslim Brotherhood has incorporated itself into the social fabric of Muslim societies.
It has reached global status, wielding power and influence in almost every country with a Muslim population.
In countries with a Muslim majority, there is often a political party of the Muslim Brotherhood.
The Brotherhood is active in over eighty countries including Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, the Palestinian territories, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria and Tunisia as well as the regions of Eurasia and Africa.
It is the dominant party in Egypt’s parliament, obtaining 47% of the vote and in the Tunisian government getting 40% of the vote.
In the form of Hamas, it is an explicit branch of the Muslim Brotherhood as it rules the Gaza Strip.
4.0 Conclusion 47 What began as a reaction to the dissolution of the Caliphate over eighty years ago grew to become the most influential Muslim organization in the world.
The Muslim Brotherhood is no longer Egypt-centric, but a global organization that has successfully become part of the political process in many countries and across continents.
5.0 Summary This unit opened by introducing you to what the Muslim brotherhood means and what gave impetus to it.
It then proceeded to examine its ideology, objectives and methodology as envisaged by its founder, Hassan al Banna.
In the main content, we discussed the history of the Muslim Brotherhood, its goal, organizational structure and how it has influenced or is influencing some Muslim groups and political system in some parts of the world.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Trace the history of the Muslim Brotherhood and examine it ideology, objectives and methodology.
7.0 References / further Reading Mona El-Ghobashy, (2005) “The Metamorphosis of the Egyptian Muslim Brothers,” International Journal of Middle East Studies Cambridge University Press Liad Porat, (2012) “The Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and Its True Intentions Towards Israel”, BESA Perspectives Paper No.
192.
Comprehensive Information on Complex Issues, “The Muslim Brotherhood: An Historical Perspective on Current Events” Retrieved from: www.cimicweb.org.
on January 10, 2014 Amr Hamzawy and Nathan J.
Brown, (2010) “The Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood: Islamist Participation in a Closing Political Environment”, Washington DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Publications Department.
Abdel-Latif, O, (2008) “In the Shadow of the Brothers: The Women of the Egyptian 48  Muslim Brotherhood” Beirut: Carnegie Middle East Centre.
Unit 9: Uthman Dan Fodio 1.0 Introduction In this unit we will look at brief biography, teaching and preaching activities of Sheikh Usman Dan Fodio.
We will also examine his jihād activities as well as his revival and reform efforts and effects all these have on western Sudan and by extension Africa and the Muslim world at large.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you should be able to: - Discuss the biography of Sheikh Usman Dan Fodio.
- Explain his teaching career.
- Enumerate the subject of Usman Dan Fodio’s teaching.
- Assess the existing conditions in Hausaland when he appearance.
- Examine forces that led to the outbreak of the jihad.
- To discuss the reform and revival activities of Usman Dan Fodio.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 His Early Life The wheel of socio-political unrest was set in motion in Hausa land.
The man who masterminded the jihad to its successful completion was a Fulani scholar Usman Dan Fodio.
In fact, Dan Fodio was the patron and inspirer of the 19th century Islamic revolution that swept through the Sudan.
He combined in himself both courage and 49 devotion to the cause of Islam and erudition.
He was a highly vocal preacher and a prolific writer.
Usman Dan Fodio was born at Marata to a Fulani tribe, whose scattered members provided most of the Muslim reformers.
His own ancestors had migrated from Futa Toro, possibly in the 15th century and were a scholarly clan devoted to Islamic learning, teaching and the manufacture of Koranic amulets.
Shortly after Usman’s birth his family moved to Degel in Northern Gobir where he grew up.
He was taught to read the Koran by his father, and later studied under different scholars among whom were Mallam Jubril at Agades and Mallam Usman Binduri, thus he became an expert in Arabic grammar; Islamic theology, history and learnt the techniques of explanation and public speaking and the writing of poetry.
Usman became famous as a scholar and a teacher, many young men flocked to Degel to study under him and receive his spiritual guidance.
During the 1780’s, Dan Fodio was employed by rulers of Gobir Nafata as a teacher to the royal court, among his pupils was Prince Yunfa who later became the King in 1802.
This was the result of his popularity which came because of his teaching and intellect.
Dan Fodio gained followership from among his Fulani tribesmen, Bororoje, Hausa talakawas and generally the downtrodden in the society as he engaged in his career from one community to another.
3.2 His Teachings Usman Dan Fodio’s teaching was not just restricted to theological matters; he also concerned himself with issues of social justice, women education, corruption, public administration and above all the establishment of a virile Islamic State.
Usman Dan Fodio’s preaching was aimed, first at converting the common people to a puritanical form of Islam and only later at compelling the rulers of Gobir to set up an Islamic state.
He enlightened people on Islamic doctrine and pointed out how wicked it was to make sacrifice to another gods and to be careless in observing prayer times.
50 He preached against the treatment of women as tools only to be used and dumped.
He condemned the drinking alcohol and encouraged the giving of alms.
Dan Fodio strongly preached against the ostentatious life led by the aristocrats and demanded rulers to rule in accordance with Islamic injunctions.
The government should conform to requirement of the shariāh: Law courts should follow Islamic law and apply Islamic remedies.
Usman Dan Fodio also preached against the un-Islamic nature of the fiscal system of the society.
Taxes were levied indiscriminately and heavily on the masses which generated tension and sharp contradictions in the society.
Corruption was very prevalent in the society at all levels.
Government officials demanded bribes for everything that had to be done.
The Judicial system was not only corrupt but manned and organized in unislamic manners thus, criminals got away with their crimes.
Usman Dan Fodio’s teachings challenged the entire administrative system and social order of Gobir and by extension hausaland in late 15th century and for that reason he won a large body of followers.
Nominal Muslims (both settled Fulani and Hausa) responded to his calls to reform their personal lives.
Settled Fulani discontented at their exclusion from the higher levels of government, saw the religious movement as means of establishing their political power over the Hausa people.
3.3 Usman Dan Fodio’s Preaching Career As mentioned earlier Sheikh Usman Dan Fodio was a great teacher who preached against injustice and unislamic attitude in the society.
Therefore more followers were attracted to him.
He started his preaching career in Degel, his home town and as he became more popular, Sarki Bawa of Gobir (1776-1796) tried to win him over by flattery, through consulting him on doctrines of Islam but failed, the Sarki used other means including a present of 500 Mitkals of gold but all in vain.
All these increased his popularity.
Thus, the King banned his activities and decreed that Muslim men should not wear turban while women must also not wear veil, to all these, Usman objected.
51 During the reign of Yunfa confrontation against the Sheikh continued to the extent of attempting on his life.
This forced Usmn Dan Fodio to take a flee to Gudu from Degel.
With this he claimed to have performed hijra.
It was in the midst of all these antagonism, the Fulanis decided to take arms against their Hausa overlords.
3.4 Uthman Dan Fodio’s Reform and Revival Activities It is, indeed, during the nineteenth century that we see two major revivalist figures in Africa.
The first, Usman dan Fodio, came close to being proclaimed Mahdi but opted instead for establishing an Islamic state in what is now northern Nigeria.
The other, Muhammad Ahmad, proclaimed himself Mahdi in The Sudan, but died before carrying out his grand plans, and left it to his successor, the Khalifa ‘Abdullahi, to grapple with theday-to-day problems of establishing an Islamic state.
Both men were scholars of the law and both were also Sufis; both were rare examples in the Islamic tradition of men of learning becoming men of action and wielders of state power.
Both of these movements deserve closer attention, not only because of what they tell us about Islamic revivalism and its relation to social and political protest.
The long-term consequences of them both are still with us.
Let us look at the movement of Shehu Usman dan Fodio.
He sprang from a Fulani group with origins in northern Senegal.
They had been settled in (what is now) north-western Nigeria since the fifteenth century, and by the mid-eighteenth century had become known for their piety and learning.
Usman received a local education in the Qur’an and Islamic law and dogma, and by 1774 at the age of 20 had embarked upon a career as an itinerant preacher and teacher.
He had also been inducted into the Qadiriyya Sufi Order.
The Fulani were a marginal people, living on the edges, or in the interstices, of a predominantly Hausa society.
The Hausa were divided into a number of small and often antagonistic kingdoms, ruled by Muslim sultans supported by an elaborate hierarchy of officials.
The mass of the people were peasants living in villages and hamlets, while in the cities many various crafts were pursued, as 52 well as trade, both local and long distance.
Slaves provided a good deal of the labor among the elite class, and the rulers maintained large harems of enslaved women.
Yet others formed a staple in the trans-Saharan trade.
A historian of this area, Murray Last, has suggested that there was an economic crisis in the area in the eighteenth century.
Hausa sultans practiced extortion on their subjects to maintain their overblown life styles; a wide gamut of taxes was being raised, including a cattle tax that particularly affected the pastoral Fulani.
The Fulani themselves were becoming increasingly hemmed in by the nomadic Tare to their north and loss of local grazing land turned over to agriculture in an apparent cotton boom.
Enslavement of rural populations may also have been on the increase, not only to satisfy trans-Saharan trade, but also to be funneled southwards towards the Atlantic slave trade, then at its height.
There also seems to have been an expansion of the Muslim learned class among the Fulani and increasingly narrower interpretations of Islamic obligations.
Shehu Usman preached against narrow condemnation of the ordinary Muslim on doctrinal grounds, while fostering a movement of wider education and community solidarity among Muslim populations both Fulani and Hausa.
The local ruler of the state of Gobir saw this as the development of a state within a state and tried to hold it at bay, banning what we would today recognize as “fundamentalist” dress—turbans for men and veils for women, seen apparently as loyalist clothing of followers of Usman dan Fodio.
Although he had some close and unfriendly encounters with his local sultan, Shehu Usman was left free, though restricted in his freedom to make new converts.
In the closing years of the eighteenth century he preached that the sultan of Gobir, and then, by extension, all Hausa sultans, had renounced the faith of Islam on account of their oppression of Muslims, their ostentatious life-styles, and the un-Islamic taxes they imposed on the people.
Having declared them infidels he then withdrew from the territory of Gobir with a devoted band of followers following the practice of the hijra of the Prophet Muhammad.
Like the Prophet also, Shehu Usman became the political, as well as religious, leader of his community, adopting the caliphal title “Commander of the Faithful” (amir al-mu’minin), and again like the Prophet he proclaimed a jihad against those he considered 53 “unbelievers” and enemies.
In the short space of four years, from 1804 to 1808 Shehu Usman, with the help of his brother and son, roused most of the local Fulani and many Hausa peasants—even some Tuareg—to fight and overthrow the sultan of Gobir, while allied Fulani groups undertook the defeat of several other remoter Hausa sultans.
His movement certainly had millenarian overtones.
Among his hundred or so writings are several that deal with the question of the Mahdi.
It is clear that he thought the Mahdi’s appearance was imminent.
Nevertheless, he saw his basic mission as the establishment of an Islamic state and the spiritual preparation of Muslims for the eschaton.
Within this Islamic state, he set up Fulani-ruled stateless (or emirates, as they were called) in place of the Hausa states and, together with his brother ‘Abd Allah and his son Muhammad Bello, wrote numerous treatises on how to establish and run an Islamic state.
Shehu Usman’s sons and grandsons continued to be at the helm of political affairs of the emirates of an over arching Islamic state, using the title “Commander of the Faithful”, for the rest of the nineteenth century, while descendants of Shehu Usman’s original appointees ruled the emirates.
These emirates proved to be enduring political organizations, essentially grounded in older Hausa forms of government that stretched back several centuries.
When the state founded by Shehu Usman, generally known as the Sokoto Caliphate, fell to the Maxim gun of British imperialism in the opening years of the twentieth century, the shrewd High Commissioner for Northern Nigeria, Sir Frederick Lugard, used them as the basis of his policy of Indirect Rule.
Emirs continued to be responsible for the day-to-day running of their states, but under the watchful eye of British Residents who would intervene if the emirs’ actions did not meet their approval.
Certainly, the wings of the emirs and of the Commander of the Faithful—now given the more secular title of Sultan of Sokoto—were clipped by the British, and they have been even more sharply clipped by successive Nigerian governments since independence in 1960.
Nevertheless, they still survive, blending Islamic legitimacy with older traditions of Hausa government and now, even sometimes with modern business sectors—one of the last sultans of Sokoto (Ibrahim Dasuqi) having been a successful merchant banker before his elevation.
54 If the shadow, at any rate, of Shehu Usman’s political institutions continued to be cast over much of northern Nigeria throughout the twentieth century, what about his social ideas?
Shehu Usman was writing and acting at a time well before any ideas of the European Enlightenment had penetrated the Islamic world.
But he was active at a time when Islamic revivalist-reformist ideas were much in the air elsewhere in the Muslim world.
In Arabia, in the Prophet’s city of Medina, for example, there was a prominent school of thought in the eighteenth century that gave pride of place to the precise implementation of the Prophet’s practice—his sunna—in all spheres of human activity, and stressed the need for individuals to ascertain Prophetic practice and follow it.
Shehu Usman certainly preached a revival of the Sunna — one of his major books is entitled “Revival of the Sunna and Suppression of Innovation” (Iya’ al-sunna wa-ikhmad al-bid’a), and late in life he appears to have advocated more personal responsibility in this matter.
But, by and large, his approach was a conservative one: follow the models elaborated by the scholars of the past and eschew radical rethinking of social and political norms.
His recipe for religious regeneration was education for all—study of the Qur’an, the hadith, the prayers, and basic obligations of the religion.
Reviving the Prophet’s practice, he encouraged the education of women in religious matters, and several of his daughters emerged as scholars and writers.
4.0 Conclusion The Sokoto jihad was a revolutionary movement within a traditional Muslim society.
It was revolutionary in ideology, in organization and in intellectual and emotional appeal.
The jihad transformed the Hausa states in different perspectives, from paganism to true practice of Islam, from lack of systematized and exploitative system of administration to a systemized, sincere and accountable system of governance.
5.0 Summary The unit highlighted the brief biography of Sheikh Usman Dan Fodio, the causes of his jihad which were categorized on religion, political, social and economy.
Other aspect 55 pinpointed out in this unit includes the process of the jihad and finally, the effect of the jihad.
Shehu Usman certainly preached a revival of the Sunna — one of his major books is entitled “Revival of the Sunna and Suppression of Innovation” (Iya’ al-sunna wa- ikhmad al-bid’a), and late in life he appears to have advocated more personal responsibility in this matter.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments - Write a short biography of Sheikh Usman Dan Fodio.
- Enumerate three causes of Sokoto jihad.
- Discuss the effects of Sokoto jihad in Hausa land.
- Assess the revival and reform activities of Sheikh Usman Dan Fodio.
7.0 References For Futher Reading Boahen A.A. & Webster J.B. (1967) The Growth of African Civilization, London: Longman.
Last, Murray (1967) The Sokoto Caliphate, London, Longman.
Usman Y.B.
(ed) (1979) Studies in the History of Sokoto Caliphate, Lagos, Third Joness Ltd. John Hunswick, “Islamic Revival in Africa: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives”.
Hunwick, John.
(1995).
Arabic Literature of Africa.
Vol.
II, The Writings of Central Sudanic Africa.
Leiden: E.J.
Brill Hunwick, John, (1996) “Secular power and religious authority in Islam: the case of Songhay” Journal of African History, 37, No.2 56  Module Three: Unit 10: The Mahdi of the Sudan 1.0 Introduction The idea of a Mahdi (a saviour of humanity) is held not only in Islam but by various other religions, such as Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism and Zoroastrianism.
This theoretical idea of Mahdi has however, been given a political and religious dimension by Muslims who believe that the expected Mahdi will fight the wrong, correct the evils and establish a new world order based on the Islamic teachings on justice and virtue.
The history of the Mahdi-claimants begins with Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyya (d. 700 C.E.
), who was proclaimed as a Mahdi by his followers.
They denied his death and claimed that he was in hiding at Jabal al-Rahwa and he would one day return to champion the cause of his followers.
From 9th century onwards, many people have claimed the Mahdi and led religious movements in their own territories for the revival of Islam.
Among them are Muhammad Ubayd Allah (d.934 C.E), the first Fatimid Caliph, who came to power through manipulation of both Mahdist expectations and Shi’i sentiment in North Africa; Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Temart (d. 1130 C.E), who guided the Almohads reform movement against the Almoravid dynasty 1; Isma’eel al-Hafawi (d. 1524 C.E.
), who carved out for himself a kingdom in Iran and Iraq from which the modern Persian state of Iran has evolved and; Muhammad Ahmad bin Abdullah (d.1885 C.E.
), who overthrew the Turco-Egyptian administration (1821-1881) in the Sudan, and established an 57 indigenous territorial state, by the name of the Mahdist State (1881-1898 C.E.).
This unit focuses on the reform and revival activities of the Mahdi of Sudan, Muhammad Ahmad bin Abdullah.
2.0 Objectives The main objectives of this unit are to: - To study the ideology of the Expected Mahdi in both Sunni and Shiite literature.
- To examine the case of the Sudanese Mahdiyyah (1881-1898), the most eminent opposition movement in the 19th century Muslim world.
- To highlight the distinctive features of the Sudanese Mahdiyyah, and to investigate its political legacy before and after Sudan’s independence.
- To look at the reform and revival activities of the Mahdi of Sudan.
3.0 Main Content 3.1.
The Ideology of the Expected Mahdi in both Sunni and Shiite literature The term Mahdi (divinely guided one) has come to denote an eschatological figure whose presence will usher in an era of justice and true belief prior to the end of time.
The origin of the word cannot be traced back to the Qur’an, where in fact it is never mentioned, but rather to a strictly honorific title applied to the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) and the Rightly Guided Caliphs by the earliest Muslims.
The term first appeared in its meaning of the divinely guided one in 686 C.E.
when the Shi’ah revolted in Kufa against the leadership of the Umayyads, and their leader al-Mukhtar bin Ubayd Allah al- Thaqafi and his Kayseni followers proclaimed Muhammad bin Hanafiyya as the Mahdi.
This revolt was suppressed by the Umayyads and brought to an end by Muh’ab bin Zubayr who defeated and killed al-Mukhtar in 687 C.E.
Before the death of al-Mukhtar, Ibn al-khanafiyya declined the title and the cause, and died in 700 C.E.
without achieving any significant success.
But many of his adherents denied his death as reality, and argued that he was in hiding at Jabal al-Rawha from where he would eventually return and fill the earth with justice and equity, as it had been filled with injustice and oppressions.
Similar beliefs arose around Muhammad bin Hanfaiyya’s son, Abu Hashim (d. 716 C. 58 E.), Muhammad bin Abdullahi al-Nafs al-Zakiyya (d. 762 C.E.
), Ja’far al-Sadiq (d. 765) and numerous others.
The denial of the Imam’s death has popularized a number of religious aspects of the Shi’i theory of the Imam, such as the clear designation of the Imam by God’s command and determination, the concealment and expected return of the Mahdi.
The concepts of concealment and return of the expected Mahdi at the appropriate time became two central beliefs in the Shi‘i doctrines.
This has helped the Shiites to endure under difficult circumstances and to hope for reform in anticipation of the return of the Mahdi.
They looked forward to occurrence of the promised events that would accompany the emergence of the Hidden Imam, who would adjust the present unbearable circumstances in favor of the oppressed loyalists to the Imam.
The Imam would be advised by God to conceal himself in order to avoid the aggression of his enemies.
The best example in this case could be said to be that of the Twelfth Imam, Muhammad al-Hasan al-‘Askari, who went into occultation in the year 874 C.E., and according to his followers, will continue to live in this state for as long as God deems necessary; and then God will command him to reappear and take control of the world in order to restore justice and equity.
They hold that during this period of concealment, the Imam is not completely cut off from his followers but has spokesmen in the person of jurists who can act on his behalf and guide the Shiites in their religious matters.
The idea of the expected Mahdi was developed from a simple notion of a leader who would bring Islamic justice to the oppressed.
The idea developed into complex theories that were largely institutionalized by Imam Ja ‘far al-Sadiq (765) as a way to firmly establish the legitimacy of the Imamate and acknowledge the concealment of the Hidden Imam until his full return at the appropriate time.
In the writings of the Shi’ah, the features of the Hidden Imam (Mahdi) are as follows: - Firstly, he is from the descendants of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) and possesses final authority in both the temporal and religious spheres.
- Secondly, he derives his authority by a clear designation by the previous Imam and not through an elective system of succession.
59 - Thirdly, he has the ability to understand both outer and inner meaning of the Qur’an by the virtue of the Muhammadan light which is passed along to each succeeding Imam.
- Fourthly, he has the authority of interpreting the Qur’an’s inner meanings because he is divinely inspired, sinless and infallible.
To the Shiites, the belief in these features is an integral part of the profession of Islamic faith.
In other words, the acknowledgment of the expected Mahdi is the fourth cardinal article of the Shi‘i faith.
To support their belief, the Shi‘i theologians listed a number of traditions attributed to the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH), such as: the Mahdi will be of the Prophet’s family, he will bear the Prophet’s name, and his father will bear the Prophet’s father’s name etc.
As for Sunni Muslims, belief in consensus of religious scholars for authoritative decision- making is very important.
In general, Sunni notion of a Mahdi came to represent a restorer of faith and one chosen for office.
Two of the four fundamental collections of Sunni traditions (al-Bukhari and al-Muslim), make no mention of the Mahdi.
Sunni theologians accept the general belief in a Renewer, or Reformer (mujaddid), who appears every century in some part of the Muslim world and whose function as the reviver of the faith and the strength of the community partly corresponds to the role awarded to the Mahdi.
3.2.
The Case of the Sudanese Mahdiyyah (1881-1898) Most Westerners believe that the Mahdist revolution in the Sudan was staged against the western Christian rulers, probably because of the events that led to the death of a British general, Charles George Gordon, who was killed in Khartoum in 1885 after a year-long siege by the Mahdi’s forces.
Though the Mahdi actually moved against western influences; but his movement was originally aimed against the alleged Ottoman rulers of the time.
The Mahdi’s justification for declaring jihad against the Ottoman administration in the Sudan was that the country’s leaders were no longer “real” Muslims, and therefore 60 no longer had any right to rule.
The Westerners were drawn into this conflict partly because they were accused of supporting the “apostate leaders” in their deliberate effort to undermine and eventually destroy the Muslim identity.
Thus the occurrence of the Mahdist revolution in the 19th century Sudan was a result of various internal and external factors that shaped the political situation in the country, and facilitated the spread of Mahdist tendencies.
At the top of these internal factors is the corrupt administration of the Turkish rulers, who were accused of brutality and injustice, and whose religious conviction was seriously contested by the Sudanese.
Throughout the sixty years of their administration they took several measures that provoked the opposition of powerful religious and tribal groups against their administration.
This later led the religious and tribal groups to unite under the banner of the Expected Mahdi, who would release them from the oppression and tyranny of the Turkish rulers.
In 1874 for example, the conquest of Darfur by the Turks and their Sudanese clients led to resistance from the Kayra ruling family and the Baqqera nomads of southern Darfur, who realized that they had exchanged the light and sporadic suzerainty of Sultan Ibrahim for an ostracized and tax-collecting administration.
Another internal factor that fired the opposition against the Turco-Egyptian administration has to do with the efforts by Khedive Ismaeel to establish an effective administration over the non-Muslim southern Sudan, predominantly controlled by the reverian traders.
The Khedive’s attempt to suppress the slave trade also intensified the resistance of these trades, and incited the opposition of other two main groups.
The first group was nomadic tribes, who used to help the slave traders in transporting slave caravans through tribal lands up to the northern Sudanese borders with Egypt.
The second group was the riverian farmers, who were affected by the suppression of slave trade that caused a sharp rise in the prices of domestic and agricultural workers.
The third factor was associated with the appointment of religious scholars in the administration of the governmental mosques and judicial institutions at the expense of traditional religious leaders who subsequently voiced their rivalry against the Turco- 61 Egyptians agitating against the loss of a wide range of their judicial, teaching and arbitration functions in the pre-colonial Sudanese kingdoms.
The nomination of a large number European Christians in key posts over a vast majority of Muslims also triggered the anger of this group and made it loose its faith in the Ottoman administration and therefore subscribe to the ideology of the Expected Mahdi.
This jittery political situation encouraged the discontented Sudanese to think loudly about the time of the Expected Mahdi, who would resolve their grievances.
The people of Kordofan in western Sudan particularly voiced their bitter grievances and waited for the deliverance at the hands of a Mahdi.
All these accounts reveal how the idea of the Expected Mahdi had spread widely among the Sudanese and proved to be highly potent ideology in mobilizing and directing their energies against the Turco-Egyptian regime on the one hand, and towards constructing a salvation history on the other.
It was amid the happenings related above that a Sufi Shaykh with a reputation for piety and integrity, proclaimed himself as the Expected Mahdi.
This man was Muhammad Ahmad bin ‘Abdullahi (1844-1885) who had originally been a disciple in the Sammaaniyyah Order.
Muhammad Ahmad bin 'Abdullah is the most famous al Mahdi.
3.3.
The Distinctive Features of the Sudanese Mahdiyyah and its Political Legacy The father of al-Mahdi was a ship builder in the Dungulah district of the Sudan.
The family moved south to a village near Khartoum shortly after the birth of al-Mahdi.
As a young man al-Mahdi was devoted to religious study.
His devotion inclined very much toward a mystic Sufism.
He aspired to strong self discipline and an ascetic life.
As a young man he joined a religious order called the Sammanujah and it was not long before he was given the status of shaykh.
Muhammad Ahmad bin ‘Abdullah (Muhammad al-Mahdı) headed a religious political movement (the Mahdiyya) for the revival and reform of Islam with a view to restoring, on the basis of the Qur’an and the Sunna, the Islamic theocracy that prevailed in the days of the Prophet Muhammad and the Righteous Caliphs.
The idea of Mahdism had manifested 62 itself in the Sudan as early as the seventeenth century.
The Mahdist movement was motivated by eschatological expectations whose source of inspiration can be traced to Egypt in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
In its initial stages the Mahdist movement had many features of a social and political protest movement.
Its main causes were as follows: the conquest of the Sudan by Egypt under Muhammad ‘Alı; the decline of the socio-political status of the indigenous religious functionaries and their replacement by orthodox ulama’, who were supported by the Turco-Egyptian regime; the annexation of Darfur to Egypt in the last quarter of the nineteenth century; and the attempts to put an end to the slave-trade with the assistance of Euro-American Christians, attempts that antagonized Sudanese vested interests.
Sudanese society was well entrenched in tribal customary law (and identified by its affiliation with popular Sufi tarıqas).
The success of the Mahdi’s attempt to consolidate a radical theocracy in such a society was dependent on the mitigation of the orthodox Shari’ah to the extent that was necessary to meet custom half-way (while maintaining strict uncompromising Puritanism in matters pertaining to morality and ethics), and enabling a charismatic leader enough scope of maneuver to solve daily political and social problems arising within a theocracy.
For this purpose, the Mahdi created a unique legal methodology that provided him with unlimited authority to enact positive rules without any institutional restriction on the part of orthodox ulama’a.
In June 1881 he dispatched letters from the Island of Abba in the White Nile, informing the notables of the Sudan that he was the Expected Mahdi.
He argued that his Mahdiship was declared in a prophetic assembly attended by the Prophet (PBUH), the four Guided Caliphs, the Prophet al-Khidir, and princes of the faith, where the Prophet (PBUH) informed him that he was the Expected Mahdi.
He then supported his claim by quoting Ibn al-Arabi’s commentary on the Qur’an that “the knowledge of the Mahdi and that Hour none knows but Allah Most High”, emphasizing that the nomination of the Mahdi lies outside the scope of human capacity.
The previous Mahdi-claimants were illegitimate due to the assumption of Ahmad bin Idris that the Mahdi will come forth from a place that nobody knows and in a condition which the people will refuse to 63 acknowledge.
In this sense Muhammad Ahmad legitimized his claim and declared jihad against the “infidel Turkish rulers” in the Sudan and for the sake of liberating the Muslim world from European colonial domination.
His call for jihad attracted various socio- political and religious groups, which had a common interest in removing the Turco- Egyptian regime from power.
Sudan was thus divided into two quarters: the abode of Islam (dar al-Islam) and that of war (dar al-Harb), and the Mahdi’s followers were advised to stop the payment of taxes and wage jihad against their opponents.
The responses to the Mahdi’s call gradually developed into a nationwide revolution that led to the overthrow of the Turco-Egyptian administration, and the establishment of the Mahdist state in 1885.
Khartoum was deserted and branded as the capital of the “infidels” and the Mahdists set up the headquarters of their new Mahdist government in Omdurman on the western bank of the Nile.
The Mahdi, as a head of the state and the sole legitimate successor of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH), called for a literal return to the idealist model of the first Islamic State in Madinah.
Consequently, he named his senior military officers after the four Rightly Guided Caliphs and appointed a group of judges to hear civil, criminal and personal cases according to the Qur’an, the Sunna and Mahdist proclamations.
He also established a treasury, known as bayt al-mal, to manage state revenues that accrued from booty, zakat, etc.
The events marked the end of the Turco-Egyptian administration and laid the foundations of the Mahdist social and political order.
3.4.
Islamic Political Activities of the Mahdi of Sudan.
As a young man, al Mahdi’s religious fervor attracted a following and in 1870 he and some of his disciples travelled 175 miles of Khartoum to an island in the Nile called Abba.
They went there to receive religious instruction from one of the teachers living on that island.
But al-Mahdi later faulted his teacher’s worldliness and was thus expelled from the following.
He then joined the following of another teacher on Abba Island.
Between 1880 and 1881, al-Mahdi became convinced that the rulers of Egypt and the Sudan were all corrupt puppets of the infidel Europeans and that the ruling class in 64 general had abandoned true Islam.
He felt his mission was to destroy those corrupt forces and agents.
On June 29, 1881 Muhammad Ahmad bin ‘Abdullah assumed the title of al- Mahdi, (The Divinely Guided One).
He and a small number of his followers began the insurrection.
He quickly gained followers and took control of the territory.
The government in Egypt sent troops to subdue the uprising.
Two such expeditionary forces were wiped out.
The government then sent a force of eight thousand troops commanded by a British general.
This too was wiped out, to a man.
In 1884 al-Mahdi forces besieged Khartoum.
The defense was under the command of Charles Gordon, who had earlier commanded British forces in the Chinese Empire.
The defenders of Khartoum resisted the siege for months and a military expedition under Lord Kitchener was sent to relieve the defenders but it was delayed.
In January 1885 the forces of al-Mahdi overpowered the defenses.
When Gordon’s headquarters was stormed he took up a sword to valiantly fight to the end.
Apparently against the express wishes of al-Mahdi Gordon was killed.
Al- Mahdi did not live long after his brilliant military victory over the Anglo-Egyptian forces in Khartoum.
He died about six months later on June 22, 1885.
He was about forty-one years of age.
It had taken not quite four years from his assumption of the title of al-Mahdi to conquer the Sudan and establish Islamic theocratic rule over it.
Before his death al- Mahdi named three Khalifas to be his successors.
Khalifah ‘Abdullah emerged as the dominant figure and ruled with the support of the Baqqara Arabs, but he was later hunted down and killed.
4.0 Conclusion This unit was able to show how the idea of the Expected Mahdi had functioned as a strong ideology that directed the energies of the Sudanese Mahdists towards the overthrow of the Turco-Egyptian administration in 1885, and inspired them to establish a territorial Mahdist State.
However, Mahdi State later broke down in 1898.
Its followers consider “themselves as purer and more representative of true Islam” than other socio- political groups in the Sudan.
They also view their political struggle as part of their 65 religious commitment, and the political manifesto of their Ummah Party as a blueprint for the establishment of a modern Islamic state in the Sudan.
5.0 Summary We have been able to study in this unit the ideology of the Expected Mahdi in both Sunni and Shiite literature.
We examined the case of the Sudanese Mahdiyyah (1881-1898), the most eminent opposition movement in the 19th century Muslim world.
We also highlighted the distinctive features of the Sudanese Mahdiyyah, and investigated its political legacy before and after Sudan’s independence.
We looked at the reform and revival activities of the Mahdi of Sudan and observed that it is mostly religio-political.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment - Examine the ideology of the Expected Mahdi in both Sunni and Shiite literature.
- Discuss the case of the Sudanese Mahdiyyah and its Islamic political activities.
7.0 References / further Reading Ahmed Ibrahim Abushouk, (2009) The Ideology of the Expected MahdÊ in Muslim History: The Case of the Sudandese Mahdiyya, 1881-1898.
Pakistan Journal of History and Culture, Vol.XXX, No.1 Aharon Layish, (1997) The Legal Methodology of the Mahdi in the Sudan, 1881-1885: Issues in Marriage and Divorce.
Sudanic Africa, 8 G.N.
Sanderson, “The Mahdist Under Khalifa Abdallah, 1885-1898”, The Cambridge History of Africa, Vol.6, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Richard H. Dekmejian and Margaret J. Wyszomirski, (1972) “Charismatic Leadership in Islam: The Mahdi of the Sudan”, Comparative Studies in Society and History, Vol.
14/2.
G.R.
Warburg, ‘From Revolution to Conservatism: Some Aspects of Mahdist Ideology and Politics in the Sudan’, Der Islam, lxx, 1, 1993.
G.R.
Warburg , Mahdism and Islamism in the Sudan’, International Journal of Middle 66  East Studies, xxvii, 1995.
Unit 11: Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan 1.0 Introduction Perceiving Muslims as backward and in need of education, Indian Islamic modernist writer, educational activist and reformer Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan (1817-1898), undertook various major projects in the field of education, both as a response to British Imperialism and to change the intellectual, political and economic destiny of Muslims in India.
The progressive spirit of the Aligarh movement founded by Sir Sayyid for the intellectual revival and socio-moral renewal and rejuvenation of Indian Muslims was one of the responses, among others, of Muslims to European Imperialism, which began in the 16th century but came to fruitition in the 19th and 20th centuries, and brought more than half of the Muslim world under its control.
In order to put his education program into practice Sir Sayyid established the Aligarh Scientific Society, the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh, and the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental Educational Conference as well as the Tahzib al-Akhlaq journal and Aligarh Institute Gazette.
This unit presents the educational reforms of Sir Sayyid as a response to the British Imperialism in the context of Indian Subcontinent.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit students should be able to: - Write about the life and legacy of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan; - Discuss the modern reforms program and projects of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan; - Assess the educational reforms of Sir Sayyid as a response to the British Imperialism in the context of Indian Subcontinent.
67  3.0 Main Content 3.1.
Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan: Life and Legacy Sir Ahmad Khan was a product of British ruled post-Mughal India.
He was born on 17 October 1817 in Delhi, the capital of the Mughal Empire,.
His family had migrated from Herat (a town now in Afghanistan) in 17th century CE.
He was born at a time when rebellious governors, regional insurrections and the British colonialism had weakened the power of the Mughal state, reducing its monarch to mere figurehead.
He received traditional Islamic education traditional in Delhi and later studied Mathematics, Astronomy, Medicine and Islamic jurisprudence.
In short, Sir Ahmad Khan had a strictly formal traditional education, which he never completed as stopped schooling at the age of 18.
But through his personal study and independent investigation, was able to reach out to new horizons of intellectual creativity and thus laid groundwork for a modern interpretation of Islam, especially after the Mutiny of 1857.
Under British rule, the social, economic, and political positions of Indian Muslims had been severely eroded.
This reality had a profound impact on the intellectual development of Sir Ahmad Khan.
Sayyid Ahmad Khan was the eldest of the five prominent Muslim modernists whose influence on Islamic thought and polity was to shape and define Muslim responses to modernism in the latter half of the nineteenth century.
He was deeply concerned with the circumstance of Muslims in a world dominated by European colonial powers.
As an educational and political leader of Muslims living under British colonial rule in India, Sayyid Ahmad Khan developed the concepts of religious modernism and community identity that marked the transition from Mughal India to the rise of representative government and the quest for self-determination.
In other words, he surveyed the terrible and unpleasant state of Muslim community in India after the Sepoy Uprising of 1857, which resulted in formal British colonial rule and the end of Muslim supremacy in the Indian sub-continent.
The Sepoy Uprising (the first Indian war of Independence) was a crucial and major event in the history of Indian Muslims and it 68 deeply influenced the development and progression of Ahmad Khan’s s thinking.
The Uprising was an outmoded attempt of Indian Muslims to regain their lost power in India as its failure, due to lack of organization, caused the disintegration and collapse of the structure of the Muslim society.
This defeat was accepted as final by Indian Muslims in the second half of the 19th century, and they felt the need for a new kind of leadership — a leadership of adjustment — to find a mode of agreement with the British rulers and their resurgent Hindu compatriots.
From 1858 to 1898, this leadership was provided by Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan thrust upon him by historical circumstances within India.
Ahmad Khan’s response to the British presence (colonialism and imperialism) in India was a complete surrender to the impact of modern ideas, as he was concerned with the Indian Muslims.
Most importantly, it convinced him that the best of Western civilization could and should be assimilated by the Muslims because the pure Islam taught by the Qur‘an and lived/practiced by Prophet (pbuh) was not only unopposed to Western civilization but was in fact, its ultimate source and inspiration.
The first two decades after 1857 witnessed Ahmad Khan’s increasing preoccupation with the prevailing conditions of Muslims in India.
Sir Ahmad Khan championed the causes of: - Rationalism in Islam, which established a new orientation—that religion existed as an aid to man’s progress, and man did not exist just for religion; - Social reforms patterned after Western culture; - Modern education through English, and - Muslim nationalism.
- Civilizations do not belong to nations, but to man.
Consequently, progress and prejudice, advancement and narrow-mindedness, could not coexist.
To accomplish the goals of his normative values, Sayyid Khan endeavored to establish Muslim-British friendliness and cordiality in India.
Perceiving Muslims as backward and in need of education, he undertook three major projects designed to increase public involvement in educational and social areas as follows: 1.
To initiate a unifying movement in order to create understanding between Muslims and Christians.
In other words, he organized a modernist 69 movement that saw no genuine conflict between Islam and Christianity since they have common moral message; 2.
To establish scientific organizations that would help Muslims to understand the secret of the success achieved by the West.
This he did with the establishment of Aligarh Scientific Society in 1865 — a translation society to make Western thought more accessible; and 3.
To objectively analyze the causes for the 1857 revolt.
To Ahmad Khan, Muslims need to change the way they see and respond to the modern world.
For that purpose, he devoted his life to religious, educational, and social reform.
He called for a daring new theology or re-interpretation of Islam and acceptance of what was best in Western thought.
He called for a new theology to respond to the modern change.
He tried to reclaim the original religion of Islam, which God had revealed and as practiced by His Messenger, Muhammed, not that religion which the Ulama and the preachers had fashioned.
His interpretation of Islam was guided by his belief that Islam was compatible with reason and the laws of nature and, therefore, is in perfect agreement with modern scientific thought.
He argued that the teachings of Islam about God, the Prophet, and the Qur’an are compatible with modern science, which involves discovery of the work of God in natural laws.
In other words, Sayyid Khan argued that Islam is in total agreement with reason.
3.2 Modern Reforms Program and Projects of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan Sayyid Ahmad Khan’s educational program was meant to change the intellectual, political, and economic destiny of Muslim India.
The program started in 1864, when he founded the Aligarch Scientific Society for the introduction of Western sciences primarily among Muslims in India.
The Society translated works on physical sciences into Urdu and published a bilingual journal, Aligarh Institute Gazette (1866).
The objectives of the Society were: 1) To translate works from English or other European languages into native languages for common use among the people; 70 2) To search for and publish rare and valuable oriental works; 3) To publish any periodical which may improve the native mind; etc.
The planning and the approved projects of the Society basically reflect Ahmad Khan’s orientation toward the sciences and their relevance to contemporary India.
The Society succeeded in translating forty European books dealing with history, political science, meteorology, electricity, algebra, geometry, calculus, hydrology, and agriculture.
In 1864, Ahmad Khan founded a modern school at Ghazipur, and in 1868 promoted the formation of educational committees in several districts of northern India.
During his visit to England between 1867 and 1870, he internalized positive aspects of British culture including the value system of modern scientific education.
He visited the universities of Cambridge and Oxford to study the British educational institutions.
Upon return, he prepared a blueprint for the higher education of Muslims and laid the foundation of the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College (MAOC) at Aligarh in 1874, modeled after the Cambridge University.
In 1920 the College became Aligarh Muslim University (AMU).
Intended primarily for Muslims, but it was interdenominational as it provided Sunni-Shia theological education, and included Hindu students as well.
It aimed at the liberalization of ideas, broad humanism, a scientific world view, and a practical approach to politics.
It strove for a steady increase of educated Muslims in the government services.
It smoothed the transition of young generation of Muslim elite from medieval conservatism to superficial modernism.
And ultimately, it was to produce the leadership for Muslim political separatism in India as a counter-balance to the growing influence of the Indian National Congress.
He along with his colleague and son Sayyid Mahmud, conceived the idea of three colleges to be located on a single campus, constituting the nucleus of a University patterned after the system of Oxford and Cambridge.
The Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College was to create a new value system among Muslim students.
First, a consciousness of Muslim nationality, national solidarity, and solidarity obligation had to be instilled.
Secondly, their dedication to Islamic religion should be strengthened so that they would 71 remain loyal to the testimony of Oneness of God (Shahadah), the affirmation of Islamic faith.
Thirdly, values such as honesty, truthfulness, and compassion for others must be internalized.
Fourthly, Ahmad Khan maintained that Arabic and Persian literary and cultural traditions should be maintained in order to counter-balance the derisive impact of modern English education.
Lastly, primacy should be given to the value of Muslims’s solidarity obligation in the boarding houses, where the students were made to realize that only with mutual help and the development in group orientation, could nations be born.
Sir Ahmad Khan devoted most of his time to promoting education among Muslims.
He also founded the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental Educational Conference (MAOEC).
Along with MAO College, the MAOEC aimed at rectifying the situation through the voluntary efforts of the Muslim community for the general promotion of Western education in Muslim India and to formulate a policy for the higher education of Muslim students in Europe.
Consequently, he began the publication of a journal, Tahzib al- Akhlaq, which was to reform Muslim religious thought and progress.
In this journal, Sayyid Khan featured articles on such topics as morals, social life as well as religion.
In the journal he also wrote on modernism as a potent force that could considerably change the course and the direction of Islam in India.
Tahzib al-Akhlaq, which was meant to educate and civilize Indian Muslims, had three main objectives: (1) Establishment of social harmony among the Muslims of India; (2) Revival of true Islamic traditions; and (3)ْRemoval of the misconception of Islam from the masses with regard to modern developments.
The first issue of this journal was published in 1870, and Ahmad Khan made it an instrument for the diffusion of his modern values, eliciting an intensely negative response from some segments of the religiously conservative Muslim middle classes.
The Tahzib al-Akhlaq aimed majorly at overcoming those religious prejudices which were impeding the progress of Muslims and which really had nothing at all to do with Islam.
By pointing out to the Muslims the weaknesses of their own society, which had brought about a 72 decline in their morals, he tried to make them detest the offensive and injurious customs and beliefs to which they are clinging.
4.0 Conclusion Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, captivated by the amazing progress registered in multiple fields by Europeans, wanted similar scientific and technological sophistication and material progress/advancement for Muslims as well.
Stimulated by a vision, and inspired by a dream, he was armed with the courage of convictions, generated a unified vision and put his ideas into practice.
His vision today is seen in the form of Aligarh Muslim University — a legacy of education, of learning, of culture, of civilization, and of a rich tradition left behind by Sir Sayyid for the educational advancement and improvement of Muslims.
5.0 Summary In this unit, an attempt was made to discuss the modern reforms program and projects of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan.
We specifically assess his educational reforms as a response to the British Imperialism in the context of Indian Subcontinent.
The progressive spirit of the Aligarh movement founded by Sir Sayyid for the intellectual revival and socio-moral renewal and rejuvenation of Indian Muslims was one of the responses, among others, of Muslims to European Imperialism, which began in the 16th century but came to fulfillment in the 19th and 20th centuries, and brought more than half of the Muslim world under its control.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Assess the educational reforms of Sir Sayyid as a response to the British Imperialism in the context of Indian Subcontinent.
7.0 References / further Reading 73 Tauseef Ahmad Parray (2012) Muslim Responses to Imperialism in India: A Study of the Educational Reforms of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan.
International Journal of History, Volume 4 Issue 3 Aziz Ahmad, (1964) Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment.
London: Oxford University Press.
Esposito, John L. (1999) Contemporary Islam: Reformation or Revolution?
in The Oxford History of Islam, (Ed.)
John L. Esposito.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Graham, George F. Irving.
(1974) The Life and Work of Syed Ahmad Khan.
Delhi: Idarah-i Adabiyat-i Delli [1885] Hardy, P. (1972) The Muslims of British India.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Majumdar, R. C. (1963) The Sepoy Mutiny and the Revolt of 1857.
Calcutta: Mukhopadhyay, Malik, Hafeez.
(1980) Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan and Islamic Modernism in India and Pakistan.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Voll, John O.
(1983) Renewal and Reform in Islamic History: Tajdid and Islah, in Voices of Resurgent Islam (Ed.
), John L. Esposito.
New York: Oxford University Press, 74  Unit 12: Imām Ayatullah Al-Khomeini 1.0 Introduction In recent centuries, the religious revival reached its climax through the efforts of people such as Seyyed Jamal'aldin Asad Abadi, Martyr Ayatollah Modarres and Imam Khomeini.
Imad Bezi from Australia, writes in the essay entitled "Bases and Principles of religion's revival in accordance with the thought of Imam Khomeini", that undoubtedly the greatest and the most successful Muslim reformer of the recent time was Imam Khomeini who changed the passage of history with the publicity of new period and created remarkable changes by sending new forces to the ground of revolution that their depth will be understood by the next generations.
This unit investigates the revolutionary and revival activities of Imam Khomeini of Iran.
2.0 Objectives Student will at the end of this unit be able to: - Identify the causes of the Islamic revolutionary activities that took place in Iran few decades ago.
- Discuss the revolutionary and revival cum reform activities of Imam Al-Khomeini.
- Appreciate the efforts of Imam Khomeini in reform the Muslims.
- Examining the methods and aftermath effects of Imam Khomeini’s religious revival.
3.0 Main Content Imam Khomeini and the Method of Religious Thought’s Revival 75 As it is obvious from the behavior and performance of Imam Khomeini, His method in the revival of Islamic thought has been the method of the Messenger of God, Holy Mohammad, Peace be upon Him, and this matter means the reflection of behavioral method of the Prophet in the early Islamic period and also the continuation of method and way of the Household of the Prophet, peace be upon Him, Imam Khomeini put the character and behavior of Holy Mohammad and His family as the model of his work in order to disseminate and develop Islamic thought and as a result he gave the steady Islamic teachings a new vitality.
The Islamic community accepted the thoughts of Imam Khomeini without paying attention to the discord between the groups and sects and thus one of the most obvious and uproaring Islamic movements (Islamic Revolution) were created in the world.
The most important feature of the revival movement of Imam Khomeini was in the recognition of obstacles, distortions and deviations happened to the religion and religious society and then the presentation of serious strategies and attempts in performing them, since the revival of the religious facts is based on the careful recognition of present obstacles and damages in the way of the revival of religion's culture that such affair occurred necessarily and suitably according to His perfection.
Now, we point to some cases of these obstacles: 1) Lack of Independence Feeling of Nations and Their Self-abasement Against Foreigners: The vast domination of West and East's culture over the Islamic societies and making the nations believe that they can't live without relying on Western and Eastern culture, and on the other hand the impressionability of some civil intellectual people from the alien culture made them believe that they can't be alive without these alien powers or the right of living is not proved for them and so this matter caused the religious culture be replaced by the alien culture and also caused the true Mohammadian revival to be deviated.
76  Regarding this matter, Imam Khomeini says, "One of the great disaster created for the nation was that they made the nation pessimistic toward themselves.
It means that if we find a patient in Tehran, they say that it is impossible to cure him/her here, go to England, go to Paris, this matter has been created by them for us, it means that we lost themselves ".
Also He underlines this matter that, "Regarding the issues that caused the past government(s) to become daunted and they should not be like them" .
2) Creating of Discord between Muslim Societies by Alien Powers: After the Crusades, the Western countries considered the best alternative to divide the Islamic Empire into various countries in order to prevent the Muslims from regaining power and developing Islam in the heart of Europe.
The Neocolonialism made the Islamic countries believe the vain and delusive inculcations by the way of nationalism among the Islamic countries.
They also perverted them from paying attention to reptilian movement toward the loot and ravage of Islamic territories by making communal-racial conflicts among the Muslims”.
Recognizing the conspiracy, Imam Khomeini has warned toward this matter in His whole messages and speeches.
He said: Pay attention to one case: “America and Soviet are beginning to act some activities such as sowing discord and making civil disturbances via hireling and seduced agents and starting war between the Islamic and impoverished countries of the world”.
3) Tending toward petrifaction, pretending sanctity and lack of understanding of time and place One of the important problems concerning the revival of religion and Islamic thought is the existence of petrifactors and dependent sanctimonious persons.
Warning about the danger of these people for the religion and system, Imam Khomeini says, “Today, some people undermine the religion, revolution and system by some sanctimonious gestures as 77 if they do not have any duty save this one.
The danger of foolish petrifactors and sanctimonious persons is not less in the seminaries.
The precious theological students shouldn't neglect to think about these snakes in the grass.
These are the promoters of American Islam and the enemies of the Prophet of Islam."
4) Misunderstanding of News Another obstacle of the revival of religious thinking in Imam Khomeini's movement is the existence of some wrong understandings and comprehensions of prophet's sayings that have entered into Islamic sources.
For example, the prophet's sayings which introduce the pioneers of the uprisings as the hegemony or consider the uprisings before the manifestation of Imam Mahdi, May God hasten his glad advent, as a defeated ones, While resorting to such news is forbidden from some aspects, for some of them have been fabricated, or are related to a personal subject and event and also anothers that have been issued on dissimulation and some of them are resulted from the wrong understanding of the prophet's saying.
Beside all of them, resorting to such prophet's sayings has no absolute intelectual and narrative reason, for many verses and prophet's sayings concerning the calling people to goodness and prohibition of sin, fighting and holy war to enemy, lack of acceptance of cruelty, ... are created that are contrary to the content of that prophet's saying.
However, this has been one of the present challenges that Imam Khomeini has took stance toward it several times.
Concerning this matter, He says they may show the narrations alot that have been fabricated by the oppressive agents and courtly mullahs concerning the praise and admiration of sultans.
As you can see, what they did via two weak narrations and put it against Quran.
The Quran that strongly says that you should rise against sovernings and also It makes Moses rose against the sovereigns (sultans) ".
78  Regarding that there is no need for the preparation and education of preliminaries for the advent of Imam Mahdi, May God hasten His glad advent, He says that some ignorant people believe that we should try to accomplish disbelief and injustice for the advent of this gracious Imam so that the world is covered by oppression and the preliminaries of the advent are prepared, نوعجارّهيلاّاناّوّللهاناف .
5) Distortion of Some Part of Religious Concepts and Teachings: One of the damages which has a significance influence on the deviation of Islamic society is the distortion in the religious teaching.
For example, trust in God which is constructive and has been advised in Islam, has been interpreted as the meaning of dissemination of laziness and being sluggish and also lack of trying by some people, or some persons have meant the word of piety that means the renunciation of the world, as the discontinuation and leaving of work and effort in the life's affairs, or still others have considered the awaiting for the reappearance of Imam Mahdi that means the preparation for a great battle, as waiting and doing nothing and sitting idly or prevarication that is a way of fighting for the preservation of Islam ,and religion was meant and interpreted in such a manner that was an obstacle in the way of fighting for the preservation of Islam and religion.
Regarding this, Imam Khomeini says that dissimulation was for the preservation of Islam and religion that if they didn't dissimulate, they would not have remained the religion.
Dissimulation is related to the subsidiary rules of religion, for example perform ablution in this or that manner, but when the principles and reputation of Islam are in danger, there would be no place for dissimulation and silence.
6) The Defective Support of the Right Islamic Government: 79 Some people believe that the establishment of Islamic government is only the task of the infallible Imam.
Any government is unjust save the government of the infallible one, peace be upon Him.
One of the supporters of this theory says, " Show that example of Islamic governor who is impeccable of sin, the one that the lust and carnal desires, love, asceticism, passion, wrath and covetous desires never have any effect on him.
If he comes, people will bow before him."
Reacting against such kind of thinking, the late Imam says, "Believing in such matters or their statement is worse than believing in and stating that Islam is abolished.
Anyone who states that the establishment of Islamic government doesn't have any necessity, he has denied the necessity of the enforcement of commandments and freedom of the commandments and eternity of the true Islam religion".
7) Separation of Religion from Politics: Another factor of depravity and downfall of Muslim's power is the idea of separation of religion from politics and its dissemination.
It is necessary to mention that such kind of thinking is rooted in Europe and the end of the Middle Ages.
This thinking was generated in Europe in order to decrease or annihilate the power of church and also the philosophy of ‘‘Escolastic’’.
It is obvious that entering such kind of thinking in the Islamic culture is not correct and wise, because first: Islam like the present Christianity in the explanation of world and taking and developing of science doesn't have behaved petrified, second: regarding the ideology and functional theosophy, it doesn't accept the method of Christianity which had only paid attention to the ethic arena and had ignored the other arenas.
Also, the erudites of Islam have not been like the erudites of Christianity.
However, Christianity aggravated the secularism that is the same as making religion to be worldly or the separation of religion from the politics.
Furthermore, they started to share and publish it.
80 Unfortunately, the societies of the Muslims were not safe from the danger of such kind of thinking and some erudites of Muslim's governments and also some puppet open-minded people disseminated this threatening thinking and as a result, the undesired influences appeared on these societies and the Islamic society of Iran; it hit the figure of political power of Islam strongly.
Imam Khomeini fought against such kind of thinking and preferred not separating the religion from politics and he also stressed on the deviation of some people that aggravate this issue.
8) Modernism of Open-minded People under the Influence of West and East's Culture: The hasty impressionability by the alien culture and believing in this matter that our happiness depends on the complete and entire acceptance of alien culture and performance show the influence of the onslaught of Western and Eastern foreigner’s thoughts in the Islamic countries that this factor was one of the important problems in the settlement of religious culture and also caused the Islamic glory to become obstructed.
Whatever was told of the current obstacles and problems in the way of religion and religious thinking is revival.
4.0 Conclusion A critical look at the events of the revival and reform activities of Imam Khomeini reveals to us that that history is the introducer of great people who have accomplished the revival of religious thought at different moments and undoubtedly Imam Khomeini is one of the successful Muslim revivalists of recent period on the evidence of history.
This is true considering the principles and bases of religious thought’s revival from the view of this great man.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we were able to identify the causes of the Islamic revolutionary activities that took place in Iran a few decades ago.
We also discussed the revolutionary and revival cum reform activities of Imam Al-Khomeini and assessed his efforts in reform of the 81 Muslim Ummah.
We particularly examined his methods and the aftermath effects of his religious revival and revolutionary activities in his home country, Iran and its impact on the global village.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Write on the reform efforts of Imam Khomeini emphasizing on at least five of his main areas of concentration in the revival of Islamic religious thought.
7.0 References / further Reading Huda Jawad (2010) “Imam Khomeini: A Short Biography” Retrieved from: www.al-islam.org/imambiography on 15/01/2014 Azranush Samee’i Zafraqandi, “Imam Khomeini and Movement of Religious Revival” Iran: Sa-zaman Tableeghat Islami Mibashid.
Abu Rabi', Ibrahim M. (1996) Intellectual Origins of Islamic Resurgence in the Modern Arab World (Albany: State University of New York Press) 82  Unit 13: LOUIS FARAKHAN AND THE NATION OF ISLAM (NOI) 1.0 Introduction The Nation of Islam under the leadership of the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan is the catalyst for the growth and development of Islam in America.
Founded in 1930 by Master Fard Muhammad and led to prominence from 1934 to 1975 by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, the Nation of Islam continues to positively impact the quality of life in America.
This unit investigates the emergence and the activities of the Nation of Islam as a modern Islamic movement.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: - Know the origin and evolution of the nation of Islam; - Discuss the ideology of the movement of the “nation of Islam”; - Give a biographical account of the founder and minister of the movement; - Say a few things about the activities of the movement in the United States of America and elsewhere.
3.0 Main Content Minister Louis Farrakhan was born on May 11, 1933 in Bronx, New York and was reared in a highly disciplined and spiritual household in Roxbury, Massachusetts.
Raised by his mother, a native of St. Kitts, Louis and his brother Alvan learned early the value of work, 83 responsibility and intellectual development.
Having a strong sensitivity to the plight of Black people, his mother engaged her sons in conversations about the struggle for freedom, justice and equality.
She also exposed them to progressive material such as the Crisis magazine, published by the NAACP.
Popularly known as “The Charmer,” he achieved fame in Boston as a vocalist, calypso singer, dancer and violinist.
In February 1955, while visiting Chicago for a musical engagement, he was invited to attend the Nation of Islam’s Saviours’ Day convention.
Although music had been his first love, within one month after joining the Nation of Islam in 1955, Minister Malcolm X told the New York Mosque and the new convert Louis X that Elijah Muhammad had said that all Muslims would have to get out of show business or get out of the Temple.
Most of the musicians left Temple No.
7, but Louis X, later renamed Louis Farrakhan, chose to dedicate his life to the Teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.
The departure of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad in 1975 and the assumption of leadership by Imam W. Deen Mohammed brought drastic changes to the Nation of Islam.
After approximately three years of wrestling with these changes, and a re-appraisal of the condition of Black people and the value of the Teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, Minister Farrakhan decided to return to the teachings and program with a proven ability to uplift and reform Blacks.
His tremendous success is evidenced by mosques and study groups in over 120 cities in America, Europe, the Caribbean and missions in West Africa and South Africa devoted to the Teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.
In rebuilding the Nation of Islam, Minister Farrakhan has renewed respect for the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, his Teachings and Program.
At 80 years of age, Minister Farrakhan still maintains a grueling work schedule.
He has been welcomed in a countless number of churches, sharing pulpits with Christian 84 ministers from a variety of denominations, which has demonstrated the power of the unity of those who believe in the One God.
He has addressed diverse organizations, been received in many Muslim countries as a leading Muslim thinker and teacher, and been welcomed throughout Africa, the Caribbean and Asia as a champion in the struggle for freedom, justice and equality.
In 1979, he founded The Final Call, an internationally circulated newspaper that follows in the line of The Muhammad Speaks.
In 1985, Minister Farrakhan introduced the Power concept.
In 1988, the resurgent Nation of Islam repurchased its former flagship mosque in Chicago and dedicated it as Mosque Maryam, the National Center for the Re-training and Re-education of the Black Man and Woman of America and the World.
In 1991, Minister Farrakhan reintroduced the Three Year Economic Program, first established by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad to build an economic base for the development of Blacks through business ventures.
In 1993, Minister Farrakhan penned the book, “A Torchlight for America,” which applied the guiding principles of justice and good will to the problems perplexing America.
In May of that year, he traveled to Libreville, Gabon to attend the Second African-African American Summit where he addressed African heads of state and delegates from America.
In October of 1994, Minister Farrakhan led 2,000 Blacks from America to Accra, Ghana for the Nation of Islam’s first International Saviours’ Day.
Ghanaian President Jerry Rawlings officially opened and closed the five- day convention.
The popular leader and the Nation of Islam repurchased farmland in Dawson, Georgia and enjoyed a banner year in 1995 with the successful Million Man March on the Mall in Washington, D.C., which drew nearly two million men.
Minister Farrakhan was inspired to call the March out of his concern over the negative image of Black men perpetuated by the media and movie industries, which focused on drugs and gang violence.
The Million Man March established October 16 as a Holy Day of Atonement, Reconciliation and Responsibility.
Minister Farrakhan took this healing message of atonement throughout 85 the world during three World Friendship Tours over the next three years.
His desire was to bring solutions to such problems as war, poverty, discrimination and the right to education.
Minister Farrakhan would return to the Mall on Washington, D.C. in 2000 convening the Million Family March, where he called the full spectrum of members of the human family to unite according to the principle of atonement.
Minister Farrakhan performed thousands of weddings, as well as renewed the vows of those recommitting themselves in a Marriage Ceremony.
As part of the major thrust for true political empowerment for the Black community, Minister Farrakhan re-registered to vote in June 1996 and formed a coalition of religious, civic and political organizations to represent the voice of the disenfranchised on the political landscape.
His efforts and the overwhelming response to the call of the Million Man March resulted in an additional 1.7 million Black men voting in the 1996 presidential elections.
In July 1997, the Nation of Islam, in conjunction with the World Islamic People’s Leadership, hosted an International Islamic Conference in Chicago.
A broad range of Muslim scholars from Europe, Asia, Africa and the Middle East, along with Christian, Jewish and Native American spiritual leaders participated in the conference.
Following the September 11, 2001 attacks against the United States, Minister Farrakhan was among the international religious voices that called for peace and resolution of conflict.
He also wrote two personal letters to President George Bush offering his counsel and perspective on how to respond to the national crisis.
He advised President Bush to convene spiritual leaders of various faiths for counsel.
Prior to the war on Iraq, Minister Farrakhan led a delegation of religious leaders and physicians to the Middle East in an effort to spark the dialogue among nations that could prevent war.
Marking a new milestone in a life that has been devoted to the uplift of humanity, Minister Farrakhan launched a prostate cancer foundation in his name May 10-11, 2003.
86 First diagnosed in 1991 with prostate cancer, he survived a public bout and endured critical complications after treatment that brought him 180 seconds away from death.
In July of that year, Minister Farrakhan accepted the request to host the first of a series of summits centered on the principles of reparations.
Nearly 50 activists from across the country answered his call to discuss operational unity within the reparations movement for Black people’s suffering in the trans-Atlantic slave trade.
Culminating the Nation of Islam’s Saviours’ Day convention in February 2004, Minister Farrakhan delivered an international address entitled, “Reparations: What does America and Europe Owe?
What does Allah (God) promise?” stepping further into the vanguard position of leadership calling for justice for the suffering masses of Black people and all oppressed people throughout the world.
On May 3, 2004, Minister Farrakhan held an international press conference at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. themed, “Guidance to America and the World in a Time of Trouble.” The press conference sought to expose the plans and schemes of President George W. Bush and his neo-conservative advisors who plunged American soldiers into worldwide conflict with the occupations of Afghanistan and Iraq.
This international press conference was translated into Arabic, French and Spanish.
In October 2005, after months of a demanding schedule traveling throughout the U.S., Minister Farrakhan called those interested in establishing a programmatic thrust for Black people in America and oppressed people across the globe to participate in the Millions More Movement, which convened back at the National Mall in Washington, D.C. on the 10th Anniversary of the Historic Million Man March.
The Millions More Movement involved the formation of 9 Ministries that would deal with the pressing needs of our people.
Also in 2005, Minister Louis Farrakhan was voted as BET.com’s “Person of The Year” as the person users believed made “the most powerful impact on the Black community over the past year.” 87 In April 2006, Minister Farrakhan led a delegation to Cuba to view the emergency preparedness system of the Cuban people, in the wake of the massive failure to prevent the loss of human life after Hurricane Katrina in August 2005.
In January 2007, the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan underwent a major 14-hour pelvic exoneration.
In just a few weeks, and as a testament to the healing power of God, Minister Farrakhan stood on stage at Ford Field in Detroit, Michigan on February 25, 2007 to deliver the first of several speeches that year with the theme “One Nation Under God.” On October 19, 2008, after nearly a year of extensive repairs and restoration, Minister Farrakhan opened the doors and grounds of Mosque Maryam to thousands of people representing all creeds and colors during a much anticipated Rededication Ceremony themed “A New Beginning.” This day also served as the commemoration of the 13th Anniversary of the Historic Million Man March and Holy Day of Atonement.
The prayers of spiritual leaders representing the three Abrahamic faiths—Judaism, Christianity and Islam—were offered to bless this momentous affair.
Those who were present that day, and who watched live via internet webcast throughout the world, witnessed Minister Farrakhan’s message of unity and peace for the establishment of a universal government of peace for all of humanity.
4.0 Conclusion Louis Farrakhan Muhammad, formerly known as Louis X is the leader of the syncretic and mainly African-American religious movement, the Nation of Islam (NOI).
He served as the minister of major mosques in Boston and Harlem, and was appointed by the longtime NOI leader, Elijah Muhammad, as the National Representative of the Nation of Islam.
After Warith Deen Muhammad disbanded the NOI and started the orthodox Islamic group, American Society of Muslims, Farrakhan started rebuilding the NOI.
In 1981, he revived the name Nation of Islam for his organization, previously known as 88 “Final Call”, regaining many of the Nation of Islam’s National properties including the NOI National Headquarters Mosque Maryam, reopening over 130 NOI mosques in America and the world.
5.0 Summary Over recent years, however, Farrakhan has been very active, including delivering weekly online sermons throughout 2013 as well as speaking at both large public NOI events as well as smaller venues.
Since 2010, Farrakhan has advocated Dianetics and the use of its "auditing" technique.
There has been much discussion throughout the years about who will succeed Farrakhan as the national leader of the NOI.
On October 20, 2013, Farrakhan chose Assistant Minister Ishmael Muhammad to deliver the Holy Day of Atonement keynote address when Farrakhan was unable to attend last minute due to illness.
This, among other things, may shed some light on future direction of the group’s leadership 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Examine the origin of the “Nation of Islam” and peruse its activities within the context of revival and reform movements of Islam.
7.0 References / further Reading http://www.noi.org/hon-minister-farrakhan/ Retrieved on 14/01/2014 Who is Farrakhan?, Interview with The Arizona Republic, March 25, 1996 Gardell, Mattias (1996).
In the Name of Elijah Mohammed: Louis Farrakhan and The Nation of Islam.
Duke University Press.
Muhammad, Jabril (2006).
Closing The Gap: Inner Views of the Heart, Mind & Soul of the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan.
FCN Publishing Company.
89 Farrakhan, Louis (1993).
A Torchlight for America.
FCN Publishing Company.
Lincoln, C. Eric (1994).
The Black Muslims in America.
Wm.
B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.
90
