 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 427 COURSE TITLE: ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS  COURSE GUIDE MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS Course Team Mr. Dele Fashomi (Course Developer/ Writer) Dr. Ben U. Nwanne (Course Editor) - DELSU, Abraka Dr. Chidinma H. Onwubere (Course Coordinator)-NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA None MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar-es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058-616-4 All Rights Reserved ii  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction......................................................................... iv What you will Learn in this Course……………………… iv Course Aim……………………………………………….
iv Course Objectives………………………………………... v Working through this Course…………………………….
v Course Materials………………………………………… vi Study Units……………………………………………….
vi Textbooks and References……………………………….. vii Assignment File………………………………………….. vii Tutor-Marked Assignment……………………………… vii Final Examination and Grading………………………….
viii Presentation Schedule…………………………………… viii Course Marking Scheme………………………………… viii Course Overview………………………………………… viii How to Get the Most from this Course………………….. x Facilitation/Tutors and Tutorials........................................ xi Summary............................................................................. xii iii  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION Welcome to MAC 427: Economic and Social Issues in Advertising and Public Relations.
This course is a two-credit unit 400 Level course for Mass Communication students of the National Open University of Nigeria.
This course material has been developed with a view to reflecting the Nigerian environment.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE In this course, you will learn about advertising as an institution, theory and practice of public relations, laws and ethics of advertising and public relations.
This course will provide you with an intimate knowledge of the laws and ethics governing the professions of advertising and public relations.
It will also discuss the self-regulatory activities of professional associations in advertising and public relations in Nigeria, as compared to the developed countries of the United States and Britain.
This course will enable you to conceptualise social responsibility as a tool of modern corporate governance in relation to the practice of advertising and public relations, and in relating truth and morality to advertising and public relations and the whole gamut of consumerism and consumer activities in Nigeria.
This course will help you to conceptualise social responsibility as a tenet of modern corporate governance in relation to advertising and public relations, as well as acquaints you with the application of truth and morality to advertising and public relations.
This course will provide you with deep knowledge of consumerism and consumer activities in Nigeria.
COURSE AIMS This course aims to refresh your memory of the basic knowledge of advertising and public relations.
Precisely, this course aims to: • refresh your memory of the concepts, structures and operations of both advertising and public relations as institutions • acquaint you with all the laws and ethics or codes of conducts and the wide spectrum of the regulatory rules and principles that guide advertising and public relations in Nigeria as compared to the developed countries of the United States and Britain respectively • highlight the economic and social issues, debates and controversies surrounding advertising and public relations, including social responsibility, truth and deception, and consumerism and consumer activities in Nigeria.
iv  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set out above, MAC 427 has overall objectives.
The specific unit objectives are also set out at the beginning of each module and each unit.
I advise that you read them before you start working through the units.
You can also refer to them during your study of the unit to check your progress.
Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of this course, you should be able to: • discuss the scope, structure and operations of advertising and public relations • discuss the laws and ethics governing the professions of advertising and public relations as compared to the developed countries of the United States and Britain • attain in-depth knowledge on the self-regulatory activities of professional associations in advertising and public relations in Nigeria • explain the concept of social responsibility as a modern tool of corporate governance in relation to the practice of advertising and public relations • discuss the concept of truth and morality in relation to advertising and public relations • identify deception and areas of possible occurrences in advertising and public relations and how this can be redressed.
• .conceptualise consumerism and the scope of its operations in Nigeria and how it can be improved upon WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
You will need to undertake practical exercises for which you need a pen, a note book, the APCON Code of Ethics and NIPR Code of Conducts for regulation of both advertising and public relations respectively, among other materials listed in this Guide.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
v  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE COURSE MATERIALS The materials you will need for this course include: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study units 3.
Assignment file 4.
The Codes of Conducts of both Advertising and Public Relations 5.
Relevant textbooks, including those listed under each unit.
STUDY UNITS There are five modules divided into 22 units in this course.
They are listed below: Module 1 Advertising as an Institution Unit 1 Origin, Development and Definition of Advertising Unit 2 Classification and Roles of Advertising Unit 3 Organisation of Advertising Unit 4 The Economics of Advertising Unit 5 The Advertising Campaign Module 2 Theory and Practice of Public Relations Unit 1 History, Growth and Definition of Public Relations Unit 2 Methods of Public Relations Unit 3 The Public Relations Campaign Unit 4 The Economics and Revenue System in Public Relations Units 5 Advertising, Public Relations and Marketing: An Interface Module 3 Laws and Ethics of Advertising and Public Relations Unit 1 The Concept of Law and Ethics Unit 2 Statutory Controls of Advertising in Nigeria Unit 3 Law and Code of Conducts of Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 4 Regulation of Advertising in the Developed Countries: A Case Study Of the United States Unit 5 Control of Public Relations in Developed Countries: The Example of Britain Module 4 Self-Regulation and Professional Associations of Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 1 The Advertising Practitioners Association of Nigeria (AAPN) and other Professional Associations: ADVAN, OAAN, BON, NPAN vi  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE Unit 2 Professional Associations in Public Relations in Nigeria: NIPR, PRCAN, ACAMB Unit 3 Criticisms and Challenges of Advertising and Public Relations Practice in Nigeria Module 5 Social Responsibility, Truth and Deception in Advertising and Public Relations, and Consumerism Unit 1 Social Responsibility in Advertising and Public Relations Unit 2 Truth and Deception in Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 3 The Concept and Origin of Consumerism Unit 4 How Consumerism Operates in Nigeria, Its Challenges and Future TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCES A number of books and other materials have been recommended for a good grasp and understanding of this course.
You will find them at the end of each unit.
Indeed, they were the books the course developer consulted in the preparation of the course.
You are advised to obtain them and other relevant materials for further reading.
ASSIGNMENT FILE An Assignment File and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the File, you will find details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of assessment of this course: the tutor-marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment according to the deadline stipulated in the presentation schedule and Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will account for 30 per cent of your total score.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT You will be required to submit a specified number of tutor-marked assignments (TMAs).
Each unit in this course has a TMA.
You will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the TMAs will be used for your 30 per cent grading.
Send your completed TMA together with the tutor-marked assignment form to your tutor.
Ensure that each assignment gets to your tutor on or before the deadline for submission.
If you have a genuine reason for not completing your work on schedule, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
vii  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination for MAC 427: Economic and Social Issues in Advertising and Public Relations is a two-hour test, which will attract 70 per cent of the total course grade.
The examination will cover all the topics covered and reflect the self-assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments you have practically encountered.
Thus, ensure that you have enough time to revise the entire course.
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule in your course material gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the date.
You should guard against lagging behind in your work.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME Assessment Marks Assignments (Best three assignments out of four =30% marked) Final Examination =70% Total =100% COURSE OVERVIEW UNITS TITLE OF WORK WEEK ASSESSMENT ACTIVITY (END OF UNIT) Module Definitions of Operational 1 Terms Unit 1 Origin, Development and Definition of Advertising Unit 2 Classification, Types and Roles of Advertising Unit 3 Organisation of Advertising Unit 4 The Economics of Advertising Unit 5 The Advertising Campaign Module Theory and Practice of 2 Public Relations Unit 1 History, Growth and Definition of Public viii  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE Relations Unit 2 Methods of Public Relations Unit 3 The Public Relations Campaign Unit 4 The Economics and Revenue System in Public Relations Unit 5 Advertising, Public Relations and Marketing: An Interface Module Law and Ethics in 3 Advertising and Public Relations Unit 1 The Concept of Law and Ethics Unit 2 Statutory Controls of Advertising in Nigeria Unit 3 Law and Code of Conducts of Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 4 Regulation of Advertising in the Developed Countries: A Case Study of the United States Unit 5 Control of Public Relations in Developed Countries: The Example of Britain Module Self-Regulation and 4 Professional Associations in Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 1 The Advertising Practitioners Association of Nigeria (AAPN) and other Professional Associations: ADVAN, OAAN, BON, NPAN Unit 2 Professional Associations in Public Relations in Nigeria: NIPR, PRCAN, ACAMB Unit 3 Criticisms and Challenges of Advertising and Public Relations Practice in Nigeria Module Social Responsibility, ix  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE 5 Truth and Deception in Advertising and Public Relations, and Consumerism Unit 1 Social Responsibility in Advertising and Public Relations Unit 2 Truth and Deception in Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 3 The Concept and Origin of Consumerism Unit 4 How Consumerism Operates in Nigeria, Its Challenges and Future HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set of books or other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the of the unit, how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives shall let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished, the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to assist you.
When you need help, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
• Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
• Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course Overview’ for x  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments related to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
• Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
• Turn to unit one and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
• Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will usually need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
• Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit, you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
• Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
• When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
• When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and on what is written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
Violent • After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
FACILITATION/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are between eight hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
The dates, time and venue of these tutorials shall be communicated to you.
The name and phone number of your tutor will be made known to you immediately you are allocated a tutorial group.Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch xi  MAC 427 COURSE GUIDE on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and assist you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
You will definitely benefit a lot by doing that.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, • you have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, • you have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should make an effort to attend the tutorials.
Thus, it is the only opportunity you have to enjoy face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
SUMMARY This Course Guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course not only refreshes your knowledge of advertising and public relations as institutions, but also provides you with in-depth understanding of the laws and ethics as well as the self-regulatory activities in advertising and public relations in Nigeria and their adequacy as compared to the developed countries.
xii  MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Advertising as an Institution.................. 1 Unit 1 Origin, Development and Definition of Advertising............................................... .. 1 Unit 2 Classification and Roles of Advertising..... 7 Unit 3 Organisation of Advertising..................... .. 14 Unit 4 The Economics of Advertising.................. 18 Unit 5 The Advertising Campaign....................... 23 Module 2 Theory and Practice of Public Relations 27 Unit 1 History, Growth and Definition of Public Relations................................................... .. 27 Unit 2 Methods of Public Relations..................... 35 Unit 3 The Public Relations Campaign................ 44 Unit 4 The Economics and Revenue System in Public Relations....................................... .
48 Units 5 Advertising, Public Relations and Marketing: An Interface........................... .. 52 Module 3 Laws and Ethics of Advertising and Public Relations....................................... 60 Unit 1 The Concept of Law and Ethics.................. 60 Unit 2 Statutory Controls of Advertising in Nigeria 71 Unit 3 Law and Code of Conducts of Public Relations in Nigeria.................................... 77 Unit 4 Regulation of Advertising in the Developed Countries: A Case Study Of the United States 83 Unit 5 Control of Public Relations in Developed Countries: The Example of Britain.............. 90 Module 4 Self-Regulation and Professional Associations of Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria.................................. 95 Unit 1 The Advertising Practitioners Association of Nigeria (AAPN) and other Professional Associations: ADVAN, OAAN, BON, NPAN 95  Unit 2 Professional Associations in Public Relations in Nigeria: NIPR, PRCAN, ACAMB................................................ 102 Unit 3 Criticisms and Challenges of Advertising and Public Relations Practice in Nigeria................................ 110 Module 5 Social Responsibility, Truth and Deception in Advertising and Public Relations, and Consumerism............. 119 Unit 1 Social Responsibility in Advertising and Public Relations..................................... 119 Unit 2 Truth and Deception in Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria.................... 132 Unit 3 The Concept and Origin of Consumerism 140 Unit 4 How Consumerism Operates in Nigeria, Its Challenges and Future....................... 145  MAC 427 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 ADVERTISING AS AN INSTITUTION Unit 1 Origin, Development and Definition of Advertising Unit 2 Classification and Roles of Advertising Unit 3 Organisation of Advertising Unit 4 The Economics of Advertising Unit 5 The Advertising Campaign UNIT 1 ORIGIN, DEVELOPMENT AND DEFINITION OF ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Origin and Development of Advertising 3.2 Advertising in Nigeria 3.3 Definition of Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The word “advertising” is a common term in our day to day activities.
We see and hear it on the television, radio, newspapers and magazines; at street corners, on the walls and rooftops of houses, roadsides, airports, seaports, on vehicles, postage stamps, nozzles of petrol pumps, on bathroom tissues and so on.
Advertising has become such a big institution that commercial activities in the society cannot exist without it.
Indeed, advertising uses various media in the society to deliver its message and achieve its objective of selling a product or service.
Therefore, to begin this course, we shall start by introducing you to the concept of advertising, its origin and development.
This will not only situate the subject, but also endow us with the knowledge of how advertising came about both in Nigeria and generally in the world.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the origin of advertising generally and how it began in Nigeria, in particular 1  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS • identify the factors that impacted on the development of advertising • define advertising as a concept.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Origin and Development of Advertising Advertising has a distant origin in ancient times.
In fact, it is safe to say that advertising started with the advent of the town crier and the street hawker.
What these people did was to shout their messages, telling people about their products.
Later on, another form of advertising was introduced with the advent of tradesmen and craftsmen, who put trademarks and symbols on their products.
These trademarks and symbols grew to become identities of these products.
However, advertising, as we know it today actually started with the advent of the printing press.
With the introduction of the printing press in the middle of 15th century came the newspapers, some of them broadsheets.
The newspapers became the first channels of advertising, as we know it today, especially as traders advertise their products for people to read in these newspapers.
However, the advent of photography brought a major turning point in advertising.
With the introduction of photography, advertising format changed, as people were able to read as well as view products being advertised in the newspapers.
We need to note, in particular, that with the advent of newspapers came the advertising agencies, the first being V.B.
Palmer, who first set up in Philadelphia, in the United States, in 1841.
This tends to confirm that modern advertising really started in America.
Palmer and a few others started as newspaper agents, which is slightly different from what we have today.
They engaged in selling newspaper spaces to tradesmen and producers and collected a commission of 25 per cent.
Today, this form of commission system has continued in the advertising industry, though it could sometimes be reduced to 15 or 10 per cent depending on bargaining and whether the advertisement is A or B grade.
Indeed, the industrial revolution, which swept through Europe and other parts of the world led to the introduction of marketing.
Producers engaged in mass production and, thus, realised that they needed to work harder to make the people know about their products, the product prices and their uses, so that they can dispose them more easily.
This way, advertising also became recognised as part of marketing.
2  MAC 427 MODULE 1 Another factor which facilitated the growth of advertising, was public education.
With the advent of modern education, the literate audience started to emerge and advertisers tried to identify which section of the public could perceive and buy which products.
Other factors included invention of radio, as well as black and white and coloured television at the different times when they were invented.
Of course, the television more than the radio had greater impact on advertising, especially because of the benefit that advertisement could contain both product image and symbols, with the symbols reinforcing the product image.
There also came the advantage of demonstrating product usage on television.
However, by the turn of the 19th century, the character of advertising changed considerably as agencies started to create space for clients.
This was because there was competition in the business of advertising as many people embarked on sale of spaces.
Thus, the agencies had to focus on creating space for clients and promotion and marketing packages.
This way, the agencies began what we today regard as full marketing services for products.
With the global economy depression, big agencies started to break up into what was called hot-shops instead of providing full marketing services, they became specialist agencies.
Even today, depending on the dictates of the global and national economies, advertising agencies have revolved around providing full marketing services and specialisation.
3.2 Advertising in Nigeria Here in Nigeria, advertising also started with the introduction of the newspapers when traders began to place space in the available newspapers.
The first advertising agency called West African Publicity Limited started in 1928.
The agency was a subsidiary of the United African Company (UAC).
Thus, we can say that the advertising agency business began with the expansion of the multinational sector of Nigeria’s economy.
The West African Publicity Limited had branches in Accra, Lagos and Freetown.
It was this same company that later became LINTAS Limited, a reputable advertising agency in Nigeria today.
Pathetically,, at the inception of the West African Publicity Limited, the literacy level in Nigeria was still very low, so the indigenous languages were used for most of the, and they were then essentially for the UAC Group interests.
What could be regarded as the first meaningful advertising campaign was done in 1948 for Kingsway Stores by the West African Publicity Limited.
In 1964, however, the West African Publicity Limited merged with LINTAS International.
3  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS This international affiliation of agencies became a trend as many global agencies, such as OBL and Ogilvy and Mather, later had subsidiaries in Nigeria.
However, the Indigenisation Decree of 1973 changed all that.
With the promulgation of the law, advertising business was reserved for only Nigerians.
Consequently,, the international agencies had to sell their interests to Nigerians.
Today, some of the local advertising agencies still have technical partnership with international agencies.
With numerous advertising agencies in Nigeria and the huge advertising billings (the total amount of money spent on advertising), advertising has now occupied a significant space in the nation’s economy.
Records show that advertising billings rose from N10 million in 1972 to N54 million in 1974 and by 1982, it was estimated to be at about N300 million.
Presently, it runs into billions, as we shall later see in this course, indicating a steady growth of advertising in the country, even though the sector continues to be affected by the economic crunch as manufacturers scale down their advertising budgets due to reduced production capacity.
Thus, from the crude posters of the West African Publicity Limited, advertising has become so sophisticated that many aspects of our lives are affected by its impact.
For example, since the return of the country to democratic rule in 1999, politicians and political contestants as well as their political parties from time to time embark on major adverting campaigns to sell their manifestoes and candidates’ programmes.
This is apart from the fact that our cultural life, social life and all the economic activities are affected by advertising in Nigeria today.
3.3 Definition of Advertising In simple terms, advertising is a sales tool.
If we agree with this, it then follows that we can stretch this further that advertising should be combined with other areas of marketing.
Therefore, we can be talking of advertising and public relations, advertising and sales promotion, because the ultimate aim of advertising is to sell a product, service or idea.
Indeed, advertising has lends itself to various definitions.
Advertising as described by the American Marketing Association, Chicago is basically “any paid form of non-personal presentation of ideas, goods and services by an identified sponsor.” This definition states that advertising is a form of persuasive communication by an identified sponsor about a product or service.
This definition of advertising may be considered as apt by some scholars.
However, it may sometimes be considered too simplistic, especially when there is no identified sponsor in some such as sometimes, social responsibility, which we shall later discuss in subsequent units in this 4  MAC 427 MODULE 1 course.
Similarly, the definition also suggests that advertising is aimed at manipulating its audience because it is one-way.
Thus, in this context, it would not be wrong to say that advertising forces itself upon its audiences, leaving little scope of response from the receiver’s end.
Another definition, however, says advertising is a mass commercial communication.
This definition identifies the wider spread of advertising message and insists on particular sponsors of the advertisement; that is the advertiser, who pays for its media exposure, in whatever for, on television, radio, newspaper and so on.
It also identifies the process for the exposure of the advertisement before it gets to the consumer.
For this course, we shall take a more comprehensive and internationally accepted definition of advertising as: Advertising is a group of activities aiming at and inducing dissemination of information in any paid non- personal form concerning an idea, product or service to compel action in accordance with the intent of an identifiable sponsor.
This is the definition of the International Advertising Association.
It is a more acceptable and comprehensive definition of advertising.
The definition shows a more complete description of the functions of advertising.
For example, it shows that advertising involves copy writing, marketing research, production, arts and other functional aspects of advertising, which are aimed at disseminating information, which could be for a product, service or an idea, in any non-personal form.
Besides, it also identifies that there must be a known sponsor of advertising, because the message has to be persuasive, otherwise it would not be effective.
4.0 CONCLUSION From its beginning, advertising has permeated human activities and existence, especially with the current communication explosion in the world today.
It is a pervasive phenomenon, so there is the need to study its origin, growth and be able to conceptualise it because it uses various media of communication and impacts on human lives in all ways.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify five major impacts on the development of advertising in Nigeria.
5  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined the various definitions of advertising and its origin with particular reference to Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define advertising and trace its development, with special reference to Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fadipe, S. (2002): Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
Jefkins, F. (1987), Introduction to Marketing, Advertising and Public Relations.London and Basingstoke: Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 6  MAC 427 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 CLASSIFICATION AND ROLES OF ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classification of Advertising 3.2 Types of Advertising 3.3 Roles of Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We indicated in the last unit that advertising has developed many specialist areas.
These areas have grown to become defined as special classifications and types of advertising.
Therefore, we need to examine these classifications of advertising, types of advertising, and the roles advertising plays in human lives and in the society.
This will help us appreciate the impacts and effects of advertising in the society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you must be able to: • classify advertising • identify the types of advertising • explain the roles of advertising in human lives and society.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Classification of Advertising There are many ways advertising can be classified.
These include: Target audience: This concerns the specific segment of the population for whom the product or service has appeal.
With the target audience approach of classification, we can identify two types of advertising as consumer advertising and business-to-business advertising.
a) Consumer Advertising: As the name implies, consumer advertising concerns people who buy goods and services for 7  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS personal consumption, for example, toiletries, shoes, wears, home appliances and groceries.
b) Business-to-Business Advertising: This is targeted at people who buy products for industrial use or for more production, such as raw materials and machines used in industrial production.
Geographic classification: This concerns market segmentation by geography, such as national and international, or region to region for advertising.
It is common in advertising for products that have global market, such as Coca-Cola to classify their market into regions of the world.
This is because these segmented markets have different socio- economic and political environment, which have marketing implications.
Primary and Selective Demand Advertising: This class of advertising is targeted at purpose for the demand of distinct products or services.
a) Primary demand advertising is concerned with the promotion of a particular product category, rather than specific or individual product or service.
b) Selective demand advertising: This is used by an individual company to sell the individual brands.
Direct and Indirect Action Advertising: A direct action advertisement is one with a toll-free number, coupon, e-mail, or Web address, or other means, which allow the advertiser to see the results of responses quickly.
This is very common in Nigeria when companies embark on sales promotion or other short-in-the-arm marketing tools to boost immediate sales of particular products.
Inversely, the indirect advertising is a prolonged process used to build a company’s image and increase consumers’ loyalty.
Indirect advertising works on public attitudes regarding a company’s image thus, it takes some time before the effects are seen.
In addition, it is a little difficult to measure, because change in public perception about a company is not easy to measure.
However, the impact of the direct advertisement is easily measured with the number of sales by simply counting the coupons and counterfoils returned by the buyers.
3.2 Types of Advertising The main types of advertising are: a) Standard Advertising: This appears in all media.
It is financed by a company or organisation in order to sell a product or service.
b) The aim of this type of advertising is to create in the potential consumer the desire for a product or service.
The decisions to 8  MAC 427 MODULE 1 place the advertisement and choice of media are made by the producer of the product or service (the advertiser) with the professional advice of the advertising agency.
Feedback or the effect of a standard advertisement is easily measured in increase in number of patrons or sales.
Standard is probably the most common type of advertising and is the lifeblood of agency operations.
c) Public Service and Social Responsibility Advertising: This kind of advertising is used to support non-profit causes and such non-profit making organisations.
Therefore, it is given free by media organisations in the interest of the public.
Also, some organisations might pay for social responsibility without identifying themselves as the sponsor, all in the spirit of public service.
This kind of advertising usually concerns safe driving, health issues such as anti-HIV/AIDS campaign, safe and hygienic environment, forest conservation and tree planting.
They may be promoted free by non-profit organisations or paid for by companies, which want to be seen as good corporate citizens, as we have noted.
d) Counter-Advertising: This is advertising directed against a product or service.
It is aimed at knocking the product or service.
This is not so common because it can really be controversial.
It is usually aimed at countering some of the claims in standard advertising of a product, which the counter-advertising advocates believe are unwarranted and can be effectively knocked out by counter advertisements.
The effectiveness of counter advertisements may not be easy to measure, because again it depends on change in the public’s attitude, which scholars have said is difficult to see.
Studies have however indicated, for example, that there is gradual reduction in drunk driving as the level of counter-advertising rises in newspapers, on radio and television, as well as media campaigns at motor parks and on the road.
Drunk driving is gradually being seen as an unacceptable social behaviour.
e) Corrective Advertising: As the name implies, corrective advertising is to correct some exaggerated or misleading claims on some products, usually on the orders of the regulatory bodies, such as Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON); or the Standard Organisation of Nigeria (SON) and National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC), if such claims concern food and drugs.
We can classify the new trend in of paracetamol drugs in Nigeria today as corrective advertising, where the regulatory bodies insist that they must go with the tail-off “if the headache persists after three days, please see your doctor.” This was not the case until 1980s when Professor Olikoye Ransome-Kuti became the Minister of Health.
It was also when tobacco manufacturers were forced to 9  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS carry the warning that “Tobacco smoking is dangerous to your health.” Sometimes, the regulatory bodies may also urge broadcast stations and newspapers to reject deceptive advertisements.
While corrective advertisements would ordinarily help to inform the public and prick them to be wary of the advertised products, counter arguments are raised as to the damage, which may have been done by such misleading advertisements and lack of remedies to victims as well as the long time it may take before the corrective advertisement can have impact.
However, generally, corrective advertisements are appreciated for their worth, at least to guide against deceptive advertising.
f) Advocacy Advertising: Whereas counter-advertising is aimed against offensive products, advocacy advertising leads campaign against conditions that affect the public.
This advertising is directed against drug abuse, use of hard drug, high rate of crime and squalid living.
It may not be directed to counter any advertisement, but to promote public good and welfare.
g) Image Advertising: This is sometimes seen as part of the public relations package of a company, designed to brighten its perception among the public.
Usually, oil companies and multinational companies engage in worthy public causes, such as giving back to the people, clean environment and care for the vulnerable groups in the society, which they want the public to be aware of.
Some companies advertise some roads, which they construct in some Nigerian cities.
The image advertising builds and brightens an organisation’s public perception.
h) Municipal and State Advertising: This kind of advertising promotes states and cities as peaceful and providing comfort for residents.
Most states in Nigeria do this, especially with billboards displayed at the entry points of their state capitals and major towns highlighting the major economic stay and other benefits in such states.
3.3 Roles of Advertising In discussing roles of advertising, we have grouped these roles into economic and social roles for the purpose of this course and easy understanding.
a) The Economic Roles of Advertising: i.
Advertising provides informational utility by getting information from the advertiser to the public.
Thus, it helps the buyer to make 10  MAC 427 MODULE 1 better decision because he is being exposed to information through advertising.
Thus, he is properly guided.
Through advertising information, selling of products is facilitated as advertising pre-sells the product or service before it gets into the market.
ii.
Advertising boosts the economy and deepens capital investment.
Producers can produce in large scale and create a big market through advertising.
This leads to economic growth in all frontiers as manufacturers plough back investments to gain from the existing large market.
iii.
It helps to maintain and stabilise production level.
Most advertisers make their impact based on repetition, especially because they want to remind the consumers, create brand loyalty, and brand preference.
Many products, such as OMO detergent, Peak milk, coffee and noodles have over time built brand loyalty and this has helped their companies to maintain and stabilise production levels and guard against wastes in the production line.
iv.
Advertising provides support for the media.
Newspapers, magazines and the broadcast media of radio and television are kept in business because of huge advertising income.
Newspaper cover prices cannot meet the cost of production of a newspaper, so the media houses are in business because huge income comes from placements of advertising in their media.
Many newspapers have gone into extinction in Nigeria because they lacked advertising support.
In Nigeria, private radio and television stations depend almost totally on adverting income.
v. It also provides product utility.
As advertising builds up a product, it also builds a personality for the product.
This is called positioning.
Some products are seen as class products today because of the personality created around them in the minds of the consumers by advertising over a long period.
What we are saying here is that advertising could be used to provide extra qualities for a product in the minds of the consumers, different and more than its inherent attributes.
An example in the Nigerian market is Guinness Stout, which is generally recognised as superior to its competitors by an average consumer.
Guinness Stout is recognised as more or less the only stout in Nigeria, although many other stout drinks have been introduced into the market; some have died, others are still struggling.
b.
Social Roles of Advertising i.
Advertising leads to a higher standard of living.
This is because advertising essentially motivates consumers to buy.
This motivation sometimes extends to products that may be beyond the economic status of the consumers at a particular point in time.
Thus, the motivation gears the consumers to improve their 11  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS income in order to buy the wanted products and improve their standard of living; the motivation may be because the consumer wants to meet up with his mates or just to improve his living standard.
ii.
Advertising also leads to production of better products and services for the consumers.
The improved products and services result from the competition among producers as they strive to satisfy the consumers and build brand loyalty.
At the very end, the consumers benefit from the value and quality of the improved products and services.
iii.
Advertising mirrors the society.
This is by way of reinforcing the norms and values of the people, because advertising can only be meaningful if it utilises the inherent characters in the people’s culture or acts within a cultural context.
For example, today, we see that advertising makes use of our folklores and also explores important aspects of our culture.
It also follows societal trend; this is why advertising uses more sex symbols today than it did in the past.
However, this is one of the criticisms of advertising, as we would later see in this course; advertising is blamed for the excessive promotion of sex and, thus, immorality.
iv.
Advertising also encourages contact between different cultures, and this leads to growth in the society.
It tends to disallow existence of a closed society by opening up the people’s lives to other people.
For example, much as we may criticise the activities of multinationals in Nigeria, their coming into the country has also improved the society in some ways.
v. Advertising remains an effective means for social mobilisation of the people by the government.
The government makes use of advertising to mobilise the people for clean environment, nation building, return to agriculture and health campaigns, because advertising is persuasive.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify three major roles of advertising in the society.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have dealt extensively with the classification, types and roles of advertising to help us draw inferences on the effects and criticisms of advertising later in the course.
We have also made a distinction between classification and types of advertising in order to separate them from each other however close they might seem.
This will not only deepen our knowledge of the subject, but also help us to be able to draw inferences and relevant conclusions later in the course.
12  MAC 427 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have treated the classification and types of advertising, and economic and social roles of advertising.
For this course, we have grouped the functions of advertising in the society under two headings: economic and social roles, essentially in relation to the framework of our course.
We have identified that advertising provides informational utility for the potential buyer, boosts economy, helps a company to stabilise production level, supports the media, builds a personality for a product, opens up cultures, mirrors society, a means for social mobilisation and leads to improved standard of living.
Of course, there are many other benefits of advertising, which can be identified.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How is advertising classified and what are the types of advertising you know?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bittner, J. R. (1989).
Mass Communication an Introduction.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Dominick, J. R. (2009).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York; McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Jefkins, F. (1973).
Advertising Made Simple books.
London: A Division of Howard & Wyndham Ltd. 13  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 3 ORGANISATION OF ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organisation of Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The way advertising is structured is crucial to how effective it has become today in the society.
Therefore, we would, in this unit, discuss the three components of advertising and see how they function to make an effective system as exemplified by the success advertising has recorded generally in the world today.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify and discuss the three components of advertising and how they function as a system.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organisation of Advertising As we have noted, the organisation of advertising revolves around three institutions: the advertiser, advertising agency and the media.
a) The Advertiser: This refers to the client side of the advertising business, such as the advertising manager, brand or product manager, marketing manager and sales manager.
Depending on the kind of organisation and structure, one or two of these managers may be responsible for advertising.
Whichever name they are called, however, the main function of the advertising or marketing manager, brand or product manager is to coordinate and supervise the organisation’s advertising programme.
The manager would be responsible for developing the advertising objectives and also coordinating the advertising budgets, as well as working closely with advertising agencies.
14  MAC 427 MODULE 1 Almost all advertisers employ the services of advertising agencies, although some advertisers have in-house agency, such as PZ Nigeria, which performs the same functions as advertising agencies; the in-house agencies create and place in the media just like normal agencies.
Most of the remuneration of advertising agencies does not come from the advertiser.
Rather, it comes from commission that ranges between 10 to 15 per cent or more, which the media give to the agencies for buying spaces in the newspaper or airtime on the radio or television.
b) The Advertising Agency: The advertising agency business started with the first set of agencies being more or less like space brokers for the media by selling space and airtime.
However, with time, other services were added.
Today, most agencies offer creative as well as media services to the advertiser.
Apart from this, there are agencies now that provide full marketing services; they offer broader range of marketing communication services.
These broader services include marketing research, product development, merchandising and sales promotion services.
However, a more recent trend in Nigeria now is that some specialist agencies have come to offer one or two specialist services to the clients.
These are small outfits, known as hot- shops or creative boutiques, that offer creative or media services only in the industry.
A modern advertising agency employs three different professionals: i.
Creative service personnel: They include copywriters, artists, visualisers and production people, such as lithographers in the print media, or producers in the broadcast media.
This group of people develop the advertising campaign.
ii.
The Client Service Group: They consist of client service executives or account executives (so-called because advertising agencies refer to any advertiser or product as an account).
An account executive liaises between the agency and the client.
He is to keep contact with the client.
His main functions, therefore, are to contribute to the development of the client’s advertising plan and communicate the client’s objectives and marketing requirements to the agency.
This means he should have a good background in marketing.
iii.
Media Services Group: This consists of media executives who are responsible for developing the media schedules and media strategies.
This group may also include marketing research specialists.
c) The Media: The media, in relation to advertising, refer to the mass mediated media of newspaper, radio and television, as well as other media, such as billboards, posters and neon signs, among others.
15  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS We have observed in our previous unit that media developments both within the country and within the world have seriously influenced the practice of advertising.
The first was the newspaper and up till today, it is still the most dominant in advertising.
However, it is also true that the advent of the radio created great opportunities for the advertiser.
This is especially so in the African societies, which have strong oral traditions and folklores.
Use of these oral traditions enables advertisements to reach our largely illiterate societies.
It is established by scholars that radio is today the most widespread of the mass media.
This gives it a long reach, which is an advantage for advertising.
Similarly, the advent of the television has brought about tremendous growth in advertising.
With its audio-visual nature, copywriters could demonstrate their products as well as create moods and atmosphere or real environment that suits the products on the television.
In particular, this allows a lot of creativity in copy writing.
Now, with the introduction of colour television, the medium has come to provide all the advantages of the other media put together, except that television commercials are very expensive in addition to being transient.
Another medium today is the magazine, which brought into advertising the possibility of producing in full colour in the print medium.
This means for advertising, true-life illustrations of pictures are possible in the print medium too.
It is noteworthy that although printing magazines in full colour is costly, the fact that magazines have slim overheads in staffing is advantageous and would cut the cost of running magazines.
Other media of advertising include outdoor media, which refers essentially to billboards, posters and neon signs.
We also have the transit media, which include advertisement cards like stickers on buses, cars and trains; posters placed in seaports, airports and bus stops.
All the media of advertising discussed so far are referred to as above-the-line advertisements.
This is because they are more traditional, more obvious media used by the advertiser.
In addition, allocation to these media in the advertising budget is specific and more concrete.
On the other hand, we also have those media we refer to as below-the- line advertisements.
They refer to other kinds of advertisements not within the traditional media.
They are sales promotion campaign items including but not limited to: • Advertising specialties – such as wall clocks, fountain pen, calendar, key holders, bottle openers, T-shirts, ash trays, and such other items, which the advertising consultants may recommend as gift items; • .Trade fairs, exhibitions and expos; 16  MAC 427 MODULE 1 • .Point-of-Purchase media : this refers to window display, banners and special stands which are directed at impulse buyers at supermarkets and exhibitions; and • .Free contests and samples – such as premiums and free sample of products, especially new products.
We need to note that these below-the-line advertisements are more or less within the realm of sales promotion, and as such, advertising commission is absent.
They may not also be done by an advertising agency.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is the main role of the advertiser in the business of advertising?
4.0 CONCLUSION The scope of advertising is large and the profession offers numerous opportunities for its practitioners.
Of course, the organisation of advertising also gives many responsibilities to practitioners to become professionals and masters of their specialisation.
However, attitude and training are essential for success and ability to know the area of advertising one is suited is important.
Whether you are an advertiser, advertising agency or the media, all the components are part of the huge advertising industry of any country.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has dealt with the organisation of the advertising industry.
In particular, we have discussed the three components of advertising: the advertiser, advertising agency and the media.
We have also dealt with how these components function to make the advertising industry the huge success it has become in the world today.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the three components of advertising and their functions.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dominick, J. R. (2009).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Fadipe, S. (2002).
Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
17  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 4 THE ECONOMICS OF ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Economics of Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we will examine the economics of advertising at two levels.
We will try to see the size of the Nigerian economy represented by some yearly income of advertising billings in the various media.
We shall narrow this down to sources of income for advertising agencies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain how an advertising agency makes money • discuss how the advertising industry contributes to the nation’s economy, or more specifically to national income.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Economics of Advertising a) It has been explained that advertising has grown to become an important industry in the country today.
In concrete terms, the contributions of advertising to national income are measurable.
So, compared to the contributions of public relations expenditure in Nigeria, estimated at three billion naira (US$6.3 million) at the end of the 2010 business year, The Economist (April 2011 citing MediaReach OMD) puts the advertising expenditure at 98 billion naira (US$646 million) in 2010.
Based on this, we can see that advertising, from its crude beginning of tradesmen and town criers, is now a money-spinner that contributes huge income to the nation’s economy yearly because of the huge advertising billings, which keep increasing each year.
Comparing the contributions and media use in advertising in Nigeria, it is a general industry observation that newspapers have consistently 18  MAC 427 MODULE 1 maintained a huge size of these yearly advertising incomes in the country.
But this is said to be challenged by the rising advertising volume from the television and radio, especially since 1999 when the country returned to democratic rule and the trend in Christendom, which depends heavily on the use of television for their religious activities.
Unlike in the developed countries, advertising income from magazines in Nigeria may have been badly affected because of the apparent reduction in their number, with the broadcast media taking a shine of the advantage of the colour in the magazines.
Many magazines are finding it difficult to stay in the market today, probably two or more of them, Tell Magazine and The News, are consistent now on the newsstand.
While the television is said to have shown some improvements in advertising volumes, the outdoor advertising may have also gained revenue with the observable increase in patronage by politicians and political parties.
The growth in the use of Internet has also resulted in improved revenue of advertising as many organisations have embraced the Web for advertising purposes.
Hardly does one see an organisation worth its salt today without a Web site and this is supported by advertisements.
Today, advertising billings in the national economy, which is used to gauge the contributions of the sector to the economy and an indicator of growth in the industry, now runs into billions as we have earlier shown above.
This is from the slow rise of the 1972 put at N10 million; 1974, N54 million; and the jump to N300 million in 1982. b) Agency Revenue: Much of the income of advertising agencies comes from commission, which is generally fixed at 15 per cent.
The commission is the discount paid by the media to agencies for the placement of advertisements.
Besides the commission, there are still other sources of agency income, but first, we will discuss the commission.
i.
Agency commission: As we have indicated above, the agency buys space or airtime in the media based on the advertising rate schedule of the media.
The agency gets a discount of 15 per cent of the rate of the space bought.
The agency gets the 15 per cent commission immediately the advertiser pays, and the media take the remainder.
The advertising practitioners in Nigeria reckon that the agency commission represents some 75 per cent of a typical agency’s yearly income.
This percentage may drop to as low as 55 per cent when it comes to smaller agencies.
Obviously, the reason for this disparity is that big agencies have bigger and even more number of accounts than smaller ones.
19  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS ii.
Other incomes: Agencies also engage in other activities for clients, such as printing jobs and are paid percentages of the projects.
iii.
Processing client’s goods and services: Some advertising agencies also take up processing of the order for goods and services of their client.
This is after the advertising agency might have charged for placing advertisements for the goods and services in the media for the client; it now takes the additional responsibility of taking orders for the goods and services from customers.
This is not provided free; the agency charges the advertiser additional money, probably on gross sales of the products.
This arrangement may not be for all agencies, especially the big ones.
This has proved to be a good source of income for smaller agencies whose market share in terms of advertisements is limited.
This procedure is common with industrial products, but not so with fast moving consumer goods.
iv.
Other sources of income for advertising agencies include organising sales seminars, training and workshops for clients.
v. Class of service: The higher and more distinguished the class of service rendered by an advertising agency, the higher the cost, especially based on the level of professionals used for a client.
For example, agencies provide services according to a client’s need, wish and pocket.
It is normal for agencies to use their best professionals for an account, which may represent a big chunk of their yearly income, so that they can continue to retain such accounts.
These variants and levels of services by agency personnel can affect the cost of projects and income of agencies too.
In the same way, use of additional secretarial and administrative hands could jerk up the cost of project executed by agencies, although the cost of deploying a clerk cannot be compared to the extra efforts put into a campaign by a media director.
vi.
Agency costs: The cost of advertising has been increasing consistently from time to time.
With these increases, the commission and income of advertising agencies have also increased consistently.
Of course, the factor that essentially determines advertising income is the cost of advertising.
In Nigeria, however, agencies have remained flexible with their commission despite rising cost.
This is because commissions are charged on the total cost of advertising.
Thus, if the overall cost of advertising increases, the tendency is for agency commission to rise accordingly.
In addition, agencies tend to place more insertions on 20  MAC 427 MODULE 1 behalf of advertisers in an economy such as Nigeria, which is dominated by fast consumer moving products, so that they earn more commission.
vii.
We have indicated in one of the earlier units that some advertising agencies take up public relations jobs for their clients, providing full marketing services.
An example of an agency with public relations arm in Nigeria is Insight Communications, which has Quadrant Communications Limited as its public relations arm; there are many others, as we will see in later units.
However, the essence of our argument is to stress that agencies with this kind of large and extensive public relations work will get a large percentage of their clients’ marketing budgets.
This is because such an agency will not only earn the client’s money for placing in the media, it will also be paid for sending press releases to the media, media representatives, organising press conferences, using pictures in the media, visiting trade fairs and organising press luncheons.
These public relations activities are not based on commission.
They tend to retain more money with the agencies, rather than the media, because they are not based on commission like direct advertisements, SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify three ways advertising earn their income in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION The advertising agencies are in business to make money and contribute to economic growth.
Although the commission they earn from the discount from the money paid to the media forms a large part of their income, they have tried to survive and continue in business employing other legal marketing related ways and activities to remain afloat.
Overall, advertising consists of economic activities and, therefore, part of the nation’s economic system.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed the contributions of advertising to the national income and how advertising agencies earn their income and survive as business concerns.
We have also identified many ways advertising agencies earn their income apart from the standard 15 per cent advertising commission, which is globally accepted today.
These other sources include payments for taking goods orders on behalf of clients, doing printing jobs and others for their clients.
21  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the sources of an advertising agency’s income and how does this income affect the national income?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bittner, J. R. (1989).
Mass Communication An Introduction.
New Jersey, Prentice Hall: Englewood Cliffs.
Dominick, J. R, (2009).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education, Fadipe, S. (2002).
Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
22  MAC 427 MODULE 1 UNIT 5 THE ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Advertising Campaign 3.2 Advertising Research 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, we discussed the sources of income of advertising agencies.
The natural follow-up to this is how the agencies run their campaigns; and the best way to show how advertisements are produced is to discuss an advertising campaign for a product in this unit.
This is what we shall do right away.
This will involve the various steps from choosing the marketing strategy, selecting the main theme or appeal, translating the theme into the various media, producing the advertisements, buying space and time, executing and evaluating the campaign.
We would also emphasise the essence of various kinds of research at different levels of the advertising campaign.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the various stages involved in an advertising campaign • discuss how advertising agencies develop and run their campaigns for clients.
• explain types of research in the advertising campaign and when each research becomes necessary and for what purpose during the campaign.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Advertising Campaign An advertising campaign is a well-planned and coordinated advertising effort aimed at presenting a product or service in a positive light to target audiences.
It contains a large number of advertisements slated to run in many media for a specified period.
The advertisements are laced with the theme or the main appeal of the campaign.
Simplified stages of an advertising campaign will now be provided for our understanding.
23  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS a) Choose the marketing strategy: The advertising campaign begins with research to determine the target audience, the appropriate price for the product or service, the overall marketing objective and the budget for the campaign.
Scholars agree that it is at this stage that the concept of positioning comes into play.
Positioning, in general terms, is identifying a segment or more of the market with the product or service to set it apart from its competitors.
We need to stress again here that positioning does not alter anything in the product or service, what it does mainly is to work on the minds of the consumers in the identified segments of the broad market.
For example, since the use of laptops for company executives has made writing in long hand unnecessary, pen manufacturers have simply repositioned pens as luxury items and part of dressing.
This has caught up with many company executives as they now hang fountain pens in the pockets of their suits as part of their dressing.
However, sometimes, positioning fails as two attempts by Guinness Nigeria to position Satzenbrau Beer as a high-class product have consistently achieved little result in the market.
Whereas, the observable marketing objective of Guinness is to interrupt the dominance of the lager beer market by Star owned by its competitor, Nigerian Breweries PLC.
b) Select the main theme or appeal: After the product positioning, a campaign theme has to be developed which would govern the messages and production of the advertisements.
Such a campaign theme is, for example, MTN’s “MTN –everywhere you go” to indicate the spread of the GSM company in the Nigerian market; Visafone’s “Have you got your visa” to show that when one has a Visafone network, he has a visa to enter or go to important places.
c) Translate the theme into the various media: This involves creatively translating the theme into all the advertisements in newspaper, radio and television as well as billboards and so on.
d) Produce the advertisements: This is where the actual production of the advertisement is done.
For all the media, it is pretty the same way.
In the newspaper copy, you prepare it first in rough form; place the headlines, subheads, pictures and illustrations in symmetry without being clumsy.
The depth of the creativity of the production department usually shows in the kind of advertisements of an agency.
However, many agencies sometimes give printing of their billboards advertisements to outside studios and printers in order to ensure perfect colours and production.
For the radio commercials, they are done like drama sketches.
First, the script is developed with dialogue, and sound and music effects are added for whatever atmosphere and mood needed.
Whether recorded live or 24  MAC 427 MODULE 1 sound studio, postproduction is done after.
This is when special effects are added; and at the end, a master tape is now ready for duplication and distribution.
The television commercial begins with the storyboard, which shows sketches and drawings indicating the scenes in the advertisements.
This would be shown to the advertiser for his input.
Once the advertiser approves, the storyboard goes into production.
If it is produced in video tapes rather than celluloid, it will be cheaper because television commercials are probably the costliest in terms of production.
Besides its many rehearsals, effects and animation also pile up cost.
Apart from these media, advertisements are also produced for the Web pages of the client or others he may buy into it.
The advertisements in these other media are still governed by the running theme and appeal in the campaign.
e) Buy space and time: It is the job of the marketing department to buy time and space in the selected media for the campaign.
The insertions and slots of the advertisements are timed appropriately in order to meet the targeted consumers.
Also, seasonal sales periods such as Christmas, Sallah and other festivities are targeted for mass sales within the year.
f) Execute and evaluate the campaign: This is the final stage of the campaign after the advertisements have been exposed in the media.
At particular stages when the campaign is running and after, testing is done to ascertain its effects on the consumers.
Sales are also monitored to know whether the campaign is effective.
3.2 Advertising Research The place of advertising research in all the stages of the campaign cannot be overemphasised.
This is because advertising research helps agencies and clients to make informed decisions about their strategies and tactics regarding the campaign.
Thus, we would discuss the various types of research and their roles in every stage of the advertising campaign.
These are: Formative research: This is done before the campaign to guide the creative efforts.
Its first step is to properly identify and define the target market, whether they are mainly females or males, adults or young.
After this has been done, the next thing is to profile the target market, especially to determine their characteristics – how they live, what they think, their attitudes, and the pattern of purchase.
Message research: This is the next stage of the research, and it involves pre-testing the messages of the advertisements in the campaign to know 25  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS whether the target market can easily understand them.
It ranges from simple tests to more serious ones as pilot tests of actual markets to determine the effect of the messages.
Here too, agencies may also be able to identify offensive messages.
Tracking studies: This research is done to know how effective the advertisements are during and after the campaign.
Samples of consumers are examined to know whether they recall the messages in the advertisements, whether their attitudes have being affected, and whether they have bought and used the goods and services.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List two types of research conducted by advertising practitioners during a campaign 4.0 CONCLUSION The advertising agencies are in business to make money and keep the business running.
Therefore, their operations are guided for success by running profitably, effective and result-oriented advertising campaigns.
This is why a good grasp of how to run a successful advertising campaign is critical and essential in this course.
5.0 SUMMARY We have dealt with the six stages of how advertising campaigns are run in this unit, emphasising pretesting, testing and evaluation as essential parts from the conception of the campaign to the end and even after.
We also stressed the significance of research before, during and after the campaign and discussed the different kinds of research and their importance.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the components of an advertising campaign, emphasising the need for research in all stages of the campaign and after.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dominick, J. R. (2009).The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Fadipe, S. (2002).
Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
26  MAC 427 MODULE 2 MODULE 2 THEORY AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1 History, Growth and Definition of Public Relations Unit 2 Methods of Public Relations Unit 3 The Public Relations Campaign Unit 4 The Economics of Public Relations Unit 5 Advertising, Public Relations and Marketing: An Interface UNIT 1 HISTORY, GROWTH AND DEFINITION OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History and Evolution of Public Relations 3.2 Growth of Public Relations in Nigeria 3.3 Definition of Public Relations 3.4 Public Relations as Management Function 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public Relations has had a phenomenal growth, with a rich body of intellectual study and theory and an enduring practice, which grew from its ordinary beginning.
However, its definitions are either too narrow or impractical, or both.
It has sometimes been confused with press relations, publicity, propaganda or promotion, which are all tools of public relations through which a public relations practitioner can reach his publics.
In this unit, we shall study the origin, growth and definition of public relations in order to understand the concept of the subject.
We shall also endeavour to identify public relations as management function, because of its importance in assisting organisation’s decision- makers.
27  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the evolution of public relations as a profession • discuss the growth of public relations in Nigeria • define public relations as a management function.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of Public Relations The practice of public relations is as old as man.
In every society, the three main elements of public relations – informing, persuading and interacting - have been prominent in the way people relate among themselves.
In the past, priests used to play the role of public relations personnel to kings.
Although this could be described at the time as public relations, what could however be regarded as the first institutionalised public relations activity was by Pope Gregory XIII in the 17th century.
This was during the period of Reformation in Christianity; Pope Gregory was then at the head of the Catholic Church.
He realised he needed to make conscious efforts to reinforce the ideals of Catholic faith, especially because of those spreading falsehood and preaching against Catholic doctrines.
The Pope, therefore, set up a committee for this purpose.
The committee was specifically charged with three basic responsibilities: a) to open seminaries b) to print Catechisms, and c) to publish religious works.
What the committee members did then was to serve as public relations men for the Catholics.
From this small institutionalised effort, public relations could be said to have started and later had a steady and speedy evolution.
Evolution of Public Relations The growth of public relations can best be understood from the study of the features of the various phases of the development of the profession.
These phases can be divided into seven: 28  MAC 427 MODULE 2 • Phase I – The development at the stage is linked with the advent of press agencies.
The press agencies publicised whatever needed to be publicised.
One B.T.
Barnum, in the United States was said to have, in 1933, exhibited a woman who said she was 160 years old and was George Washington’s slave.
Barnum (who was in showbiz then) engaged press agents to help publicise his ideas in the newspapers with the aim of fooling the public.
Although this worked for him then, it is contrary to the guiding principle of public relations today, which insists public relations must be based on truth.
• Phase II – This is the phase of “Let the public be informed.” This phase was championed by media men led by Ivy Lee.
Lee was a newspaperman based in New York who believed that to carry favourable public opinion, the people needed more than the activities of press agencies.
Later, Lee was said to have been engaged by Pennsylvanian Railroad to inform the public about the activities of the corporation.
Later, he formed a public relations firm with Mr. Paller, but broke with him to set up another outfit called Lee, Harris and Lee.
His popular declaration of principles of 1906 is seen in many circles as the beginning of professional public relations.
His public relations strategy was said to have been mainly proactive.
• Phase III – The growth of public relations at this period is linked with Edward Barnays, who was a public relations counsellor.
The practitioners then were publicity men who realised that the public needed more than being informed but that they had to understand their attitude towards business and would use this knowledge to take steps to gain the public’s goodwill.
• Phase IV – The Depression Period – The public goodwill developed earlier had ebbed into distrust as depression set in, in the 1930s in the whole world, so corporate management realised they had to build public confidence and goodwill.
Companies, therefore, employed public relations counsellors to improve their image.
This was when Paul Garret formed a public relations department in General Motors in the United States.
• Phase V – The developments surrounding the depression discussed in Phase IV also brought about government control and regulation of commerce.
This led to more attention to business operations by the public.
Thus, business concerns and trade associations had to employ public relations men to represent them, to explain issues to government and the public.
• Phase VI - World War II – Industries regained public confidence owing to their contributions to the prosecution of the war and community help during the period.
The corporations also employed public relations practitioners to inform the public of their contributions.
They also employed institutional advertising 29  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS to retain public image, especially as they were deploying more resources into production of arms and ammunition, with reduced consumable goods.
This was the beginning of the use of corporate advertising for public relations.
• Phase VII – Military Public Relations – This was when the United States military and government encouraged business and commerce to employ public relations and build public understanding.
Earlier in World War 1, President Woodrow Wilson was said to have set up a committee to explain the war efforts to the public to gain their understanding.
• Phase VIII – Government Public Relations – The United States was said to have established the United States Information Agency (USIA) saddled with the responsibility of explaining the United States and its foreign policy to the world.
The USIA still exists today performing the same role for the United States.
3.2 Growth of Public Relations in Nigeria Formal public relations practice in Nigeria started on January 1, 1944, when the British colonial administrators established the first Public Relations Department in the country.
The department was recorded to have been headed by Mr. D.C. Fletcher, as the leader of a group of staff, who included a public relations officer, an assistant public relations officer, a process engraver, a press officer, a publicity artist, an antiquities officer, a photographer, a films officer, a radio officer and a confidential secretary.
The function of the department was mainly to carry out “public enlightenment” programmes regarding government activities.
This was targeted at selected publics, such as Nigerian soldiers who participated in World War II as part of the British Army.
At independence in 1960, when the country severed from colonial rule, the public relations department was transferred to the new Federal Ministry of Information (FMI) where it continued with information activities for its various publics.
The department focused on information on environment, public health campaigns aimed at eradicating communicable diseases such as yaws, yellow fever, and tuberculosis, which were prevalent in Nigeria then.
This was usually at the request of the WHO (World Health Organisation).
The FMI was also used for campaign for the success of government education programmes through the cinema and open-air film shows, which encouraged parents to send their children to school.
The first public relations professional body, the Public Relations Association of Nigeria (PRAN), was founded by Samuel Epelle, Director of PR at FMI.
In 1967, Epelle published the first authoritative 30  MAC 427 MODULE 2 book on public relations in Nigeria, Essentials of Public Relations, indicating his significant contributions to the development of public relations in Nigeria.
Epelle, as PRAN’s founder, became its coordinator and chairman and worked to recruit colleagues from other governmental departments and private industries to join him in enlarging PRAN’s membership.
In 1969, PRAN was renamed the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations (NIPR) and several years later, it organised the annual Sam Epelle gold medal in his honour, which still continues to be awarded till date.
3.3 Definition of Public Relations Public Relations is within the realm of social sciences, thus, there has not been all-be-it definition of the concept.
Scholars, practitioners and several associations have defined public relations in various ways.
These definitions have somehow tried to straighten out the various misconceptions about the subject, which we referred to earlier above.
The British Institute of Public Relations (IPR) defines public relations as “the deliberate, planned and sustained effort to establish and maintain mutual understanding between an organization and its various publics.” An authority on the subject, Frank Jefkins (1980), also says public relations consist “of all forms of planned communication, outwards and inwards, between an organisation and its publics for the purpose of achieving specific objectives concerning mutual understanding.” The World Assembly of Public Relations Associations in Mexico in 1978 agreed, “Public Relations practice is the art and science of analysing trends, predicting their consequences, counselling organisation leaders and implementing planned programmes of action, which will serve both the organisation and its publics.” While in all the definitions above, we can identify the characteristics of public relations in them, probably what can be considered as more comprehensive and scholarly definition was the one given Rex Harlow in 1976.
Harlow, a public relations expert, says Public Relations is “a distinctive management function, which helps establish and maintain mutual lines of communication, understanding, acceptance and cooperation between an organisation and its publics; involves the management of problems or issues, helps management to keep informed on and responsive to public opinion; defines and emphasises the responsibility of management to serve the public interest; helps management to keep abreast of and effectively utilise change; serving as an early warning system to help anticipate trend, and uses research and sound ethical communication techniques as its principal tools.” 31  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS What we would however, do here is to draw the major characteristics of public relations from the various definitions above: a) it is a philosophy and function of management b) it studies and evaluates public opinion c) it identifies the policies and procedures of an organisation or individual with the public interest d) it executes a programme of action to earn public understanding and acceptance.
Public Relations is a philosophy of advertisements management, which says the interest of the public who depend on its employment, income, wages and services and goods must be served by an organisation.
It emphasises at every stage understanding and establishing good public opinion among its public.
Based on this position, it is necessary to study public relations as a management function.
3.4 Public Relations as a Management Function The philosophy of public relations as a management function is based essentially on the fact that public relations is practised at senior management level where decisions are made and that all departments of an organisation embrace public relations as an attitude.
For example, the purchasing department should establish good relationship with suppliers, consumers, dealers and distributors, as well as other departments within the organisation; the account and finance department should establish good relations with the financial community, including banks, shareholders and the workers.
However, it is the function of the public relations department to coordinate and manage these public relations efforts of each department to sustain the mutual understanding between the organisation’s publics.
The public relations department, therefore, plans, execute and evaluate the overall public relations programmes of the organisation.
This is done through its tools of press conferences, press releases, news publicity, photographs, seminars, and other media.
Public Relations should be a management function because every action of each department has public relations impact and implications.
In addition, corporate decisions are taken at management, it is necessary for the head of public relations department to be in the management where decisions are taken in the organisation.
This way, the head of the public relations department can also keep the management abreast of the implications of public relations activities and actions.
This leads us to identifying the roles of public relations in management.
32  MAC 427 MODULE 2 Roles of public relations in management These include: a) counselling based on the understanding of human behaviour.
b) analysing future trends and predicting their consequences c) establishing and maintaining two-way communication based on truth and full information d) research into public opinion, attitude and expectations e) preventing conflicts and misunderstanding f) promoting mutual respect and social responsibility g) harmonising private and public interests h) promoting goodwill among staff and with suppliers and customers i) promoting products and services j) maximising profitability k) promoting good employee relations l) projecting the marketing efforts of the organisation m) promoting good financial and shareholders relations n) promoting good government relations.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List five roles of public relations in management.
4.0 CONCLUSION Realistically, no corporate world or organisation can succeed without the recognition and conscious efforts to build mutual understanding with its publics, both internal and external.
It is particularly realised that every action concerning the organisation has public relations implications, this is why public relations is recognised as a management function, so that the public relations practitioner is part of corporate decision making in the organisation, by advising management on the public relations concern of their actions and reporting his public relations activities to management.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have defined public relations and the various stages of its growth.
We have also defined public relations and stressed its philosophy of management function, while highlighting the various roles of public relations in an organisation.
33  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the growth of public relations in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Black S. (1982).
Practical Public Relations.
London: Education Low Priced Books Scheme .
Elvy, H. B.
(1980).
Marketing Made Simple.
London: Heinemann.
Jefkins, F. (1987).
Introduction to Marketing, Advertising and Public Relations, London and Basingstoke: Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 34  MAC 427 MODULE 2 UNIT 2 METHODS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Press Relations 3.2 Photographs as Aid to Public Relations 3.3 Exhibitions and Trade Fairs 3.4 Film in Public Relations 3.5 Other Tools of Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The choice between setting up an in-house public relations office and giving the services to public relations consultancy firms is usually varied or weighed against the advantages and disadvantages of both.
Some factors, which favour the use of consultancy firms, include easy costing of the work against achievements, wide experience of consultancy firms, unbiased and impartial advice can be obtained from consultancy firms and ease in terminating contracts if services are not satisfactory.
Similarly, the disadvantages are also true in hiring consultancy firms, rather than an in-house public relations department.
There are arguments in support of this.
The practical knowledge of the workings of an organisation is better understood by its staff not consultants; consistency may be lacking as consultancy firms are changed frequently; speed which essential to the operations of public relations activities may be lacking as the consultancy firms have to refer complex queries to the headquarters of the client organisation.
On the other hand, in an in-house staff public relations department, staff identify with the aims and objectives of the organisation and personal stakes in its success.
They are therefore ready to assist the press and establish mutual relationship among themselves and reduce the cost of running public relations activities.
Whether an organisation uses an in-house or consultancy public relations firm, the methods of carrying out public relations activities are the same.
Thus, in this unit, we will be treating methods of public relations, which concern the media and tools of public relations generally.
35  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention the media or tools, which public relations use in achieving its objectives • discuss the benefits of these media or tools available to public relations practitioners.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Press Relations Press relations is an important tool of public relations, probably the most significant media of public relations activities.
Press relation is a two- way communication between an organisation and the media, including newspapers, magazines, radio and television.
This two-way communication requires an organisation to supply the media with information on the request, and on its own too, an organisation initiates commentaries, features, press releases and photographs, which are sent to the media.
It is necessary to note that public opinion is largely moulded by what is read in the newspapers, and heard on radio and television in Nigeria today.
Therefore, it is necessary for public relations practitioners in the country to cultivate mutual cordial relationship with the media.
The best policy is for the public relations practitioner to have confidence in the media by telling them the truth, but giving them reasons why some news cannot be published and why others can be published about an organisation.
Similarly, the press office should also classify the newspapers, radio and television in terms of their bent in coverage of events, whether dailies, monthly or weekly, and the audience of radio and television stations.
This information would help in the writing and distribution of press releases, photographs and other materials to the media by the press office.
Specifically, the operations of a press office can be categorised into three: a. issuing of news, features, reports and commentaries for use by the media b. answering press enquiries and providing comprehensive information service for the media 36  MAC 427 MODULE 2 c. monitoring of the newspapers, magazines, radio and television to evaluate the effects of public relations activities and correcting unfavourable news reports on the organisation in the media.
The press officer in an organisation should ensure free and unhindered flow of news and information from the organisation to the media.
Apart from news, the press officer should also initiate articles and reports to be published in the media about the organisation.
Care should however be taken in sending and distribution of these media items.
This is by keeping up-to-date press list o ensure appropriate timing of the release of these materials to the media to ensure their use, particularly by addressing them to the news editor or the appropriate desk heads in the newsroom of the media organisation.
Public Relations also involves using the wire services to send some of these news and reports to the media if it is considered appropriate.
While a news release is written in news form by observing that the main points in the story are set in order of their importance, efforts must also be made not to leave out the details.
This point is also important in other reports for the media from the organisation.
All materials from the organisation should be put on its letterheads, because this is part of public relations.
In addition, photographs should be appropriately captioned and sent with the news and reports.
We shall come to discuss photography as a tool of public relation in details later.
Press Conferences and Receptions Press conferences and receptions are good avenues of giving information to the media.
However, one should not call a press conference or a press reception unless the issue at hand is important for such.
Press conference or reception should not be called for what ordinarily a press release would do.
A press conference is necessary when the issues for it would generate many questions from the media.
Press conference helps the organisation in giving the media “off record” information, that is, information not to be published or aired; such information is to keep the media into confidence and this is usually not betrayed by the media.
It is necessary to give enough time, say a week notice to the media before holding a press conference.
Reminders could just be by reaching news editors on phone.
Details must be given about the press conference, such as reasons for it, speakers, date and venue of the conference.
It is usual to hold a press conference before 3 p.m. so that it could be slated for the following day’s publication.
Care should be taken to ensure that press conference does not clash with any major event.
Fridays are not 37  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS especially good for press conferences that concern issues for national newspapers.
At the venue, arrangement should be made for enough chairs and tables for journalists, who should sign in, and be received by public relations staff on their arrival and be given already prepared press packs, which include handouts, photographs and other relevant reports about the organisation.
The arrangement at the press conference should be such that provides a platform for the speakers at the venue.
It is not compulsory for the chairman of the organisation to engage on an elaborate speech unless it is needful; he can simply open the event and allow questions and reactions from relevant units of the organisation.
Copies of the speeches should be given to the journalists at the venue and should be sent to other media houses who are not represented on the occasion.
These arrangements for press conference are true of press receptions, except that press receptions are less formal and may require journalists moving from place to place in the organisation.
Facility Visits Facility visit affords the invitation of journalists to visit the installation of the organisation and offices.
Black (1982) divides such visits into three categories: visits by buyers, open days for the public and press facility visits.
In particular, a press facility visit should be called when major events such as opening of a new factory, commissioning of power stations and new eatery outlets.
A facility visit is an important way to build mutual relationship between the media and an organisation, especially because of the interest and cooperation it builds.
A facility visit can take a whole day depending on the itinerary planned by the organisation for the journalists on the visit.
Invitations should be sent to the media early enough, indicating the reasons for the visit, time and venue of take off and means of transporting the journalists; if there is need for accommodation, the hotel should be stated.
There may be need to ask journalists who accept the offer to indicate acceptance, in order to know how much reparation would be involved by the public relations department.
Facility visits are usually successful if the number of media houses is kept within manageable limit.
There should be enough number of guides, with identifiable tags, who will accompany the journalists during the visit.
Facility visits allow journalists to meet with top executives of the company, but speeches should not be long; the journalists should be allowed to see for themselves and ask questions.
Kits and literature should be provided to 38  MAC 427 MODULE 2 the journalists well in advance before the visit begins, or sometimes at the end of the end of the visit.
Photographs should also be made available to the journalists during such visits.
Letters to the Editor Letter to the editor has a long history as a tool of public relations.
Letters to the editor are published in the column reserved for such correspondences, which serve public interest.
The letters may however be of public or private concern, comments or complaints about an already published story in the newspaper.
The letters are usually edited to space so that many such letters can be used in the column.
Letters sent by the public relations department should be on the letterheads of the organisation and signed by relevant executive officer or manager.
If the organisation considers the issue in the letter so important or urgent, the editors could be phoned or notified of the letter.
Letters to the editor should not be unnecessarily long and should be directed at issues, which serve the public interest in relation to an organisation.
House Journals A house journal is defined as a non-profit making, free publication published by an organisation to build mutual contact and relationship with its employees and other publics.
It is usually published by an organisation to further its public relations interest among its staff and the public.
The design of the house journal should have a similar layout with other publications such as company reports, catalogues and reference data books for uniformity.
It should be given a name, which makes it easily identifiable with organisation.
House journals feast on such issues as products of the organisation, staff and their social lives, customers, distributors, among others.
The number of pages, use of colour and number of appearances are usually weighed against cost, beauty and aesthetics of the journal.
All such decisions must be taken to the extent that the house journal fulfils its objectives and attracts the maximum public relations benefits to the organisation.
The number of the copies to be printed depends on whether it is a house journal meant for only internal circulation in the organisation or for wider circulation among its external publics such as distributors, supplies and customers, or for both.
In all cases, the public relations practitioners should be familiar with printing works so that he can be properly advised at every stage of the publication of the house journal, including working with the printer.
39  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS Direct Mails These are leaflets, pamphlets, broadsheets, letters and bulk GSM messages used as means of reaching the public by organisations.
In the past, direct mails used to be by sending letters to some members of the public, but recently, GSM has served as a veritable and effective way of sending some of these messages.
Thus, GSM serves as public relations tool.
Assessing Press Activities An important aspect of press relations is the monitoring of everything that appears in the media about the organisation, however innocuous or small this might be considered, and whether favourable or unfavourable.
This involves cutting of these news items in the newspapers, and noting them on the radio and television.
The press cuttings, bearing dates and the newspapers, should be given to the top executive of the organisation to read every day.
Appropriate actions should be taken regarding the contents on the published news items.
A copy of these cuttings should also be kept in the press office.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify two media of press relations.
3.2 Photographs as a Tool of Public Relations Photographs are good tools of public relations because they lend credence to events and stories.
They also add beauty to events and are appealing to the eyes.
All publications in organisations, including annual reports, are today published with relevant photographs and captions.
Photographs are used as a tool of public relations in organisations for so many reasons, including to: • illustrate stories, articles and reports in the newspapers; • illustrate booklets, house journals, annual reports; • keep as records of events; • use as part of ; and • for training and research purposes.
Photographs are taken by an organisation during events, including annual general meetings, launching and commissioning of offices, outlets and installations.
Photography is an art and the aesthetic of the art must be maximised in public relations activities, so quality must be emphasised whether the photographs are for records or for use in publications.
Indeed, photographs for news stories must be: 40  MAC 427 MODULE 2 • striking and appealing in order to attract attention; • topical and tell a story; and • well captioned.
Some public relations departments have their own photo unit, while others hire the services of professional photographers.
The main thing is to get good pictures with excellent angles and quality print.
3.3 Exhibitions and Trade Fairs Trade fairs and exhibitions are good tools of public relations.
Exhibitions, such as book or motor exhibitions are staged to display goods or services of organisations mainly, but trade fairs such as the ones staged by some states in Nigeria are for sales of goods and services and companies are expected to buy stands for participation.
However, Black (1982) says the organisation of both exhibitions and trade fairs are similar somewhat.
In particular, the public relations department should have a list of the exhibitions and trade fairs and when they are organised and for which purposes.
The aim of this is to be able to decide which exhibitions or trade fairs to attend.
The decision to attend an exhibition or trade fair may be based on the size of attendance, the type of participants and visitors, knowledge of the venue of exhibition or trade fair and the timing.
In all these, consideration must be given to the costs of building of stands at the venue, models, furniture, recorded sounds, sculptures, diagrams, telephone and other novelties.
It is necessary to draw up these cost units in order to assess properly the overall cost and benefits of the exhibition or trade fair to the organisation.
At an exhibition or trade fairs, it is given that companies would provide literature, catalogues and other literatures for patrons.
Also, enquiries should be properly attended to by the staff.
It is essential to announce and advertise the company’s participation in an exhibition or trade fair.
An organisation should also seize the opportunity of an exhibition or trade fair to address the press on its participation.
3.4 Film in Public Relations Since the introduction of film, it has been an important medium of public relations.
The advent of documentary films gave impetus to the medium as a tool of public relations, although the documentary has been much prominent in the television today.
Documentaries are made on the history of an organisation, its operations, offices and installations and its staff.
Films are costly to make but they last long, so in deciding whether a public relations activity needs a film or not, the options of other 41  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS alternatives should be considered; whether the film would better serve the public relations interest; whether the audience would be better reached through films.
In considering these decisions, the public relations practitioner may not be adept in film making, but he needs to have knowledge of how to make films.
Crucial decisions on the audience, what information to impart and the cost of the films, length of the film, facilities to be used, time factor, distribution, cost and contacts among the personnel must be considered and arrived at by the organisation before embarking in film as a medium of public relations.
Essentially, in making the film, the public relations department would have to work with such people as the producer, writer, director, cameramen and the film editor.
Films are also very useful in exhibitions and trade fairs because they afford an organisation to demonstrate their products and show their organisation to the patrons of the events.
3.5 Other Tools of Public Relations Other media of public relations are effective public speaking, microphone techniques, telephone manners, souvenirs and gift items, mementoes and decent appearances by all staff of an organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION The media of public relations are expensive.
Their use depends on the public relations activity and the cost implications in relation to alternatives.
This is why it good for public relations practitioners to be knowledgeable in media and their operations.
Besides helping him to understand the workings of the media, this would also make him know how to combine the media to achieve good and effective ends.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has dealt with the media of public relations extensively.
We have discussed press relations and all its aspects, including press releases, commentaries, reports, facility visits, press conferences, letters to the editor and assessing press relations activities as well as monitoring the media.
We have dealt with photography, trade fairs and exhibitions as media of public relations and use of films in public relations.
Others tools of public relations we identified are: the spoken words, souvenirs and gift items, mementoes and decent appearances by the staff of an organisation.
42  MAC 427 MODULE 2 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss press relations a method of public relations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bittner J. R. (2003).
Mass Communication: An Introduction.
New Jersey: Prentice – Hall Inc. Black, S. (1982), Practical Public Relations.
London: Education Low Priced Books Scheme.
Jefkins, F. (1987).
Introduction to Marketing, Advertising and Public Relations.London and Basingstoke: Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 43  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 3 THE PUBLIC RELATIONS CAMPAIGN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Public Relations Campaign 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The main preoccupation of the public relations practitioner is to run a successful and effective public relations campaign and resolve an organisation’s public relations challenges.
This way, he satisfies his motive of as a professional and pleases his organisation or his client, if he runs an agency, by making the organisation operate in a safe and hitch-free public space.
Thus, in this unit, we shall outline and discuss the strategies for running a successful and effective public relations campaign.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the eight basic steps in running a public relations campaign • explain the essence of research in public relations campaign • organise a typical public relations campaign.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Steps in the Public Relations Campaign Analysing the Need This is the first step in any public relations campaign where the practitioner embarks on basic research to determine the level of the public relations problem and gather information about this.
This research towards gathering information about the public relations problem can take several means.
It could be as basic as taking organisation’s records, trade journals, reference books, personal contacts and interviews.
If more information is needed, a proper survey can be 44  MAC 427 MODULE 2 done on the public concerned or around the environment of the campaign.
Establish Objectives The next stage is to establish your goals.
These goals could be strategic, (long –term goals) of the organisation, or tactical, which are short term, detail and specific.
However, these goals, whether short or long term, must be measurable goals that would provide a clear foundation for the direction of the campaign.
If the goals are clearly established, the success of the campaign would be easy to determine.
However, in some campaigns, especially those concerned with attitude change, it may be a little difficult to measure because, as we said, it takes some time before change in attitudes is noticeable.
However, in many cases, the success at the level of setting objectives for the campaign will depend on how well you have worked in analysing the need for the public relations campaign in the first place.
Develop the Plan Planning is vital to the success of a public relations campaign.
This stage involves properly framing objectives, considering all the options and assessing the risks involved in each alternative course of action.
It also involves setting budgets, defending and securing approvals from the management.
Many public relation practitioners today operate by Management by Objectives (MBO) to plan more efficiently and achieve results in public relations campaigns.
MBO simply means that an organisation sets observable and measurable goals for itself and allocates resources to meet these goals.
For example, an organisation may want to be the number one socially responsible organisation within the next 10 years in Nigeria.
When the time has elapsed, it would be easy to see how it has met this goal with the resources allocated to it.
At this stage too, appropriate media choice is done depending on the public and the message as well as the goals.
The peculiarities of the media are assessed in line with all the identified characteristics of the campaign.
Pretesting the Plan The developed plan above is more like a draft; it must be put to test.
This process is true for both public relations and advertising campaigns, because once messages are disseminated, recall is impossible, and remedies are costly and may be ineffective.
You could also lose an account in the process.
Therefore, this is why you need to pre-test all 45  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS your ideas, messages and every stage of the campaign before implementing them.
Pretesting starts from simply showing a press release to someone in the office for correct spelling and grammar before giving it to the press.
It may also involve embarking on real test situations in the market itself.
Sometimes suggestions of appropriate colours and headlines for a brochure before printing could just be helpful and save an organisation millions of Naira.
Revising the Plan This is a natural follow-up to the pre-testing above.
Mistakes discovered in the message, choice of media, or the strategy for any particular stage of the campaign at the pretesting stage are reviewed and corrected at the revision stage.
This stage allows you to discuss and agree with all the public concerned in the campaign and work according to what is okay for them.
Implementing the Plan This is the execution stage.
All aspects of the programme are energised, including the advertising plan on radio, television, newspapers and other media such as billboards, meetings, press conferences, demonstrations and printing of literature publicising the programme.
All aspects must be in tune with the theme of the campaign.
Nothing must be given to chance.
This is why the public relations practitioner should have a good knowledge of the media and also be a good user of words.
Evaluating Effectiveness Once you have set observable and realistic goals, it would be easy to measure whether your public relations programme has succeeded or not in meeting those goals.
Percentages can easily be used in sample surveys to get this.
However, in certain cases, which pertain to improving corporate image or changing attitudes, measuring success can be tasking and a little difficult.
Sometimes at this evaluation stage, some companies hire the services of market research companies to administer surveys to guide against bias.
Indeed, evaluation helps to be able to determine where an organisation is and what needs to be done in subsequent public relations campaigns.
Reviewing Procedures This is needed to determine the successes and failures of the campaign.
Questions are thrown at every stage of the campaign.
A thorough review of the answers to those questions would help the success of future campaigns.
Although, we have kept the reviewing procedures at the end 46  MAC 427 MODULE 2 of the campaign, you should know that review processes occur at every stage of the campaign to address immediately shortfalls before they become big problems against the success of the campaign.
It is necessary for everyone involved in the campaign to keep an open mind and be ready for changes if need be.
4.0 CONCLUSION The public relations campaign is crucial to the operations of public relations consultants and public relations departments of any organisation.
Mastering the eight steps involved in public relations as discussed above is important for the organisations and individual public relations practitioners.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have explained the eight steps involved in a public relation campaign.
Success of a public relations practitioner depends on his ability to know the media and the peculiarities as well as the advantages and disadvantages of the media in relation to his need at every stage of the campaign.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the stages involved in a public relations campaign, with hypothetical example of a public relations problem.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bittner J. R. (2003).
Mass Communication: An Introduction.
New Jersey: Prentice – Hall Inc. Dominick, J. R. (2009).The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Fadipe, S. (2002).
Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
47  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 4 THE ECONOMICS AND REVENUE SYSTEM IN PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Public Relations Volume in Nigeria 3.2 Revenue of Public Relations Agencies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We noted in the last module on advertising that much of the income of advertising agencies come from commissions.
We also identified others sources of income for advertising agencies, including printing jobs for clients, graphic designs and taking sales order of client’s products.
For public relations agencies, there are similarities in some ways, just as there are distinctions, as we shall examine in this unit.
Specifically, in public relations, we have the fixed fee agreement system, fixed fee agreement plus billing and the consultancy operations.
These are distinctive income and revenue systems in public relations practice, which we shall now discuss in details.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain how public relations firms earn their income and stay in business • discuss ways and the volume of public relations’ contributions to national income.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public Relations Volume in Nigeria The amount of money spent on corporate public relations in Nigeria may be difficult to estimate; unlike the developed countries where records are adequately kept and data of these activities are readily available, and thus form a sizeable part of the National Income computations.
However, indications that the public relations industry is growing is 48  MAC 427 MODULE 2 shown by the increasing public relations expenditure in Nigeria, which we said was estimated at three billion naira (US$6.3 million) at the end of the 2010 business year.
Compared to advertising expenditure which The Economist (April 2011 citing MediaReach (OMD) puts at 98 billion naira (US$646 million) in 2010, it could be said to be small.
However, if one considers that the growth of public relations is a recent development as a profession in the country, this could be said to be encouraging.
The PRCAN records show that there are only 50 active, well-established public relations firms in Nigeria.
Of course, there are some major public relations firms, many of them owned by reputed advertising agencies or multinational companies.
Quadrant Communication is owned by Insight Communications, Centrespread Advertising Ltd (now CentrespreadFCB), owns MediaMore, a media planning and public relations firm, while Lintas, a pioneer of public relations in the country was established by UAC Nigeria PLC.
There are still other reputable PR firms, which stand alone without any link with advertising agencies in the country.
The public relation business is however dominated by the big firms.
The income of smaller public relations agencies could really be small, as they have to take up other allied jobs in marketing communication to survive in the industry.
There is hardly any doubt that the public relations industry in the country continues to grow and it is contributing its own quota to the National Income.
3.2 Revenue of Public Relations Agencies Public relations firms earn their income in various ways.
Some of them print annual reports for clients and charge specific fees.
They also charge clients retainer every year, which a fee is paid by the client to the public relations firm for undertaking an organisation’s public relations activities for the year.
Other public relations firms charge per hour for public relations activity, and may bill the client extra costs for other services and materials used.
The main methods used by public relations firms in billing clients are: a) The Fixed Fee Agreement This is an agreement between a public relations firm and a client to perform a public relations activity for a prearranged fee or fixed fee.
The client will usually allocate a particular budget for a public relations activity, and the client expects the public relations firm to work within the budget.
For example, one of the oil prospecting firms may contract a public relations firm in the country to help it in the area of its corporate 49  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS social responsibility in the Niger Delta.
Under a fixed fee agreement, the oil company contracts the public relations agency for a specific fee.
This can also be done for an eatery company with many outlets, which may hire the services of a public relations firm for a fee to coordinate the opening of the outlets.
In either case, however, the public relations firm still has to work with relevant departments of the client.
In the fixed fee arrangement, the media expenses and printing of materials would have been added up before the client and the public relations firm seal the agreement.
Under the fixed fee agreement too, the public relations firm would have worked all estimates of the activities involved in the programme.
Where there are extra costs after this, adjustments may be difficult once agreement has been sealed with the client.
It is also up to the public relations firm to bear the extra cost because of its reputation and hope to keep the account for more businesses.
b) Fixed Fee with Billing Agreement This arrangement may operate with the fixed fee agreement, where the public relations firm may also bill the client for other activities such as placement of graphic designs and printing expenses.
For the fixed fee and billing agreement, a public relations firm operates like an advertising agency regarding the commission it charges for the extra marketing activities.
The fixed fee with billing agreement is beneficial to the public firm because it can bring in more income.
It is also useful in taking care of underestimating which we said is a loss to the public relations firm under the fixed fee agreement.
But for the client, this agreement creates an open-ended economic relationship with the public relations firm.
However, it could be good in nurturing an enduring business relationship after all.
c) Consultancy The consultancy public relations business is still growing in Nigeria.
The public relations consultants are registered under the Public Relations Consultancy Association of Nigeria (PRCAN).
The public relations consultants are specialists.
Many times, they work on a single public relations campaign or are engaged for trouble-shooting purposes by clients to help solve public relations problems.
A consultant usually charges more for his services.
This is usually a flat fee paid by the client for specific public relations problem.
50  MAC 427 MODULE 2 4.0 CONCLUSION The intricacies of charging appropriate fee for a public relations firm need to be studied and understood.
Of course, the success of a public relations outfit depends not only on its ability to attract business, but also on how to charge appropriately and perform the public relations activities to the satisfaction of the client.
The practitioner must not only be skilled in the performance of the tasks, he must also be able to bill appropriately without underestimating or adding extra costs to himself, or losing an account because of mistrust by the client.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed the different ways public relations firms charge for their services.
In particular, we identified three ways, which can sometimes be interwoven.
We have also shown that it is difficult to know the total amount spent on corporate public relations in the country, but the fact remains that the public relations industry continues to grow in the country as demonstrated by its contributions to National Income, which we identified in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the ways public relations agencies charge clients for their services and show the relationship, if any, in the identified agreements.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bittner J. R. (2003).
Mass Communication: An Introduction.
New Jersey: Prentice – Hall Inc. Dominick, J. R. (2009).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education Fadipe, S. (2002).
Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
51  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 5 ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS AND MARKETING: AN INTERFACE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Evolution of Marketing Concept and Definition of Marketing 3.2 Marketing Mix 3.3 Promotion Mix 3.4 The Role of Advertising in Marketing Mix 3.5 The Role of Advertising in Product Life Cycle 3.6 Image Advertising and Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall examine the interface among marketing, advertising and public relations.
This is because evolving modern marketing communication seems to have blurred the traditional concepts of advertising and public relations in such a way that the three are now interwoven.
Thus, we shall discuss: the evolution of marketing concept and define marketing; marketing mix, promotion mix, role of adverting in marketing mix, role of advertising in product life cycle and relationship between image advertising and public relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the evolution of marketing concept and define marketing • distinguish between the marketing mix and promotion mix • explain the roles of advertising in marketing mix and product life cycle • discuss the relationship between image advertising and public relations.
52  MAC 427 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Evolution of Marketing Concept and Definition of Marketing Evolution of Marketing The marketing concept is a philosophy of business, which states that satisfaction of customers’ wants is the economic and social justification for a company’s existence.
This marketing concept evolved from production orientation, which came after the industrial revolution when there was mass production of goods and services.
This mass production was in a social and economic context that favoured a seller’s market.
Thus, manufacturers at that time were more interested in efficient production lines and mass production of goods.
This kind of orientation was therefore called production orientation.
The manufacturers believed then that as long as you had a good product, the product would sell itself; thus, manufacturers became nonchalant about the interest of their consumers.
This was made possible because of the prevailing seller’s market.
However, with the evolution of technological changes, which also affected the socio-economic conditions, there emerged a more sophisticated consumer.
This more or less destroyed the existence of the seller’s market, which the manufacturers were used to.
One, the condition changed in the sense that there emerged a more affluent consumer, who is sophisticated and more discerning in what he bought in the market.
This forced the manufacturers to increase the kinds and volume of production of goods and services.
There was, therefore, a change from the seller’s market to the buyer’s market.
The manufacturers became many and thus tried to satisfy the few buyers; consequently, they could not afford to be nonchalant about consumers’ satisfaction any longer.
This sales era continued until early 1950s, when it again changed to marketing orientation.
The marketing orientation says, the customer is king, he has the choice to buy or not.
A very important factor that led to the emergence of marketing orientation is consumerism.
The consumerist movement forced the manufacturers to first find out what the buyers want before embarking on production.
There are three basic elements under marketing orientation: a) Consumer orientation: This says the marketing process begins and ends with the consumer.
53  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS b) Goal orientation: This says the goal of marketing is not only to generate high sales turnover, but also to ensure long-term profitability.
c) Systems orientation: This says marketing involves an integration of various efforts and input within the business system or organisation.
That is, marketing involves functional areas like finance, distribution, research and development and promotion, which must be managed and integrated into a whole to ensure not only high sales, but also long term profitability.
For example, high sales must not be at the expense of huge overhead.
d) Social orientation: This concept says that business is moving beyond only profitability as a goal to seeing themselves as socially responsible to the people or their community.
Here in Nigeria, we can give examples of oil companies that provide social amenities such as potable water, hospitals, electricity and roads for the communities where they operate.
We also point to the activities of GSM companies, especially MTN and Glo, which undertake social development projects for the people’s welfare.
This is aimed at being socially relevant as good corporate citizens.
This leads us to the definition of marketing.
Definition of Marketing The Chartered Institute of Marketing defines marketing as “the management process responsible for identifying, anticipating and satisfying customers’ requirements profitably.” Another definition which may be seen as more comprehensive says, marketing is “a total system of interacting business activities designed to plan, price, promote and place wants satisfying products and services to present and potential customers within a context of profitability and survival of the company.” These are classical definitions of marketing.
However, these classical definitions of marketing are being questioned these days for their adequacy in the face of modern consumerist movement.
That is, whether companies are not more concerned today about the welfare of the people beyond just profitability than they were in the past.
This has therefore led to another concept of marketing which Phillip Kotler (1984) refers to as social marketing.
That is, marketing orientation takes cognizance of the welfare of the people.
A more contemporary definition that takes care of this says marketing is an organisation’s task to determine the needs, wants, and interests of the target markets, to deliver the desired satisfaction more effectively and efficiently than competitors in a way that preserves and enhances the consumers and the society’s wellbeing.
This definition introduces beyond profitability, the elements of customers’ satisfaction, edging out competitors and caring for the society.
54  MAC 427 MODULE 2 There is no doubt that the import of this last definition of marketing would help our discussions and understanding of the various issues surrounding debates on effects of advertising and public relations on the society later in this course.
3.2 Marketing Mix Marketing mix refers to a combination of marketing input used in any marketing operation to reach the target consumers.
These inputs are four, called the “4Ps:” Product Planning and Strategies, Place, Pricing and Promotion.
These marketing inputs are varied by the marketer in a mix depending on the kind of product and market.
Thus, the marketing mix of OMO detergent is different from that of 7UP soft drink.
Let us briefly consider the 4Ps of marketing in details: a) Product Planning and Strategies: This refers to the product and the choice of product, planning and development of the product and the strategies for producing it for the target markets.
b) Place: This concerns distribution of the product.
This essentially refers to how the product moves from the producer to the consumers, which is usually depicted by the chain of producer, wholesaler, retailer and the consumer.
Again, this chain varies with the kind of product and market.
For example, the distribution chain for an industrial market good like printing machine is usually a single chain, from producer to the consumer, whereas for fast moving consumer goods like beverages, this market is faced with multiple distribution chain, from producer, wholesaler, and retailer to consumers.
There are other aspects of distribution such as warehousing, storage, logistics and physical handling.
c) Pricing: This simply involves determining the right price for a product or service that is good for both the producer and the buyer.
Pricing also relates to other marketing strategies such as discount, profit contribution or profit margin.
d) Promotion: This refers to management decisions in persuading and informing the consumers of the availability and the characteristics of a company’s products.
The marketing inputs here include advertising, publicity, personal selling, sales promotion and public relations.
These four variables are controllable and are blended through appropriate management decisions to identify, anticipate and satisfy customers’ needs profitably.
55  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.2 Promotion Mix There are four elements in the promotion mix.
They are: a) Advertising: As defined earlier, advertising is non-personal paid presentation of a product in the media in order to persuade consumers to buy it.
b) Publicity: This is the unpaid for presentation of information about a product or service in the media.
The assumption here is that the information is newsworthy and serves the public interest.
This is where publicity is different from advertising, which is paid for by an identified sponsor.
c) Personal Selling: This is the presentation of goods through direct contact by salesmen.
This entails face-to-face sales of goods.
d) Sales Promotion: This refers to any marketing activity aimed at creating immediate sales and in support of the other marketing inputs.
This is usually done at the point of sale or along the line of the point of sales.
Merchandising is almost the same as sales promotion; however, it only refers to promotions, such as displays, at the point of sales.
All these promotion mix inputs are controllable by the management of an organisation and can be blended depending on the kind of product and the market.
For example, Coca-Cola produced by Nigerian Bottling Company is already an established product in the Nigerian market yet the company is involved in sales promotion from time to time and mixes this with advertising, personal selling and publicity.
3.4 The Role of Advertising in Marketing Mix The role of advertising in marketing mix could be summarised as: i. to stimulate buying actions by the consumers.
ii.
to convey to the consumers the knowledge and attitude required by a company.
iii.
to communicate to the consumers changes in the market iv.
to move the product through the marketing channel v. to support personal selling.
These functions of advertising in the marketing mix also depend on the kind of market and product.
For example, if the market is not accessible like the market for industrial machines, advertising plays, less role.
However, for easily accessible market or fast moving consumer products like sweets and biscuits, advertising plays a major role.
This is because personal contact is minimised in accessible markets, but emphasised in inaccessible markets like sale of Web offset machine.
56  MAC 427 MODULE 2 Besides the kind of product and market, competition affects advertising role in the marketing mix because the producer is not alone in the market, so he is guided by what his competitors are doing, such as their advertising budgets.
This is to avoid being edged out of the market.
3.5 The Role of Advertising in Product Life Cycle The concept of product life cycle refers to an attempt by the advertiser to see a product as a living thing, which lives in stages from its making to maturity and adulthood and death.
In other words, when we compute sales turnover of a product against time, we have a situation where a product passes through various stages similar to the growth of man.
When a product is introduced into the market, the concept says it is at the birth or introductory stage; it eventually gets to growth stage, maturity stage, saturation stage and decline.
The important thing here is that the role of advertising changes as the product moves from one stage to the other.
The role of advertising changes because as the product moves from stage to stage, the marketing situations also change.
At the introductory or birth stage, the market is such that people are unaware of the product.
Thus, advertising has a lot to do to create awareness and provide information about the product.
At the growth stage, the people are already aware of the product, but advertising continues to make people buy it, so that production can increase.
At the growth stage, the role of advertising is more of providing information on how to use the product and where to get it.
Advertising expenses is usually high in the introductory and growth stage, until the product gets to the maturity stage.
At maturity stage, the market becomes competitive and the role of advertising is to differentiate the product from its competitors.
This is the case of detergents market in Nigeria today, where we have a flux including OMO, Elephant, Klin and Ariel detergents.
At maturity stage, advertising budget is still high but the role of advertising is aimed at branding and product differentiation.
Indeed, the detergent and lager beer markets in Nigeria are at maturity stages.
At saturation stage, the role of advertising is to retain the market share of the product for a long time in the face of competition.
This will continue until the product suffers decline and may either be repackaged by the company for another product life cycle to commence again.
Otherwise, the product is stopped altogether.
57  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.6 Image Advertising and Public Relations Image advertising is aimed at promoting the organisation as good and responsible corporate citizen.
Sometimes image advertising is called prestige or institutional advertising.
There are two types of this-one sets out to inform the public of the contributions of an organisation to the welfare of the public and the country and the other, which is more indirect in its approach.
Advertising tries to educate the people on issues of public interest.
This may be road safety matters, healthy living and care for the environment, which we say is common with oil companies.
Image advertising is probably one of the most difficult advertising to measure because it relies on an organisation’s image in the public and its social responsibility.
These are areas, which require knowledge of how a company is perceived by the public.
Essentially, there is usually a difficulty whether image or institutional advertising is within the purview of advertising department in an organisation or public relations department.
However, since it is about corporate social responsibility, it is an interface between advertising and public relations in the expanding frontiers of marketing communication today.
Promotion and publicity are tools of public relations, and it is noteworthy that all advertising activities within the various stages of the product life cycle have their public relations implications, which must be the concern of the public relations practitioners in an organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION The frontiers of integrated marketing communication are expanding.
The argument is whether an organisation really needs to compartmentalise advertising, public relations and marketing, since they are interwoven.
Opponents of the argument believe that it would particularly erode the credibility of public relations since public relations activities could now be interpreted as advertising.
It would also defeat the position that public relations is a two-way communication between an organisation and its publics.
Proponents of integrated marketing communication believe it would not only save cost, but result in better coordination and effectiveness in the management of the marketing mix.
However, as the debate continues, choices are left for each organisation based on relevant options.
However, the fact remains as we have shown in this unit that advertising, public relations and marketing are interwoven in their strategies, media use and sometimes their operations and approaches to reach their goals to inform and persuade the public.
58  MAC 427 MODULE 2 5.0 SUMMARY This unit dealt with the evolution of marketing concept and definition of marketing, promotion mix, and roles of advertising in marketing mix and product life cycle.
We also explained the interface among marketing, advertising and public relations with the evolving integrated marketing communication today.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Using the concept of integrated marketing, explain the interface among marketing, advertising and public relations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER HEARING Bittner J. R. (2003).
Mass Communication: An Introduction.
New Jersey: Prentice – Hall Inc. Black, S. (1982).
Practical Public Relations.
London: Education Low Priced Books Scheme.
Dominick, J. R. (2009).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Elvy, H. B.
(1980).
Marketing Made Simple.
London: Heineman.
59  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS MODULE 3 LAWS AND ETHICS OF ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1 The Concept of Law and Ethics Unit 2 Statutory Control of Advertising in Nigeria Unit 3 Code of Conduct of Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 4 Regulation of Advertising in the Developed Countries: A Case Study of the United States Unit 5 Control of Public Relations in the Developed Countries: The Example of Britain UNIT 1 THE CONCEPT OF LAW AND ETHICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Ethical Principles 3.2 A Model for Individual Ethical Decisions 3.3 Ethical Challenges in Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria 3.4 How to Improve Ethical Conduct in Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Activities of advertising and public relations have great effects on the people.
This is because practitioners of advertising and public relations use various media of communication to deliver their messages, which have effects on the society.
Thus, advertising and public relations should be guided by certain ethics in their professions.
In this unit, therefore, we shall study ethics as rules and principles and knowledge of good and bad conduct as well as morality, which should guide every action of man in whatever endeavour.
We shall relate this principle of knowledge of good from bad conducts to the practice of advertising and public relations in Nigeria.
In specifics, this concerns the code of ethics of advertising and public relations, and personal ethical guidance of individual practitioners in their daily professional activities.
60  MAC 427 MODULE 3 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss various ethical principles and a model for individual ethical decisions • relate the concept of ethics to the practice of advertising and public relations in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Ethical Principles Ethics is concerned with moral principles or rules of conduct, which help us to determine a right or wrong action.
The Internet Encyclopaedia of Philosophy explains: “The field of ethics, also called moral philosophy, involves systematizing, defending, and recommending concepts of right and wrong behaviour.” Definitions of ethics have common elements of requiring some form of systematic analysis, distinguishing right from wrong, and determining the nature of what should be valued.
In advertising and public relations professions, ethics would thus include values such as honesty, openness, loyalty, fair-mindedness, respect, integrity and forthright communication.
In this regard, scholars have identified five ethical principles, which are considered relevant to advertising and public relations as well as the media generally.
We will now examine these five ethical principles.
The Principle of Golden Mean: This philosophical principle is associated with Aristotle.
It states that moral virtue lies between two extremes, which is moderation in every human action.
In the same vein, the philosophical basis also espouses that ethical dilemma in what is the proper way of behaving lies between doing too much and doing too little.
For example, the rational action in eating lies between eating too much food and too little food as both extremes is dangerous to healthy living.
Examples of such course of actions, which require moderation or a middle of the road approach to decision making, are encountered by professionals in advertising and public relations in Nigeria every day.
Categorical Imperative: This is based on the ethical principle that what is right for one is right for all.
This ethical principle is espoused by Immanuel Kant.
According to Kant, to measure a correct human behaviour, we need to act in line with a rule that we would want to see universally applied.
Kant insists that “categorical” means “unconditional,” under no circumstances and no exceptions.
The 61  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS philosophical principle also says right is right, without any colour and no matter the consequences.
A categorical imperative principle is based on individual’s conscience; so, as the individual examines his conscience, it informs him of what is right.
Thus, after performing an action, your conscience will tell you whether it is right or wrong; if you are worried or feel guilty by your action, it means you have worked against your conscience and the action would be deemed wrong.
Applying the categorical principle to advertising and public relations, we can see that all forms of deception in advertising and public relations are wrong and must be avoided.
Every one detests being deceived, this is a universal truth, and so advertising and public relations practitioners should avoid deception and negative promotion.
In Nigeria, although many people still participate in many of the “Play and Win” promotions, many Nigerians generally believe that some of them are deceptive.
The same is true of many of the promotions by the GSM operators who ask their subscriber to participate in promotions to win exotic gifts such as cars simply by texting certain amount to the network promo.
The truth is that even when the GSM operator eventually announces one winner of the draw, majority of the patrons of the contest do not still believe that the GSM operator had not swindled them.
Principle of Utility: This ethical principle is identified with Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill.
It is based on utility, which means seeking the greatest good for the greatest number of people.
That is, what is right is the greatest good for the greatest number of people in the society.
This is also how much good our action attracts and how much evil it expunges or distracts from.
The principle outlines the methods for evaluating ethical courses of action: a) calculate all the consequences, good and bad of the choices; and b) choose the alternative that maximises value and minimises loss.
Again, applying this ethical principle to advertising and public relations as in the case of promotion of the controversial product, “My Pickin” paracetamol syrup, which was selling fast in Nigeria but was found to be a killer drug for children was a mistake.
The advertiser would be adjudged to have flouted this ethical principle of seeking the greatest good for the greatest number of the people.
The advertising and public relations agencies and the advertiser involved are therefore all guilty.
For the advertising and public relations practitioners involved in the promotion of this controversial drug, they had a choice to find out the characteristics of the drug before its introduction.
They cannot claim to be ignorant of this.
However, they all appeared to have been caught between a decision on profitability and social responsibility.
Based on 62  MAC 427 MODULE 3 the utilitarian principle, the obvious choice would have been to reject the product because a decision to reject the product and take steps to inform the relevant authorities by any of the practitioners would have provided the greatest good for the greatest number of people, against their own personal objective of profitability.
The Veil of Ignorance: This is based on the principle that justice is blind.
Equal should be treated equally, and unequal should not be treated equally.
The principle also states that the vulnerable members of the society should be protected by our actions.
This means women and children should be catered for, thus using women as sex object in advertising would be wrong, and exposing children to violence should be abhorred in all promotional activities.
The Principle of Self Determination: This is based on the Christian ethics of “Love your neighbour as yourself.” It says all human beings have value and that the right to self-determination should not be violated.
No man should be used as a means to an end for someone else.
This principle, also stressed that using women as sex object in advertising to achieve the organisation marketing objectives as prevalent in the perfume and pomade industry would be wrong.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain two philosophical principles in relation to advertising and public relations.
A Model for Individual Ethical Decisions This concerns personal ethics for making individual decisions, especially among a client, advertising agency and the media regarding what should be included or not in contents of activities during advertising or public relations campaigns.
Many times, some of these decisions are adjudged to have been made without proper ethical considerations.
This model helps the advertising and public relations practitioner to make rational ethical decisions in such situations.
Model for individual ethical decisions is adapted from Ralph Potter’s Logic of Moral Argument, which espouses the ethical principle of Decision-Values-Principles-Loyalties-Action, in that order.
The model says an individual should consider these four aspects of a situation before taking action.
First, consider the pertinent facts involved and the possible actions; second, determine what values are involved and which values are more relevant in deciding the course of action; third, establish what ethical principles apply, such as the five ethical principles we discussed earlier; and fourth, decide where your loyalties lie – to whom 63  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS do you owe a moral duty?
Essentially, in advertising and public relations, you owe a duty to yourself, clients, your agency or organisation, the profession and the society in general.
In short, we can simply summarise this line of action for our easy understanding as: establish the facts, clarify values, state principles and determine loyalties.
3.3 Ethical Challenges in Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria There are developed standardised codes of conduct or codes of ethics guiding advertising and public relations professions in Nigeria, as in the developed countries.
In Nigeria, the major regulator of advertising profession is the Federal Government through the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) Decree Number 55 of 1988 and its subsequent additions and amendments.
The APCON law sets the principles of advertising practice in Nigeria, covering such issues as contracts, credit extension, unfair tactics, creative side of the practice, and provisions prohibiting misleading price claims, offensive statements, and the circulation of harmful rumour about a competitor.
Most of these provisions are outcome of the professional code set by the Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN).
The statutory regulation of advertising will be fully treated in the next unit.
For the public relations profession, the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations’ Public Relations Practitioners Decree No.
16 of 1990 empowers the Council of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations to determine what standards of knowledge and skills are to be attained by public relations practitioners.
To attain high standards of practice, the Institute is empowered to from time to time update its Code of Professional Conduct.
The decree also empowers the Council to make byelaws and other rules not inconsistent with this decree.
Thus, pursuant to the provision of the decree, the Council of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations made the Bye Laws to be known as “The Nigerian Institute of Public Relations Code of Professional Conduct Bye-laws No.
1 of 1992.” This professional code of conduct covers such issues, as in the APCON Decree and advertising code of conducts, as contracts, credit extension, unfair tactics, creative side of the practice, and provisions prohibiting misleading price claims, offensive statements, and the circulation of harmful rumour about a competitor.
The controversies about ethics in both advertising and public relations in Nigeria are not based on whether the codes exist or not.
The problem has been whether advertising and public relations practitioners really 64  MAC 427 MODULE 3 abide by the spirit and contents of their professional ethics.
It is argued by critics that ethics of both professions have proved ineffective in dealing with professional and ethical challenges in the country.
It is believed that apparent violations of the ethical codes have gone scot- free, unchallenged, considering the many cases of misleading and harmful products as well as other promotion and marketing abuses in the country.
Ayozie, et al.
(2011, pp 50-62) writing on “Ethical Issues Involved in Integrated Marketing Communication in Nigeria,” identified what they described as constraints that impinge of free choice by a person.
In other words, influences that may obstruct a person’s disposition to freely choose a moral course of action, rather than the immoral one in relation to advertising and public relations, and other marketing communications in Nigeria are categorised as coercive influences that are always controlling; persuasive influences that are generally non-controlling and manipulative influences that are sometimes controlling.
These will now be discussed in details.
a.)
Coercive Tactics Coercive tactics are relatively rare, but often used in public advertising.
It involves threat of sanctions for choosing the alternative course of action.
Examples are replete in most of the penal legislation, which dwell on coercive tactics while informing the public about laws.
For example, you are asked to “Belt up”, in one of the advertisements requiring passengers in a car to fasten their seat belts.
Again, on payment of tax, you hear advertisements, which say, “It is the law” pay your taxes to the correct internal revenue office, you can go to jail if you patronize the illegal offices.
In the examples of public advertisements above, they could be considered coercive, as they do not give people freedom to choose whether to belt up or not.
if one chooses not to belt up, against the wish of the advertiser (the government), the person will be made to face the negative consequences of the law.
In a free and competitive market economy, like Nigeria, this coercive tactics would be considered unethical, especially if it were in merchandising.
b.)
Persuasive Influences While coercive tactics are considered unethical, what may be considered as its opposite, persuasion is accepted technique in advertising and public relations, and generally in marketing.
The assumption is that persuasion should be based on rational position of good and objective reasons, which are opened to the people, concerned.
However, the reality in some advertising and public relations situations is that some practitioners employ persuasion to play on the emotions of the people, 65  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS which do not let them make objective judgements.
This kind of persuasion is unethical in advertising and public relations, because it is manipulative.
Ayozie, et al.
(2011, pp50-62), who gave the examples of whether toothpaste, such as Dabur, Macleans and Close Up really improves sex appeal or intimate appeal as in many in Nigeria, said using sex appeal angle could be considered irrational persuasion for these products.
Quoting Chandan J. S. et al.
(1990), the researchers say persuasion is “rational as far as the persuasiveness lies in the substance of the argument rather than in the manner of presentation, the authority susceptible to suggestions from other.” In the case of the toothpaste advertisement, the expected change in the potential buyer is hinged on the strength of the argument.
This is considered as unethical because it would have denied the buyer the free will of choice.
Similarly, while some persuasive advertisements may be rational to some potential buyers, they may be unethical to others.
For example, if a potential buyer who does not need to buy a car is being persuaded by an advertiser to buy a new car for his wife because he loves her so much.
This is irrational persuasion and, therefore, unethical.
c.) Manipulative Influences Manipulation has a tendency for deception in advertising and public relations.
Manipulation can be seen as playing on one’s emotions.
Implied in this is trick, unfair and hidden tactics to ensure that the buyer fulfils the expected end of the manipulator.
Manipulative advertisements on herbal drugs that can make excessively fat people lose weight without doing exercises are many in Nigerian newspapers.
Indeed, there are no medical proofs of these by relevant regulatory agencies, yet the advertiser goes ahead to support these with manipulative photographs of “before and after” taking the herbal medicine.
These are couched in persuasive messages: “Lose all your weight within a week;” and “Look 20 years younger in one week.” By their nature, advertising and public relations use persuasion; however, if they are to be considered as ethical, such persuasion should contain information, not deception.
Many critics of the APCON and NIPR Code of Conduct or Code of Ethics insist that they remain mere platitudes, as violators are rarely held accountable when they overrun the boundaries of persuasion as in some of the identified cases.
The society, as we would however see hereunder, needs to play a major role in ensuring that advertising and public relations perform their roles only, and not being deceptive, tricky or negative, and offending the sensibility of the people.
66  MAC 427 MODULE 3 3.4 How to Improve Ethical Conduct in Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria An individual needs to assess properly the contents of advertising and public relations messages to determine if they are deceptive or manipulative.
We need to note here of the individual differences.
Of course, the effects of messages hit people differently.
When these messages are overtly deceptive and the consumer is convinced, such a consumer has a number of alternatives course of action he can take.
(a) He can desist from buying the product and advise others close to him against this.
This boycott of the product may on the long run affect sales of the product and thereby force the advertiser to correct the anomaly of the deceptive message.
(b) He can also be more proactive and write to the company directly alone or in concert with other aggrieved consumers.
The tendency is that any reputable company in such a situation would take such complaints seriously.
(c) He can also write to a newspaper.
These complaints are likely to be published under the consumer column of the newspaper.
We have also seen television and radio stations in Nigeria take up such complaints on deceptive advertisement of products some times in the past.
These are commendable exceptions.
(d) Legal option - Consumers may also embark on an individual or a class suit.
This may attract cost, but if the complaint is considered serious enough, legal option may prove justifiable.
This option is usually taken by women, human rights or religious groups to seek ethical redress on offensive advertisement.
Most of the times, just a letter from a lawyer could make the advertiser make amendment.
(e) Complaint with the regulatory agencies - In Nigeria, the APCON and NIPR are saddled with the regulations of advertising and public relations respectively as we would discuss in the next units.
A complaint against indecent promotions can be filed with these bodies.
There are other bodies concerned with specific aspects of promotions, such as NAFDAC, Standard Organisation of Nigeria, Central Bank of Nigeria, Broadcasting Organisation of Nigeria, Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria, among others.
These organisations could push for remedies from the advertisers once they are convinced of a wrongdoing.
Organisational/ Company Level An organisation should set certain ethical codes, which should be imbibed by everyone within the group.
The top hierarchy of management should be role models in setting ethical standards in the 67  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS organisation.
For instance, the organisation should not give advertising, public relations personnel and salesmen unachievable targets.
This way, they can perform their roles abiding by the required level of morality or ethical standard.
An organisation can properly maintain a policy on ethics if the entire workforce is guided by certain motivations, which include being responsible, credible, virtue of protecting the defenceless and knowing that long-term profitability can only be achieved if the organisation cares for the interest of its customers and the public in general.
Self-Policing Activities These involve writing or blowing the whistle on an offending competitor.
Complaints can be lodged with APCON, NIPR and other regulatory bodies.
Some authors, advertising and public relations practitioners have however continued to rise spiritedly in defence of their professions.
They believe powerful political and consumer groups are exploiting the situation to gain publicity and recognition to vilify them.
They argue that advertising messages, for example, are not as dangerous as entertainment (movies, serials) and news media (television and press) disseminated freely under the fundamental rights of free speech.
It is admitted that advertising and public relations use persuasion as a strong tool of communication, but they must be judged under the same principles like any other media that disseminate messages to the public.
They say freedom of expression for commercial or promotional purposes must not be viewed differently from freedom of expression.
The issue really is that the environment in Nigeria has continued to change in the last decades.
There is no doubt about the great influences of western culture on our local culture, which, we must agree, is not the responsibility of advertising and public relations.
The average Nigerian consumer are today more liberal and open-minded.
While he may not adopt many of the western values and lifestyles, he has become more open to accept some of these views he encounters every day.
This is reflected in the mismatch of cultures in Nigeria today, food, clothes, language and even marriages.
Advertising and public relations are not immune from these social changes.
It can be argued that critics of advertising over ethical standards may just be ascribing too much influence to the profession.
For example, there are many other social influences in the society, including film models and music whose impact may be more that many insertions and slots of advertisements in the media or publicity, which is also a tool of public relations.
As we have said, the debate over whether advertising 68  MAC 427 MODULE 3 and public relations abide by the ethics of their professions would continue for a long time.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is no dispute in the need for ethical codes in advertising and public relation.
This is because the activities of advertising and public relations have great impact on the lives of the people and the society.
However, the mere existence of the codes of ethics is not enough.
They must be properly applied for the overall good of the advertisers, the advertising agencies, the media and the society in general.
5.0 SUMMARY We have identified and discussed five principles of ethics in relation to advertising and public relations, and a model for individual ethical decisions.
We have discussed the controversies of ethical issues in advertising and public relations in Nigeria.
The debate about whether promotional messages, be they advertising or public relations, impact negatively on culture, moral virtues and decent taste in the society would continue.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify possible areas of ethical infractions and remedies in advertising and public relations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayozie, D. O. et al.
(2011).
“Business and Management Dynamics.” A Journal of the Society for Business and Management Dynamics, 1(4).
Bittner, J. R. (2003).
Mass Communication: An Introduction.
New Jersey: Prentice – Hall Inc. Black, S. (1982).
Practical Public Relations.
London: Education Low Priced Books Scheme.
Dominick, J. R. (2009).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education Fadipe, S. (2002).
Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
69  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 2 STATUTORY CONTROL OF ADVERTISING IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON): History and Its Operations 3.2 Control Functions of APCON 3.3 Other Laws Controlling Advertising in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on the history of APCON, its organisational structure regulatory and control functions, as well as areas where APCON needs more regulatory work.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what APCON stands for • discuss the regulatory and control functions of APCON • identify other laws concerned with the regulation of advertising in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of APCON and Its Operations We have noted in one of the earlier units that the main regulator of advertising practice in Nigeria is the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON).
It is the body established by the Federal Government to regulate advertising activities through APCON Decree 55 of 1988 and the subsequent amendments: Decree 93 of 1992 and Decree 116 of 1993.
The adoption in January 1988 by the National Council of Ministers of a broad National Mass Communication Policy was an important milestone in the birth of the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria.
Various discussions were said to have led to the articulation of the relevance of advertising in the nation’s social, 70  MAC 427 MODULE 3 political and economic activities as well as the need for recognition and regulation.
The Advertising Practitioner Council of Nigeria (APCON), established by Act 55 of 1988, was a logical outcome of the legislative recognition to advertising as a profession in Nigeria.
Functions of APCON Section One Act 55 of 1988, which set up APCON, states its functions as: a. determining who are advertising practitioners; b. determining what standards of knowledge and skill are to be attained by persons seeking to become registered as members of the advertising profession and reviewing those standards from time to time; c. securing in accordance, with the provisions of the Decree, the establishment and maintenance of a register of practitioners and the publication, from time to time, of list of those persons; d. regulating and controlling the practice of advertising in all its aspects and ramifications; e. conducting examinations in the profession and awarding certificates or diplomas to successful candidates and when appropriate and for such purpose, the council shall prescribe fees to be paid in respect thereof; f. Performing the other functions conferred on the council by the Act.
Membership The Decree makes provision for four grades of membership: • Fellow • Full Member • Associate Member • Student Member Registration as an Ad Practitioner Associate Member Anyone above the age of 21, who possesses any of the degrees or diplomas listed under the student category, and is employed in a recognised organisation where he or she can acquire professional experience.
He or she must be of good character and must not have been convicted in Nigeria or elsewhere of a criminal offence.
71  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS Full Member Anyone, who has met the requirements for associate membership and in addition has been in continuous advertising practice for a minimum of five years.
Fellow To be a fellow, the applicant must have fulfilled the conditions for associate and full membership.
In addition, he or she must have been in continuous active advertising practice in the 15 years preceding the date of his or her application, and must show evidence of significant contributions to the practice of advertising.
Student Member Anyone who satisfied the Council that he or she is undergoing a course of studies recognised by the Council and leading to the award of: • APCON Diploma/Professional Certificate • CAM or BEEC Diploma in Advertising • Degree/HND in Marketing, Mass Communication, Graphic Arts or Advertising • NIJ PGD Advertising Enrolment for the Examination Application for registration as a student must be made on the prescribed form, which requires an undertaking on the part of the applicant to abide by the rules laid down by the Council from time to time.
Every applicant will be required to produce satisfactory evidence of age, name, character and eligibility together with certified photocopies of educational certificates and four certified passport size photographs.
Examination Philosophy The examination is designed to test candidates’ knowledge both in the theory and in practice of advertising.
Emphasis is on professional knowledge and application of principles to practice.
The challenge from the contemporary advertising environment requires that present and future advertising practitioners demonstrate knowledge and ability in solving advertising and marketing communications related problems.
Thus, the syllabus is guided by the need to provide the students a perfect blend of professional and theoretical knowledge.
The APCON Processional Diploma in Advertising is a qualifying certificate for registration into the advertising profession.
The basic qualification for 72  MAC 427 MODULE 3 enrolment into the programme is a bachelor’s degree or the Higher National Diploma in any discipline.
Candidate who holds degree or HND in Marketing, Mass Communication and Graphic Arts would be exempted from some of the courses on individual/Merit.
The examinations are conducted twice a year: June and November.
Specifically, with the APCON laws, the APCON is statutorily saddled with the regulation of advertising in Nigeria.
This is in spite of the self- regulation of the profession through other bodies, such as the Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN), which is the umbrella association of all advertising practitioners in Nigeria, and other sectoral associations like ADVAN, OAAN, BON and NPAN.
APCON is composed of a 20-member Council, which is its highest policy body.
The Council is headed by a Chairman, and a Secretariat, also headed by a Registrar.
The composition of the Council is made up of representatives of interest groups in advertising in Nigeria, including AAPN, ADVAN, OAAN, BON, NPAN and others.
The chairman of the council is appointed by the President of the country.
He must however be a fellow of the advertising practice in Nigeria; this requirement is compulsory.
Bel-Molokwu (2000), a former Registrar of APCON, presents the structure of advertising in Nigeria as approved by the APCON: a) APCON b) Workforce c) Individual practitioner d) Organised practice e) Corporate practice f) Organised sectoral groupings: ADVAN, AAPN, OAAN, NPAN, BON Indeed, the advent of APCON since 1988 changed a situation where advertising was an all-comer affair and agency operations and practice were loose.
With the law, APCON defines the structure of advertising, regulates the functions and activities of the component groups and practitioners.
3.1 Control Functions of APCON In putting effect to the APCON law, a Secretariat was created, saddled with the responsibility of monitoring and enforcing the provisions of the APCON law and the Code of Advertising Practice in Nigeria.
73  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS In this regard, the Council appoints other bodies to support the secretariat in executing the provisions of the law.
These bodies are: a) Investigating Panel: this body hears complaints from and against advertising practitioners and stakeholders in the industry.
b) The Advertising Practitioners Disciplinary Committee: this body is charged with adjudicating in these cases.
c) The Advertising Standards Panel – this ensures that practitioners maintain standards set in the industry.
Besides this regulatory structure of the industry, Fadipe (2002) also identifies other functions of APCON as set out in the law setting it up.
These are: i. screening and registration of practitioners ii.
induction of new practitioners iii.
assessing and upgrading practitioners iv.
vetting of new advertisements v. monitoring of the exposure of advertisements vi.
education of practitioners and training of new members vii.
accreditation of departments offering advertising courses in universities and polytechnics viii.
publishing reading and reference literature on advertising ix.
enforcing discipline x. ensuring that ethical standards are maintained.
Apart from these functions, APCON also ensures that advertising practice is developed and upgraded to international standards.
Essentially, APCON recognises excellence in the practice of advertising in Nigeria by giving awards and an annual lecture series to increase debate and body of literature in the industry.
These include: a) Annual Advertising Day/Lecture, at the end of very year.
b) Student Encouragement Awards.
These are sponsored by eminent and registered members of the advertising industry, corporate bodies and other practitioners in the practice.
However, issues continued to be raised by advertising practitioners where they think APCON needs to do more work.
Some of these are: i. they believe that direct media buying and selling, which involves placement of advertisements by an advertiser without the knowledge of the practitioners, is against the APCON law and therefore unhealthy for the advertising industry ii.
they believe that the entry into the profession is loose as many unregistered people still engage in the business of advertising in 74  MAC 427 MODULE 3 the country.
They say this is also against the spirit and tenets of the APCON law iii.
members of the public have continued to raise issues about the need to strengthen the effectiveness of the APCON laws regarding deceptive advertisements iv.
in addition, issues of compliance with the advertising code of ethics are raised against APCON too as we shall see in subsequent units.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Which areas of advertising would you give APCON credit and where does it need to do more work?
3.2 Other Laws Governing Advertising in Nigeria Other agencies, organisations, or decrees put in place by the Federal Government to address the problem of unwholesome practices between producers, marketers, suppliers, service providers and the consumers in Nigeria include: • Food and Drug Decree of 1974: this law prohibits sale of certain category of food and drugs, and or of such food and drugs because they are considered to be either unsafe or their are misleading the public.
For example, you are not allowed to advertise a drug, which claims to cure obesity in Nigeria.
Unfortunately, this is now flouted with impunity in Nigeria and APCON and some of the regulatory bodies concerned have proved incapable of dealing with these infractions.
• Standards Organisation of Nigeria (SON) • National Drug Law Enforcement Agency (NDLEA) • National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC), 1993 • Nigerian Communication Commission (NCC) • Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC).
• Independent Corrupt Practices and other related offences Commission (ICPC).
• Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA) • National Lottery Regulatory Commission • The Counterfeit and Fake Drugs Decree No 21 of 1988 • The Food and Drugs Act Cap 150 of 1990 • The Poison and Pharmacy Act Cap 366 of 1990 • Consumer Protection Council (CPC), a parastatal of the Federal Government established by Act No.
66 of 1992 established to promote and protect consumers’ interests in all areas of products 75  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS and services, provide speedy redress to their complaints, inform, educate and empower them (consumers) to act as discerning and discriminating consumers in the market place.
There is also the Consumers Association of Nigeria and other such groups, which we shall deal with under consumerism.
4.0 CONCLUSION Since 1988 when APCON came into being, advertising in Nigeria cannot be said to be without laws and regulations.
The APCON law has provided the structure for operations and growth of the industry in Nigeria.
There are of course, many areas in the advertising industry in the country that needs improvement and more work, especially the areas of direct media selling and buying and proper registration of members to weed out non-professionals.
In addition, APCON needs more work in the area of regulating messages of advertisements to guide against deception, negative advertisements, misleading claims of products and other marketing abuses.
It is hoped that the seeming protective cover of the practitioners against detection, report and prosecution of deceptive advertisements would be fought by the rising consumerism flavour in the country.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has looked at the statutory regulation of advertising in Nigeria.
In this regard, we have examined the composition of APCON, the structure of advertisements industry, control and functions of APCON in Nigeria.
We have also identified the main areas where APCON needs to do more regulatory work.
In the same vein, we have identified some other laws and organisations set up by the Federal Government to regulate the relation between producers, advertising agencies, marketers and the consumers in the country.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the composition of APCON and its control functions in regulating advertising in the country.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bel-Molokwu, J.
(2000).
Principles of Advertising in Nigeria.
APCON.
Bel-Molokwu, J. et al.
(1997).
Advertising in Nigeria.
APCON.
Fadipe, S. (2002): Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
76  MAC 427 MODULE 3 UNIT 3 CODE OF CONDUCT OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conduct Towards the Practice of Public Relations 3.2 Conduct towards the Public, the Media and Other Professionals 3.3 Conduct to Employers and Clients 3.4 Conduct to Colleagues 3.5 Interpreting the Code 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall focus on the Code of Conduct of Public Relations as legalised by NIPR Public Relations Practitioners Decree No.
16 of 1990.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the code of ethics for the practice of public relations in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The Nigerian Institute of Public Relations, Public Relations Practitioners Decree No.
16 of 1990 empowers the Council of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations to determine what standards of knowledge and skills are to be attained by public relations practitioners.
In order to maintain high standard, the law empowers the Institute from time to time update its Code of Professional Conduct.
The law also empowers the Council to make bye laws and other rules not inconsistent with the decree as to acts which constitute professional misconduct.
Thus, in pursuance of the provision of the decree, the Council of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations made the following Bye Laws 77  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS known as The Nigerian Institute of Public Relations Code of Professional Conduct Bye-laws No.
1 of 1992.
3.1 Conduct towards the Practice of Public Relations A Member shall: Have a positive duty to observe the highest standards in the practice of Public Relations and to deal fairly and honestly with employers and clients (past and present), fellow members and professionals, the public relations profession, other professions, suppliers, intermediaries, the media of communications, employees and above all, the public.
i.
Expected standard of public relations practice Be aware of, understand and observe this Code, any amendment to it, and any other codes which shall be incorporated into it, remain up to date with the content and recommendations of any guidance or practice papers issued by the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations and have a duty to conform to good practice as expressed in such guidance or practice papers.
ii.
Up-to-date knowledge of developments in the profession Uphold this Code and co-operate with fellow Members to enforce decisions on any matter arising from its application.
A Member who knowingly causes or allows his or her staff to act in a manner inconsistent with the Code is party to such action and shall be deemed to be in breach of this Code.
Staff employed by a Member who act in a manner inconsistent with this Code should be disciplined by the Member.
iii.
Upholding the code: Vicarious liability of members All disputes within the Institute must be resolved through the internal machinery of the institute-namely, the State Chapter Executive Committees, the Investigating Panel.
iv.
Panel and the Tribunal Reference adjudication of dispute A Member shall: 78  MAC 427 MODULE 3 neither engage in any practice nor be seen to conduct him or herself in any manner detrimental to the reputation of the Institute or the reputation and interest of the public relations profession: • issue unauthorised statement about the Institute to the media except the statement is authorised by the President • circulate or disclose the content of any of the Council's Minutes of Meetings without the approval of the Council, the President or Vice President • bring the Institute, its officers or members to public ridicule • damage the professional reputation of the Institute, the officers of the Institute or its members.
v. Requirement of Presidents consent before publication of any statement Exposure of council's minutes, subject to approval 3.2 Conduct towards the Public, the Media and Other Professionals A Member shall: i. conduct his or her professional activities with proper regard to the Public interest ii.
scrutinise information before dissemination.
A member has a positive duty at all times to respect the truth and shall not disseminate false or misleading information knowingly or recklessly, and take proper care to check all information prior to its dissemination iii.
when working in association with other professionals, identify and respect the codes of those professions.
iv.
respect for code of other professionals.
A member shall respect any statutory or regulatory codes laid down by any other authorities, which are relevant to the actions of his or her employer or client, or taken on behalf of an employer or client v. respect regulatory codes vi.
honour confidences received given in the course of professional activity Neither offer nor give, or cause an employer or client to give any inducement to holders of public office or members of any statutory body or organisation who are not directors, executives or retained consultants, with intent to further the interests of the employer or client if such action is inconsistent with the public interest Prohibition from giving of inducement.
79  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.3 Conduct towards Employers and Clients A Member shall: i. safeguard the confidence of both present and former employers or clients; shall not disclose or use these confidences to the disadvantage or prejudice of such employers or clients, or to the financial advantage of the Member (unless the employer or clients has released such information for public use or has given specific permission for disclosure), except upon the order of a court of law.
ii.
be free to accept fees, commissions or other valuable considerations from persons other than an employer or client, if such considerations are disclosed to the employer or client.
iii.
accept benefits subject to consent of employer.
iv.
be free to negotiate or renegotiate with an employer or client terms that are a fair reflection of demands of the work involved and take into account factors other than hours worked and the experience involved.
These special factors which are also applied by other professional advisers shall have regard to all the circumstances of the specific situation and in particular to: Negotiation of remuneration a) The complexity of the issue, ease, problem or assignment, and the difficulties associated with its completion.
b) The professional or specialised skills required and the degree of responsibility involved.
c) The amount of documentation necessary to be perused or prepared and its importance.
d) The place and circumstances where the work is carried out in whole or in part.
e) The scope, scale and value of the task and its importance as an activity issue or project to the employer or client.
Charge fees when a client calls for proposals for an assignment but the member was not restrained to execute the proposal: A member shall not: 1. misuse information regarding his or her employer or client's business for financial or other gain.
2. serve an employer or client under terms or conditions, which might impair his or her independence, objectivity or integrity.
3. represent conflicting interests but may represent competing interests with the express consent of the parties concerned.
80  MAC 427 MODULE 3 Non-representation of conflicting interest: Guarantee the achievement of results, which are beyond the members direct capacity to achieve or prevent making unrealistic promise.
3.4 Conduct towards Colleagues A Member shall: Address the highest standards of accuracy and truth avoiding extravagant claims or unfair comparisons and giving credit for ideas and words borrowed from others.
Proficiency and recognition of the capabilities of others Be free to represent his or her capabilities and service to any potential employer or client either on his or her own initiative or at the behest of any client, provided he or she does not seek to break any existing contract or detract from the reputation or capabilities of any member already serving that employer or client.
Representation A Member shall not: Injure the professional reputation or practice of another member.
3.5 Interpreting the Code In the interpretation of this Code, the decisions of the Investigating Panel and Disciplinary Tribunal set up by the Institute shall be final.
A breach of the Code of Professional Conduct Bye Laws should be reported in writing to the Chairman of the Investigating Panel of the Institute.
The Panel and Tribunal will carry out their functions as provided by Decree 16 of 1990.
Breach Report of breach Functions of Investigating Panel and Disciplinary Tribunal A breach of the Code will earn reprimand, suspension or expulsion from the Institute.
81  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 4.0 CONCLUSION The practice of public relations should no longer be loose, or an all- comer affair.
This is because the provisions of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations Public Relations Practitioners Decree No.
16 of 1990 provide the ground norm for the practice of public relations in Nigeria.
However, this is not the case.
There are still many unprofessional in the practice of public relations in Nigeria and this partly explains the level of unethical practices in the profession in the country.
One of the most important tasks for the NIPR is to weed the unprofessional out of the system, and for any practitioner to keep abreast of the NIPR professional code of conduct and realise that he has as much responsibility to himself, the profession, the client, media and the society where he practices.
5.0 SUMMARY Since 1990, public relations, like law, medicine, pharmacy and advertising, has had a professional Code of Conduct to guide practitioners in the profession.
The professional code of conduct has provisions outlining conduct towards the practice of public relations, conduct towards the public, the media and other professionals, conduct to employers and clients and conduct to colleagues.
It also provides for power to interpret the Code.
This has been the focus of this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Highlight the main issues raised in the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations Code of Conduct.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nigerian Institute of Public Relations Public Relations Practitioners Decree No.
16 of 1990.
NIPR Code of Conduct 82  MAC 427 MODULE 3 UNIT 4 REGULATION OF ADVERTISING IN THE DEVELOPED COUNTRIES: A CASE STUDY OF THE UNITED STATES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Advertising Regulation by the Federal Trade Commission 3.2 Commercial Speech Comes Under the First Amendment 3.3 Professional Self Regulation in Advertising in the United States 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we have picked the control and regulation of advertising in the United States as a case study.
This is because advertising and even public relations are more developed in the United States than elsewhere in the world; of course, the industries grow with developments in the free market economy.
Indeed, many of the provisions of the APCON laws in Nigeria, and in the advertising regulations in many other developing countries can be related to the experiences of the United States, except in a few cases.
In the United States, like Nigeria, there are both government control and self-regulations of advertising as in Nigeria.
It is therefore believed that the benefit of the United States’ experience will help the Nigerian practitioners by giving them insights into a properly organised and developed advertising industry, such as the United States.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • discuss both the government control and self-regulation of advertising in the United States • compare advertising in the United States with that in Nigeria.
83  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Advertising Regulation by the Federal Trade Commission Advertising control by the government in the United States was said to have been spurred by abuses in the observance of marketing practices in the country in the early 20th century.
These abuses were defined by deceptive advertisements and exaggerated claims, especially noticeable in patent medicines.
Thus, to stem this ugly trend, the United States government took steps by creating the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in 1914.
The commission was initially saddled with encouraging competition through the regulation of questionable business practices, such as bribery, false advertising and mislabelling of products.
These functions were not at the beginning aimed at protecting the consumer.
However, by 1938, the consumer gained more attention from the FTC with the passage of the Wheeler Lea Act.
With this law, the FTC got the power to prevent dissemination of deceptive advertising that can harm the public, whether or not they had any negative effects on competition.
The FTC Enforcement Powers a.)
It issues trade regulations that suggest guidelines for the advertising industry.
In performing this function, the FTC in 1965, for example, ruled that all auto must contain both the city and highway estimates of gas mileage.
b.)
It also uses consent order to ensure that an advertiser stops carrying out an advertising practice.
A consent order is said to be an agreement by the advertiser to desist from an advertising practice, even though he may not admit violation of any law.
c.) It can also issue a cease-and-desist order.
This is described as a stronger order, which follows a hearing by the commission that says that certain advertising practice actually violates the law.
Failure to comply with a cease order and cease-and-desist order can lead to fines against the advertiser.
Indeed, cases and issues of advertising law violations abound in the United States, especially from 1960s and 70s.
This was said to be indicative of the fact that the FTC took a more active role in regulation of advertisement in the country.
In addition, the rising consumer groups’ activities led to increased complaints against abuses in advertising.
In the wake of these complaints, more functions of the FTC became noticeable as: 84  MAC 427 MODULE 3 • it can and does ask for documentation and proof of product claims by an advertiser • it also asks for corrective advertisements to be carried if past claims by an advertiser are found to be untrue • it has more recently focused more on protecting children from unfair influence of advertising.
For example, in 1997, the FTC was said to have issued a complaint against a tobacco advertisement, which featured a cartoon character.
The FTC argued that the advertisements would encourage children to smoke.
The company was said to have made amends • it also writes reports to regulate film advertisements targeted at the under-aged children in the United States.
The FTC report in 2000 against film makers in Hollywood led to a commitment by some film makers to reform their promotions • it also regulates deceptive claims on health products.
For example, in 2005, the FTC instructed an orange juice firm to stop its claim on its product that it reduced the risk of heart disease and stroke.
It also filed lawsuits against companies whose advertisements claimed that people who use their products would lose weight without exercises or dieting.
In 2007, it also asked companies who engage in word-of-mouth advertisements to declare these relationships to customers.
3.2 Commercial Speech Comes under the First Amendment In the United States, since 1970s, advertising or commercial speech has been treated under the First Amendment to the country’s constitution that is, under the free speech provision.
However, many court rulings clarified the advertisements that would succeed under this provision.
These are advertisements in the public interest or that deal with important social issues.
Several court rulings also defined what is in public interest.
There are four tests: a) commercial speech that involves an unlawful activity or advertising that is false or misleading is not protected b) the government must have a substantial interest in regulating the commercial speech c) the state’s regulation must actually advance the government interest involved d) the state’s regulations may be only as broad as to promote the state’s interest.
Under these four tests, advertising activity such as pasting posters on government property is declared unlawful even when the content is in the public interest.
Professionals such as lawyers, doctors and so on are 85  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS granted the right to advertise their services and prices, unlike in Nigeria where this is disallowed.
3.3 Professional Self Regulation in Advertising in The United States There are four groups concerned with the practice of advertising in the United States.
They are the Council of Better Business Bureaus, the American Advertising Federation, the American Association of Advertising Industries and the Association of National Advertisers.
These four groups came together in 1971 and formed the National Advertising Review Council (NARC).
The objective of the NARC is to sustain high standard of truth and accuracy in the United States’ advertising industry.
The Council is composed of two divisions: the National Advertising Division (NAD) and the National Advertising Review Board (NARB).
The NAD hears a complaint first, assesses it and decides the merit whether it is trivial or unfounded.
The NAD can contact the advertiser for more explanations on the complaint.
If it is convinced that the advertisements complained of is in order, it would throw the complaint away.
If otherwise, NAD finds out that the complaint has basis, it can ask the advertiser to change or discontinue the advertisements.
In case the advertiser disagrees with the NAD position, the case goes to the NARB, which hears appeals on advertising.
If the case is still not resolved, the NARB would refer it to the Federal Trade Commission or other relevant agencies.
This option rarely happens as most advertisers usually comply with NAD’s directives.
For the purpose of this course, we can also present one of the important reviews undertaken by the Council for Better Business Bureaus here concerning children.
This is because the Council realises that children are one of the most vulnerable groups regarding the harmful effects of advertising in the United States.
Children’s Advertising Review Unit (CARU) The main self-regulatory body for children’s advertising in the United States is the Children’s Advertising Review Unit, or CARU, part of the Council of Better Business Bureaus.
It was established in 1974 by the National Advertising Review Council to promote responsible children’s advertising and to respond to public concerns.
It is worth reviewing the seven CARU principles, which embody the philosophy upon which CARU’s mandate is based.
These principles form the platform for a comprehensive set of guidelines covering everything from promotions to celebrity presenters to branded content.
86  MAC 427 MODULE 3 a.
Advertising should always take into account the level of knowledge, sophistication and maturity of the audience to which their message is primarily directed.
Younger children have a limited capacity for evaluating the information they receive.
They also may lack the ability to understand the nature of the personal information they disclose on the Internet.
Advertisers, therefore, have a special responsibility to protect children from their own susceptibilities.
b.
Advertisers should realise that children are imaginative and that make-believe play constitutes an important part of the growing up process, therefore, they should be cautious not to exploit unfairly the imaginative quality of children.
Unreasonable expectations of product quality or performance should not be stimulated either directly or indirectly by advertising.
c. Products and content, which are inappropriate for children, should not be advertised or promoted directly to children.
d. Recognising that advertising may play an important part in educating the child, advertisers should communicate information in a truthful and accurate manner and in language understandable to young children with full recognition that the child may learn practices from advertising which can affect his or her health and well-being.
e. Advertisers are urged to capitalise on the potential to influence behaviour by developing advertising that, whenever possible, addresses itself to positive and beneficial social behaviour such as friendship, kindness, honesty, justice, generosity and respect for others.
f. Care should be taken to incorporate minority groups in advertisements in order to present positive and pro-social roles and role models wherever possible.
Social stereotyping and appeals to prejudice should be avoided.
g. Although many influences affect a child’s personal and social development, it remains the prime responsibility of parents to provide guidance for children.
Advertisers should contribute to this parent-child relationship in a constructive manner.
3.4 Other Forms of Control Economic Pressures: These can be divided into two: advertisers and business pressures.
• Pressure from advertisers: Media require a lot of advertisements money to stay in business.
Thus, lack of advertisements money may “kill” a newspaper or magazine.
Consequently, advertisers can exert pressure on the media over their contents.
While advertisers have little influence over the contents of films because 87  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS films do not depend wholly for advertisements as revenue, the same cannot be said of radio, newspapers, magazines and television.
Although, this is not to say that advertisers fully control the contents of the media in the United States.
• Business Policies: In the same vein, pressure may come from within the media’s business policies.
In this area, consideration from the media involves trading news coverage with advertisement space or airtime.
This kind of pressure or trade off comes because of the close relationship between the advertiser and the media.
Pressure Groups: These are groups regarded as stakeholders in the media.
These groups may threaten boycott or embark on campaigns to force the hand of the media to do their wish.
Pressure groups can organise under several lines; it could be political, economic, and social or health, their aim is to exert pressure on the media along their preconceived beliefs and standpoints.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify two forms of self-regulation of advertising in the United States.
4.0 CONCLUSION As we indicated earlier unit (on the government regulation of advertising in Nigeria), there are still many areas of the APCON law and operations that need improvements for the development of advertising industry in Nigeria.
For example, the United States has created special regulatory unit for children advertisements.
This is a controversial aspect in Nigeria since advertising abuses do occur in Nigeria.
Some other areas include direct media buying, existence of unregistered practitioners in the profession and other forms of deception in advertisements.
It is believed that the United States has helped to shed some light in some of these areas in which more work is needed to be done by the APCON in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has used the case study of how advertising is regulated in the United States by the government through the Federal Trade Commission and the provision that sees advertising as part of the free speech and therefore part of the First amendment to the United States Constitution.
We also dwelt on the self-regulation of advertising and the various forms of economic and social pressures by groups and advertisers on the media in the United States.
88  MAC 427 MODULE 3 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why would you recommend the regulation of children advertising in the United States for APCON in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Dominick, J. R. (2009).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
89  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 5 CONTROL OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN THE DEVELOPED COUNTRIES: THE EXAMPLE OF BRITAIN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Code of Conduct of the Institute of Public Relations 3.2 Objectives of the Institute of Public Relations 3.3 Membership of the Institute of Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit provides you with the Code of Conduct of the Institute of Public Relations (IPR) in Britain, its objectives and membership.
This will afford you the opportunity to compare this with what obtains in Nigeria, especially regarding the control and structure of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the main provisions of the IPR, its objectives and membership structure • compare the operations of the IPR in Britain with the NIPR in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Code of Conduct of the Institute of Public Relations The Institute of Public Relations (IPR) is the only body in Britain that has responsibility for the regulations of public relations.
The IPR has the exclusive power for studying and developing the profession of public relations.
The IPR was founded in 1948 by a group of public relations officers in commerce, industry and central government, who believed that their profession should have an organisation for the purpose of regulations.
The IPR was incorporated in 1964.
90  MAC 427 MODULE 3 IPR Professional Code of Conduct The IPR Code of Conduct is based on the import of the Memorandum of Understanding of the IPR entitled “Objects.” The Objects aims “to encourage and foster the observance of high professional standards by its members and to establish and prescribe such standards.” Indeed, from its outset, the IPR had been concerned about the effect on reputation of the conduct of members.
Thus, the IPR set out some principles to guide members in their relationship with the public.
These are: a) a member shall conduct his professional activities with respect for the public interest b) a member shall at all time deal fairly and honestly with his client or employers, past or present, with his fellow members and with the public c) a member shall not intentionally disseminate false or misleading information, and shall use proper care to avoid doing so.
He has a positive duty to maintain truth, accuracy and good taste d) a member shall not engage in any practice, which tends to corrupt the channels of public communication e) a member shall not create or make use of any organisation purporting to serve some announced cause but actually promoting a special or private interest of a member or his client or his employer, which is not apparent f) a member shall safeguard the confidences of both present and former clients and employers.
He shall not disclose except upon the order of a court of competent jurisdiction any confidential information, which he may have obtained in his official capacity without securing and making known the consent of the said client or employer g) a member shall not represent conflicting or competing interests without the express consent of those concerned, given after full disclosure of the facts.
h) a member in performing services for a client or employer shall not accept fees, commissions or any other valuable considerations in connection with those services from any other than his client or employer unless such practice is acceptable to the client or employer i) a member shall not cause or allow to be done anything for touting or advertising calculated to attract business unfairly j) a member shall not propose to a prospective client or employer that his fee or other compensation be contingent on the attainment of certain results; nor shall he enter into any fee agreement to the same effect k) a member shall not intentionally injure the professional reputation or practice of another member, but if such a member 91  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS has evidence that another member has been guilty of unethical, illegal or unfair practices, it shall be his duty to inform the Institute in accordance with the Memorandum and Articles l) a member shall not engage in or be connected with any occupation or business which, in the opinion of the Council, is not consistent with the membership of the Institute m) a member shall not seek to supplant another member with his employer or client, nor shall he encroach upon the professional employment of another member unless both parties are assured that there is no conflict of interest involved, and are kept advised of the negotiations n) a member shall cooperate with fellow members in upholding and enforcing this Code.
3.2 The Objectives of the Institute of Public Relations The IPR’s main objectives are: i. to promote the development of public relations for the benefit of the practice in commerce; industry; central and local government; nationalised undertakings; professional, trade and voluntary organisations and for the benefit of all practitioners, and others concerned in or with public relations.
ii.
encourage and foster the observance of high professional standards by its members and to establish and prescribe such standards.
iii.
to arrange meetings, discussions, conferences, etc, on matters of common interest, and generally to act as a clearinghouse for the exchange of ideas on the practice of public relations.
3.3 Membership of the Institute of Public Relations The constitution of the IPR provides for various categories of membership.
These are: Honorary Life Members, Fellows Members, Associates Members, Student Members, Retired Members, Overseas Affiliates and Affiliates.
The IPR also provides for Honorary Life Members and Fellows, which are conferred by the Council in recognition of distinguished members of the public for their services or outstanding contributions to public relations.
Membership of the IPR is open to applicants in the different categories listed, except the Honorary Life Members and Fellows who are appointed by the Council.
For others, to become a member of the IPR, you must be: a) individuals who at the date of their application are 28 years of age or more and whose applications are acceptable to the council, providing that they have had at least five years’ comprehensive 92  MAC 427 MODULE 3 experience in, and that they are qualified to undertake the practice of, public relations as defined in the Memorandum of Association.
b) individuals who at the date of their application are 28 years of age or more and whose applications are acceptable to the Council, providing that they have had at least two years’ comprehensive experience in, and that they are qualified to practice of, public relations as defined in the Memorandum of Association; and providing further that they shall have been previously awarded the Institute’s Diploma in Public Relations or (prior to 1971) that they have passed the Institute’s Final Examination.
Each member is entitled to a Membership Certificate and entitled to vote in the affairs of the Institute as well as use the MIPR letters.
Apart from registration of members, the IPR also organises courses in collaboration with relevant colleges in Britain.
IPR holds the Certificate in Public Relations examination twice a year.
These courses are besides evening lectures, discussion meetings, debates, film shows and conferences, which the IPR organises for members.
Indeed, all the activities of the IPR are aimed at achieving both its educational, social and regulatory objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Code of Conduct of the Institute of Public Relations is simple and explanatory in its articles and provisions.
Its coming into existence is similar to the way the NIPR Code of Conduct came about in Nigeria by the efforts and activities of the professionals who felt there was a need for the control of the profession.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has dealt with the provisions of the IPR Code of Conduct.
The Articles of the Code of Conduct, especially regarding membership, relationship with colleagues, client or employer, examinations, how the Council of the Institute honours distinguished members and others have been explained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss some of the similarities in the articles in the IPR and NIPR Codes of Conduct.
93  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Black, S. (1982).
Practical Public Relations.
London: Education Low Priced Books Scheme.
The New Encyclopedia Britannica.
Encyclopaedia Britannia Inc. (1987).
Vol.
3, 15th Ed.
94  MAC 427 MODULE 4 MODULE 4 SELF- REGULATION AND PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN) and Other Professional Bodies in Advertising in Nigeria Unit 2 Professional Associations in Public Relations in Nigeria: NIPR, PRCAN, ACAMB Unit 3 Criticisms and Challenges of Advertising and Public Relations in Nigeria UNIT 1 ASSOCIATION OF ADVERTISING PRACTITIONERS OF NIGERIA (AAPN) AND OTHER SECTORAL ADVERTISING ASSOCIATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History and Objectives of the Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria 3.2 Sectoral Advertising Associations: ADVAN, OAAN, BON, NPAN, 3.3 Agency Structure 3.4 Other Forms of Controls: Economic and Political Pressures from Advertisers and Consumer Groups 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have said earlier that advertising profession is controlled and regulated in Nigeria in two ways.
One is the statutory regulation through the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria laws (the APCON laws) and other organisations and laws passed by government for regulating various aspects of advertising, as we have examined the formal regulations of advertising in one of the earlier units.
The other way advertising is regulated in Nigeria is the voluntary or self-regulation 95  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS by professional bodies, such as the Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN), ADVAN, OAAN, BON and NPAN.
Others self-regulating measures are through the structures of the agencies themselves, pressures from the advertisers, consumer groups and individual controls by the practitioners.
These various forms of voluntary regulation are the focus of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • trace the history and objectives, especially in relation to self- regulation, of the Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN) • identify briefly other voluntary regulatory bodies: ADVAN, OAAN, BON, NPAN, NAFDAC • discuss the economic and political pressures exerted by advertisers and consumer groups in the advertising industry.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History and Objectives of Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria Voluntary regulation of advertising in Nigeria is mainly through the Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN).
The AAPN was formed because practitioners realised that voluntary regulation and control of advertising would generate respect and confidence among members of the public.
This would enhance credibility in the advertising industry.
The AAPN was also formed because it would allow practitioners to follow and be guided by some ethics of conduct.
This would also allow for effectiveness of advertising in Nigeria.
Thus, in June 1971, the advertising professionals came together to establish the AAPN.
Its first meeting was held among four professionals.
By 1973, two years after, members of the AAPN had increased to 22.
Indeed, today, the AAPN has risen to a formidable and pre-eminent voluntary advertising organisation in the country with membership in hundreds.
The AAPN remains a body composed of only advertising agencies in Nigeria, as individual members are not registered.
There is no doubt that there are still many in the advertising field in Nigeria who are yet to be registered as members of the AAPN.
Even a cursory look at the number of the agencies in the field is indicative that there are still many yet to register with the AAPN.
Yet the APCON laws 96  MAC 427 MODULE 4 say no agency or practitioner should practice the profession of advertising without being legally registered to do so.
This is one of the areas of controversy in the practice of advertising today in the country.
Some complaints have also been levied against the AAPN and the APCON laws that the processes and principles of registration are too stringent.
This may have made it difficult for those yet to register to do so.
Indeed, in its formative years, the AAPN was able to remove from under the control of the Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria (NPAN) the control of advertising in Nigeria.
Before then, NPAN controlled advertising in the country.
The process to win this battle by the AAPN was not easy.
It involved a court action in 1978.
The AAPN eventually won the case for the total control over advertising in Nigeria.
However, NPAN, as media owners, still exert some control over advertising, especially regarding rejection of advertisements by their media.
For example, until it ceased from the newsstand, Concord Press of Nigeria, publishers of the Concord newspapers, rejected lager beer advertisements.
Also, The Guardian newspapers, until probably recently, rejected obituary advertisements.
This is no doubt a form of control of advertisements.
it is to the glory of AAPN that it was later able to get advertising practice in Nigeria indigenised through the Indigenisation Decree of 1973.
This law made advertising practice in Nigeria the preserve of Nigerian professionals.
So, with this law, we have a situation in the country where non-Nigerian cannot engage in the practice of advertising.
Objectives of the AAPN a) The main objective of the AAPN is to develop and improve the practice of advertising in Nigeria.
b) It also regulates advertising practice in Nigeria through a formal code of ethics that becomes incumbent on all members to adhere to.
c) It accords recognition to practitioners and agencies, as well as provides a forum for seminars, conferences, debates, cooperation and arbitration among members.
In line with these objectives, the AAPN establishes a formal code of professional practice, and was instrumental to the signing of the APCON laws by the government for the regulation and control of advertising in the country.
97  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS In the last recent years, the AAPN has transformed into the Association of Advertising Agencies in Nigeria (AAAN).
The emphasis now seems to be on “agency” rather than on “practitioner.” The Code of Ethics regulates the nature and content of advertising as well as the professional conduct of members with colleagues, clients, media and members of the public.
The primary aim of the code of conduct is to guide against abuses in advertising, such as deceptive and negative adverting, unfair competition among members or fraudulent advertising of products, use of unfair appeals, superstition and misleading claims on products.
3.2 Sectoral Advertising Associations: ADVAN, OAAN, BON, NPAN • ADVAN – Advertisers’ Association of Nigeria.
It was established in September 1992.
It also supports APCON in the regulation of advertising in Nigeria.
• OAAN – Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigeria.
It was first called Outdoor Advertising Contractors Association of Nigeria.
It formally came into being as OAAN in 1986.
It supports APCON in the regulation of outdoor in the country.
• BON – Broadcasting Organisations of Nigeria.
BON went through many stages of its development, but it was formally established in 1988.
It also supports APCON in the regulation of the broadcast media.
• NPAN – Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria.
It supports APCON by contributing to the regulation of advertisements for the newspapers and the print media generally.
3.3 Agency Structure and Principles The advertising agency deals with the advertisers, media, the public and government.
It, therefore, creates an effective structure, which can coordinate its activities and workforce to achieve all its objectives.
These are set out in principles and rules that guide the agency’s operations, as we shall see hereunder.
a) Because agency personnel give service, their physical appearance is important.
It is usual for an agency to have a dress code specified by management for the workforce.
Sometimes, wardrobe allowance and subsidy are given by management to staff.
98  MAC 427 MODULE 4 b) It is the duty of an agency to pay media owners and suppliers immediately it is paid by the advertiser.
Thus, the agency has a right to be paid by the advertiser.
Indeed, it is the right of the agency to operate independent of its clients and the media owners.
The agency has right to adequate briefing by its client, and also service agreement as well as pitch rejection fee under the AAPN regulations.
c) It is required of agency personnel to keep to time schedule at meetings with clients and pay attention to details, produce and deliver on demand by the advertiser.
d) An agency should benchmark the performance of other agencies and lend a hand where it is needed.
This helps in the overall improvement of the advertising industry.
e) Constant training and retraining should be a policy of any agency.
This helps to sharpen the skills of the agency personnel and, at the end, the job of the agency.
f) The structure of the agency should be such that right tools and environment are provided.
Some of the tools required in an agency include computers, cameras, scanners, telephones, photocopiers, office furnishing, and clean environment.
g) Staff efficiency should be emphasised in an agency.
This is done by not overstaffing or understaffing the office.
h) The agency should also allow its executives to take certain decisions when this is necessary, and defend such actions and decisions.
i) The agency must insist on adequate records of meetings between a service personnel and advertiser.
Such records of meetings help to confirm positions, and lead to mutual understanding between an agency and advertiser.
Agencies usually have what is called client contact record.
This record should be sent to the client within 72 hours of each meeting.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List five ways how advertising agencies maintain internal control of their organisations.
3.5 Other Forms of Control Advertisers’ Pressures: In Nigeria today, the media industry generally has grown tremendously.
Like in the United States and Britain, the Nigerian media industry cannot survive without revenue.
Thus, the loss of money, as we indicated in the United States experience in one of the earlier units, may lead to the death of a newspaper or magazine.
Thus, pressure can be exerted by advertisers on the media over their contents.
99  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS As we said earlier, it is true that advertisers have little influence over the contents of films, because films do not depend wholly for advertisements as revenue, and even in Nigeria where many films are still in video, not much corporate advertisements are put in them.
Above all, the effects of advertisers’ pressure cannot be as serious even in celluloid films compared to the radio, newspapers, magazines and television.
We can also say in Nigeria too, that the pressure from advertisers on the media is not to say that advertisers fully control the contents of the media.
If one goes by the critical contents of the serious newspapers and magazines in the country, it would be realised that this position is unfounded.
Business Policies: Some pressures also come from the media organisation’s business policies.
In this area, it could be both ways.
One way is rejection of some advertisements by the media because of their business policies as, for example, as saw that Concord and The Guardian which refused certain kinds of advertisements because of their business policies.
On the other way round, media may not carry some stories because of advertisement considerations or the advertisers’ interest.
Consumer Groups: This is a recent development in the country.
The consumers form themselves into pressure groups to make some demands as stakeholders in the advertising industry.
These groups may threaten boycott or embark on campaigns to force the hand of the media and advertiser to do their wish.
Here in Nigeria, pressure groups organise under several lines; it could be political, economic, and social or health, their aim is to exert pressure on the media along their preconceived beliefs and standpoints.
This kind of groups in the country are still usually short-lived, they cease immediately their aim is achieved.
4.0 CONCLUSION The essence of self-regulation in advertising is to demonstrate the responsibility and credibility of the practitioners.
It is noted that this had started before the government regulation of the profession with the setting up of APCON.
It is hoped that effective coordination among all the efforts of self-regulation by the component groups in advertising industry in the country will make the work of APCON easy, and the professionals, the public and the country will be better for it.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed self-regulatory activities in the advertising industry.
We noted that the main self-regulatory effort is by AAPN.
Other sectoral associations such as ADVAN, OAAN, BON and NPAN also 100  MAC 427 MODULE 4 contribute in regulation of advertising in Nigeria.
Other aspects of regulation are done through pressures from advertisers on the media, consumer groups and controls within the agencies themselves.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss self-regulation of advertising in Nigeria and identify the roles of advertisers and consumer groups in this.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bel-Molokwu, J.
(2000).
Principles of Advertising in Nigeria.
APCON.
Bel-Molokwu, J. et al.
(1997), Advertising in Nigeria.
APCON.
Fadipe, S. (2002).
Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
101  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 2 PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS IN PUBLIC RELATIONS IN NIGERIA: NIPR, PRCAN, ACAMB CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations (NIPR) 3.2 Public Relations Consultancy in Nigeria 3.3 Association of Corporate Affairs Managers of Banks (ACAMB), A Financial Affiliate of NIPR 3.4 NIPR’s Code of Conduct 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Summary 5.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 6.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on professional self-regulation of public relations in Nigeria by the NIPR and its affiliates such as PRCAN and ACAMB.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the history of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations • discuss the origin and growth of public relation consultancy in Nigeria • explain how the Association of Corporate Affairs Managers of Banks (ACAMB) developed and its objectives.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Nigerian Institute of Public Relations Public Relations started in Nigeria before the country’s independence in 1960.
Public Relations practice commenced in the country in the early 1940s when the British colonialists wanted to give information to the colonised people about the war efforts.
Indeed, many Nigerians were drafted into the Second World War by the British colonialists.
This was because Nigeria was a British colony then.
Thus, the colonial 102  MAC 427 MODULE 4 government, realising the importance of information to Nigerians on happenings in the war front, created a Special Information Centre for disseminating information to the people.
With this, there was better understanding between the colonialists and the colonised Nigerians, especially as there was already at the time growing concern about the country’s independence.
The Special Information Centre later metamorphosed into the Public Relations Department in 1944, when Nigerians were employed to manage it for better and more effective information dissemination.
This could be regarded as the first attempt by government at creating a semblance of government public relations.
However, the first company to establish a public relations department was the United African Company, popularly known as UAC.
The unit was known in 1949 as Information Department.
The Nigerian Railways Corporation, a government parastatal, also established its own unit in 1956 where Dr. Sam Epelle served as its first public relations officer.
The Shell Petroleum Development Company, then known as British Petroleum (BP), created its own outfit in 1969.
The first public relations association was set in Nigeria in 1963 through the efforts of early practitioners like Sam Epelle, Chief Olu Holloway, Alhaji Ade Thani, Adewale Fashanu and Mr. Malafa.
The first umbrella public relations organisation was called Public Relations Association of Nigeria (PRAN).
It was this association that later became the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations (NIPR) in 1969.
The NIPR was given a chartered status through Decree 16 of 1990.
The decree empowers the NIPR to determine what standards of knowledge and skills are to be attained by all persons to be registered as members of the public relations profession.
The decree was signed through the efforts of past presidents of the institute, including Chief Alex Akinyele, Chief Bob Ogbuagu, Mr. Mike Okereke and Alhaji Sabo Mohammed.
The NIPR should be praised for getting its charter when it did before many developed countries.
While the Public Relations Society of America was chartered in 1947, the Chartered Institute of Public Relations, United Kingdom, only obtained its charter status in 2005, about 15 years after the NIPR, while the Public Relations Institute of South Africa, the Public Relations Institute of Australia, the Public Relations Society of India, among others, have not been chartered up to now.
It is important to recognise some of the achievements of NIPR within its short existence despite its various challenges: 103  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS a) obtaining a charter status first in Africa in 1990 and ahead of many European and North American public relations associations; b) hosting the Commonwealth Public Relations Conference in 1983; c) playing an active role in the continental African Public Relations Association and hosting its 2010 conference in Abuja; d) funding a chair in public relations discipline at the University of Nigeria, Enugu Campus; and e) getting the government to evaluate and equate its diploma with a university degree.
NIPR continues to make valuable contributions to the International Public Relations Association and has established a public relations school in Lagos.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify six objects in the NIPR Code of Conduct.
3.2 Public Relations Consultancy in Nigeria The first affiliate of Nigerian Institute of Public Relations is the Public Relations Consultancy Association (PRCAN), which was inaugurated in 1984 by Major General Tunde Idiagbon, the then Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters in the General Mohammadu Buhari’s administration.
Renowned public relations practitioner, Mr. Toye Ogunmorin, was its first president with four consultancy firms as its pioneer members.
These consultancy firms were Bloomel Public Relations Practitioners, Progan Promotions, Good Contact Public Relations Services and Philips, Johnson and Associates.
It is recorded that consultancy public relations actually started in the late sixties and early seventies with the late Ebun Adesioye, Dr. Clarkson Majomi, Chief Dotun Okubajo, Mr. Olu Ademulegu, Otunba Kunle Ojora and Peter Hospdales as the doyens in the practice.
They were however operating their consultancy services individually with no merger between them.
As PRCAN became more vibrant in the early 1990s, some advertising agencies diversified and founded public relations subsidiaries.
These subsidiaries now handle full public relations services or the media relations of corporations, politicians, and government to keep the big public relations spending in-house for these advertising agencies.
For example, Insight Communication Ltd, an advertising agency, established The Quadrant Company, a public relations firm; while Centrespread Advertising Ltd (now CentrespreadFCB), an advertising agency, 104  MAC 427 MODULE 4 established MediaMore, a media planning and public relations firm, among others.
It is believed that the fact that PRCAN was redundant for a long time due to its financial and organisational challenges, many advertising agencies had dominated the public relations industry.
However, from 2000, when PRCAN became more assertive in the Nigerian corporate communication, this position changed.
PRCAN has since inaugurated a capacity-building programme called Mastering Public Relations to enhance professional competence development of its members, and established PR Review, a journal dedicated to promoting best practices in public relations consulting.
Indeed, a research by Amujo, O. C. and Melewar, T. C. (2011) says public relations consultancy in Nigeria today consists of public relations firms with one or two practitioners, small-scale public relations firms comprising about five practitioners, and large-scale public relations firms consisting of more than 10 practitioners.
The one-practitioner or two-practitioner public relations firms sometimes operate mini offices from home, while the small-scale and large-scale public relations firms operate full office complexes.
With the mounting economic crisis of the 1980s and the inability of advertising and sales promotion to deliver expected marketing objectives of the 1990s appropriately, the search for an alternative marketing communication strategy became compelling for the captains of industry, hence public relations counselling became the suitable alternative.
The relative low profile and poor visibility of some public relations firms in Nigeria’s economy today is a source of concern; only a few are big firms.
From all indications, the public relations expenditure in Nigeria, estimated at three billion naira (US$6.3 million) at the end of the 2010 business year, may not be encouraging compared with the big advertising expenditure which The Economist (April 2011 citing MediaReach OMD) put at 98 billion naira (US$646 million) in 2010.
The public relations billing is gradually improving when compared with its scope in the late 1990s.
This relative success may be attributed at least, in part, to the rising profile and assertiveness of PRCAN since 2002.
Aims and Objectives of PRCAN • To raise and maintain standards in the practice of the profession; 105  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS • To provide facilities for government, public bodies, professional associations, industrial concerns, financial institutions, social, cultural and religious organisations; • To improve the relationship of public relations professionals with employers and clients, with government and its agencies, with communications media and their agencies.
3.3 Association of Corporate Affairs Managers in Banks, NIPR Financial Affiliate After the Public Relations Consultants Association of Nigeria (PRCAN), which was recognised as the first affiliate of the NIPR, another affiliate, the Association of Corporate Affairs Managers in Banks (ACAMB), emerged in 1996.
As the case with the former, ACAMB has the objective of evolving and implementing strategies to improve and sustain good image for and within the nation’s banking industry.
Thus, it became the financial affiliate of NIPR.
A notable researcher who has successfully identified the problems of financial public relations in reference to the distress in the banking sector, Abubakar Alhassan, was quoted in 2011, in “In Contemporary challenges impacting on the practice of public relations in Nigeria (1990-2011).” He asserts the idea behind the emergence of ACAMB was first mooted by the corporate affairs managers at the 1992 Bank Directors Seminar organised by Financial Institute Training Centre in Abuja.
Subsequently, discussions were said to have been made informally among some of the Banks’ Public Relations managers in Lagos.
The machinery for formal discussion of the idea was set in motion after a media management seminar held at Badagry also in Lagos in 1996 at which suggestion for the formation of the body was extensively discussed.
Later, a series of meeting were held at Eko Hotel, Lagos, during which the public relations managers of banks agreed to have an association.
They set out the association’s aims and objectives and laid conditions for membership.
Membership of the association is open to all heads of public relations in the banking sub-sector.
In addition, all members of the association must have been duly registered with the NIPR as required by Decree 16 of 1990.
A member, who ceases to be a public relations manager in the banking industry, has automatically relinquished his membership right.
He may however be considered for associate membership.
There is also the Code of Conduct for membership, which states, among others, that erring members whose acts contravene any rule or regulation of the association will be reprimanded.
106  MAC 427 MODULE 4 The first Annual General Assembly of ACAMB was held in September 1996, during which elections were held into offices of the association’s Executive Committee.
The Executives were sworn in during the Committee’s inauguration on 3rd December, 1996.
Those sworn in were Kabir Dangogo,as President; Tunde Thomas, Vice President; Waheed Olagunju, Secretary General; Aduke Gomez (Ms), Financial Secretary; Steve Osuji, Publicity Secretary; and Emeka Adio, as Assistant Secretary General; and five EX-officio members are Abubakar Minjibir, Tony Ede, Toyin Abayomi-Banjo, Gbade A. Zanda and Ogie Eboigbe.
ACAMB also has its constitution and code of conduct.
As a non-profit making body established to foster interaction among public relations managers of the banking sub-sector and advise the leadership of the sub- sector on the public relations implications of policies and development, ACAMB is registered under the Companies and Allied Matters Decree of 1990.
Objectives of ACAMB Some of the objectives of the association include: • to evolve and implement strategies to improve and sustain a good image for the nation’s banking industry; • educate the public on relevant banking laws and policies; • represent the industry as a group on public relations matters; promote and protect the interest of the banking industry as well as carrying out public enlightenment campaigns on behalf of the industry.
• to promote continuous public confidence and trust in the nation’s banking industry and to promote facilities for training the members of the association on banking practice and other related matters.
3.4 Code of Ethics of NIPR The Nigerian Institute of Public Relations’ (NIPR) Code of Conduct, which is backed by a statutory instrument, the Decree 16 of 1990, has 12 articles, including the following: Every member of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations shall: a. respect the moral principles of the “Universal Declaration of Human Rights” and the freedoms entrenched in the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria in the performance of his/her own duties; b. recognise that each person has the right to reach his own judgement by himself; 107  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS c. respect the right of parties in a dispute to explain their respective points of view; d. encourage the free circulation of public information and preserve the integrity of channels of communication; e. put trust and honesty of purpose before all other considerations; f. safeguard the confidences of his present/previous employers or clients; g. represent interests which are not in conflict; h. refuse to enter into any agreement, which requires the attainment of certain results before the payment of professional fees; i. protect the professional reputation or practice of another member, but make it his duty to report unethical behaviour on the part of any member of the institute; j. not seek to displace any other member with his employer or client, except with the mutual agreement of all the parties concerned; k. not operate any front organisation; l. co-operate with other members in upholding and enforcing this code.
These articles are said to be good adaptations of some international codes and the British codes of ethics to suit the Nigerian environment.
The extra-ordinary general meeting of the institute held at the Bristol Hotel in Lagos on January 30, 1981 approved the NIPR Codes of Conduct.
4.0 CONCLUSION Given the recent vibrancy in public relations practice in Nigeria, there are available positive indices that a dynamic and robust public relations industry will rival the advertising industry in future.
The establishment of a public relations school by the NIPR is also a good development that can help build the required body of knowledge and professionalism in the country.
This must be supported by the strict observance of the NIPR Code of Conduct.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed the humble beginnings of public relations before Nigeria’s independence until the setting up of the first public relations association in the country, the Public Relations Association of Nigeria (PRAN) in 1963, and the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations chartered in 1990 with Decree 16 of 1990.
We identified the practitioners that were instrumental to the charter status of NIPR, and discussed NIPR’s affiliates: PRCAN, an association of consultancy PR firms formed in Nigeria, in 1984, although consultancy public relations services had 108  MAC 427 MODULE 4 been in Nigeria earlier; and ACAMB, an association of public relations managers of banks, started in 1996.
We examined the objectives of the NIPR, PRCAN and ACAMB and how these associations have rekindled the practice of the profession in Nigeria.
In particular, we identified the main objects in the article of the NIPR Code of Conduct.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Trace the history of professionalism of public relations, using the NIPR and its affiliates as your guide.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Amujo, O. C. & Melewar, T. C. (2011).
“Contemporary challenges impacting on the practice of public relations in Nigeria (1990- 2011).”PRism 8(1): http://www.prismjournal.org/homepage.html.
109  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 3 CRITICISMS AND CHALLENGES OF ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Criticisms and Challenges of Advertising in Nigeria 3.2 Criticisms and Challenges of Public Relations in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Criticisms of advertising and public relations arising from the issues of trust, deception, and the effects of advertising and public relations messages on the public have continued in Nigeria.
The criticisms of advertising have been more virulent than public relations, and the reasons for this can easily be identified.
Advertising is a bigger industry than public relations in Nigeria today; it preceded public relations, and it is more aggressive in the public space than public relations.
However, both professions are within the eye of the public, especially because they use the instrument of persuasion to achieve their promotional objectives.
In this unit, we shall discuss both the criticisms and challenges of advertising and public relations in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • discuss the criticisms of advertising and public relations in Nigeria • examine the challenges faced by advertising and public relations in Nigeria.
110  MAC 427 MODULE 4 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Criticisms and Challenges of Advertising in Nigeria Criticisms of Advertising The public’s critical attitudes towards advertising can be discussed under three dimensions: a.)
Nature and content of advertising: The public has continued to raise issues on the content and nature of advertising.
The questions concern the aggressive nature of advertising and its contents, which use appeal and persuasion to achieve its objective of selling a product or service.
Because of the nature of advertising, some critics believe that the repetitive nature of advertising sometimes makes it silly and irritating.
Some believe advertising does more than give information about a product or service to potential buyers.
According to this category of people, advertising uses deception and unfair approach to achieve its objectives.
Issues of fears are also raised about the contents of advertising.
Issues are raised by critics whether it is right, for example, for a giant insurance company in Nigeria to use scenes of accidents and loss of close relations to persuade the public to take an insurance policy.
The critics argue that women especially, may be unable to cope with such situations.
While it cannot be denied that repetition is an important character of advertising, it cannot be said that all advertisements aim at deception, rather than to sell a product.
Therefore, this argument cannot be overstretched and or hold for all situations.
b.)
Effects of contents of advertising on the people: Issues are also raised on the effects of advertising on people’s lives.
It is believed that advertising may change people’s lifestyle and values in the society.
This is because they believe that the contents of advertising messages are capable of affecting the minds of the people.
They are also capable of working on the sub-consciousness of the mind and may force people to do what they ordinarily would not have done.
This position predisposes that advertising is so powerful and can make people do both good and bad.
Here, advertising practitioners have argued too that advertising is being given more than its known power.
They insist that advertising does not have a power of its own; it acts through other media, such as television, radio, newspaper and others, and it is only fair that advertising should be judged rightly and not be made a “scapegoat.” The critics have stressed that advertising leads to changes in the people and eventually affect the values 111  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS and culture of the people.
This argument is also stretched further that advertising spurs people to materialism and acquisition, attitudes, which impinge on the values of the society.
It is believed that materialism and endless acquisition of goods are bad for the people as a way of life and as such, every society frowns at it.
The argument that advertising is all-powerful has been faulted.
It is defeated also by the argument against the hypodermic needle effect in communication.
The hypodermic needle effect has since been changed with the development of other theories such as the two-step flow or diffused flow of communication effects on the people.
The reality in mass communication is that human beings are affected by all sources of media open to them.
It has also been proved by some researchers that public models in films affect changes in the society than advertising messages.
c. Economic effects of advertising: Here, critics talk of advertising resulting in higher prices of goods and services.
It is believed that advertising is not free.
It costs millions to produce advertisements.
Therefore, the producer naturally passes the cost of advertising to the consumers of goods and services.
However, advertising practitioners have dismissed this argument.
They say advertising, in fact, leads to reduced prices at the end.
This is because with advertising, more people become aware of the goods and services and eventually make decisions to buy.
As many people buy, the producer produces more and gains from the benefits of large-scale production.
This eventually leads to lower cost of production and prices of the units.
Indeed, the debate and the dimensions of the controversies and criticisms of advertising are inconclusive.
It is ongoing, because all the arguments against advertising can be disproved too.
The truth of the matter is while the regulatory organisations continue to improve on their activities, the advertising industry would be better for it.
This will not only remove deception and manipulations in advertising, other challenges in the way of an enduring practice of the profession would cease to exist.
Challenges of Advertising Practice in Nigeria We have established that advertising is an industry in Nigeria whose contribution to national income runs into billions.
Its operations and activities in Nigeria are faced with some challenges.
Some of these are: a.)
the Nigerian populace are by far now more enlightened and educated that they have become conscious buyers and consumers of products and services.
The Nigerian marketing environment is 112  MAC 427 MODULE 4 no longer in favour of the sellers, but buyers and consumers.
This poses a challenge for both production of goods and advertising regarding the satisfaction of the needs of people.
b.)
in the same vein, many markets of products and services in Nigeria have reached maturity and saturation stages on their product life cycle.
This way, there is stiff competition in the market of these products.
For example, it is increasingly getting very difficult to identify the unique selling point (USP) of detergents and toothpastes in the country today, whereas this is an important factor in successful advertising campaign.
This is a big challenge to advertising practitioners.
c.) the practitioners in advertising are not from the outer space.
They are from this world, live among the people, and are affected by the social and economic changes in the society.
They also have individual behaviour and personal interests.
Thus, the contact persons in the client’s organisation can have personal interest which may vary from the corporate goals.
When this happens, the agency and advertiser’s relationship could be difficult to manage.
d.) the choice of relevant agency for a particular job may also prove a difficult task.
This is especially if there are other interests beyond the professional and competence considerations.
Agencies that may not have the necessary skills and competence can be given a job because of their connections with the advertiser even when they cannot fully perform such jobs.
e.) the agency income has remained on 15 per cent since the advent of advertising.
This has continued even when inflation has spiralled and worsened the purchasing power of the currency.
Agencies have had to beef up their income creatively in the industry by performing other allied jobs for clients.
f.) advertising is a service industry where both sexes mix freely.
Advertising traces fashion trends and uses beauty for effects and glamour.
It is not impossible for amorous relationship to creep in among practitioners.
This may affect the operations and activities of the agency and its deliverables to the client.
g.) regrettably, some agencies engage in what could be described as espionage activities against other agencies, especially when they are pitching for jobs.
They may use unfair methods to get undue advantage by stealing creative ideas, designs, artwork, films and proposals.
h.) the media owners also face challenges of competition, especially when big accounts such as Coca-Cola, 7UP, Shell and other big companies are involved.
However, the problem has been lack of adequate data on newspaper sales and coverage for agencies and advertisers’ planning and decision-making.
The sooner this is done properly by the media in Nigeria, the earlier this problem of 113  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS unhealthy rivalry among media houses for big accounts would be reduced.
i.)
the fear that an advertiser may stop a big account is also a source of worry for agencies.
This does not make for mutual relationship in agency and advertiser relationship.
j.)
agencies do involve in poaching of jobs and skilled staff among one another.
This could be painful, especially if such agencies depend solely on such accounts or the poached staff were trained by the agencies.
k.) it is a Herculean task to build an agency from the scratch these days in Nigeria.
When small agencies cannot get the required financial muscle to finance new jobs, the possibility of the agency dying is real.
The fact that only big agencies dominate the industry also worsens the situation.
This is a great handicap for smaller agencies.
l.) there is still a shortage of competent staff in the industry.
This may explain the rampant incidence of staff poaching among agencies.
m.) direct media buying and selling which leaves out the practitioners is a big problem in the advertising industry.
We have identified this as one of the problems also to the operations of the APCON in an earlier unit.
n.) petty jealousy also exists among agencies and practitioners, especially over big accounts.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify the main criticisms of advertising in Nigeria.
3.2 Criticisms and Challenges of Public Relations in Nigeria i.
The practitioners of public relations are sometimes faced with a situation of choosing between personal gains and obeying the ethics of their profession.
When this happens, it is often found out that many public relations practitioners prefer to go for personal gains.
This affects the growth of the profession in the eye of the public at large.
ii.
The intangible nature of public relations products is usually a source of criticism because activities of public relations are not easy to measure.
They are about changing the attitude of the public towards an organisation.
Because of this challenge, critics believe that public relations practitioners are out to spin, manipulate, or spread propaganda, deception and half-truths.
This position is worsened by the fact that many people in Nigeria believe in physical appearances, rather than the intangible but effective operations of public relations; therefore they tend to 114  MAC 427 MODULE 4 criticise public relations practitioners for contributing so little to the organisation, while taking so much from it.
iii.
The success of public relations depends on building favourable public opinion.
Building a favourable public opinion especially for an organisation does not come easily because changing people’s attitude does not come too quickly.
i. Stretching the ethical question, critics say sometimes public relations practitioners do some jobs against the interest of the nation and their conscience.
In rare cases when public relations practitioners find the objective of an organisation at variance with public good or against the interest of their country, some people find it difficult to quit such jobs.
This is about conscience, and in such circumstances, some public relations practitioners have gone against the demand of the ethics of their profession and their conscience, probably because of their responsibilities.
ii.
Democracy cannot function properly without the support of public relations.
Since democracy is government of the people for the people, the electorate requires knowledge of how government functions and so, there is the need for public relations to educate the people about their rights and privileges.
Here in Nigeria, judging from our experience, public relations practitioners are found wanting in this crucial area.
iii.
Similarly, lobbying is an accepted practice in democracies all over the world.
However, this seems to have been grossly abused in Nigeria, especially in the unquantifiable high level of fraud between the Executive arm of the government and the legislature, which is largely engendered by public relations activities.
The challenges of public relations in Nigeria are also real.
Some of them are identified hereunder: a) Corporate Nigeria is under-served by public relations: This relates to the low activities of public relations in Nigeria compared to the country’s vast human and natural resources.
Indeed, NIPR records indicate that there are over 6000 public relations practitioners in public employment and private services.
While this may be said to be huge, it comes to nothing if one considers thousands of blue-chip national and multinational corporations in oil and gas, telecommunications, food and beverages, mines and power, banking and insurance, textile, automobile, manufacturing and others, which are without public relations practitioners.
b) Lack of professionalism: The problem of professionalism in public relations is multi-dimensional.
It reflects not only in shortage of skilled professionals, because this is the end-result of 115  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS other challenges.
Some graduates are in public relations without the relevant qualification, besides the fact that the curriculum of many schools are inadequate to produce competent public relations practitioners who are proficient in writing, editing, photography, media, or production of publications such as news releases, advertising copy, speeches, corporate magazine and newsletter.
c) Poor recognition for public relations practitioner: The late entry of public relations into the curricula of Nigerian universities, polytechnics and colleges is affecting its professional recognition.
It was not until 1992 that the NIPR endowed an MSc d) Problem of clearly defining public relations role in organisations: This stems from the relationship or interface among public relations, marketing and advertising.
Some organisations cannot identify where the relationship begins and ends.
They therefore tend to regard public relations as product publicity.
In other words, public relations would only involve entertainment of guests, contributing to charity and staging of anniversary celebrations.
Rather than seeing public relations as management function to advise and contribute to policies because of their public relations implications.
e) Problem of appraising and measuring activities of public relations: There is the challenge of measuring results of public relations activities, especially because they are about change in attitudes.
Of course, we have said above that attitude change does not come soon quickly.
f) Poor performance of some public relations practitioners: Due to the mass entry of non-professionals into public relations owing to the dearth of skilled manpower, a certain level of poor performance in the industry is noticeable.
This has not only denied recognition for the profession, it has reduced the urge by some organisations to see the continued need for public relations practitioners.
g) Lack of adherence to the Code of Conduct: Even though there are apparent violations of the NIPR Code of Conduct as stipulated by Decree 16 of 1990, the NIPR has not been serious about prosecution of culprits.
For example, the NIPR charter stipulates the acceptable qualifications such as an NIPR diploma, CAM diploma, IPR diploma, Business Education and Examination Council (BEEC) public relations diploma or higher national diploma, BA, BSc, MA, MSc, MBA and PhD in public relations or mass communication/communication arts for registering practitioners.
Initially, many of the earliest practitioners in Nigeria obtained a CAM (Communications Advertising and Marketing Education 116  MAC 427 MODULE 4 Foundation) diploma from the UK, while a few possessed degrees in mass communication, social science and humanities in the 1960s and 1970s.
The majority of practitioners admitted through age and experience in the heyday of NIPR did not make an effort to undertake professional development in public relations through training programmes, sitting for NIPR diploma exams or obtaining postgraduate degrees in public relations.
Yet they are dealt with by the NIPR even when a clear case of violation of the charter can be established.
h) Poor membership register: The NIPR membership register has not been fully updated, which hindered the ability to state the total number and the full character of practitioners precisely.
Although encouraging progress is said to have been made by the NIPR in membership accreditation lately.
i) Low visibility of PR firms in Nigeria: The relative low profile and poor visibility of some public relations firms in Nigeria’s economy today is a challenge for PR practice.
At once, this reflects in the public relations expenditure in Nigeria, estimated at three billion naira (US$6.3 million) at the end of the 2010 business year, compared to advertising expenditure which we earlier said was (April 2011 citing MediaReach OMD) put at 98 billion naira (US$646 million) in 2010.
j.)
Initial dormancy of PRCAN: A possible reason for the state of the public relations economy in Nigeria could be attributed to the fact that PRCAN was initially dormant in the economy.
This gave room for the big advertising agencies in the country to take up big public relations accounts.
k.) Many public relations practitioners were in government ministries: Available evidence in NIPR’s register shows that majority of practitioners work for government.
The structure of the civil service became more like a disservice to the growth of public relations.
4.0 CONCLUSION A proper understanding of the socio-economic environment of Nigeria is required by new advertising and public relations professionals to make a success of their professions.
This is why we have dealt so much on the criticisms and the challenges of advertising and public relations practice in Nigeria, in order to show the peculiar environment of the milieu of practice.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have identified some of the criticisms and challenges of both the advertising and public relations professions in Nigeria.
We have 117  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS also exhaustively raised the issues and controversies around these criticisms.
We have also suggested some remedies to these challenges.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the challenges of advertising and public relations in the country.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajala, V. (2001).
Public Relations: In Search of Professional Excellence.
Ibadan: Afrika-Link Books.
Amujo, O. C. & Melewar, T. C. (2011).
Contemporary Challenges Impacting on the Practice of Public Relations in Nigeria (1990- 2011).
Bel-Molokwu, J.
(2000).
“Principles of Advertising in Nigeria, APCON.” PRism 8(1): http://www.prismjournal.org/homepage.html.
Bel-Molokwu J. et al.
(1997).
Advertising in Nigeria, APCON.
Fadipe, S. (2002): Advertising Practice with Nigerian Orientation.
Lagos: Christ Publishers.
118  MAC 427 MODULE 5 MODULE 5 SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, TRUTH AND DECEPTION IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1 Social Responsibility in Advertising and Public Relations Unit 2 Truth and Deception in Advertising and Public Relations Unit 3 Origin and Concept of Consumerism Unit 4 How Consumerism Operates in Nigeria, Its Challenges and Future UNIT 1 SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept and Inherent Reasons for Social Responsibility 3.2 Categories of Social Responsibility 3.3 Social Responsibility of Advertising and Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is concerned with all the issues pertaining to social responsibility in all its ramifications.
You will be introduced to the concept of social responsibility as a tool by organisations to undertake causes in the public interest; inherent reasons for social responsibility, and social responsibility in relation to advertising and public relations, including their identified harmful effects on the people and suggested remedies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept and inherent reasons for social responsibility • identify the main categories of social responsibility • discuss social responsibility in relation to advertising and public relations.
119  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept and Reasons for Social Responsibility Social responsibility (CSR) has become a big concern in modern corporate management, as well as in advertising and public relations today.
This is because of the continuing realisation by organisations that long-term survival and profitability depend on how much they serve the public interest.
This is demonstrated not only in producing good product or service, but also on how much they care for their environment, society and the people.
According to the Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopaedia (2009), “corporate social responsibility, which can also be called corporate responsibility, corporate citizenship, responsible business and social responsibility, is a concept whereby organisations consider the interest of the society by taking responsibility for the impact of their activities on customers, suppliers, employees, shareholders, communities and stakeholders as well as the environment.
This obligation is seen to extend beyond the statutory obligation to comply with legislation, and sees organisations voluntarily taking further steps to improve the quality of life for the local community and society at large.” This definition of the concept emphasises that organisations take up causes for the society essentially to mitigate the impact of their activities on the people.
However, the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) stresses the ethical dimension in the definition of social responsibility, and thus brings into the concept the idea of obligation, compulsion and duty as well as continuity and commitment.
It says it is “the continuing commitment by business to behave ethically and contribute to economic development while improving the quality of life of the workforce and the families as well as the social community and the world at large.” For Tim Sanders, author of the book Saving the World at Work, social responsibility should be viewed as a corporate opportunity.
He went further to introduce the advertising and public relations functions in the concept of social responsibility.
He says it “is a hybrid Public Relations/branding program that attempts to convert compliance into goodwill,” adding: “Corporate social responsibility attempts to align corporate needs (profits, revenue, growth) with social needs (people, community, planet).
CSR is a compulsory exercise designed to limit liability, boost morale and add to the branding story of the company.” Sanders explained that it is a deliberate inclusion of public interest into corporate decision-making and the honouring of a triple bottom line: “People, Planet and Profit.” He says he has no doubt that “a CSR policy 120  MAC 427 MODULE 5 in which corporate responsibility projects are used to advertise the company would be excellent.” Indeed, we can immediately draw certain inferences from these definitions above, particularly regarding some of the inherent reasons of social responsibility.
Inherent Reasons for Social Responsibility i.
Social responsibility has a large bandwidth of all activities involving all good causes undertaken by organisations for the society in order to promote development; such causes include both areas for which their activities have impact and others for which they do not have impact.
For example, Cadbury Nigeria Plc, which manufactures beverages, sponsors children to overseas summer holidays and gives scholarship yearly; these are causes which can be described as having indirect relationship to the company’s core business, except to target brand loyalty through the young students on the long run.
ii.
Social responsibility is also aimed at promoting on the long run, goodwill for the organisations among the public, where the public sees organisations as responsible corporate citizens.
iii.
It is also about bringing ethics or morality into business, thus emphasising the obligation and the compulsion in it for the overall good of the stakeholders in an organisation - customers, suppliers, employees, shareholders, communities and others.
Again, it is predicated also on doing all aspects of organisations’ business in conformity with the best practices, right from efficiency of products or services and effective and timely delivery of the products or services to the consumer, and through truthful and socially responsible advertising, merchandising, storage, publicity and public relations.
iv.
It is also usually heavy in sectors of the economy where competition is high, thus it is aimed at prolonging the life cycle of a product through creating brand loyalty.
This is because many products or services in such competitive sectors have reached maturity stage in their life cycle.
For example, in the Nigerian banking sector today, a critical examination of their product offerings shows that many of them are almost the same or similar.
The only difference being in the names they give to them.
The ‘UBA direct’ in UBA is just the same online banking service like the ‘Diamond online’ or ‘GT connect’ in Diamond bank and Guaranty Trust Bank respectively.
When one bank tells you they have introduced chip and pin technology to their ATM cards, before you know it, other banks would join.
So, it is difficult for 121  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS a customer to decide which bank to choose, since they appear to be the same.
Many of the banks are now more involved in corporate social responsibility activities, such as providing scholarships, sponsoring educational trips, donating food items and clothing to orphanages, sponsoring sports competitions and so on.
The belief is that this option would build public goodwill for these banks and would affect profitability on the long run than many direct advertisements on CNN and in the Nigerian media.
This is not, however, to say that the banks are still not heavily involved in direct advertising today.
Compared to the social responsibility activities of the telecommunications giants, such as MTN and Glo, the banks still have a long way to go in this area of social responsibility.
v. Social responsibility is a way of actually mitigating the impact of the activities of organisations on the people and the environment as identified in one of the definitions above.
Such impact comes from production of goods and the intended and unintended effects of advertising, promotion and public relations on the people, which are considered harmful to their values, norms and culture.
In particular, we can also put the heavy spending by oil companies due to environmental damage caused by their activities in the host communities within this framework.
3.2 Categories of Social Responsibility We have said that the spectrum of social responsibility activities is wide.
However, we shall attempt to categorise them here.
These include: • Enterprise: these are activities supporting and developing initiatives to nurture budding entrepreneurs and boost enterprise.
They include corporate organisations’ activities to develop the skills of young Nigerians in small-scale enterprises.
• Activities relating to bringing fresh impetus and values into the lives of young people, especially students in all categories, whether tertiary, secondary and primary schools.
This also includes building classrooms, libraries, providing computers and other equipment by organisations in order to aid learning.
• Arts and Culture: providing assistance for a range of artistic activities and bringing communities together, especially during festivals.
• Environment: This is an expansive area of activities for oil companies.
It includes direct involvement in cleaning the environment because of the damage caused by industrial activities and encouraging efforts to safeguard the environment and improve the quality of life of the people.
It also includes 122  MAC 427 MODULE 5 pollution control projects and various measures taken in adhering to Federal Government standard.
• Product Lines: this involves not producing dangerous products and maintaining good product standard that are environmentally safe.
• Marketing Practices: this involves responding to consumer complaints, setting fair prices, maintaining fair advertising contents and truthful public relations and promotional activities.
• Employee Service: this involves training, counselling, granting allowance for the welfare of employees.
• Corporate Philanthropy: this entails contributing to community development activities and initiating social projects.
• Employee Safety and Health: this involves setting effective work environment policies, accidents safeguard food and medical facilities.
3.3 Social Responsibility of Advertising and Public Relations From an overview of our discussions so far in this unit, we can see that social responsibility activities are an interface between advertising and public relations in today’s marketing communication.
Many scholars are even still not clearly decided whether social responsibility should be a function of advertising or public relations.
While some say, it is still part of selling and, therefore, an advertising function, others believe since most of social responsibility activities are not paid for by the consumers, social responsibility is a public relations function targeted at building mutual understanding between an organisation and its publics.
What more, advertising is paid for by an identified sponsor, whereas most of the times, the sponsors of social responsibility activities are not identified.
However, Bittner (2003), emphasising social responsibility as part of advertising, identifies public service and social responsibility advertising, or “prestige” advertising as “support for non-profit causes and organizations.” He says time and space in the media, whether in the print, broadcast or billboards are given free in order to promote the public interest, such as for Red Cross, emergency services, safe driving, clean environment, preservation of reserves and conservation of energy.
Many of these are undertaken by non-profit organisations, who are sponsored free by other organisations who want to associate with them and serve public interest.
Alabi, F.O.
and Ntukepo, S.S. both of the Department of Communication & Media Studies, Ajayi Crowther University.
Oyo, Oyo State, focused more on community relations aspect of social responsibility, and insist that social responsibility is part of public relations.
While working on the impact of Chevron’s social responsibility activities on three oil communities in the Niger Delta, the 123  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS researchers said corporate social responsibility cannot be divorced from community relations, which they say is an aspect of public relations.
According to them, community relation is “a series of mutually beneficial business partnerships with one or more stakeholders, which enhance the company’s reputation as a good corporate citizen.” The researchers, however, stressed that community relations is a branch of public relations that has emerged from what used to be referred to as corporate social responsibility.
They further explained that “community relations is a problem solving process and this involves strategic analysis of the problem, planning, taking action, and evaluating programme effectiveness, inadequacies, or outright failures.” Based on this position, they argued, “Community relations would encompass various methods a company uses to establish and maintain a mutual beneficial relationship with the host community.
Thus, the objective of community relations is the acceptance by an organisation of a civic responsibility to its community, including its workforce, in order to build long term support, loyalty, and general goodwill.” We shall not dwell too much on this interface, since definitions of social responsibility above all indicate that it has a lot to do with both advertising and public relations.
We shall now discuss the social responsibility of advertising and public relations in performing their roles in the society.
Indeed, we note that advertising and public relations are involved with organisations on two planes.
Firstly, advertising and public relations practitioners are involved with the advertisers’ products or services (from making, packaging, and eventual sale); second, they are also involved in the messages they give the media and the public about the products or services as well as on the organisation generally.
We have exhaustively dealt with the roles and functions of advertising and public relations in our earlier units.
We may only need to remind ourselves that both advertising and public relations are not only powerful communication media, but also vital components of the nation’s economic system; vehicles of financing mass media, both are aesthetic and cultural institutions, professional and business management institutions that employ large people.
However, we need to also note quickly that many critics of advertising and public relations insist that these roles and functions of advertising and public relations are practically not neutral.
They believe that advertising and public relations do have both positive and harmful effects on the public and the society generally.
They say, this area is, in fact, where the question of social responsibility of advertising and public relations comes properly into focus.
124  MAC 427 MODULE 5 Essentially, for our purpose here, we can streamline all the various roles and functions of advertising and public relations in two: to inform and persuade, whether to sell a product or service, or to build favourable public image for an organisation.
The Oxford English Dictionary defines persuasion as: “to induce by argument, advice, to bring to any particular opinion, to cause to believe, to convince, to influence the mind.” Based on this definition, one would be tempted to believe that advertising and public relations, operating on the premise of persuasion, can have both positive and harmful effects on the people and the society.
This also presupposes that advertising and public relations can be socially responsible or otherwise.
We can now discuss some of the identified harmful effects of advertising and public relations in the society, since we have earlier treated the benefits, and therefore the positive effects of advertising and public relations in the society.
Harmful Effects of Advertising and Public Relations a) Economic Harms of Advertising and Public Relations: These arise when advertising and public relations betray their roles as sources of information by misrepresenting or withholding relevant facts from the people.
Indeed, it is argued that sometimes the information function of media can be subverted by advertisers and the management pressure on publication or programmes may not allow questions that might embarrass or inconvenient an organisation, especially during a press conference.
This is in spite of whether these questions may be essential or important for the society and the people.
For advertising, in particular, some scholars say more often than not, it is not only used to simply inform, but to persuade and motivate — to convince people to act in certain ways: buy certain products or services, patronize certain institutions, and the like.
The scholars say these are the areas where particular abuses can and do occur.
Similarly, certain brand-related promotional activities can raise serious problem of choice of goods.
There may be only little differences among similar products, yet advertising and promotions may try to induce people to buy one than the other.
This has a tendency of making people to act irrationally or on impulse.
This not only denies them the right to freely choose, but also wastes their hard earned money on something they really may not need.
125  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS In addition, in public relations, “gimmick,” which can be described as publicity stunt or trick, is justified when used with discretion, and especially when there is a serious objective to be achieved.
b) Harms of Political Advertising and Promotions: Advertising and public relations can support the processes of democracy, but at the same time, they are capable of also obstructing it.
This situation can occur when the costs of advertising and public relations limit political competition to only wealthy candidates or parties, as we now have in Nigeria today.
This may make the political office-seekers to trade off or compromise their integrity and independence by over-dependence on special interests for funds.
There are also other instances where political advertising and promotional packaging of candidates help to distort information and records against a good candidate.
This way, advertising and public relations obstruct the democratic process, instead of being vehicles for honest expositions of candidates' views and records.
Thus, advertising and public relations become instruments for base instincts, selfishness, bias and hostility toward others, to racial and ethnic prejudice and the likes, rather than to a reasoned sense of justice and the good of all.
Here too, we can add that sometimes in Nigeria, it is observed that the public may find it difficult to differentiate between public relations activities in support of political parties and their candidates and propaganda.
Indeed, we can define propaganda simply as “an instrument of politics, a power for social control.” The function of propaganda is not essentially only to convert.
Rather, it is also to attract followers and keep them in line by blurring any other human activity, so that the environment is changed to absorb only the identified viewpoint of an organization or a political movement.
Thus, propaganda can be seen as a kind of persuasion, which emphasises self interest, where facts are distorted or falsified in order to achieve the purpose of that self interest.
This exercise causes political injuries to the public, because public relations employed for this kind of purpose as is common in Nigeria, is not only deceptive, but also harmful to the voters, the public and building of enduring democratic institutions.
c) Cultural Harms of Advertising and Public Relations: A lot of harm is done also by advertising and promotional activities, which encourage and glamorise foreign culture against our local culture.
These activities exert a corrupting influence upon our culture and cultural values.
This eventually induces destructive patterns of consumption in the people.
In Nigeria, unrestrained foreign consumption of goods and services from the developed countries has not only impacted negatively on our culture, but 126  MAC 427 MODULE 5 also on our economy and the political system.
A lot of foreign exchange goes to satisfy the importation of these foreign goods and services.
Besides the fact that we are losing our history and culture, we are also losing our money, while developing other nations.
It is painful that these corrupting influences of foreign culture have reflected also in some of our films and the lifestyles of our models.
Also neglected in this fray are the educational and social needs of certain segments of the populace, including the very young, the very old, and the poor— who do not match the demographic patterns (age, education, income, habits of buying and consuming, and so on) of the kinds of audiences advertisers want to reach.
It is also true that some kind of advertising and promotional activities lead to dangerous stereotyping of some groups, placing them at a disadvantage compared to others.
For example, women have become objects of exploitation for sex appeal by advertising.
This tends to deny women their specific natural gifts of feminine insight, compassion, understanding and love.
These are virtues, which have contributed immensely to civilisation.
Certain advertisements like that of ready-made garments, fabrics, cosmetics, leather goods, jewelries, and so on, mostly feature celebrities and portray highly westernised and ostentatious type of lifestyle.
People often cannot relate themselves with these advertisements.
It definitely affects the mindset of the people, leaving them with the feeling of inferiority complex in front of those who can afford the kind of lifestyles portrayed in certain advertisements.
d) Moral and Religious Harms of Advertising and Public Relations: We have said advertising and public relations can be used positively or negatively.
When it is distasteful, deceptive and untrue, it is against the moral standards of the society.
Critics say sometimes advertising can be vulgar and appeals to such motives as envy, status seeking and lust, and that it is common today for some advertisers to consciously exploit the content of a morbid, perverse, pornographic nature to deliver their messages.
Definitely, this has negative effects on their audience and the people generally.
Sometimes, advertising tries to promote products by shocking its audience with visuals which run against the norms of the society, such as some advertisements of insurance companies.
In the same vein, the position of some religions, especially Christianity is clear against use of contraceptives, abortion and harmful products, which advertising and public relations promote for some organisations.
Contrarily, advertising and public relations promote artificial birth control, 127  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS “safe sex” and similar practices, which are contrary to traditional values and society.
Of course, discussions about the social responsibility of advertising and public relations would remain with us for a long time.
It is true that any form of mass communication has effects on the people and, thus, should have a social responsibility attached to their activities.
Therefore, advertising and public relations, which are multi-dimensional communication, should not be exceptions.
The big question has been whether advertising and public relations fulfil their social responsibility or whether advertising and public relations organisations are fulfilling their responsibility only to their clients and their staff.
As we have said earlier, both advertising and public relations fulfil their social responsibilities in many ways.
It is within this context that we group all the range of items we identified within social responsibility above.
Social responsibility issues or public service advertising tends to focus on social issues like national integration, pollution, family planning, care and concern for the aged and disabled, awareness campaigns against smoking, drugs, alcohol, and so on.
The primary purpose of this type of advertising and promotions, we have said, is to educate the masses through effective messages.
These messages deal with ideas for public good, not sell products.
For Keith Reinhard, Chairman, Chief Executive of DDB Worldwide, a global advertising agency, because advertising “is good at selling things, it is a force for good.
It sparks the free market system by making choices known, and by making choices affordable through the economies of scale.
It also makes choices better by stimulating competition which in turn leads to product improvements.” He explains that advertising also brings every citizen endless varieties of free information and enjoyment through paid sponsorship of media content.
He alluded to a special point here with respect to children’s programming and children’s advertising, saying, “if there were no children’s advertising there’d be no children’s programming and kids”, which is obviously true.
“In addition, when we do it right, advertising itself can lift the human spirit.
We can do this with humour with music with art, or with catchy slogans people like to repeat.
Advertising has been called the art of the masses—lifting spirits while lifting sales.” Whatever the arguments, advertising and public relations, have remained, targets of attacks regarding their social responsibility.
These controversies would remain with us for a long time.
However, efforts of the regulatory bodies and professional associations in advertising and public relations would go a long way to make practitioners to be socially 128  MAC 427 MODULE 5 responsible.
In particular, we need to stress that both the APCON and the NIPR should take the lead in ensuring practitioners of both professions abide by the tenets of social responsibility.
The APCON and the NIPR Charter are rich in terms of regulations of advertising and public relations, as well as their respective codes of professional conducts.
They should be well applied, not merely existing as just official documents.
For example, the APCON provides for what it calls essence of good advertising in Section 2 of its code.
It reads that all advertisements in Nigeria should: i. be legal, decent, honest, truthful and respectful of Nigeria’s culture ii.
be prepared with a high sense of social responsibility and should not show disregard for the interest of consumers and the wider Nigerian society iii.
conform to the principles of fair competition generally accepted in business, and fair comment expected in human communication.
iv.
Enhance public confidence in advertising.
Going through the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations’ (NIPR) Code of Conduct, which is backed by a statutory instrument, the Decree 16 of 1990, we have 12 articles, all signifying the importance of being legal, honest, truthful and socially responsible and observance of the attitude of fair competition by public relations professionals.
We can also run the 12 articles as follows: Every member of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations shall: a. respect the moral principles of the “Universal Declaration of Human Rights” and the freedoms entrenched in the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria in the performance of his/her own duties; b. recognise that each person has the right to reach his own judgement by himself; c. respect the right of parties in a dispute to explain their respective points of view; d. encourage the free circulation of public information and preserve the integrity of channels of communication; e. put trust and honesty of purpose before all other considerations; f. safeguard the confidences of his present/previous employers or clients; g. represent interests which are not in conflict; 129  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS h. refuse to enter into any agreement, which requires the attainment of certain results before the payment of professional fees; i. protect the professional reputation or practice of another member, but make it his duty to report unethical behaviour on the part of any member of the institute; j. not seek to displace any other member with his employer or client, except with the mutual agreement of all the parties concerned; k. not operate any front organisation; l. co-operate with other members in upholding and enforcing this code.
Based on the import of both the APCON and the NIPR codes, it is necessary to restate that what is particularly needed in both professions to ensure social responsibility, and avoid deception and mitigate the effects of harmful promotions is for all regulatory organisations and laws to be more active and effective.
This is the only way to put these laws into effect and we can therefore expect to get a saner atmosphere in the advertising and public relations industries.
Luckily, all the laws give room for amendments, so loopholes that are discovered during the operations of the laws can still be amended.
4.0 CONCLUSION The practice of social responsibility is a subject of much debate and criticisms.
Proponents argue that there is a strong business case for it, because organisations stand to benefit in multiple ways by operating with a perspective broader and longer than their own immediate, short- term profits motive.
Some critics, however, argue that social responsibility is a distraction from the fundamental economic role of business.
Often quoted in this group is the free market philosopher, Milton Friedman, who described social responsibility as fundamentally subversive, writes that corporate responsibility is the pursuit of individual interest in an unrestrained market.
Overall, social responsibility has been expanding with almost all organisations applying it as a tool of business, because of its effects on their organisations.
It is not out of place to insist that advertising and public relations would embrace it fully, first, as a way of providing support for their clients, and second, as a means of mitigating the impacts of their promotional activities on the people and doing good business.
130  MAC 427 MODULE 5 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed social responsibility extensively.
We have defined the concept, identified the inherent reasons for social responsibility and categories of social responsibility.
We have also dealt with the issue of social responsibility in advertising and public relations, identifying their harmful effects of the people and society.
We have also insisted that these are the existence of these harmful effects are the justification that advertising and public relations must be socially responsible.
We again gave relevant areas of the APCON code and the NIPR code that can make for saner advertising and public relations industries respectively.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How can advertising and public relations be socially responsible?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayantayo, K. (2005).
International Journal of African and African American Studies, Volume IV, No.
1 Dominick, J. R. (2009).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Reinhard, K. (2005).
“Advertising Industry's Commitment to Social Responsibility.” A lecture presented at AEF's Annual Symposium.
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopaedia (2009) 131  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 2 TRUTH AND DECEPTION IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What Truth Means and Its Relationship With Morality 3.2 Relating Truth to Advertising and Public Relations 3.3 Deceptive Advertising and Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is a clear relationship between truth and advertising, and truth and public relations.
It is not unusual for some people to think that since advertising and public relations are to inform and persuade people and because they are armed with the right of free speech, truth has no place in their professions.
This is far from the truth.
Because communication and language used by advertising and public relations practitioners are tools of the society, this makes them to be guided by the rules and norms of the society too.
Advertising and public relations are activities performed in the society; thus, they should be subject to the rules of the society, including truth.
Providing this essential link of truth, and therefore morality, to advertising and public relations is the subject of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the concept of truth and morality • examine how truth and morality are relevant to advertising and public relations • identify what constitutes deception in advertising and public relations and steps that can be taken to ensure that they operate by truth.
132  MAC 427 MODULE 5 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What Truth Means and Its Relationship with Morality Truth is described as an action or statement or a situation in agreement with reality; a statement that it is actual, accurate and in conformity with the known facts.
Thus, we can say that a true statement, action, or situation is one that is according to the established facts or known facts by the society.
A truthful statement is not based on imagination, but facts of the case in point.
One of the philosophical principles, which we examined earlier, the categorical imperative philosophical principle by the German philosopher, Immanuel Kant, becomes very relevant here.
This is because the philosophical principle insists on the absoluteness of truth to establish whether an action is true or false.
According the categorical imperative philosophical principle, “what is right for one is right for all.” Thus, to measure if one’s behaviour is right, Kant suggests that we have to act according to the rules we would want to see being universally applied.
According to the principle, categorical means the rules are “unconditional,” that is under any circumstances.
In line with Kant’s ethical principle, therefore, a true behaviour is right no matter what the circumstances and consequences.
Accordingly, the categorical imperative says the examination of the individual’s conscience is crucial in any behaviour.
That is, whatever action performed by an individual, your conscience will tell you whether it is a right or wrong action.
Kant stretches this further that saying “if you feel guilty or uneasy after performing an action, you have probably violated your conscience, because your action is not in line with the known or established behaviour by the society.” Applying this specifically to advertising and public relations, therefore, any untruth or deception in the product advertised, whether in packaging or the physical product, or untruth or deception about the promotion of an organisation or idea, service is wrong and unacceptable under the categorical imperative ethical principle.
This is essentially because it is against one’s conscience as professionals and makes one feel guilty that one’s action is not in line with the truth or in agreement with the established and known facts in the society.
The inference we can deduce from this analogy above is that everyone has an obligation, a duty in whatever he does to tell the truth in line with the demand of being seen as morally upright in the society.
One needs to tell the truth to and act in line with one’s conscience; this is the only way 133  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS to free one’s conscience.
This, therefore, leads us to considering truth or being truthful as a moral virtue by man in the society.
Advertising and public relations as activities of man can be assessed under this prism; that is, we can assess and know whether advertising or public relation activities are truthful or deceptive, and therefore morally upright or in line with established facts in the society.
Truth and Morality Truth is a moral obligation.
An obligation is a moral duty, something that is governed by compulsion; something we must do without choice.
This is what we have said above.
Morality, we may need to repeat here, is the principle of behaviour, which guides us towards the right or best action in a situation.
Morality is concerned with rules of ethical conduct.
It refers to certain general standards of behaviour, which is regarded by a community as virtuous or upright in character.
Therefore, truth being a moral conduct, every member of a society must do it as of duty.
Of course, truth is a compulsory moral duty or obligation because the society considers it a virtue.
Truth is right or good, not because an individual likes it, but because the society sets it as an obligation to do for every member at all times, and in all situations and under any circumstances; not when he likes.
The society demands for truth from every member as a moral duty to maintain a serene society devoid of crises and controversies from its members.
Moreover, a truthful person in a society is seen as upright and having integrity and a deceitful man is likewise blamed and derided for lack of integrity.
While a truthful man propels the society to progress, a deceitful man hinders the society’s growth.
Kehinde (2005) identifies many situations in real life that illustrate when one is expected to be truthful, such as: oath-taking, oath-giving, statement on oath, promising oath, bond, covenant contract, marriage vow, sacred pledge and solemn declaration.
The researcher explains that in these circumstances, it is expected that “every word must be truthful, that is, it must be devoid of falsehood or deceit.” According to him, truth is a moral mandate in any given assignment, including advertising and public relations.
To stress the value that a society puts on truth, the saying says, “Honesty (that is being truthful) is the best policy.” Every religion, be it Christianity, Islam or African Traditional Religion, emphasises the virtue of truth and it remains the bedrock of all activities of the faithful.
Indeed, a truthful person is dependable, reliable and honourable in all that he does; he keeps his words, abides by the contents of his contracts and promises, as well as obligations.
134  MAC 427 MODULE 5 In relation to advertising and public relations, therefore, advertising and public relations practitioners are expected to be truthful about the contents of all advertisements and promotion packages that come from them; without deception, falsehood, propaganda or gimmicks.
This is what the society expects from them because of the value, which society places on their actions and activities.
Of course, advertising and public relations are part of man’s activities in the society, so the society expects no less that truth and moral uprightness from advertising and public relations practitioners.
This leads us to a proper contextual discussion of the relationship of truth with advertising and public relations.
3.2 Relating Truth with Advertising and Public Relations From our discussions so far in this course, we have already shown that advertising and public relations are part of the wider modern marketing communications.
While advertising aims to sell a product or service, public relations builds the mutual understanding between an organisation and its various publics.
Without unnecessarily repeating the theories and practice of advertising and public relations, which we have exhaustively dealt with in our earlier modules, we can again simply streamline the functions of advertising and public relations into two: to inform and to persuade.
to perform these functions, advertising and public relations use various means, including the mass media of newspapers, magazines, radio and television, posters, film shows, exhibitions, seminars, workshops, notices, cardboards, samples, circulars, catalogues, labels, wrappings, slogans, price tags, tickets and T-shirts.
Others are street or town criers, loudspeakers, internet and other range of media, which can be combined, with some of these ones mentioned.
All these media are used essentially by advertising and public relations to inform and persuade.
Indeed, advertising and public relations claim the right to free speech and right to communicate which are inalienable freedoms of man.
However, because advertising and public relations are human activities and have effects on man, they must be guided by the rules of the society like other human activities.
Again, because advertising and public relations use language and communication, which are tools of the society, they should be guided by the rules and ethics that guide man in the society.
This means advertising and public relations should be guided by truth, which is a moral virtue.
However, this may prove a little difficult because advertising and public relations use persuasion as their main tool to perform their roles in society.
The difficulty in relating truth to advertising and public relations 135  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS is in the inherent nature of persuasion, which, as we said earlier, is “to induce by argument, advice, to bring to any particular opinion, to cause to believe, to convince, to influence the mind.” Based on this nature of persuasion, it can easily be used to tell the truth or to deceive.
Since we have agreed that advertising and public relations are human activities and, therefore, should be subjected to rules of morality by the society, that is the rules of right or wrong, truthful advertising and public relation activities are the ones that are morally right, and the wrong ones are untruthful, deceptive and false.
For example, if a product does not contain what an advertisement says it has, the consumers or the society would be deceived by the advertisement; it can then be described as deceptive or false advertising.
The same is true of public relations activities which are untruthful or deceptive, essentially when gimmicks, which some experts in public relations say can be used with discretion, is involved, or in such situations when public relations campaigns are used to promote some bad politicians in Nigeria through propaganda.
Many of these candidates win political offices, but are later smeared with corruption, which is morally condemnable in the society.
Indeed, when you have truthful advertising and public relations, the society benefits because they would be better informed, make rational choices of products and services.
They also enjoy better goods and services and they would be stimulated to higher standard of living.
Similarly, the company benefits because more and more of the goods would have to be produced to take care of the increase purchase and brand loyalty as well as the attendant increase in standard of living.
In the same vein, the nation benefits increase in employment because increasing production activities would make companies employ more labour.
Taxes would also increase and the country would be able to undertake more development projects and provide more amenities for the people.
This is why the society wants advertising and public relations to be truthful and not deceptive.
The society also wants all organisations, advertisers, clients, employers, advertising and public relations agencies to be socially responsible by being truthful about their promotional and marketing activities; to produce, promote and sell goods and services based on the expected moral obligation of truth.
Of course, it is needless to stress that if advertising and public relations practitioners operate by moral obligation of truth, the benefits are enormous to them, their clients, the consumers and the nation, in general.
Scholars have identified some of the areas where deception occurs in advertising and public relations, which we shall now deal with.
136  MAC 427 MODULE 5 3.2 Deception in Advertising in Public Relations The areas of possible deception in advertising and public relations are: a) false or misleading statements and visuals which contain exaggeration, embellishment, hyperbole and other superlatives used in persuasion in many forms in advertising and public relations b) testimonials used as promotional packages, which do not reflect the real choice of competent witness.
c) price, products or services’ claims which are misleading d) comparison, which unfairly disparages competitive product or service, a client or employer, as well as fellow practitioners and colleagues e) claims which are insufficiently backed by facts or which distort facts or true meaning or application of statements of professional or scientific authorities f) statements, suggestions or pictures offensive to public decency, including propaganda, gimmicks, and all forms of lies.
We should realise that deception in advertising and public relations is harmful to the society in many ways and the practitioners themselves would lose both in economic terms and in integrity on the long run.
So, some steps have been recommended by scholars to guide against this in the field of marketing communication.
i.
The professions of advertising and public relations have ethical codes of conduct, which we have dealt with in earlier units.
These are the first steps to guide against deceptive advertising and public relations.
There are many provisions in professional codes, involving decency, honesty, truthfulness, and respect for Nigerian culture that would take care of the infractions, which arise regarding deception.
However, we must stress that the existence of the laws is not a guarantee of their obedience.
These laws in both professions and their professional codes of ethics should be applied without qualifications.
In this area, APCON and NIPR should be seen to be taking the lead in ensuring that the professional codes of ethics are respectively applied and obeyed.
ii.
The media where the advertising and public relations messages are used also have moral obligations to screen these messages for decency, censor for dignity and good taste.
The media have a duty to reject publication of deceptive advertising and public relations messages.
iii.
The public should also wake up to their duty of ensuring that they fight and guide against deception in advertising and public relations.
Even at the individual level, a consumer can report 137  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS identified deception in advertising and public relation messages as well as report as a group to relevant regulatory authorities, including APCON, NIPR and others.
The experience here in Nigeria is that many consumers are too complacent to report infractions, whereas only a letter could be enough in some cases to lay a genuine complaint against a product or promotions, which would lead to remedies and truth.
iv.
The government should be more active in this area also, especially through the Consumer Protection Commission and other agencies responsible for regulating marketing activities in the country.
The Consumer Protection Commission, in particular, should now be more proactive to listen, provide assistance and support to consumers seeking redress over unfair marketing activities, including advertising and promotions.
The commission should punish erring advertisers, organisations and practitioners where infractions are established.
It should above all, provide a forum where consumers, producers, distributors, advertising and public relations agencies and distributors can meet regularly to exchange ideas and views.
4.0 CONCLUSION Truth as a moral virtue should be the essential guide for practitioners of advertising and public relations.
This is because truth is the hallmark of social relations and advertising and public relations are human activities.
At the end, truthful advertising and public relations would benefit advertising and public relations practitioners, the media, the advertisers, the economy and the buying public, who would enjoy more quality products.
5.0 SUMMARY We have dealt extensively with many concepts and their link in this unit.
We have defined truth, truth and morality and relationship of truth with advertising and public relations.
We have also treated deception in advertising and public relations and identified areas where abuses occur easily as well as how these can be stemmed in advertising and public relations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT When can advertising and public relations be deceptive and what remedies can you suggest?
138  MAC 427 MODULE 5 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayantayo, K. (2005).
International Journal of African and African American Studies, (IV) 1.
Dominick, J. R. (2009).
The Dynamics of Mass Communication, Media in the Digital Age.
New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
139  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 3 THE ORIGIN AND CONCEPT OF CONSUMERISM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Origin and Concept of Consumerism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nigeria remains a big market for many commodities and services in the world.
The sheer size of the population estimated at over 160 million is a large market that can accommodate a large number of companies, some of which produce similar or the same goods.
Because of this, some producers believe they can produce any kind of goods- regardless of the quality or standard– and sell in the country.
Even on the side of the importers, sharp practices and unethical marketing behaviour are worse; all manner of imported products, both wanted and unwanted are dumped in the country, thus making Nigeria more like a “junkyard” of foreign goods.
Many Nigerian producers are probably the worse violators of quality and standards regarding goods and services.
This situation has given rise to consumerism, where the consumers are demanding for their rights regarding what they consume, including free choice of goods and services, right to safety, right to be informed about goods and services they consumer, and right to be heard.
Therefore, the origin and concept of consumerism shall be our focus of this unit, 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the origin of consumerism • discuss consumerism as a concept • highlight factors that gave birth to consumerism in Nigeria.
140  MAC 427 MODULE 5 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Origin and Concept of Consumerism The idea of consumerism started as a pressure group by consumers to fight against deceptive sharp practices in business in the United States around 1920s.
Before then, there had been what was called the seller’s market, especially in consumer goods market.
Because of this, businessmen were not marketing-oriented.
They were engaged in all sorts of sharp practices to make profit.
The market then was characterised by unethical marketing practices, bad products and deceptive promotions.
All these sharp practices made the consumers to come together to fight for their rights.
The pressure was so much that in 1962 under the Presidency of J. F. Kennedy, the government of the United States moved for the passage of the Charter of Rights of the Consumer by the Congress.
According to this Charter, the consumer has the following rights: i. the right to safety ii.
right to be informed about goods and services the consumer wishes to buy iii.
the right to choose.
iv.
The right to be heard.
What then is consumerism?
Kotler (1989) defines consumerism as a social movement seeking to augment the rights and powers of buyers in relation to sellers.
Agbonifoh, et al.
(2007), also defines consumerism as “organized efforts of consumers aimed at promoting, protecting and enforcing the rights of consumers in their exchange relationship with all organizations and individuals.”Another definition says consumerism is the organised efforts of consumers in seeking redress, restitution and remedy for dissatisfaction they have suffered in the acquisition of their standard of living.
For Anthony Ijewere of the Department of Business Administration, University of Benin, Benin City, the term “consumerism” refers succinctly to “the consumerist movement, consumer protection or consumer activism.”An online definition by www.Canadian.Money.Advisor.ca, says the term consumerism “is an economic policy that states that the market is shaped by the choice of the consumers.
It outlines the fundamental rights of the consumers, including right to safety, right to choice and right to information.” These definitions have brought into focus the inherent characteristics of consumerism generally.
How did consumerism start in Nigeria?
The advent of consumerism can be attributed to several factors.
While some 141  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS of these factors may not be too different from those of other places in the world, the peculiar marketing environment in Nigeria also played a significant role in the evolution of consumerism in the country, as we would see.
Some of these factors are: a) unscrupulous business practices and pressure on government by the public – Due to sharp practices by businesses, the public mounted pressure on government to come to their assistance to end these.
Some of the initial legislations by government in Nigeria were in respect of housing and some consumer goods; many states in 1970s made rent edicts and producers were also forced to put manufacturing and expiry dates on their products.
b) another factor was scarcity of goods and services, especially during the oil boom and salary increase of the 1970s in Nigeria.
The oil boom and salary increase of “Udoji” had a multiplier effect on demand for goods by Nigerians.
This was in the face of the seller’s market in Nigeria then, characterised by high demand and low supply of goods.
Consumers had no choice but to buy the available goods with high prices and sometimes, low quality.
Sellers became indifferent about consumers’ complaints.
c) also, education resulted in the advent of consumerism in Nigeria.
This is because as more and more Nigerians became sophisticated and educated, they became discreet consumers of goods and services and they are ready to fight against any sharp practices targeted at infringing their rights.
d) planned product obsolescence – This is a situation where manufacturers intentionally plan that some products become obsolete in order that they can have an edge over competition.
An example of this was the exclusion of Asprin tablets from the list of analgesics in Nigeria.
This was said to have been spurred in part by competition.
Indeed, planned product obsolescence is a strategy of survival in the face of stiff competition.
The bad aspect of this, however, is that manufacturers who cannot cope are forced to make wild claims in the advertisements and promotions about what their products can do and this attitude results in consumerism, where the consumers feel cheated and are demanding for their rights.
Because of all these factors, consumerism became inevitable in Nigeria and it has been with us since, although it is believed that there are still a lot of areas for its development.
Of course, the short history of consumerism in Nigeria has been characterised by attempts by government to make policies and take measures in favour of the consumer.
For instance, there is the consumer protection against arbitrary increase in prices, which was the Price 142  MAC 427 MODULE 5 Control Decree of 1970 against profiteering and hoarding at a time when there was scarcity of goods.
The Standards Organisation of Nigeria (SON) was established to ensure that products and services conform to certain standards.
Furthermore, there was the promulgation of the Food and Drug Decree of 1974, prohibiting the sale of certain foods and drugs, and its advertisement because they are considered either to be unsafe or misleading the public.
For example, in Nigeria, you cannot advertise a drug that cures obesity.
There were also price control edicts by the state governments in Nigeria to protect consumers of goods.
On the side of the consumers, members of the public have come together to form pressure groups to protect their rights, such is the Association of Tenants of the Federal Housing Authority (FHA), which seeks to ensure that standards and certain amenities are provided under the FHA schemes.
Today, we even have an umbrella body of consumer association in Nigeria.
All these efforts in fighting for the rights of the consumers in Nigeria will be the focus of our discussion in the next unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Nigerian market is awash with sharp and unethical marketing practices today.
The manufacturers of goods and services appear to be taking the advantage of the country’s large population and market to sell substandard goods.
The situation may have been worsened by the insatiable taste of many Nigerians, especially the upper class, for foreign goods; easily Nigeria has become a dumping ground for all manner of foreign goods.
Even the ones made in Nigeria carry labels showing they are made overseas.
This is how bad and pitiable the situation has become.
The situation calls for more pressure on government and its agencies and the consumers themselves to rise to insist on the right to freely choose what they buy, be informed of what they want to buy, claim their right to safety and right to be heard.
This is when consumerism would have fulfilled its purpose in the country.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed the origin of consumerism and the concept of consumerism.
We have seen that the evolution of consumerism in Nigeria was not too different to the experiences of other countries.
The factors that spurred consumerism in Nigeria only reflected the peculiar Nigerian marketing environment at the time.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and discuss the factors that led to the evolution of consumerism in Nigeria.
143  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Agbonifoh, et al.
(2007).
Marketing in Nigeria: Principles, Concepts, and Decisions, Second Edition.
Aba: Afritowers Limited.
Ijewere, A.
(N.D).
“Consumerism in Nigeria.” Retrieved from http://www.
servenigeria.com 144  MAC 427 MODULE 5 UNIT 4 HOW CONSUMERISM OPERATES IN NIGERIA, ITS CHALLENGES AND FUTURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How Consumerism Operates in Nigeria 3.2 Challenges and Future of Consumerism in Nigeria 3.3 Future of Consumerism in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The peculiar marketing environment of any country spurs the evolution and growth of consumerism.
This also dictates how consumerism operates in such a country.
In this unit, our focus is to see how consumerism operates in Nigeria.
These include the various laws passed by government to augment the rights of the consumers against the sellers, various organisations set up to implement these laws as well as the efforts of the consumers to demand and insist on the rights from the sellers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain how consumerism operates in Nigeria, including the various laws and activities of consumer organisations • identify areas of challenges to effective consumerism in Nigeria and suggest remedies.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 How Consumerism Operates in Nigeria Due to the reasons we have identified in the last unit and many other reasons, which abridge consumer rights in Nigeria, the Federal Government and the state government set up some organisations and passed some laws to protect the public against the bad products or unethical business and marketing practices.
We have said earlier that government efforts to protect the rights of the consumers came 145  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS essentially from pressures from the people.
We shall, therefore, discuss these organisations and identify the consumer rights laws.
Consumer Protection Council (CPC) Consumer Protection Council (CPC) is an agency set up by the Federal Government through Act No.
66 of 1992.
However, it did not start operations immediately; it only became operational only in 1999, when its institutional framework was put in place.
Though it could be said to have been relatively late in coming, the Consumer Protection Council has eventually become the apex consumer protection organisation in Nigeria.
Essentially, it was set up to promote and protect consumers’ rights regarding all areas of products and services, provide speedy redress to their complaints, inform, educate and empower them to act as discreet consumers.
Indeed, the Council came about because government realised that the Nigerian consumers are largely illiterate, thus lacking adequate and relevant knowledge of the components of many goods and services.
Closely related to this factor is that because of the high level of illiteracy, many consumers lack the power of bargaining.
All these have placed the producer of goods in an advantage position above many Nigerian consumers.
Thus, the Consumer Protection Council came to resolve the mutual distrust between the consumers and producers of goods in the country.
Specifically, the establishment of the Consumer Protection Commission is to disallow opportunities for dubious businesses practices targeted at exploiting the poor and vulnerable consumers with substandard products and services; deny buyers to get value for their money and leave a large part of the population with reduced access to basic products and services.
This is because government has realised from their own records that Nigeria is a largely uninformed and illiterate society, a developing economy which readily provide a climate for the exploitation of consumers.
Therefore, the CPC is to appropriately rise to the defence of the consumers, by sharpening consumers’ skills in bargaining, providing them with information and practical protection against obnoxious practices and their unscrupulous exploitation in the market place.
Servicom SERVICOM means Service Compact with all Nigerians.
An organisation established aims to put action behind the social contract between the Federal Government and the people of Nigeria.
Thus, 146  MAC 427 MODULE 5 SERVICOM gives Nigerians the right to demand to be well served with good services and products.
It carries out independent surveys of the services provided to citizens by the ministries and government departments and public corporations.
This is aimed at achieving in the government’s institutions, adequacy and timely delivery of services as well as customer satisfaction.
SERVICOM has a Charter, which spells out the details of these rights and operations of the agency.
The charter is made available to all government agencies where services are provided to the public.
It gives details of what the public should expect and what to do if the service fails or falls short of their expectation Other institutions and laws concerned with consumerism include: • Standards Organisation of Nigeria (SON) • National Drug Law Enforcement Agency (NDLEA) • National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC), 1993 • Nigerian Communication Commission • Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) • Independent Corrupt Practices and other related offences Commission (ICPC) • Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA) • National Lottery Regulatory Commission • The Counterfeit and Fake Drugs Decree No 21 of 1988 • The Food and Drugs Act Cap 150 of 1990 • The Poison and Pharmacy Act Cap 366 of 1990 Consumer Associations Available evidence suggests that some traces of consumer activism have been noticed in different parts of the country for sometimes.
For instance, such consumer organisations like the tenants’ association existed in various forms in some cities like Lagos, the Consumers’ Association in Lagos and the Enugu Consumer Movement.
Unfortunately, they were ineffective and soon died off.
As means to communicate consumer rights, some newspapers, such as Vanguard, The Guardian, The Punch and others, have consumer affairs pages; most of these newspapers still function till date.
However, a consumer movement called the Consumer Protection Association of Nigeria (CPAN), according to Agbonifoh, et al.
(2007), was actually formed in September 1980.
The objectives of Consumer Protection Association as set out by the group are: 147  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS i.)
promoting and stimulating consumers’ interests and awareness in the goods and services they buy ii.
ensuring that goods and services sold to consumers are merchantable and of the right quality iii.
providing a better forum for dialogue between consumers, the government, manufacturers and middlemen iv.
cooperating with government and similar associations so that the interest of consumers could be better served v. serving as a clearing house for consumer complaints and assisting them to seek redress where there are disputes regarding goods and services purchased.” Unfortunately, in spite of the efforts of the Consumer Protection Council, the Consumer Association and other consumerism activities have not been able to stop sharp practices and marketing abuses targeted at the consumers in Nigeria.
The consumers have also been complacent and publicity of abuses has been low.
Hence, Nigerian consumers have generally continued to suffer in silence.
So, what are the factors militating against effective consumerism in Nigeria?
3.2 Challenges of Consumerism in Nigeria a.)
High Level of Illiteracy: The high level of illiteracy in Nigeria is a major factor for the failure of consumerism.
Nigeria is grouped among the illiterate countries in the world by the United Nations records.
Because of this, the average Nigerian consumer may not be able to read, write or understand the components of a product, much less to know when a given product is adulterated.
b) Ignorance: An ignorant man is only partially alive, because ignorance is a disease.
The cure for the disease is knowledge and information.
Indeed, many consumers in Nigeria are ignorant of their rights as consumers.
In the face of apparent exploitation by producers and marketers, they appear helpless.
c) Government Stakes in Certain Businesses: Government ownership and monopoly of certain categories of businesses, such as such energy, railways, water supply and telecommunications has resulted in the inability of the civil society to successfully prosecute these companies when they exploit consumers or perform below expectation.
In addition, government, which is supposed to defend the rights of the consumers, are unable to do so because of its personal interest.
This has been a major impediment to consumerism.
d) Poor Import Substitution: Most of the products sold in Nigeria are imported.
This makes the country a consuming nation with less power to control these imported goods.
This leaves the Nigerian consumer with no choice than to buy the imported 148  MAC 427 MODULE 5 products.
It is reasoned that this situation would have been different if Nigeria can produce most of what her citizens consume.
This is even worsened by Nigerians excessive taste for foreign goods so much so that even the ones produced in Nigeria are sometimes labelled as produced overseas.
Besides the corruption involved in this, it is also deceptive to the consumer.
e) Corruption: Corruption is pervasive in the Nigerian systems, and this retards development in all frontiers.
Even the people who should fight for the rights of the consumers are themselves corruptible.
This casts a great doubt over the success of consumerism in Nigeria.
It is sometimes alleged that some consumer rights activists succumb to material and financial inducement and therefore abandon the fight against the exploitation of the consumer.
f) Unpatriotic Activities: It is also alleged that many Nigerian traders travel to request that the overseas producers produce low quality products for sale in Nigeria.
The truth in this allegation can be gauged by the level of fake products seized in the Nigerian ports today.
A visit to the Nigerian open markets shows the display of these unwholesome and fake products by our traders.
Similarly, in the service sector, hardly can one see many qualified crafts and tradesmen in Nigeria today.
There is a dearth of qualified electricians, motor mechanics, plumbers, etc.
Many apprentices do not spend the required training periods before they go into the market.
This leads to poor services and deception.
At the end, Nigerians are not satisfied about these services.
g) Poverty: Nigeria is rated among the poorest countries in the world, with a majority of Nigerian consumers in the poverty brackets.
As result of this, many Nigerians, especially the poor in the cities and those who reside largely in the rural areas lack the will and the logistics to prosecute the big companies, which they may feel, have abridged their rights as consumers.
For example, how will a poor consumer in a Nigerian in the rural area prosecute a multinational milk company in Holland for infringement of his right as a consumer over an adulterated product?
h) Poor Publicity: The Nigerian press may not be doing enough in promoting consumerism yet.
The journalists and the owners of the press who may have interest in some of the companies, which are culprits in matters of consumer rights infringement, are responsible for this.
Besides the fact that some journalists have no nerve to pursue some of the cases of consumer abuses to their logical conclusions, some of the newspapers do not consider consumerism as important yet as to dominate aspects of the business.
149  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS i) Lack of Adequate Government Response: Clearly, governments in Nigeria are yet to demonstrate full commitment to defend the rights of the consumers.
This goes beyond just approving the laws.
There is the need to show that government is committed to consumer rights and that any violators would be dealt with appropriately.
This is what the success of consumerism in any country depends on largely.
The government should therefore be not only lawgiver, but should provide other infrastructure that would make this work.
j) Ineffective Consumers Groups: The consumers groups/associations in the country are still have weak infrastructure and organisation.
They also lack the financial muscle to take on big multinationals who continually flout consumer laws.
k) High Cost of Legal Fee: Both the prohibitive cost of legal fee and excessive technicalities hinder many consumers in seeking legal redress in cases of consumer infringement.
They therefore withdraw into their shell and nurse their wounds in patience.
3.3 Future of Consumerism in Nigeria In spite of all these hindrances in the growth of consumerism in Nigeria, there is still a future for it.
This is considering that consumerism is still new in Nigeria and that Nigerians have examples of the developed countries to copy from.
Indeed, in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada and France, consumer associations engage in many activities to safeguard their members and the public.
According to Agbonifoh, et al.
(2007), these measures if taken would ensure the growth of consumerism in Nigeria.
1) Comparative laboratory testing of products on sale based on selected important product attributes and the dissemination of the results of the tests for public consumption.
2) Conducting surveys among consumers to ascertain their experiences and impressions about certain brands, which they have used.
This information about product performance is to guide other consumers in their choices.
3) Sending out warning signals to consumers about products, which are known to be hazardous.
4) Conducting research aimed at ascertaining what product designs more truly meet consumer needs.
5) Identifying for the benefit of consumers the exaggerations that may be contained in certain advertisements and highlighting other inadequacies of the information given by companies about their products particularly in cases where vital items of 150  MAC 427 MODULE 5 information that may affect consumer choice or decisions are withheld.
6) Drawing government attention to areas in which further legislation and regulations are needed to regulate unhealthy trade practices.
7) Educating consumers on their rights in relation to producers and sellers and therefore on the obligations of manufacturers and retailers to them.
8) In specific instances where aggrieved consumers cannot obtain satisfactory redress, they can turn to a consumer association to take up the matter with the manufactures or sellers concerned.
9) Publication of a periodic magazine, which will serve as a major instrument for reaching the public or more specifically its members.
4.0 CONCLUSION Consumer rights in Nigeria are still violated with recklessly abandon.
This is happening because of many reasons.
The government is yet to show enough commitment to see that consumerism is entrenched in the country; the consumers themselves lack the wherewithal to fight for their rights yet, and their associations are still weak, lacking the financial and legal muscles to take on the big market abusers.
However, hope is still not lost if measures can be taken towards proper organisation of consumerism, with the government and the consumer associations taking the lead, and the press supporting from the rear.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed how consumerism operates in Nigeria highlighting the establishment of the Consumer Protection Council by the Federal Government and objectives; the Servicom whose aims is to ensure that Nigerians are better served by government ministries, agencies and parastatals.
other organisations and laws provided by government for effective consumer rights guarantee, such as EFCC, ICPC, SON, NAFDAC, and so on were also examined.
In the same vein, we discussed the setting up of Consumer Association of Nigeria and its objectives.
We identified the challenges against effective consumerism in Nigeria and suggested ways this can be reinvigorated for effective delivery of consumer rights, while insisting that there is a future for consumerism in Nigeria.
151  MAC 427 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Does consumerism exist in Nigeria?
Identify factors militating against its growth.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Agbonifoh, et al.
(2007).
Marketing in Nigeria: Principles, Concepts, and Decisions.
(2nd ed.).
Aba: Afritowers Limited.
Ijewere, A.
(n.d).
“Consumerism in Nigeria.” Retrieved from http://www.
servenigeria.com.
152
