 International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) MAC 424: INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING AND PROPAGANDA NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA, LAGOS 1  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) MAIN WORK MAC 424: INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING AND PROPAGANDA COURSE TEAM COURSE DEVELOPER/WRITER Rev.Sis.
Chika Asogwo Kogi State University, Ayingba.
08130047065 euchika@yahoo.com CONTENT EDITOR Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos +234-806-9395-473 aliedeom@yahoo.com HEAD OF UNIT Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos +234-806-9395-473 aliedeom@yahoo.com 2  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2013 First Printed 2013 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by 3  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) CONTENTS PAGE MODULE 1: THE CONCEPT OF INTERNTIONAL ADVERTISING Unit 1: Nature of Global Advertising Unit 2: Importance of International Advertising Unit 3: Roles and Relevance of International Advertising and Promotion Unit 4: Advertising: A Tool for Social Engineering in a Globalised World Unit 5: Barriers to International Advertising and Campaigns Unit 6: Overcoming the Challenges Facing International Advertising MODULE 2: PROPAGANDA: NATURE AND APPLICATION Unit 1: Propaganda: a coin of two faces Unit 2: Origin of propaganda Unit 3: Principles and characteristics of propaganda Unit 4: Functions and usages of propaganda Unit 5: Criticism against propaganda Unit 6: Propaganda as a tool in international advertising and diplomacy MODULE 3: LOCAL VERSUS GLOBAL ADVERTISING Unit 1: Concept of Domestic and Global Advertising.
Unit 2: Problems Associated with Global Advertising.
Unit 3: Decision Areas in International Advertising.
Unit 4: Promotional mix Elements in International Advertising MODULE 4: ETHICAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY IN INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING AND PROPAGANDA Unit 1: The Advertising Dimension of Adjusting Propaganda to Positive Uses Unit 2: Economic Effects of Advertising in a Free Economy Unit 3: Beyond Economic Gains: Using Advertising and Propaganda to Improve Human Dignity Unit 4: The Place of Ethics in International Advertising Unit 5: Social Responsibility Issues in International Advertising 4  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) MODULE 1: THE CONCEPT OF INTERNTIONAL ADVERTISING (Twenty Questions) Unit 1: Nature of Global Advertising – 4 questions from each unit Unit 2: Importance of International Advertising Unit 3: Roles and Relevance of International Advertising and Promotion Unit 4: Advertising: A Tool for social Engineering in a Globalised World Unit 5: Barriers to International Advertising and Campaigns Unit 6: Overcoming the Challenges Facing International advertising MODULE 1: THE CONCEPT OF INTERNTIONAL ADVERTISING UNIT 1: NATURE OF GLOBAL ADVERTISING 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objective 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Meaning and definition of Global Advertising 3.2.
Features of Global Advertising 3.3.
Historical Development of Global Advertising 3.4.
Nature of Global advertising 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0.
References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION With the steady growth and expansion of capitalism in recent time, as well as the globalization of the world economy and polity, organizations, government and individual’s quest for recognition and acceptance beyond their immediate locale has increased tremendously.
There seems to have been an intense jostling for the available market by an ever-increasing and varied number of international brands or companies with a common aim: to sell their products to as many consumers as possible.
According to Ortiz-Sotomayor, (2007) however, ‘the globalization of markets also means that companies today are addressing an incredibly varied target group, with many different languages and, more importantly, cultures’.
Brands now have to be able to earn the consumers’ respect in each market in order to increase sales and fight competitors.
In fact, “respect” has become the buzzword of the industry.
As Ralph Lacher, president of the US advertising agency La gente de RLR, said in May 2005 at the American Marketing Association meeting in Los Angeles: 5  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) “Consumers respond best to marketers who invest in relationships-reaching out with respect—first to their hearts and then their wallets.
To win, begin at the beginning: listen to your audience; market to their needs; and communicate on their terms.” (Lacher 2005) International organizations need to enter the communities and cultures in order to gain respect, trust, be accepted and eventually be listened to.
One of the major ways of achieving this is through advertising and promotion of the goods, services, ideas, etc to the target market, the global market.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to appreciate:  The meaning and definition of global advertising  The basic features of global advertising  Historical Development of global advertising  Nature of global advertising 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Meaning and definition of Global Advertising The word advertising comes from the Latin word ‘advertere’ meaning ‘to turn the minds towards.’ The definition of advertising is evolving just as the practice is undergoing constant changes.
For instance, at the beginning of the twentieth century, Albert Lasker, who today is generally regarded as the father of modern advertising in some quarters, owned a prominent advertising agency, Lord & Thomas.
At the time, he defined advertising as “salesmanship in print, driven by a reason why,” (McDonough, 1993: F4).
But that was long before the advent of radio, television, or the Internet.
The nature and scope of the business world, and advertising, were quite limited.
A century later, our planet is a far different place.
The nature and needs of business have changed, and so have the concept and practice of advertising.
Today, many definitions of advertising abound.
Journalists, for example, might define it as a communication, public relations, or persuasion process; business people see it as a marketing process; economists and sociologists tend to focus on its economic, societal, or ethical significance.
And some consumers might define it simply as a nuisance.
Each of these perspectives has some merit, but for now we’ll focus on a few definitions that had attracted international acclaims: 6  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Arens (2008:7) sees advertising as a ‘structured and composed non personal communication of information, usually paid for and usually persuasive in nature, about products (goods, services, and ideas) by identified sponsors through various media’.
This definition is similar to that of the American Marketing Association which viewed "advertising as any paid form of non- personal presentation and promotion of ideas, goods and services by an identified sponsor".
William J. Stanton observed that, "Advertising consists of all the activities involved in presenting to an audience a non-personal, sponsor-identified, paid-for message about a product or organization."
The above definitions are similar to that of Dominick (2007:321), which says that ‘advertising is any form of non-personal presentation and promotion of ideas, goods and services, usually paid for by an identified sponsor’ From the foregoing, we can see that advertising is the process of creating awareness about goods, ideas, products, and services.
However, when the focus is on markets across the shore of a single country or nation, it is referred as international or global advertising.
Global (International) Advertising is the type of advertising undertaken by those companies, which operate in more than one country, known as ‘multi- national’ companies.
Global advertising therefore, entails dissemination of a commercial message to target audiences in more than one country.
Exporters, generally advertise their products and services in foreign countries, where ready markets are available.
Air India and other airlines, and multinational companies advertise their products and services all over the world.
Coca-Cola and Pepsi are advertised globally, as the sales are almost all over the world.
International advertising is extremely expensive, involving the services of professional advertising agencies in different countries.
Global advertising is expensive because it is a form of communication that takes place in multiple cultures that differ in terms of values, communication styles, and consumption patterns.
In a nutshell, global advertising is structured and composed non personal communication of information, usually paid for and usually persuasive in nature, about international products (goods, services, and ideas) by identified multinational sponsors through various foreign media.
These means, global advertising covers business activity involving advertisers and 7  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) the advertising agencies that create adverts and buy media in different countries.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Define Global advertising in your own terms 3.2 Features of Global Advertising Going by the definitions above, one can highlight the following features of global advertising: Global Advertising is, first of all, a type of communication.
It is actually a very structured form of applied communication, employing both verbal and nonverbal elements that are composed to fill specific space and time formats determined by the sponsor.
Second, Global advertising is a non personal form of communication which is typically directed to groups of people rather than to individuals across international boundaries.
These people could be consumers, who reside in different countries and buy products like Close-up, Coke, Cars, etc for their personal use.
Or they might be business people in different national locations who would buy large quantities of Close-up for resale in their stores.
Most global advertising are paid for by their sponsors (multinational companies).
Coca Cola for instance pays the newspaper or the radio or TV station to carry the adverts you read, see, and hear.
However, note that some sponsors don’t have to pay for their adverts because of their nonprofit status.
Likewise, a poster on a school bulletin board promoting a dance is not paid for, but it is still an advert—a structured, non personal, persuasive communication.
Of course, most global advertising are intended to be persuasive—to win international converts to a global product, service, or idea.
Although, some adverts, such as legal announcements, are intended merely to inform, not to persuade; they can still be classified as global advertising when the target audience are located in different nations of the world, because they satisfy all the other requirements of the definition.
A global advert identifies its sponsor.
This seems obvious.
The sponsor wants to be identified, or why pay to advertise?
One of the basic differences between advertising and public relations, though, is that many PR activities (for example, publicity) aren’t openly sponsored while advertising does.
8  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Finally, global advertising reaches its target audience through international or foreign mass media.
Generally, an advertising medium is any paid means used to present an advert to its target audience.
Thus, we have radio advertising, television advertising, newspaper adverts, and so on.
When an expatriate tells a nationale how good coke tastes, that’s sometimes called word-of-mouth (WOM) global advertising.
Although WOM is a communication medium, it’s not an advertising medium.
It’s not structured, or openly sponsored, or paid for.
Historically, advertisers have used the traditional mass media (the plural of medium)—radio, TV, newspapers, magazines, and billboards—to send their messages.
But today technology enables advertising to reach the target audiences efficiently through a variety of addressable media (for example, direct mail) and interactive media (like the Internet and kiosks).
Advertisers also use an increasing variety of other nontraditional media such as shopping carts, blimps, aero-advert (when air flight takes messages about a particular international brand from one country to another as it travels around the world) and videocassettes to find their audience.
The planning, scheduling, and buying of international advertisements should therefore be thoroughly handled as it is key to the success of any global advertising campaign.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What are the features of Global Advertising?
3.3 Historical Development of Global Advertising The beginnings of global advertising can be traced back to the end of World War II, (Ortiz-Sotomayor, 2007).
At that time, European nations increased international trade.
A decade later, some attention had shifted to Latin American countries as US corporations led the way in looking for external markets.
In the 1970’s, non- US multinationals began overseas expansion, hoping to mirror the success of the US corporations.
The globalization debate received an impetus in 1983 after Harvard Business School Professor Ted Levitt argued in his book The Globalization of Markets that the same products and services could be sold in the same way everywhere.
Meanwhile advertising agencies re-positioned themselves to serve the clients with more emphasis on international expansion and global marketing.
In the 1990s the collapse of the Communist regimes in central and Eastern Europe opened up markets filled with consumers eager for new products and services.
Since that decade, markets and clients have increasingly become more global and more complex, and the importance of global advertising has increased exponentially.
For instance, “in 1960, international billings constituted only 6% of the gross revenues of the top 9  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) ten US advert agencies.
By 1991, this percentage had increased to almost 60%” (Ducoffe 1998: 303).
In recognition of the situation, advertisers’ associations such as the US Association of National Advertisers and the UK Institute of Practitioners in Advertising have created global marketing committees in the last decade to help their members share problems and find solutions.
This rapid evolution has combined with what I think has been the most dramatically changing dimension of the advertising industry: the introduction of the Internet.
Both have contributed to the birth of a new advertising environment.
This paper will attempt to trace the logics of advertising within this changing environment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Trace the historical development of global advertising 3.4 Nature of Global Advertising The nature and purpose of advertising differ from one industry to another and/or across situations.
The targets of an organization’s advertising efforts often vary, as do advertising’s role and function in the marketing program.
One advertiser may seek to generate immediate response or action from the customer; another may want to develop awareness or a positive image for its product or service over a longer period.
Advertising message is of certain content, which is to be conveyed to a recipient.
It is a part of mass public communication and a specific message in the process of mass communication characterized by: 1) its commercial character (it is created and published to initiate and guide the behavior of potential consumers at buying certain products and 2) to be distributed to recipients through means of mass communication (Milovanović, 1997).
The content of an advertising message, regardless of whether it is aimed at domestic or foreign markets must be evaluated according to its contribution to sale results.
Advertising message for global markets, as both product and activity, is distributed through different means of mass communication; it endures strong competition and comes in contact with those to whom it isn't aimed.
Such message should be repetitive, general and must stimulate recipient's behavior.
There are not a big number of advertising messages, which are able to draw or constrain attention of recipients to a certain product.
It is mainly the case with some commercial that have been going on for a prolonged time and which can be recognized with customers and general public and are based on advertising appeal as a carrying idea or theme of the advertising 10  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) message.
The aim of the advertiser is to discover the real appeal and to evaluate the role it plays in the overall campaign.
Aiming of the content of advertising message at activating one or more motifs through the appeal one can turn a motive into a necessity for certain products or services.
One should recognize positive and negative promotion appeals.
Mainly a positive appeal points out the benefits which a buyer will acquire if he buys a certain product (saving, rationality, purity etc.).
Negative appeals point out possible damages of inconveniences, which can be absorbed if a certain product is bought and used.
Use of advertising appeal in stimulating motives in consumers is often criticized since it is considered to create tension and generates needs for whose fulfillment there are no real possibilities.
4.0.
CONCLUSION Global advertising became more pronounced at the end of the Second World War in 1945 with the expansion of American and European economies.
The overwhelming influence of multi-national corporation in global trade has made international advertising a part of everyday life in nearly all countries of the world.
STOP/CONTD.
5.0.
SUMMARY The need for multi-national companies to gain trust, respect and patronage across international frontiers has made international advertising a necessity.
From the various perspectives discussed so far, we have seen that advertising is any form of non-personal presentation and promotion of ideas, goods and services by an identified sponsor through assorted media channels.
It is a persuasive form of communication that has an identified sponsor whose prime objective is to sell his/her ideas, goods and/or services to a target audience across international boundaries.
It is distinguished from public relations because public relations does not aim to sell and its sponsor in most cases is not identified.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT  International advertising is unnecessary wastage in global trade.
Discuss.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Arens, W. F. (2004).
Contemporary Advertising.
NY: McGraw-Hill Companies Dominick, J.
(2007).
The dynamic of Mass Communication in the Digital Age.
NY: McGraw-Hill Companies 11  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Ducoffe, Robert, and Andreas Grein.
1998.
“Strategic Responses to Market Globalization among Advertising Agencies”.
International Journal of Advertising (3).
301–319.
McDonough, J.
(1993).
FCB: from One Man Freedom to Global Power House.
Advertising Age Commemorative Section:FCBat 120, December13, p. F4 Lacher, Ralph (2005): "Follow the Heart: Creating and Transforming the Brand Essence " Branding in Multicultural Markets.
http://www.marketingpower.com/aevent_event.php?Event_ID=2479 6&Content_I D=5 &ActionType=WIMP.
Visited May 2005.
Ortiz-Sotomayor, J. M. (2007).
Multiple dimensions of international advertising: An analysis of the praxis in global marketing industry from a translation studies perspective.
EU-High- Level Scientific Conference Series; MuTra 2007 – LSP Translation Scenarios: Conference Proceedings 12  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 2: IMPORTANCE OF INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of international Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Advertising is an integral part of our social and economic systems.
In our complex society, advertising has evolved into a vital communications system for both consumers and businesses.
The ability of advertising and other promotional methods to deliver carefully prepared messages to target audiences has given them a major role in the marketing programs of most organizations.
Companies ranging from large multinational corporations to small retailers increasingly rely on advertising and other promotional mix to help them market products and services.
In market-based economies, consumers have learned to rely on advertising and other forms of promotion for information they can use in making purchase decisions.
Evidence of the increasing importance of advertising and promotion comes from the growth in global expenditures on advertising in recent years.
It was Belch and Belch (2003) who observed that, nearly everyone in the modern world is influenced to some degree by advertising and other forms of promotion.
This is even more glaring in this era of globalization with international social crusades of engineering from health, politics, human right, to other social issues.
Organizations in both the private and public sectors have learned that the ability to communicate effectively and efficiently with their target audiences is critical to their success.
Advertising and other types of promotional messages are used to sell products and services as well as to promote causes, market political candidates, and deal with societal problems such as alcohol and drug abuse.
Consumers are finding it increasingly difficult to avoid the efforts of marketers, who are constantly searching for new ways to communicate with them.
13  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: Explain the importance of global advertising 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of International Advertising There are several reasons why advertising is such an important part of many international marketers’ promotional mix.
Belch and Belch (2003), identified the following key ones: First, it can be a very cost-effective method for communicating with large audiences.
For example, the average 30-second spot on the four major networks during prime-time network television reaches nearly 10 million households.
The cost per thousand households reached is around $14.27.
Advertising can be used to create brand images and symbolic appeals for a company or brand, a very important capability for companies selling products and services that are difficult to differentiate on functional attributes.
For example, since 1980 Absolute has used creative advertising to position its vodka as an upscale, fashionable, sophisticated drink and differentiate it from other brands.
The advertising strategy has been to focus attention on two unique aspects of the product: the Absolute name and the distinctive shape of the bottle.
Most of the print adverts used in this long running campaign are specifically tailored for the magazine or region where they appear.
The campaign, one of the most successful and recognizable in advertising history, has made the Absolute brand nearly synonymous with imported vodka.
While all other spirits sales have declined by more than 40 percent over the past 15 years, Absolute sales have increased 10-fold and the various Absolute brands have a combined 70 percent market share.
Another advantage of advertising is its ability to strike a responsive chord with consumers when differentiation across other elements of the marketing mix is difficult to achieve.
Popular advertising campaigns attract consumers’ attention and can help generate sales.
These popular campaigns can also sometimes be leveraged into successful integrated marketing communications programs.
For example, Eveready used the popularity of its Energizer Bunny campaign to generate support from retailers in the form of shelf space, promotional displays, and other merchandising activities.
Consumer promotions such as in-store displays, premium offers, and sweepstakes feature the pink bunny.
Pictures of the Energizer Bunny 14  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) appear on Energizer packages to ensure brand identification and extend the campaign’s impact to the point of purchase.
In a nut shell, importance of global advertising can be summed up as follow: 1.Promotion of Sales: It promotes the sale of goods and services by informing and persuading the people to buy them.
A good advertising campaign helps in winning new customers both in the national as well as in the international markets.
2.Introduction of New Product: It helps in the introduction of new products in the market.
A business enterprise can introduce itself and its product to the public through advertising.
A new enterprise can't make an impact on the prospective customers without the help of advertising.
Advertising enables quick publicity in the market.
3.Creation of Good Public Image: It builds up the reputation of the advertiser.
Advertising enables a business firm to communicate its achievements in an effort to satisfy the customers' needs.
This increases the goodwill and reputation of the firm which is necessary to fight against both local and foreign competition in the market.
4.Mass Production: Advertising facilitates large-scale production.
Advertising encourages production of goods in large-scale because the business firm knows that it will be able to sell on large-scale with the help of advertising.
Mass production reduces the cost of production per unit by the economical use of various factors of production.
5.Research: Advertising stimulates research and development activities.
Advertising has become a competitive marketing activity.
Every firm tries to differentiate its product from the substitutes available in the market through advertising.
This compels every business firm to do more and more research to find new products and their new uses.
If a firm does not engage in research and development activities, it will be out of the international market in a short while.
6.Education of People: Global advertising educate the people about new products and their uses.
Advertising message about the utility of a product enables the people to widen their knowledge.
It is advertising which has helped people in adopting new ways of life and giving-up old habits.
It has contributed a lot towards the betterment of the standard of living of the society.
7.Support to Press: Global advertising provides an important source of revenue to the publishers and other media houses with broader coverage.
For instance, it enables the publishers to increase the circulation of their publication by selling them at lower rates.
People are also benefited because they get publications at cheaper rates.
Advertising is also a source of revenue for TV network.
For instance, AIT, Channels, and NTA insert adverts before, in between and after various programmes and earn millions 15  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) of naira through adverts.
Such income could be used for increasing the quality of programmes and extending coverage.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Why is advertising very important?
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion, we can conclude that advertising is a very vital component of the marketing mix and its role in global trade cannot be overestimated.
5.0 SUMMARY Advertising’s importance lies in its ability to create choices for consumers especially when differentiation across other elements of the marketing mix is difficult to achieve.
It helps to create brand images for companies.
It is equally a form of education for consumers as most advertising messages try to offer insight into the composition of the products they offer for sale.
Above all, advertising offers financial support that helps to lubricate the mass media industry across the world.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT Explain the relationship between the mass media and advertising industry?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Belch, G. E. and Belch, M. A.
(2003).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspectives.
NY:The McGraw−Hill Companies.
16  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 3: ROLES AND RELEVANCE OF INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING AND PROMOTION 1.0.
Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Roles and Relevance of International Advertising and Promotion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION The role of advertising and promotions have come to be further re-echoed in the global market in recent time.
This is as a result of the globalized nature of the current world economy and the recent business expansion across the national frontiers of most multinational corporations.
Advertising and promotion are an integral part of our social and economic systems.
In our complex society, advertising has evolved into a vital communications system for both consumers and businesses.
The ability of advertising and other promotional methods to deliver carefully prepared messages to target audiences has therefore given them a major role in the marketing programs of most organizations, (Belch and Belch, 2003).
Companies ranging from large multinational corporations to small retailers increasingly rely on advertising and promotion to help them market products and services.
In market-based economies, consumers have learned to rely on advertising and other forms of promotion for information they can use in making purchase decisions.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of unit, you should be able to vividly explain the role and relevance of global advertising and promotions 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Roles and of International Advertising and Promotion As a component of integrated marketing communication mix, advertising and promotion play a good number of roles in the international market.
These roles that had made it relevant to global brands cab be 17  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) discussed under two major subheadings: its role as an element of marketing mix, and its role in the international society Role of Advertising and Promotion in Marketing Mix Marketing mix consist of four important variables of marketing, i.e.
4Ps- Product, Price, Promotion and Place.
Apart from the traditional 4 Ps, there are also other variables, i.e.
Packaging, Position, and Pace.
Advertising is an element of promotion.
However, it not only assists in promoting the product, but also affects the other variables of marketing mix.
This can be explained as follows: 1.
Advertising and Product: A product is normally a set of physical elements, such as quality, shape, size, colour and other features.
The product may be of very high quality.
At times, the product is so designed that it requires careful handling and operations.
Buyers must be informed and educated on the various aspects of the product.
This can be effectively done through advertising.
Thus, advertising plays the role of information and education.
2.
Advertising and Price: The price is the exchange value of the product.
A marketer may bring out a very high quality product with additional features as compared to competitors.
In such a case, price would be definitely high.
But buyers may not be willing to pay a high price.
Here comes advertising.
Advertising can convince buyers regarding the superiority of the brand and thus its value for money.
This can be done by associating the product with prestigious people, situations, or events.
Alternatively when a firm offers a low price products the job of advertising needs to stress the price advantage by using hard hitting copy.
It is not just enough to convince, but it is desirable to persuade the buyer.
Thus advertising plays the role of conviction and persuasion.
3.
Advertising and Place: Place refers to physical distribution and the stores where the goods are available Marketer should see to it that the goods are available at the convenient place and that too at the right time when the buyers need it.
To facilitate effective distribution and expansion of market, advertising is of great significance.
Thus advertising do help in effective distribution and market expansion.
4.
Advertising and Promotion: Promotion consists of advertising, publicity, personal selling and sales promotion technique.
Businessmen today have to face a lot of competition.
Every seller needs effective promotion to survive and succeed in this competitive business world.
Advertising can play a significant role to put forward the claim of seller, 18  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) and to counter the claims of competitor.
Through effective advertising, sellers can face competition and also help to develop brand image and brand loyalty.
5.
Advertising and Pace: Pace refers to the speed in marketing decisions and actions.
It involves among other things the launch of new products or brand variations at greater speed than before.
As and when new brands are launched, advertising plays an important role of informing, educating and persuading the customers to buy the product.
6.
Advertising and Packaging: The main purpose of packaging is protection of the product during transit, and preservation of quality and quantity.
Nowadays, marketers take lot of efforts to develop and design attractive packages as they carry advertising value.
A creatively design package attract the attention of the customers.
It also carries an assurance of quality and creates confidence in the minds of customers to buy the product.
7.
Advertising and Positioning: Product positioning aims at creating and maintaining a distinct image of the brands in the minds of the customers.
Through advertising the marketer can convey the positioning of the brand and accordingly can influence the buying decision of the target audience.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Why is international advertising and promotion necessary?
Role and Relevance of Advertising and Promotion in the Global Society Advertising is the integral part of every day's life.
It is a pervasive method of marketing in society.
Though the methods by which marketers advertise have changed over the decades, the role and purpose of advertising has changed over the period of time.
Without advertising modern society cannot survive .Advertising and promotion play the following roles in the society.
Encourage Purchasing Encouraging people to purchase goods and services is the main role of advertising.
Some industries rely on advertising more than others: A cereal company, for instance, must advertise more aggressively, due to the wide arrange of competing products, than a power company that faces little to no 19  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) competition.
Advertisers often influence members of society to purchase products based on instilling a feeling of scarcity or lack.
.
Reflect Cultural Trends Advertising bridges the gap among people by communicating varied culture through advertising message.
It bring variation in the social life.
Promotes Economic Growth Advertising contributes to bring about all round development of the economy by increasing demand and by encouraging economic activities it fuels the desire to shop and, in turn, shopping stimulates the economy.
Improves Standard of Living Advertising is an economic activity.
It provides opportunities to people to improve their income.
It motivates people to consume more material and thereby improves their standard of living.
Provides employment: Effective advertising generates demand for goods and services.
high demand calls for more production which requires more of physical and human resources thus creating employment opportunities.
Advertising and Brand building Brands are the identification that differentiates one business from another (through name, symbol etc.).
However, today brands can also be defined as the personality they reflect to people in relation to status, emotional characteristics and subjective quality.
Advertising and promotions is one of the key elements in building a brand which is equally important to the marketer and consumers.
Advertising by creating or reinforcing brand's personality enhances brand value or equity which in turn can be leveraged through brand extension.
Brand personality also helps brands to gain market share, command price premium and insulates from discounting Brands.
Building a strong brand name is key factor for business success.
In the competitive business environment of today, consumer sophistication has altered business practices.
Organizations are forced to anticipate customers' needs and convey clear messages to consumers by establishing strong brand names and focusing on brand building.
In consumers' minds, a brand is more than just a recognizable name: it is a promise that needs to be met on a regular basis.
Advertising is important for 20  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) building brand awareness.
By raising consumer interest and making consumers awareness of their products and services, firms not only expand their customer base, but they also keep their loyal customers and increase their market share.
In other words, the more aware consumers are of a brand, the more likely they are to buy from a particular business.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  How does advertising help in branding?
4.0.
CONCLUSION From its sociological conception as a communication process that relies heavily on persuasion, advertising has grown to become a vital sector that drives growth in the economy both at the local and international fronts.
5.0.
SUMMARY Being part of the marketing mix, advertising enhances purchase thereby boosting commerce.
It reflects the cultural values of the society in which it takes place.
Overall, advertising helps to improve a society’s standard of living.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  How does advertising differ from promotion in marketing?
7.0.
REFERNCES/FURTHER READING Belch, G. E. and Belch, M. A.
(2003).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspectives.
NY:The McGraw−Hill Companies.
21  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 4: ADVERTISING: A TOOL FOR SOCIAL ENGINEERING IN A GLOBALISED WORLD 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objective 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
The meaning and definition of Social Engineering 3.2.
The Historical Development of Social Engineering 3.3.
The Roles of Advertising in Social Engineering 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0.
References / Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION 2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to understand:  The meaning and definition of social engineering,  The historical development of social engineering, and  The role of advertising in social engineering.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
The Meaning and Definition of Social Engineering Social engineering is a discipline in social science that refers to efforts to influence popular attitudes and social behaviors on a large scale, whether by governments or private groups.
A social engineer is one who tries to influence popular attitudes, social behaviors, and resource management on a large scale.
Social engineering is the application of the scientific method for social concern.
Social engineers use the methods of science to analyze and understand social systems, so as to arrive at appropriate decisions as scientists, and not as politicians.
In the political arena, the counterpart of social engineering is political engineering.
22  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Decision-making can affect the safety and survival of literally billions of people.
As expressed by German sociologist Ferdinand Tönnies in his study The Present Problems of Social Structure, society can no longer operate successfully using outmoded methods of social management.
To achieve the best outcomes, all conclusions and decisions must use the most advanced techniques and include reliable statistical data, which can be applied to a social system.
In other words, social engineering is a data- based scientific system used to develop a sustainable design so as to achieve the intelligent management of Earth’s resources with the highest levels of freedom, prosperity, and happiness within a population.
For various reasons, the term has been imbued with negative connotations.
However, virtually all law and governance has the effect of seeking to change behavior and could be considered "social engineering" to some extent.
Prohibitions on murder, rape, suicide and littering are all policies aimed at discouraging undesirable behaviors.
In British and Canadian jurisprudence, changing public attitudes about a behaviour is accepted as one of the key functions of laws prohibiting it.
Governments also influence behavior more subtly through incentives and disincentives built into economic policy and tax policy, for instance, and have done so for centuries.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  In your own terms, define social engineering.
3.2 The Historical Development of Social Engineering The term sociale ingenieurs was introduced in an essay by the Dutch industrialist J.C. Van Marken in 1894.
The idea was that modern employers needed the assistance of specialists—"social engineers"—in handling the human problems of the planet, just as they needed technical expertise (ordinary engineers) to deal with the problems of dead matter (materials, machines, processes).
The term was brought to America in 1899, when the notion of "social engineering" was also launched as the name of the task of the social engineer in this sense.
"Social engineering" was the title of a small journal in 1899 (from 1900 named "Social Service"), and in 1909 the title of a book by its former editor, William H. Tolman (translated in French in 1910), marking the end of the usage of the terminology in the sense of Van Marken.
With the Social Gospel sociologist Edwin L. Earp's The Social Engineer, published during the "efficiency craze" of 1911 in the U.S., the usage of the term was launched that has since then been standard: the one building on a metaphor of social relations as "machineries", Östlund, (2007), to be dealt with in the manner of the technical engineer.
23  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Before one can engage in social engineering, one must have reliable information about the society that is to be engineered and effective tools to carry out the engineering.
Both of these became available only relatively recently: roughly within the past one hundred years.
The development of social science made it possible to gather and analyze information about social attitudes and trends, which is necessary in order to judge the initial state of society before an engineering attempt and the success or failure of that attempt after it has been implemented.
At the same time, the development of modern communications technology and the media provided the tools through which social engineering could be carried out.
While social engineering can be carried out by any organization.
whether large or small, public or private, the most comprehensive (and often the most effective) campaigns of social engineering are those initiated by powerful central governments.
Extremely intensive social engineering campaigns occurred in countries with authoritarian governments.
In the 1920s, the government of the Soviet Union embarked on a campaign to fundamentally alter the behavior and ideals of Soviet citizens, to replace the old social frameworks of Tsarist Russia with a new Soviet culture, to create the New Soviet man.
The Soviets used newspapers, books, film, mass relocations, and even architectural design tactics to serve as "social condenser" and change personal values and private relationships.
Similar examples are the Chinese "Great Leap Forward" and "Cultural Revolution" program and the Khmer Rouge's plan of deurbanization of Cambodia.
In Singapore, the government's housing policies attempt to promote a mix of all races within each subsidized housing district in order to foster social cohesion and national loyalty while providing the citizens with affordable housing In Tanzania in the 1970s, the government pursued a policy of enforced villagisation under Operation Vijiji in order to promote collective farming, (Lange, 2008) Non-authoritarian regimes tend to rely on more sustained social engineering campaigns that create more gradual, but ultimately far- reaching, change.
Examples include the "War on Drugs" in the United States, the increasing reach of intellectual property rights and copyright, and the promotion of elections as a political tool.
The campaign for promoting elections, which is by far the most successful of the three examples, has been in place for over two centuries.
Social theorists of the Frankfurt School in Weimar Germany like Theodor Adorno had also observed the new phenomenon of mass culture and commented on its new manipulative power, when the rise of the Nazis drove them out of the 24  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) country around 1930 (many of them became connected with the Institute for Social Research in the United States).
The Nazis themselves were no strangers to the idea of influencing political attitudes and redefining personal relationships.
The Nazi propaganda machine under Joseph Goebbels was a synchronized, sophisticated and effective tool for creating public opinion.
In a similar vein the Greek military junta of 1967–1974 attempted to steer Greek public opinion not only by propaganda but also by inventing new words and slogans such as palaiokommatismos (old-partyism), Ellas Ellinon Christianon (Greece of Christian Greeks), and Ethnosotirios Epanastasis (nation-saving revolution, meaning coup d'état).
Social engineering can be used as a means to achieve a wide variety of different results, as illustrated by the different governments and other organizations that have employed it.
The discussion of the possibilities for such manipulation became especially active following World War II, with the advent of television, and continuing discussion of techniques of social engineering, particularly in advertising, is still quite pertinent in the western model of consumer capitalism.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Trace the history of social engineering.
3.3 The Role of Advertising in Social Engineering Advertising, like other medium of communication for reorientation and behavioural change, performs a good number of roles in social engineering.
Among them are:  It serves as a tool for social engineering  Reinforces belief and value system advocated by the social engineers  Takes the desired information to the target audience with little overhead cost  Serves as a link between the society and the social engineers SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What are the roles of advertising in Social Engineering?
4.0.
CONCLUSION From the much you have learnt so far, we can deduce that beyond its impact in sales promotion and trade, advertising has also proven to be an effective tool for social engineering.
25  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 5.0.
SUMMARY Social engineering is a reference made to efforts aimed at influencing popular attitudes and behaviours.
This could be by individuals, corporate bodies or governments.
Governments’ efforts at prohibiting crime, improving health and encouraging citizens to pay tax can be termed “social engineering” since it is aimed at changing behavior.
As a tool for social engineering, advertising serves as a link between a society and the group seeking for change.
By bringing information to the target audience, advertising helps to reinforce beliefs and value system desired by the social engineers.
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT  Explain the relationship between advertising, propaganda and social engineering.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READING David Östlund, (2007).
“A knower and friend of human beings, not machines: The business career of the terminology of social engineering.
http://www.ideasinhistory.org/cms/index.php?page=a- knower-and-friend-of- human-beings Lange, Siri.
(2008) Land Tenure and Mining In Tanzania.
Bergen: Chr.
Michelson Institute, p. 2 26  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 5: BARRIERS TO INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING AND CAMPAIGNS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objective 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Barriers to International Advertising and Campaigns 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0.
References / Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION Increasingly, it is possible to launch products worldwide.
With the aid of the web, a traditional beverage-maker in a village like Ofante-Ogugu, Olamaboro Local Government Area of Kogi State, Nigeria, can serve the world (assuming that food regulations do not get infringed along the way).
For many years, marketers have tried consciously to develop international advertising campaigns—and many were using them that way long ago, without stopping to think how they might be received in “foreign” parts.
As a successful example, towards the end of 2001 the world welcomed a global hit movie: Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone.
However, in the US it had to be called Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone.
Apart from that, the movie is a highly successful global brand, as are the books on which the current films are based.
Harry Potter is, in fact, a nice illustration of the potential, and the pitfalls, of international marketing.
If you can find a story with near-universal appeal, and attach it to a product that is very widely acceptable, you can have a global brand.
Not every marketer is so lucky.
It is usually very hard to find how best to fit a brand into the often-conflicting needs, desires, attitudes and aspirations of several different cultures.
The many complex practical, legal and logistical difficulties involved should not be forgotten, as well as all the problems arising from differences in culture and language, market maturity and market position.
27  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) One formula will not fit all.
Jon Wilkins (2002) as cited in Oravský, (2001/2002), draws upon the findings of a very large database of advertisement pre- and post-tests in Europe and the Americas to demonstrate that few ads travel well.
Differences from country to country in such factors as the position of the brand and the relations to persuasion of particular executional styles (for example, testimonial, demonstration, atmosphere or humor) mean that the advertising mechanisms that work best must reflect market conditions, cultural differences and brand history.
There is thus a need to look for similarities in behaviour and in attitudes that cross national boundaries, feed them into the creative development process and, if possible, produce adverts that deliver good in-market results cross-nationally.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit therefore, you should be able to clearly explain the possible barriers of global advertising.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Barriers to International Advertising and Campaigns A lot of factors have been identified to pose serious challenge to global advertising practices.
Among them are Communication infrastructure, Agencies might not serve a particular market, Consumer literacy, Legal restrictions and self-regulation, Differing values and purchase motivations, Attitudes toward product country of origin, Promotional mix elements, Differences in culture, market and economic development make it difficult to use global advertising, Consumer needs and usage patterns often vary by country or region, Media availability or usage may vary by country or region, Legal restrictions may make it difficult to develop an effective universal appeal.
These factors were further grouped into two main categories by Jon Wilkins (2002) as cited in Oravský, (2001/2002).
These are market and cultural differences.
a) Market differences:  Economic factors: The stage of development and state of the economy play a fundamental role.
What is affordable to most in the US may be a luxury in less wealthy markets, affecting the tone and positioning of the advertising.
 Media environment: Although global media exist, all markets have their local media landscapes.
This affects which media people encounter and 28  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) how people consume advertising.
It is important to note that limitations on creative strategy imposed by media may diminish the role of advertising in the promotional programme and may force marketers to emphasize other elements of the marketing mix.
Creative advertisers in some countries have even developed their own media for overcoming media limitations.
In some African countries, advertisers run boats up and down the rivers playing popular music and broadcasting commercials into the bush as they travel.
 Advertising regulations/restrictions: Sometimes regulations may prohibit advertising to certain target groups or products altogether—to children in Sweden, or for cigarettes in many countries.
They can also restrict the content permitted.
 Category development: This is one of the most common variables facing advertisers and is a popular means of segmenting markets into less- developed and better-developed groupings.
For example, categories are very different in mobile telecommunications markets in Western Europe and the Middle East.
 Competitive development: Though your own brand may be international, the competitive set can vary widely between countries, both in number and positioning.
Contrast the competitive context for San Miguel beer in Spain and the UK.
Equally, order of entry into the market may play a key role, even if the main brands are the same.
b) Consumer differences:  Cultural differences: The cultural heritage, values and habits of a country (and different groups within it) influence perceptions and reactions to creative styles, driving the use of humor, settings, casting and tonality.
The attitude toward consumption of snacks such as crisps in the UK is entirely different, for example, from Spain, where consumers generally follow regular meal patterns.
The problems of communicating to people in diverse cultures are one of the great creative challenges in advertising.
Communications is more difficult because cultural factors largely determine the way various phenomena are perceived.
International marketers are becoming accustomed to the problems of adapting from culture to culture.
Knowledge of differing symbolism of colors is a basic part of the international marketer’s encyclopedia.
Color is a small part of the communications package, but if the symbolism in each culture is understood, the marketer has an educated choice of using or not using various colors.
 Communication syntax: Language is one of the major barriers to effective communication through advertising.
The problem involves the different 29  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) languages of different countries, different languages or dialects within one country, and the subtler problems of linguistic nuance and vernacular.
Each country has social habits or values that influence the expression of emotions, gestures, facial expressions, body language and even verbal communication.
 Experience with the brand: How consumers use, consume and interact with the brand may differ, as may their level of experience of the brand.
The consumer and market differences proposed by Jon Wilkins highlight some important factors that limit the scope for finding common conditions across markets.
There are clearly many more detailed factors and examples that add further difficulties.
For instance, if we focus now on the cultural differences and follow Marieke de Mooij’s hypothesis that “all aspects of consumer behavior are culture-bound and not subject merely to environmental factors”,1 it becomes clear that we need some help in order to identify the differences in consumer behavior across countries.
At the end of the 20th century, the Dutch cultural anthropologist Geert Hofstede conducted very interesting research work that shed some light on the problem.
He performed detailed interviews with hundreds of IBM employees in 53 countries.
Through standard statistical analysis of fairly large data sets, he was able to determine patterns of similarities and differences among the replies.
From this data analysis, he formulated his theory: that world cultures vary along consistent, fundamental dimensions.
More importantly, he identified those dimensions and catalogued countries according to them.
In my opinion, there are some weaknesses that invalidate his work to a certain extent.
For instance, he maintained that each country has just one dominant culture, when that is not always necessarily the case.
Nonetheless, the general framework he designed is very useful for marketers; it is a good starting point, as authors like De Mooij have acknowledged.
Hofstede (1997) identified five dimensions of culture: collectivism vs. individualism, femininity vs. masculinity, uncertainty avoidance, power distance, and long- vs. short-term orientation: a. Collectivism vs. individualism: Individualist cultures typically emphasize the goals of the individual, individual initiative and achievement, more dominantly than collectivist societies, which are 30  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) more concerned with collective goals and the group as a whole.
In advertising, individualist societies rely more heavily on facts and figures to determine the optimum outcome, whereas collectivist societies put a greater emphasis on personal relationships and group harmony.
b. Femininity vs. masculinity: Masculine cultures typically favor assertive, competitive and tough attitudes, whereas feminine cultures emphasize caring and tender attitudes.
Typically, masculine societies offer higher rewards and favor a challenging and competitive environment, whereas in feminine societies the emphasis is more on good relationships and cooperation.
c. Uncertainty avoidance: The degree of risk aversion in a society is central to this dimension.
Countries that score low in uncertainty avoidance typically favor taking risks, trying new ways and using novel approaches.
Societies that score high, however, tend to put greater emphasis on the “tried and tested” methods, are unlikely to take on high risks, and are generally considered to be averse to ambiguity.
d. Power distance: This dimension is concerned with the respect for authority, hierarchy and status.
The respect for authority and status are typically more dominant in high-power-distance countries than low power- distance countries, where decisions from the top can (and should) usually be questioned and are typically based on reasoning and factual information.
In extremely high-power-distance countries, the respect for authority figures, such as teachers, superior managers and parents, is generally so high that their decisions are not questioned and have to be obeyed.
e. Long-term orientation: This dimension is typically concerned with the time frame in which the individual operates.
Short-term orientation is primarily concerned with the present and immediate future, such as favoring immediate benefits over long-term gain.
The emphasis in long term-oriented cultures is more clearly on the continuity of the past to the future, such as the adaptation of traditions to modern life, and the perseverance towards slow gains.
Hofstede notes that some relativism is necessary since not everyone in a society fits the cultural pattern precisely.
However, there is enough statistical regularity to identify trends and tendencies.
The good thing for international marketers is that these trends and tendencies, visualized in the country ratings, can be used to their advantage.
“Post-globalization” markets are those regions in which most peoples’ needs and wishes are increasingly being 31  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) homogenized—even with strong opposition from anti-globalization defenders.
They are significantly bigger and consequently more attractive than the old home markets, but are also infinitely more complex.
There are many local rules and expectations, particularly in terms of differences betweens markets and consumers.
Among the consumer differences, culture is one of the most important aspects, since as Mooij (1998: 288) suggests, “consumer behavior is culture bound”.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What are the barriers to international advertising and how significant are the barriers in international advertising?
4.0.
CONCLUSION International advertising despite its glamour and fun fare has some daunting challenges.
For the industry to thrive more, those challenges must be overcome by the players in the industry.
5.0.
SUMMARY Global advertising is confronted with assorted problems and barriers ranging from poor communication and media network in some countries to mass media restrictions and regulations in some others.
Other barriers include cultural inhibitions as well as unequal market structures in different countries across the world.
Above all is the disparity in economic resources across the globe.
6.0.
TUTOR- MARKED ASSESSMENT  Despite the height attained by globalization, international advertising still has obstacles.
Explain in detail five of such obstacles.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Mooij, Marieke De (1998): Global Marketing and Advertising.
Understanding Cultural Paradoxes.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Inc. Oravský, D. (2001/2002).
International Advertising and Promotion Effort.
Comenius University Faculty of Managemet, Assessed Work 32  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 6: OVERCOMING THE CHALLENGES FACING INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objective 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Overcoming the challenges facing International Advertising 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0.
References / Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION An important assignment of a manager in globally oriented company is to understand all limitations on national and foreign target markets (differences in culture, limitations of media, complex regulations etc.)
and to develop advertising strategy which will enable the real message to be transferred at the right time and in the right manner to prospective customers.
Along the line the company can sustain failures a) if the message doesn't reach the recipient due to inadequate media, b) if the message is received by prospective recipients and is understood but does not affect the public since the market researcher didn't adequately evaluate needs and wishes of the aimed at market.
Managers who understand the process of communication can, more efficiently, develop program of global promotion under conditions of varied environment.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to appreciate the various techniques that could be employed in order to surmount the various barriers to effective global advertising.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Overcoming the Challenges Facing International advertising Many scholars have tried to outline various ways of overcoming such challenges associated with global advertising such as language, culture, media, barriers, etc.
however, it is important to note that overcoming the many barriers bedeviling global advertising requires a lot of efforts and 33  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) dexterity from the brand marketer and the advertising agent handling the account.
Global advertising is more or less uniformed for markets of number countries and often (yet not always) presupposes the use of means of media of global range.
There are global prototypes in which the sound and visual effect can be used to avoid language and cultural barriers.
For example Colgate-Palmolive and Coca-Cola companies often use prototype advertisements.
These are followed by instructions for acceptable changes in prototypes; ideas for creative changes and suggestions for acceptable media follow these commercials.
Localized advertising can be global in its essence.
Contrary to that in multinational advertising messages and/or their creative implementation is modified to the demands of certain markets, (Milovanović, 1997).
According to Milovanović, to fulfilling efficient communication and persuasion through advertising messages and strategy of media it is necessary to change commercials, messages and promotion strategy and to modify it to demands of local markets and regions.
However, modification of advertisements too preferential of local markets demands creativity.
For example a commercial in Arabic for men's perfume "Drakkar Noir" showed a woman's hand stroking man's hand holding the perfume; in USA the same hand hold the wrist of a man.
Accepting such differences the promoter avoids possibilities of appearance of unacceptable commercials.
In France it is unacceptable to have a commercial showing cheese and a glass of beer.
Such a commercial would be in accordance with habits of Germans whereas in France the acceptable combination would be cheese and wine (Keegan, 1989:499).
Certain modifications in advertising are the way to answer demand of different cultures.
For example, Goodyear Tire & Rubber in 39 countries used a slogan "Goodyear, take me home" but there were certain differences.
For instance in Philippine they stressed certain emotional family scenes while in Brazil they ended these with a visual joke.
Similar to that "Kellogg" used frizzed flakes in similar commercials worldwide (using different names in different countries) (O'Shaughnessy 1992:463).
A considerable number of globally oriented companies use popular pop stars in global advertisements.
For instance, Michael Jackson is shown in the main role in Pepsi commercial around the world including Russia.
Tina Turner was also in Pepsi global commercials.
When Pepsi wished to localize the commercial it made a generic version.
Tina Turner was video taped on a stage.
The tape was then sent to different countries 34  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) where her voice was synchronized by local stars in local tongues (Business International, 1988:210).
It can be deducted that global products need global advertising.
It is often the case.
For instance promotion campaigns of Swatch, Benetton and Reebok are similar on all continents.
Yet, it is always needed to adapt global campaigns local markets.
For example, a Levi's jeans are a global product with a globally recognized brand but it aims at specific markets with different appeals for each of these.
Only positioning of products and brands vary as differences vary among aimed markets (Johansson, 1997:550-551).
Sometimes global advertising of a global brand mishaps and company must turn to multinational adaptation.
For example, Parker Pen Company sold pens under the same name on all markets and with support of global advertising.
However because of downfall of sale in the mid-eighties it had to return to multinational advertising strategy i.e.
to meet demands of individual markets.
So in Germany printed commercials showed a hand with Parker pen writing, "This is how you write with precision".
In Great Britain, where this brand is a leader, exotic scenes prevailed in commercials (tender stroking of golden point with a nutshell).
Commercials in USA point out the status and image.
There were two interesting commercials "you walk into a boardroom and everyone's naked" and "there is a time when it has to be a Parker".
A different content in commercials was conditioned by the image of a product and different motive of consumers on different markets (Cateora , 1990:462-463).
So even if a company sells the same products worldwide it is not realistic to expect that they will demand uniformed commercials.
Cultural and economic differences between countries and markets often demand off hand difference between basic advertising appeal and creative implementation of that appeal to be made on local markets.
For example the basic appeal of S. C. Johnson company, for advertising shaving foam "Edge", is smooth shaving.
To demonstrate such advantages of the foam in USA the company used certain creativity using a credit card.
A man strokes his face with a credit card.
The side, which used "Edge" foam, is smoother and softer than the other side which used some other brand.
Appeal of smooth shaving could be spread on to global markets.
Yet, on many markets, non-existence of credit cards would limit creativity of such an appeal so overall efforts would be inefficient.
In producing commodities, the possibility of using the same appeal is far greater than in consuming commodities.
Producing commodities are bought 35  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) and used in the same way and for the same reason in every country.
In many consuming commodities a possibility of using the same appeal.
However a considerable number of marketing experts holds that consuming good depends so much on local demands that it's impossible to use any element of mix marketing on foreign markets.
Translating the message is a subject of great debates among experts in this field.
According to Milovanović (1997), efficient translation demands: 1) good knowledge of original language and the one into which it is being translated 2) good knowledge of technical aspects of the product and special appeals about the product and ability to write text, which can recreate and affect.
Before deciding whether to make a new commercial for foreign market or to simply have it translated into the local tongue the expert must be sure that when the text is translated will be accepted and understood by prospective consumers.
The expert must think in the language into which he wants to translate the message and to understand connotations of words, phrases and their meaning to evaluate whether the message will be accepted and properly understood.
A creative translation is very important rather than literal meaning.
It is a condition of good communication.
Again, well formulated of translated message can increase covering the market, sale and profit.
However hundreds of examples of wrong formulation and translation are in existence.
For example, advertising of Chevrolet's car "Nova" was not accepted on the Spanish market since in Spanish "No Va" means "Doesn't go".
Likewise the message of Esso Company ("Put a tiger in your tank") was a success in USA but not in some countries in Europe and Asia.
Modifications were necessary to be consistent with preferences, wishes and attitudes of markets in individual countries.
In France, the word "tank" means reservoir yet in this message it would mean oily (risqué) so that motor would be an adequate substitute for tank.
The message had to be modified in Thailand not to be wrongly understood since the tiger is not a symbol of strength in that country.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What is the importance of language and culture in international advertising?
4.0 CONCLUSION The barriers in international advertising are surmountable as long as advertising professionals take time to domesticate or localize messages to suit specific locations.
Message modifications can help avoid breaking cultural values.
5.0.
SUMMARY 36  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) The presence of numerous cultural, economic, political and other differences between the markets of certain countries demands that the managers adopt the advertising strategies and/or messages to the demands of local markets.
Also, those differences demand before all, before making final decisions about taking promotional actions of the foreign markets, that the managers consult the experts for those markets or to confine the creating of promotional actions and implementation of promotional actions to the local advertising agencies.
With the help of local national advertising agencies, which have the access to the global network, the managers of the globally oriented enterprises will be able to avoid the doubling of the advertising efforts and also to increase the rational use of budget of advertising.
Finally, some brands of the product, in some countries, will be promoted more effectively by implementation of standard advertising messages, while for the others, however, the local (modified) advertising messages will be needed 6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT  How can the barriers against international advertising be surmounted?
7.0.
REFERNCES/FURTHER READING Business International (1988).
Global Marketing Campaigns with a Local Touch.
July 4 Cateora, Ph.
R. (1990).
International Marketing, Seventh Edition.
Boston: IRWIN.
Johansson, J. K. (1997).
Global Marketing: Foreign Entry, Local Marketing, and Global Management.
Chicago: IRWIN.
Keegan, W.J., Global Marketing Management, Forth Edition, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1989.
Milovanović, G. (1997).
Marketing Dimensions of Global Advertising.
The scientific Journal Facta Universitatis Series: Economics and Organization, Vol.1, No 5,1997 pp.
71 – 78.
UDC: 339.138;658.8 O'Shaughnessy, J.
(1992).
Competitive Marketing: A Strategic Approach, Third Edition.
London Routledge.
37  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) MODULE 2: PROPAGANDA: NATURE AND APPLICATION Unit 1: Propaganda: a coin of two faces Unit 2: Origin of propaganda Unit 3: Principles and characteristics of propaganda Unit 4: Functions and usages of propaganda Unit 5: Criticism against propaganda Unit 6: Propaganda as a tool in international advertising and diplomacy UNIT 1: PROPAGANDA: A COIN OF TWO FACES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1.
Meaning of propaganda 3.2.
Propaganda; A coin of two faces 3.2.1 Advantages of propaganda 3.2.2 Disadvantages of propaganda 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0.
Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Over the years, propaganda as a form of persuasion has come under the scrutiny of scholars.
Much of it has been very controversial.
While some see it as a desirable form of persuasion, others see it as full of deceit and therefore harmful to a society.
This unit presents a general overview of what propaganda is and outlines the nature as well as the merits and demerits of propaganda.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (i) Explain what propaganda means (ii) Discuss why it is likened to a coin with two faces 38  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) (iii) Know the advantages and disadvantages involved in the use of propaganda 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
What is Propaganda?
Much of human communication is centred on persuasion.
Persuasion is the act of influencing others to behave in a manner desired by a communicator.
This is usually achieved by adducing reasons why the desired action is better than the one preferred by the recipient of a persuasive message.
Every time we open a book, a newspaper or magazine; every time we tune to one radio station, television station or the other, we see someone is trying to educate us, to convince us to buy a particular product and forgo another, to persuade us to vote a particular issue that is right and preferable.
This level of persuasion is mostly done through advertising.
Like advertising, propaganda, too, aims to persuade.
Yet, the two are not the same-thing.
What then is propaganda?
Propaganda is the communication of a view point with the goal of having the recipient of the appeal come to “voluntary” acceptance of the communicator’s position as if it were his or her own.
It is a form of communication aimed towards influencing the attitude of the community toward some cause or position by presenting only one side of an argument.
The world book encyclopedia (Vol.15) defined it as a one-sided communication designed to influence people’s thinking and actions.
3.2.
Propaganda: A Coin of Two Faces Propaganda messages may be partly false and partly true.
Propaganda is usually repeated and dispersed over a wide variety of media in order to create the chosen result in audience attitudes.
Juxtaposed with unbiased and impartial provision of information, propaganda more often than not, attempts to provide information basically to influence an audience.
Often facts are selectively presented (heightening the possibility of lying by omission) to encourage acceptance of a desired idea.
Propaganda messages are coined to produce emotional rather than rational response to the information provided.
The desired aim and result is a change of attitude towards a political religious, cultural, commercial agenda.
As utilized 39  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) during the Nazi era in Germany and in totalitarian regimes in most of eastern Europe then, propaganda was associated with the massive dissemination of biased ideas, opinions, often through the used of his and deception.
Over time, scholars have come to agree that propaganda “is a coin with two faces”.
Or influence through the manipulation of symbols and the psychology of the individual.
This could be for very good reasons ranging from campaign to embrace better hygiene, the need to pay tax, the need to participate in elections to the need to participate in censuses.
In recent times, people have discovered that propaganda is not essentially mischievous communication.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Is propaganda really a mischievous concept?
3.2.1 Advantages of Propaganda  It enhances the recruitment of men and women for a national or a communal cause.
 In times of war, it helps to raise human and material resources  It affords professionals in the field a means of livelihood  It enhances economic growth because much of the propaganda messages run on one Mass Media or the other and they are paid for.
3.2.2.
Disadvantages of Propaganda  Where propaganda is built on deception, it can backfire the day the truth manifests.
This makes the propagandist lack credibility.
 It can cause disaffection when the recipients do not buy the idea involved in it.
 Based on the above, it could lead to a lot of economic waste.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What are the advantages and disadvantages of propaganda?
4.0 CONCLUSION We have seen that propaganda started on a positive note because it was actually meant to enhance the propagation of the catholic doctrines.
The ideological differences between the catholic and protestant worlds gave 40  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) propaganda its negative and positive connotations.
Because of its use for political reasons, propaganda has assumed the status of “a coin with two faces”.
It can be used for good or bad causes depending on the sanity of the user.
5.0 SUMMARY Propaganda has to do with persuading recipients for a cause.
There is a great deal of manipulation – using language, signs and symbols in propaganda.
Propaganda messages may be partly false and may be partly true.
The propagandist selects the ‘truth’ that will further the cause while it has its benefits, propaganda has its disadvantages.
It can help mobiles a society for a worthy cause but at the same time can bring lack of creditability to the propagandist if it is built on deceit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Is propaganda necessary in human society?
 Give at least four reasons for your answer.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Billing, M. (1987).
Arguing and Thinking.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cialdini, R.B (1984).
Influence.
New York: William Morrow Fiske, S.T.
& Taylor, S.E (1991).
Social Cognation.
New York: Mc Graw- Hill.
Holifild, E.B (1989).
Era of Persuasion: American Thought and Culture, 1521-1680.
Boston:Twayne.
The World encyclopedia.
(1997) Vol.15.
USA: The World International Packard, V. (1957).
The Hidden Persuaders.
New York:Mc Graw-Hill.
41  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 2: ORIGIN OF PROPAGANDA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Origin of Propaganda 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The negative colouration of propaganda will make some persons surprised to know that the word has roots in religion.
This unit offers an insight into the origin of propaganda and how it started from the church.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Understand and explain the origin of propaganda  Understand why propaganda has negative connotation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ORIGIN OF PROPAGANDA In the 1600’s, the Roman Catholic Church was engaged in mostly unsuccessful holy wars to re-establish the faith by force of arms.
Realizing that this was a failing effort, Pope Gregory XV established the Sacra Congregation de propaganda fide in 1622.
This Papal effort saw propaganda as a means of persuading men and women to accept Catholic ideals and doctrines.
It was easy for the word to wear a negative gown in protestant countries but a positive connotation (just like preaching, teaching or education in catholic areas (Pratkaris & Aronson, 1992).
42  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Propaganda’s negative connotations became more manifest in the early 20th century, when it was used to describe the persuasion methods used by the Nazi Germans during the World War I and later by totalitarian regimes.
It is important to note that not all persuasion is propaganda.
According to Pratkanis and Aronson (1992:9), “the classical rhetoric theories of the early Greeks and Romans which were avidly studied by those responsible for crafting the governments of western Europe and America prized discourse that could illuminate the issue at hand.
Such persuasion could take the form of an argument, a debate, a discussion, or just a well-argued speech presenting the case for or against a given proposition.
The end result was an education for both the audience and the speakers”.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Trace the evolution of propaganda from 1622 to the present day.
4.0 CONCLUSION Propaganda started with noble intentions but due to its use by political demagogues over the years, it has grown to assume negative connotations.
5.0 SUMMARY In 1622, Pope XV established a congregation for the propagation of the Catholic faith otherwise called “Sacra congregation de propaganda fide.” The Pope had by then realized that rather than through wars, the faith cold be better spread by persuasion.
The differences in ideals in protestant and Catholic societies gave propaganda its different shades of meanings.
In the Catholic world, it meant preaching, teaching or education but in protestant climes, the word became associated with falsehood and deception.
The use of which propaganda has been put over the years in politics around the world has made the negative connotation of it more reinforced.
Example of such usage was during the war efforts of Nazi Germany under Adolf Hitler and the various totalitarian regimes of Eastern Europe.
Hitler succeeded in using propaganda to mobilize the German populace into war based on the idea that they are superior to all other races in the world.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Is propaganda a necessary tool for evangelism?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dilenschneider, R.L (1990).
Power and Influence.
New York; Prentice Hall.
43  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Fox, S. (1984) The Mirror Makers.
New York: Morrow Petty, R.E.
& Cacioppo, J.T.
(1981) Attitudes and Persuasion: Classic and Contemporary Approaches.
New York; Springer-verlag.
Pratkanis, A.R Elliot, A.
(1992) Age of Propaganda.
New York; W.H., Freeman and Company.
44  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT3: PRINCIPLES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF PROPAGANDA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Principles and characteristics of propaganda 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Propaganda like other forms of persuasion has some fundamental principles and characteristics.
This chapter treats in detail these principles and characteristics that distinguish propaganda from advertising and public relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  Understand –how propaganda works  Identify propaganda messages when you are confronted with any.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principles and characteristics of propaganda Joseph Goebbels was Adolf Hitler’s minister of Propaganda during World War II.
Based on his ideas, the following are principles of propaganda:  The propagandist must be knowledgeable about events and public opinion.
 Propaganda must be planned and executed by one authority  The propaganda consequences of an action must be considered in planning that action.
 Propaganda must negatively affect the enemy’s policy and action.
 Declassified operational information must be available to implement a propaganda campaign.
 Propaganda must arouse the interest of the audience and must be conveyed through an attention getting communication channel.
 Propaganda messages must be credible 45  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424)  It should be enhanced by leaders with prestige  It must be timed and must start at the optimum moment  A propaganda theme must be repeated but not beyond some point of diminishing effectiveness.
 Propaganda must label events and people with distinctive phrases or slogans.
3.2 Characteristics of Propaganda Propaganda of whatever type, have the following characteristics;  For propaganda to work effectively, it must attack the “group” through “individuality”.
In order words, propaganda messages are coned in such a way that even an individual in a mass audience will feel he/she is being addressed personally.
Through this, the propagandist makes his audience feel as if they want to voluntarily participate in his desired goal.
 All propaganda carries within it the power to take everything that can serve it.
It must be in the life of its audience every minute of everyday so that they have little or no time to think rationally on their own.
 Lastly, propaganda works through manipulation so much that the line demarcating truth from falsehood is often blurred.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What are the principles upon which propaganda is built?
4.0 CONCLUSION Taking a look at the contemporary principles and characteristics of propaganda, we can conclude that there has been a radical departure from the religious essence of propaganda in the 1600’s to politics in most parts of the world.
5.0 SUMMARY From its religious beginning in 1622 in Rome, under Pope Gregory XV, Propaganda grew to become a tool in the hands of government leaders across different parts of the world.
It was widely used in Germany during the World War II and its effectiveness then made it a subject of academic enquiry.
Adolf Hitler’s propaganda minister then-Joseph Goebbels was so adept at his trade that his views on propaganda till today are well respected.
Following his ideas, we have come to realize that for propaganda to be 46  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) effective, the brain behind it must be knowledgeable about events and public opinion.
For propaganda to succeed, it must address an audience as if it is targeted at individual members separately.
Above all, the propaganda messages must be repeated constantly in order not to allow audience members enough time for rational thought.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  In what ways does propaganda differ from public relations and advertising?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Childers, T. (1983).
The Nazi Voter.
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Key, W.B.
(1989).
The Age of Manipulation.
New York: Holt.
Steele, R.W.
(1985).
Propaganda in an Open Society: The Roosevelt Administration and the Media, 1933-1941.
West Poet, CT: Greenwood Press.
47  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 4: FUNCTIONS AND USAGES OF PROPAGANDA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of Propaganda 3.2 Usages of Propaganda 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Propaganda as we have seen from its religious roots has a lot of useful functions.
Either in commerce or in the administration of a state, propaganda can be put to good use.
This unit focuses on the functions and the usages of propaganda in the society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This unit seeks to educate students on:  The functions of propaganda generally  Situations where propaganda can be used 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Functions of Propaganda As a means of winning support for a cause, a policy, opinion, belief or greed, propaganda has the following functions:  Where propaganda is for a noble cause it serves to better the lives of people in a society.
 It links its audience with the leadership of a nation.
By extension, it helps to reinforce patriotism.
It should be noted here that not all propaganda is negative or bad.
For example, a government propaganda persuading citizens to embrace agriculture to produce more food cannot be said to be bad.
 Advertisers use propaganda to boost sales and by extension helping the growth of an economy.
 In war time, propaganda is used to keep the morale of the armed forces high.
3.2 Usages of Propaganda 48  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424)  Governments across the globe use propaganda not only to convince their citizens on one policy or the other but to win friends and allies around the world too.
 During electioneering campaign, politician engages the use of professional lobbyists who use propaganda to influence voters’ opinions.
 Pressure groups and non-governmental organizations use propaganda to influence governments on issues like civil rights, abortion, gay marriages, the environment, foreign policy, nuclear energy etc.
 Business organization apart from using propaganda in advertising products and services, employ it to win and maintain customer loyalty.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Who needs propaganda and for what?
4.0 CONCLUSION From the much we have seen about the functions of propaganda, we can conclude that not everything about propaganda is negative as it can equally be used for noble purposes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we saw that propaganda is a double edged tool in the hands of individuals, organizations, and governments, which can be used to win support for a cause of a policy, opinion and/or belief.
It can be used to build (noble cause).
Politicians use it extensively to win votes during elections; governments use it to win support for their policies/programmes and win allies for their countries across international frontiers.
NGO’s and pressure groups use propaganda to get support for their views on topical issues like gay marriage, abortion, nuclear energy etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Identify a scenario that will warrant the use of propaganda if you must achieve the desired result.
 Give a detail of how you will use it to achieve your objectives.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Asemah, E. (2011).
Understanding Public Relations.
Jos: Lizborn Press.
Corbett, E.P.J.
(1990).
Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Iyengar, S & Kinder, D.R.
(1987).
News that Matters Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Encyclopedia Americana.
(1924) Vol.
12.
USA.
49  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 5: CRITICISMS AGAINST PROPAGANDA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Criticisms against propaganda 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Propaganda has been criticized in academic circles as a tool in the hands of the mischievous.
This is due to the fact that had truths and lies are used by the propagandist often.
This unit discusses the subtleties involved in propaganda.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of our discourse in this unit, you should be able to;  Discern the negativities involved in the use of propaganda.
 Identify the subtle methods through which propaganda works  Know that propaganda has positive sides too 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Criticisms against Propaganda As pointed out in the preceding units, propaganda employs the use of manipulation of facts, figures, symbols and culture to convince a given audience to accept a belief, opinion or cause desired by the propagandist.
More often than not, it has been used to mobilize citizens for war (as it happened-during the first and second world wars, the American invasion of Iraq etc).
Critics have referred to propaganda as mind-control, brainwashing and hidden reduction.
It leaves the audience members with no choice for rationale thought which amounts to a denial of one of man’s fundamental rights -the right to independent thought.
In democratic societies, propaganda is extensively used especially to campaign for votes, for the acceptance of opinions on sundry issues.
This extensive use of propaganda can turn the citizens and the electorates into 50  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) cynics because today’s reader and media listener is highly educated and sophisticated.
Similarly, in war time propaganda, forces could be exposed to propaganda from opposing camps - making them not knowing which one to believe.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What are the criticisms against propaganda?
4.0 CONCLUSION We have seen that not all propaganda is bad.
However, where propaganda is built on deceit and geared toward the selfish desires of the propagandist it becomes a problem.
5.0 SUMMARY Propaganda can be effective in mobilizing citizens for a desirable goal in a society.
Critics of propaganda have referred to it as mind-control, brain washing and hidden seduction which leaves the recipients with little or no choice in thinking for themselves.
Extensive use of propaganda can equally bring about a cynic public.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Propaganda is a double edged sword that can be used to build or destroy.
Why do you think this is so?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Baker, R.A. (1990).
They Call It Hypnosis.
Buffalo, NY; Prometheus.
Nwosu, I.
(1997).
“Public Relations Versus Propaganda”.
Public Relations Digest, Vol.4.
Packald, V. (1957).
The Hiden Persuaders.
New York: Mackay Ries, A.
& Trout, J.
(1981) Positioning: The Battle for your Mind: New York: Warner Books.
51  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 6: PROPAGANDA AS A TOOL IN INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING AND DIPLOMACY Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
What is international advertising?
3.1.1 Propaganda in international advertising 3.2.
Diplomacy in international circle 3.2.1 Propaganda in international diplomacy 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION There is a symbiotic relationship between advertising and propaganda.
A common concern of the two is the desire to persuade.
A. point of difference is that whole advertising aims to sell (a product or service).
Propaganda aims to convince or make one believe an idea or a cause.
Advertising either at the local or international level uses a lot of propaganda techniques.
This unit elaborately discusses the issues involved in the use of propaganda for international advertising.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Explain the concept of international advertising  Establish a link between propaganda and advertising  Identify propaganda techniques used in international advertising.
3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
What is International Advertising?
Advertising is any form of paid message used to sell or promote a product, service or an idea to a given audience.
When this takes place in several countries across the globe, it is called international advertising.
For it to be effective and successful, international advertising must take into cognizance the cultural diversities and dynamics in different countries across the world.
It is significant to emphasize the fact that international advertising is not 52  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) just a communication process but a huge business industry too.
Being a communication process, advertising, even more with international advertising, is affected culture, language, literacy level and the media.
For example, a multi-national firm will not want to use the print media to promote its products or services in a country where literacy level is low - as doing so will amount to wasting resources.
Similarly, an international organization promoting family planning through the use of contraceptives will not find that easy in Islamic countries.
International advertising agencies try to identify international media organizations to locate ads.
The industry is made up of a network of small and medium sized agencies located across the world.
It should be noted that international advertising reflects the values, morals, gender roles and lifestyles of a society.
The image of a product or service created by international advertising in a way promotes specific aspects of society.
Since the bulk of international advertising stems from the western counties of Europe and the United State of America, critics have often pointed to the fact that they promote western values and culture over and above indigenous cultures around the world.
They point out the idea that most products being advertised are cultural symbols and citizens of other countries constantly patronizing them means foregoing their own cultures.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  In your own terms define International advertising 3.1.1.
Propaganda in International Advertising Advertising and propaganda have the common goal of persuading an audience to accept an idea, a product or service.
For this, scholars have referred to advertising as a form of propaganda.
In International advertising, five propaganda techniques are easily identified.
They are discussed as follows: (a).
Bandwagon: This involves persuading a consumer by telling him/her that others are into the same - thing.
For example, the indomie noodles advert that shows strong healthy children playing and healthy is an encouragement for others to eat indomie noodles, get the same energy and make them enjoy the same fun.
(b).
Testimonial: This entails the use of authorities in different fields of human endeavour (famous-celebrities) to attest to the goodness or efficacy of a product or service.
For example, an advert may show members of the Nigerian Dentist Association approving the use of a particular toothpaste.
53  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) (c).
Transfer: Which is when a product is sold by the name or picture of a famous person or thing.
(d).
Repetition: This is another propaganda technique and it involves the repletion of the idea (in propaganda) or the product/service (in advertising) several times.
This happens so often that the message recipient takes it to be the ‘only real thing’.
(e).
Use of Emotive Words: As it is in propaganda, international advertisers use words that appeal to people 3.2.
Diplomacy in International Circles Diplomacy is the act of conducting international relations between countries.
It often involves the negotiation and signing of treaties, protocols or agreements related to trade, defense (security) sports or some others.
Diplomacy requires a lot of skill, tact and ingenuity.
In the process of maintaining relations internationally, some countries economic, cultural and political interests come into conflict with that of others.
This brings about crises across the globe.
In the attempt to win allies, some countries bring a lot of propaganda to tear on their foreign relations.
3.2.1.
Propaganda in International Diplomacy.
The world book encyclopedia (vol.
15, 1997) opines that many propaganda methods are common-sense-techniques that resemble those of persuasive speaking.
These techniques include: i.
Gaining people’s trust ii.
Simplicity and repetition iii.
The use of symbols.
Apart from the three listed above, concealment and lies, exaggeration and name-calling are other techniques used by propagandists.
For example, to win the support of the international community in its war against Iraq in 2003, the United State of America lied to the entire world that the Iraqis had stockpiled weapons of mass destruction .The war ended and no such weapons were found.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Why is propaganda necessary in International advertising and diplomacy?
54  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 4.0.
CONCLUSION International advertising and diplomacy has economic, political and cultural dimensions.
The dynamics involved are so complex that for players involved to achieve success, a lot of propaganda is brought to bear.
5.0.
SUMMARY In this unit, we have seen that international advertising is not just a communication process but a huge economic industry and for it to be very successful, it must take into cognizance the cultural diversities across the globe.
We have equally seen that diplomacy in international circles requires special skills and tactfulness.
In the attempt to win over buyers and allies internationally, advertisers and diplomats often resort to using propaganda techniques to achieve their aims.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Explain, in detail, the relevance of propaganda to international advertising and diplomacy.
7.0.
REFERNCES /FURTHER READING.
Pratkanis, A.R, Elliot, A (1992).
Age of Propaganda.
New York: W.H.
Freeman and Company.
Packard, V (1957).
The Hidden Persuaders.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Petty, R.E.
& Cacioppo, J.T (1981).
Attitudes and Persuasion: Classic and Contemporary Approaches.
New York: Springer-verlag.
55  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) MODULE 3: LOCAL GLOBAL ADVERTISING Unit 1: Concept of Domestic and Global Advertising.
Unit 2: Problems Associated with Global Advertising.
Unit 3: Decision Areas in International Advertising.
Unit 4: Promotional Mix Elements in International Advertising MODULE 3: LOCAL GLOBAL ADVERTISING UNIT 1: CONCEPTS OF LOCAL AND GLOBAL ADVERTISING 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objective 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Domestic Advertising 3.2.
Global Advertising 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0.
References/ Further Readings 1.0.
INTRODUCTION Advertising is one discipline among others which has enriched mass communication as a profession.
Advertising has offered a lot to people by presenting their wants to them in a systematic and persuasive ways; it has offered audience something to cogitate on.
One fundamental role of advertising is its selling nature; it is almost a sales message if it is non- commercial.
A crucial issue in the study of advertising and society is the apparent and frequent conflict between the goals which is ultimately to increase sales and patronage.
Bovee and Aren in Ucheanya (2013:1) define advertising as a “non- personal communication of information usually paid for and usually persuasive in nature”.
Dickson, Kraegner and Nicosia in Ucheanya (1999) posit advertising as turning the attention of the public to a commodity or service and in a broader sense; hence, anything that turns attention to an article or service might be called Advertising.
Advertising Practitioners council of Nigeria (APCON) explains advertising as a form of communication through media about products, services or ideas, paid for by an identified sponsor.
These definition have given us insight into the keywords to look out for, when defining the word advertising.
These words are (i).
Non-personal Communication and (ii).
Paid for by an identified sponsor.
56  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) In this unit, our focus shall be to exhaust the concepts of Local and Global advertising.
Daily, we are consciously and unconsciously, exposed to different advertisements and they control our taste, desire and disposition to react in a given way, which is to the benefit of the advertiser.
Knowing what these two concepts are is critical to helping students know which is which in their practice of advertising.
Domestic advertising shares variety’s like: Local, Rural and Regional advertising, while global advertising has varieties such as: International, Multinational and Foreign advertising.
A good knowledge of these concepts would make an excellent practitioner in the field of advertising.
2.0.
OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, students should be able to know, understand and explain what local and global advertising are, and their varieties.
Students would be able to differentiate among the varieties of both Local and Global advertising as well.
3.0.
MAIN CONCEPT 3.1.
What is domestic advertising?
Domestic advertising is advertising campaign carried out within the geographical boundary of a state or country.
It is also referred to as national advertising.
This kind of advertising is produced and implemented within a domestic region of the world such as a country.
Domestic advertising does not reach its audience directly rather, it involves the use of middle men.
For instance, Cadbury Bournvita or Seven up bottling company does not sell their product directly to consumers, they get distributors who after purchasing these products from them, thereafter sell to the consumers.
In order to optimize the advantage of a domestic advertising or national advertising, frantic effort must be taken to reach out to all the nooks and crannies of the nation by using all available ethnic languages through special events, such as music promotion, cultural dance, festivals, religion and so on.
Domestic advertising basically functions to promote local businesses or multinational business with a local touch.
The reach of this type of advertising is bounded by the national boundary of a country, so, Local business marketing is one problem of the top questions often asked in order to determine how domestic advertising can forestall, and give one hundred percent return on investment.
Question like “what is the best form of advertising for my local business?” is harmless but deeper down, it indicates some kind of thinking that a “Short-cut” to results of getting more 57  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) clients or customers actually exists.
Worse than this, it shows lack of understanding of advertising in the first place.
While I place no blame, the point is the “best advertising option is specific.
Jef.I.Richards posits “Advertising is the wonder in wonder bread”.
There are domestic advertising regulatory bodies who are responsible for designing, installing and maintenance of advertising laws.
In Nigeria we have the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON).
Domestic advertising affair is their statutory responsibility.
How, when, where, what and why of advertising questions are their job role to respond to.
So also, do we have countries outside our local boundary, carrying out regulatory advertising functions, with a body established and empowered by law?
For the purpose of clarity, we shall examine the practice of domestic advertising in three (3) countries.
Domestic advertising authorities set up rules and regulations to define which products can be advertised in a particular region and which cannot.
These rules can determine a variety of different areas such as the placement, content and timing of the advertisement in the media.
According to Wikipedia organization reports “in United State, false advertising and health related advertisements are mostly regulated.
Sweden and Norway prohibit domestic advertising that targets children”.
Some European countries do not permit the sponsorship of children’s programs, In fact, the censorship is so stiff that not advertisement can be targeted at children under the age of twelve and there cannot be advertisements five minutes before or after the children program.
Advertising of tobacco on billboards, sporting events and television is banned in United Kingdom.
Instead, tobacco companies are only allowed to advertise corporate and brand image and not anything aligned with consumption.
Wikipedia has it that in most non- western countries of the world, a lot of linguistic and non- linguistic strategies are used to mock and undermine the regulation.
Most of the widely regulated products in several countries of the world are tobacco and alcohol advertising.
Let us examine three countries in the world and their domestic advertising bodies.
1.
United Kingdom (UK): advertising regulation in UK is governed by Advertising Standard Authority (ASA) whereas most kind of outdoor advertising like display of billboards is the UK town and planning system.
Incumbently, any advertisement without consent from any of these regulatory bodies is a criminal offence liable to fines at E2500 pounds or more per offence.
It is recorded that all the major outdoor billboard companies have conviction of this nature.
58  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 2.
South Africa: in this country, advertising content is self-regulated and guided by the standard contained in a Code of Advertising Practice established by the Advertising Standard Authority (ASA) of South Africa.
The members of this regulatory authority consist of: advertisers, advertising agencies and media sources that carry advertising.
ASA South Africa adopted a code of advertising practice based on the international code of Advertising which was prepared by the International Chamber of Commerce.
3.
New Zealand: advertising standards authority of New Zealand is solely responsible for the advertising content and practice of the country.
ASA’s complaints board (ASCB) consists of public representatives and representatives of media, advertising agencies and advertisers.
The decision of this board is predicated by ASA’s advertising codes of the public, ASBC considers it.
In a situation where a complaint is upheld, ASA would requests the withdrawal of advertisement voluntarily by the advertiser.
In the case of Nigeria, Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria regulates advertising campaigns.
Though it is evolving in enforcing its rules and regulations, yet it is weak compared to its western counterparts.
APCON as it is popularly known is a force in advertising market in Nigeria, it regulate advertising agencies activities, censor the campaign and charge fees for advertisement according to sizes of organizations and so on.
It is obvious that some state government like LAGOS, OGUN, KWARA and OYO states are running their advertising regulatory bodies; they appear to be more functional than APCON in this regard.
Lagos State Advertising Agency (LASSA) is chief among other states regulatory bodies.
The duties of LASSA include the followings among others: a.
Collection of fees for sign post by organization b.
Approval of advertisement boards.
c. Billboards advertising supervision e.t.c Be it as it may, APCON is partially visible to an average firm in Nigeria.
By this I mean, most sole proprietors are less aware of APCON and its functions safe the elites and large companies.
Domestic advertising in Nigeria uses the print media often than other mediums, some firm do media mix to enable them to be seen and heard by their target audience.
The presence of cable television has made it easy for domestic advertiser to reach out to their audience based on programme specification and media formats.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain what you understand by domestic advertising: stating examples of 3 countries including Nigeria.
59  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Types of Domestic Advertising Domestic advertising is broad and can be further broken down to three major divisions.
These are: i.
Rural Advertising ii.
Local Advertising iii.
Regional Advertising.
1.
Rural Advertising: There are differences between primitive and modern advertising.
Under rural variety of domestic advertising, we place emphasis on how to reach the grass root communities, i.e villages within a country with advertising messages.
This type of advertising encourages “Street Hawking” or “Town Criers” strategies or better still a “technology assisted street Hawking” like experiential marketing, advertising vehicle, mobile sales etc.
Commercial bus hawking is a technology assisted hawking, the bus is a technological invention that prevent the hawker from trekking, thereby fulfilling the purpose.
2.
Local Advertising: This variety of domestic advertising is also known as “retail advertising”.
This advertising is restricted to a particular local community especially if the advertising agency is existing in that locality.
This type of advertising helps agency to do pre-test or pilot test of an advertising campaign or sales of product.
Locality for instance can be suburbs like Ojota, Victoria Island, Yaba, Surulere, Ikorodu etc.
3.
Regional Advertising: This variety of domestic advertising divides a nation’s boundary into regions of reach for an advertising campaign.
For instance, if an advertisement is prepared to serve a particular region in Nigeria, say the western region, all the media that would reach only to these region would be used to transport the advertising message to it, specifically in the audience language and culture.
For a successful national advertising campaign, it would be advisable to annex the three (3) varieties of domestic advertising to deliver sales messages to national audience and also to provoke patronage in such that would endear more businesses to the agency.
It should also be that, in the absent of a professional and researched media plan, success could only be a wish.
SELF ASSESSSMENT EXERCISE  Mention and explain the three varieties of domestic advertising.
3.2.
Global Advertising Concept Advertising is a crucial element and part of marketing campaign of organization that are competing in the global market place.
George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995) state that over 130 billion U.S dollars is spent 60  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) on advertising in the United State each year, they also posit that advertising expenditures outside the United States have increased dramatically over the past two decade and now exceed 170billion dollars annually.
Many firms and organizations have realized as well as recognized that effective promotional strategies are important for companies competing in global markets.
Vern Terpstra in George et al (1995) quote this “… with the promotional function, however, the firm is standing up and speaking out, wanting to be seen and heard”.
Vern Terpstra understands the fact that every multinational organization needs a slot in the international market where their products or services would be display to scrabble for customers’ attention.
And the only way this is possible is through international advertising campaign.
Many organizations are faced with the challenge of developing the right promotional programs to allow them space the international market.
Going global does not encourage acting local.
Organization that has foresight of playing fairly in the global market must have been thinking globally and acting locally from inception.
Companies advertising their products or services abroad face unfamiliar marketing environment and customers with different sets of values, customs, consumption, patterns, habits, moods and tones as well as differing buying motives and abilities.
The factor of media potential in various countries differs.
In the light of this advertisers must be very critical in the selection of agency that would better represent their product and make it a global brand.
These factors require different creative and media techniques in other elements of the advertising program for foreign market.
Global advertising is a variety of advertising which transports or disseminates advertising messages to the nooks and crannies of the world.
E.g.
: Coca cola, Seven Up, Nescafe e.t.c.
Marlboro and Benson and hedges cigarettes are among the oldest form of global advertising.
Such is Coca- Cola, a global brand that can be found in most countries of the world.
Sometimes ago, Guinness book of record releases a report on the most popular personality in the world, guess what, Jesus Christ ranked first, afterwards Coca-Cola ranked second.
This instance is a perfect definition for global advertising brand.
Global advertising has a problem of cultural and economic imperialism which can affect the purse of local advertising agencies and rendering of latent talents and stars redundant.
It is standardized because it is the same everywhere, without variation in the picture or words of the advertisement.
What is display in the U.S is the same display in Nigeria.
However, global advertising projects: video, images, and graphics much more than words of mouth or illustration; this is simply because pictures and images tell more 61  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) stories than words could.
Also, the cultural differentiation is another reason for more motion than wordy illustration.
Global advertising can be divided into 3 types, they include: I.
International Advertising II.
Multinational Advertising III.
Continental Advertising 1. International Advertising: This is a global advertising variety which focuses on advertising of products across the boundary of two nations.
It is done to secure recognition from another country that has similar culture with the advertising brand though different languages.
E.g.
“Gold Spot the zing thing” is an Indian idea which is not Nigerian.
What does the word “zing”, an Indian word mean to the Nigerian populace?
But, the advert is still used in Nigeria because it is broadcast in English language.
2.
Multinational Advertising: This variety promotes brand in three or more countries.
This type encourages the adoption of local themes which may remain the same but subject to local condition.
For instance, having to translate coke advert “The real thing” to different international languages such as French, German, e.t.c.
3.
Continental Advertising: This advertising variety, promotes an advertising brand among countries or nationals within a particular continent of the world.
For example, African continent, Asian continent, American continent e.t.c.
Brands promoted here must have features that are common with most countries in that continent.
The issue of malaria, polio and poverty are common features in most African countries that make up the continent.
Though, few nations are excluded, yet they are indirectly affected.
So, any brand that would be promoted must have verisimilitude with a most general problem in the continent.
SELF ASSESSSMENT EXERCISE  Explain global advertising and list the types.
 What are the challenges facing global advertising?
International Marketing Environment George et al (1995:621) state that companies engaging in international marketing must carefully analyze the major environmental factors of each market in which they complete, this include: economic, demographic, cultural and political/ legal variables.
These variables would help a market expert to analyze his environment before launching his campaign.
There are some factors worth considering under each variable, these are pointer to give the advertiser ideas of a workable action plan.
These factors are important in evaluating the potential of each country as well as the diagram below shows the forces in the international marketing environment.
62  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Figure 4:1 Forces in the International Marketing Environment Economic Environment Cultural Environment .
Stage of economic development Language .
Economic infrastructure Lifestyles .
Standard of living .
Valve .
Per-capital income .
Norms and customs .
Distribution of wealth Ethics and Moral standard .
Currency stability Taboos .
Exchange rate INTERNATIONAL MARKETING AND PROMOTION DECISIONS Demographic Environment Political/Legal environment .
Population size Government policies .
Number of households.
Laws and regulations .
Age distribution Political Stability .
Occupational distribution Nationalism .
Education levels Attitudes toward multinational companies .
Employment rate .
Income levels Source: George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995) A careful study of the diagram would assist an advertiser or advertising agency to launch a successful campaign in the international market, thereby giving its brand a chiefly place among other international brands.
Global Versus Domestic Advertising The marketing environment of various countries of the world are different, this therefore suggests that each country’s market requires a distinct advertising program.
Notwithstanding, recently, attention has focused on the concept of global advertising; a situation where organization use same advertising plan to run advertisement for all countries.
This is actually part of global marketing.
The dichotomy between global and domestic advertising is obvious, the tabulation below would give the clarifications.
63  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) GLOBAL ADVERTISING Vs DOMESTIC ADVERTISING 1.
Global advertising offers It does not always offer common campaign to all target common campaign to all audience audience because of the heterogeneous nature of the target audience.
2.
It covers the nooks and crannies It covers only the national of the entire globe boundary of country 3.
Lower advertising cost as a Higher advertising cost as a result of reduction in planning result of increasing and multiple and control planning of various advertising campaign that would reach the heterogeneous audience targeted.
4.
Economies of scale in Diseconomies of scale in the production and distribution of production and distribution of advertisement advertisement 5.
A consistent international brand Consistency in local brand and and company image image management of organization 6.
Simplification of coordination Complexity of coordination and and control of marketing and control of marketing and promotional programs since promotional programs for all advertising campaign is the categories of audience.
same for all countries.
7.
Abilities to exploit good ideas It does not have the quick on a worldwide basis and opportunity to penetrates world introduce products quickly into market various world market George et al (1995) opine that “number of companies have been very successful using a global advertising approach”.
These companies they say include: coca cola, Xerox, British Airways, Merrill Lynch and H.J.
Heinz.
They further state that Gillette used global advertising to launch its new sensor sharing system, which has become one of the most successful new products in the company’s history.
The advertising theme Gillette used for its global campaign is “The best a man can get”.
Just as marketing as an allied professions to advertising operates at both domestic and global realms, so is advertising.
Advertisers should understand the concept of both global and domestic advertising and then choose carefully before allocating budget to their advertising plans.
64  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  In a tabular form, state the characteristics of both global and domestic advertising.
4.0.
CONCLUTION A lot of American organizations are recognizing not only the opportunities of global advertising but also the necessity of marketing their products and services internationally because of saturated markets and intense competition from both domestic and foreign competitors.
Advertising and promotion are crucial parts of international marketing program of a multinational corporation.
Advertising is generally the most effective way to communicate with buyers and create a market in other countries.
Domestic advertising being what it is, remains the foundation stone for global advertising.
No product that can stand accurately in the international market if it has not passed the challenges of the domestic one.
The truth is, no global awareness is successful without a domestic campaign to support it.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit explains the concepts of domestic and global advertising in its best possible way.
It started up with a brief definition to what advertising is, pointing at few definitions from advertising experts like; Boree and Aren, Dickson, Kraegner and Nicosia.
APCON point of view to advertising was not left out in the introduction as well.
After the objectives of the unit were stated, a quick move was made to understand what a domestic advertising is.
As we were looking into the concept of domestic advertising, three countries domestic advertising practices were considered; these countries were United Kingdom (UK), South Africa and New Zealand.
We further critique advertising practice in Nigeria with respect to advertising practitioners’ council of Nigeria’s (APCON) crusade on regulatory processes.
Afterwards, the unit examines the types of both domestic and global advertising to keep students from future confusion of the concepts.
The concept of global advertising was dealt with extensively, touching the types and the international advertising environment.
While explaining this, the unit X-rays the forces of the international marketing environment that affects the operation of global advertising directly or indirectly in a diagrammatic format.
The unit was concluded by the characteristics of both global and domestic advertising which were presented in a tabular form.
Hence, global versus domestic advertising.
65  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT  What do you understand by the term “International Marketing Environment”?
 With the aid of diagram, explain the forces in the International Marketing Environment.
7.0 REFRENCE/ FURTHER READING George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995).
Introduction to advertising and promotion: and integrated marketing communications perspective 3rd (ED).
Irwin Mc Graw-Hill Boston.
66  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) MAC 424 UNIT 2: PROBLEMS FACING GLOBAL ADVERTISEMENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Problems associated with global advertisement 3.2 When globalization of advertisement is appropriate 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assessment 7.0 References/further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The frailty of man lie in his disposition to experience problems, what he does with problems determines the fate that lay before his destiny.
Problems is unavoidable in every endeavor of life, be it, social, economy, or political.
The common consensus is that problems abound and it must be attended to in view of a better future.
When a discipline and subject like advertising is examining the problems facing its attainment of optimum goal, all it is doing is looking for a way to avert or conquer such, so that, patronage can be got from the target audience.
Global advertisement has numerous advantages over domestic advertising, it reaches a very wide audience and hence compete for a position in the international market.
However, there are prices it pays to get up there.
This unit shall examine the problems associated with global advertising; it shall x-ray these problems in the light of some international brand such as Nestle, McDonald etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, students would learn and understand the various problems associated with global advertising.
Students should be able to explain this problems as they relate to international brands and market.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problems Associated With Global Advertising Global advertisement as discussed in previous unit, opines the dissemination of advertising sales messages to every nooks and crannies of the world in-order to have a market share among other brands in the international market.
Global advertising is very unique because of its 67  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) international feature; it contends with various cultures, beliefs, lifestyles, languages, and traditions.
Standardization is the world of similarities in quality and production of products in the market, if product like Coca-Cola can maintain same standard in the global market, it is therefore no surprise why it is so well popular and patronized.
However, the question is, can global advertisement emulate global marketing strategy?
The opponents of standardized global approach argue that very few product lend themselves to global advertising.
Non-similar culture, market, and economy development, consumer needs and usage pattern; media availability; and legal restrictions make it extremely difficult to develop an effective universal approach to advertising, George et al (1995).
Unlike product, advertising is intangible, its consumption is passive and if is not well structured to achieve its objectives, the efforts become a waste of resources.
So an advertiser needs to put into high consideration, the factor in the global market which can bedevil against his advertising campaigns.
George et al (1995:628) posit that other school of thought argues that cultural change is occurring in the direction of cultural diversity, not commonality.
Thus advertising job of informing and persuading consumers and moving them toward using a particular brand can be done only within a given culture.
The world is diversified in culture, beliefs and values, there is every need that a global brand would tilt a little to the right or left in order to convey its message to the intended global audience, though the advertisement could maintain a common or similar projection in-terms of video, audio or graphical illustrations, however, compromise should be made in language and culture to prompt its capability.
For example, you don’t sell a brand in Saudi Arabia with a picture of a half nude model, such product would lose sales because, and the projection negates the beliefs and values of the Arabians.
Hence, it applies to other countries of the world.
The use and perception of a product vary from one country to another, so advertising agency should learn to adjust their advertising approaches to different problem they may face in different market.
George et al (1995) share the example of Nestles introduction of instance coffee brand to the international market.
They enumerate five situations in various parts of the world.
They include: 68  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 1.
In the United State, the idea of instant coffee had great penetration but Nestle had the minor share.
2.
In continental Europe, Nescafe had the major market share but the idea of instance coffee was in the early stages.
3.
In United Kingdom (UK) and Japan: the tea-drinking countries, tea- drinkers had to be converted not just to coffee but to instant coffee.
4.
Latin Americans, preferred a heavy coffee such that could not be replace with an instance version.
5.
In Scandinavia, Nestle had to deal with the ingrained custom of keeping a pot of coffee on the store from dawn till dusk, especially late at night.
Nestle employed different advertising strategies for each market; a global campaign would not have been able to represent these varying situations firmly.
Lots of experts in this profession believe that promoting a standardized product in an homogenous way all over the globe can be less appealing to consumers, alienate employees and blind an organization to the choice of consumers’ needs.
When McDonald expanded to Puerto Rico, it pissed-off consumers by using television advertisement dubbed in Spanish and then using Hispanic advertisements that were produced in New York which research subsequently showed looked too Mexican.
Local manager of parker pen in its foreign branches resented the home office, centralizing the advertising appeal used in their market in mid 1980s through global advertising.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain the various problems of global advertising in the light of the examples stated in this lesson.
3.2 When Globalization of Advertising Is Appropriate Globalization of advertising is almost an impossible task, this is the view of many in advertising industry.
The task of global advertising is difficult and requires a high level of care and professionalism to achieve it.
Nevertheless, progress has been made to determine what product and service are best suited to international appeals.
According to George E. and Michael A. Belch (1995) the followings are the indicators to note when determining what products or service is matured enough to feature in the international market.
These include: 1.
Brands that can be adapted for visual appeal, avoiding the problems of trying to translate words into dozens of languages.
69  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 2.
Brands that are promoted with campaigns that play to universal appeals such as sex or wealth 3.
High-tech product and new product coming to the world for the first time not steeped in the cultural heritage of the country.
4.
Products that has a national flavor, in the case where the country has a reputation in the field.
For example Italy is renowned for quality shoes, so if such product is introduced to the international market, it would surely receive recognition.
5.
Product that appeals to a market segment with universally similar tastes, interests, needs, and values.
A good number of organizations and brands depend heavily on visual appeals that are easily adapted for use in global advertising campaigns.
The reason is not far-fetch, visual display appeals to the eyes and there unto the mind, afterwards, it forms a strong image that is capable of repulsing or appealing to the audience.
What words would say in one thousand sentences, a visual display would say it with just a single image.
More so, visual does not segregate elites from the illiterates, it projects actions and imagery that both classes would see, appreciate and react to.
For instance, NIKE used global advertising to launch the Air 180 running shoe, its first global product launch.
They were no words, spoken in the commercials but there was the use of visual imagery.
British Air and Singapore Airlines with international operations use global corporate image advertisements that rely strongly on visual appeals.
Marlboro Cigerettes cowboy was used around the world too, to promote the brand.
So do other products and services noise themselves to the global audience, in order to get enough share and profit.
George et al citing Leritt (1995) acknowledge the believes of many advertisers that joy, sentiment, the excitement, comfort, glory, beauty and other emotions have global affinities, that is, every countries and persons all over the world identify with these emotions.
So the best way to make waves in the global market is by planning and producing global advertising to accommodate these emotional appeals.
One advertising execute said: “What it all boils down to, is, that we are all human.
We share the gift of emotional response.
We feel things.
And we feel them in remarkably similar ways.
We speak different languages, we observe different customs, but we are wired to each other and to an ultimate power source to a common emotional spectrum.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain five points to note when a brand is qualify to go global.
70  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 4.0.
CONCLUSION The major problem in global advertising is when a problem persists and it is not attended to.
The problems of cultures, believes, values and so on are not critically tackled by advertisers when budgeting for global advertising campaign.
Though these areas have their own significant contributions to the success of a product or service in the international market, however, they can be down played by a professional in advertising, who knows very well how to use visual imagery effectively.
More so, the problems facing global advertising is the heterogeneous nature of the world.
Since we all speak, think, value and believe differently, advertisers then need to find a common ground to relate to everyone irrespective of cultural values and belief systems.
The common ground of agreement is our emotion: everyone feels and reacts speedily to visual imagery in this direction, global advertising becomes easy and interesting.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit x-rayed the various problems associated with global advertising.
The introduction explains the crisis a problem can result to if not attended to.
It further states that problem is inevitable in all human endeavor and how it is manage is dependent on experience and exposures.
The problems facing global advertising centered on the heterogeneous nature of the world; the in balances between and among cultures, beliefs, values and the interrelationship in terms of religious, social, economic and political intercourse.
Problems of global advertising were enumerated in the light of global brands like: Nestle, M.C.
Donald and Parker Pen.
Afterward, we considered critically the points needed to observe in order to determine whether a brand is due for global advertising.
The points were itemized according to the explanations of George et al (1995).
This unit was concluded with advice that, advertising agencies need to move fast in producing global advertisement basically to create visual imagery, which is a universal advertising language in the light of global advertising.
6.0.
TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT  Explain what the problems of global advertising are.
 When is a product or service ripe enough to go global?
Give five reasons in support of your answer.
71  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 7.0 REFERENCE/ FURTHER READING George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995) Introduction to Advertising and Promotion: An integrated marketing communications perspective.
U.S.A, Irwin M.C GRAW- Hill.
72  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) MAC 424 MODULE 4 UNIT 3: DECISION AREAS IN INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objective 3.0.
Main content 3.1.
Decision areas in international advertising 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor marked assessment 7.0.
References/ further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Decision making is the core of every endeavor in life.
When decisions are not taken, goals stayed and objectives become unachievable.
Just like in management process, decision making is a critical aspect in the design, implementation and maintenance of an advertising campaign.
Much more, a careful step needed to be taken when making decision to launch an international advertising campaign.
In this unit, we shall examine various steps we need to take before venturing into international market in terms of advertising of goods and services.
Organizations producing and developing advertising and promotional campaigns for international markets need to take some functional decisions similar to those of domestic markets.
The decision to be taken include: style, agency selection, advertising research, creative strategy and execution, media strategy and selection and so no.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  Know and identify, understand and explain the areas of decision making in international advertising.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Decision Areas In International Advertising When a company decides to markets its products or services to other country of the world through the development of advertising and promotional programs, it must choose how to organize the advertising and promotional functions.
This decision will possibly depend on how the 73  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) company would organize itself for the overall international marketing and business.
George et al (1995:634) identified three basic options, which are centralization at the headquarters, decentralization of decision making to local and foreign markets, or a combination of the two.
The followings are the various decision areas in international advertising which we shall examine, thus: a. Centralization b. Decentralization c. Combination of centralization and decentralization d. Agency Selection e. Advertising research f. Creative decision g. Media selection a. Centralization This decision area of international advertising allows for an organization to centralize the development and production of advertising campaign for its brands in the home office or headquarters for image and reputation purposes.
Centralization is effective often in an environment where the media of countries hosting a company or where a company’s brands are sold seem similar and interrelated in terms of policies and control.
Most organizations basically centralize their international advertising and promotion functions so that decisions like: agency selection, research, creative strategy and campaign development, media strategy and budgeting are made by the headquarters.
Centralization is usually best when a company’s international business is small and operates through foreign distribution or licenses who do not get involved in the promotional process.
More so, why so many organizations preferred centralization is because of the protection of their foreign investments and also to keep track and be in charge of their marketing efforts and brand image.
b. Decentralization In this decision area, organization allows for flexibility and power sharing in advertising and promotional functions among its branches in different countries of the world.
Branches of an organization in various countries are allowed to engage advertising agencies, allocate budgets, develop creative strategies, select media and carry out research on the kind of advertisement to aim at.
Organization that practice decentralization put great trust in the Judgment and decision potential of their staffs in local markets.
This is very possible when companies realize that personnel in local markets understand very well the situation of the country the best.
According to George et al 74  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) (1995) “Decentralization also works in small or unique markets where headquarters’ involvement is not worthwhile or where advertising must be tailored to the local market.
c. Combination (Centralization And Decentralization) Organization in combining the decision areas of centralization and decentralization aims at getting the best and profitable push for its brands in the international market.
What truly obtains here is the fact that, where the needs for advertising arise, regional and local offices’ advertising managers submit their advertising plans and budgets to the headquarters for review.
The international advertising manager for the organization peruses and approves them for execution, after being satisfied of the details in them.
Local managers play a major role to determine the right advertising appeals for their situation in terms of media selection.
The trends of combining the decision areas in international advertising function are on the increase.
Often, the headquarters has the most control over advertising policies, operations and guidelines in all markets.
This combined approach allows for uniformity and consistency in an organization.
Hence, international advertising still approves local input and adaptation of promotional programs in its campaign.
d. Agency Selection Advertising agencies play crucial role in the advertising campaign of any brand.
The experience and exposure of an agency determines the quality and acceptable creative work that it could put forth.
Agency selection is an important decision for firm that is engaged with international marketing campaign.
Here, such firm carefully and critically selects the advertising agency that would represent its brands at both local and international level.
George et al (1995) suggest three basic alternatives that organizations can select from when choosing advertising agency that would represent their brands worldwide.
These are: i.
Organization can choose a major agency with both domestic and overseas offices.
Many large agencies have offices all over the world and as a result become truly international in operations.
ii.
The second alternative for the international market is to choose a domestic agency that, rather than having its foreign offices or branches, is affiliated with agencies in other countries or belongs to a network of foreign agencies.
This alternative gives the domestic agency the independence of selling itself to an international agency offering multinational coverage and contacts.
To the advertiser, the benefit of this arrangement is that, the 75  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) domestic agency is engaged but the organisation still has access to foreign agencies with detailed knowledge of market conditions, media and so on, in the local markets of the country.
The challenge associated with this alternative is whether the domestic agency has control or coordination in the dependent foreign agencies it is affiliated to.
More so, companies employing this must ask the local agency if it has control over the quality of its affiliates’ works in areas like creature and media.
iii.
The third alternative is for organization to choose the advertising agency in the countries where its brands are produced.
Since local advertising agencies understand the market situations of their countries, it is the best thing to do in order to avoid errors during advertising campaign.
In addition, a local agency can develop the most effective advertising because of its understanding of the marketing and advertising environment in their region.
Criteria for Agency Selection What determines the selection of agency to handle or manage an organization’s international advertising is how the organization organizes itself for international marketing and the kinds of assistance it would need to meet its goals and objectives in the foreign market.
The followings are the criteria for selecting agency (ies) to handle international advertising campaigns: 1.
The agency must be able to cover relevant markets that have the interest of its client’s brands.
2.
The agency must show high quality of work, in terms of creativity and production.
3.
The kind of market research, public relations and other services offered by the organization should be cutting edge over other campaigns.
4.
The relative roles of company advertising department and agency.
5.
Level of communication and control desired by company.
6.
Ability of agency to coordinate international campaign.
7.
Size of company’s international business.
8.
Company’s desire for local and international image.
9.
Company’s organizational structure for international business and marketing (centralized versus decentralized).
10.
Company’s level of involvement with international operations.
The involvement of some companies in the international markets live those with 76  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) no choice but to combine the three alternatives mentioned in this section.
Since market situations differ, so does the advertising environment and situations in each country.
George et al (1995) hold that several experts in international marketing and advertising advocate the use of international agencies by international companies, particularly those firms moving toward global marketing and striving for a consistent corporate or brand image around the world.
e. Advertising Research Research is fundamental in any venture, with it, you can avert mistakes and accomplish your task faster than you can imagine.
Most advertisers rarely do advertising research for their international market penetrating goals.
Maybe, the cost of embarking on it is too high or perhaps low budget allocation could have been responsible for this negligence.
Instead, they do casual observation to determine the general situation of the international market.
To guide the promotional processes, research plays the same crucial role in the development of international advertising and promotion programs as it does locally in order to help managers make better and informed decisions.
George et al (1995:138) opine that “when international markets represent a small percentage of overall sales, investments in research are difficult to justify”.
Companies are in recent times seeing the needs of conducting research in marketing and advertising, because of their increasing investments in the international markets.
There are areas where research in international markets can help organizations make better advertising decisions.
These include the following among others: i.
Information on demographic features of markets ii.
Information on cultural differences like values, beliefs, lifestyle, norms etc.
iii.
Information on how consumer used the products, their attitudes, media usage and preferences.
iv.
Reactions to varieties of advertising appeals and execution through copy testing.
v. Research on the effectives of advertising and promotional programs in foreign markets.
f. Creative Decision The decision as to the appropriate message for advertising campaign is pre- eminent here.
It is not enough to engage a multinational advertising agency, but what quality of job has it got to disseminate in order to attract patronages and acceptability of a brand in the international market.
77  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Basically, the creative strategy development for international advertising is similar in process and procedure to that of domestic advertising.
Market conditions and strategy for foreign markets influences the advertising and communication objectives as well.
The factor of global versus local advertising is an issue in creative strategy for international brand.
Following the standard approach, creative team in advertising agency must develop advertising that will transcend cultural differences and communicate effectively in every country.
The view of George et al (1995) is that when companies follow a localized advertising strategy, the creative team must select the selling idea, appeal, and execution style that will work in each market.
g. Media Selection Knowing and identify the right media for an advertising campaign is the greatest success of advertisers.
This is so because, the end of every advertising campaign is to drive the message to the actual audience who would react in turn to patronize or support the brand.
No matter how creatively developed and produced an advertisement may be, if it goes through the wrong vehicles, or media it would fail in effort and resources.
This is why most of the advertising agencies engage media experts and planner to help them determine and choose the right media to transport their messages through.
George et al (1995:641), hold that “one of the most difficult areas for the international advertiser is media strategy and selection.
Media planner finds it very challenging in the attempt to communicate advertising message to consumers in foreign countries.
The reason for this challenge is the imbalance nature of media in various countries of the world.
Some countries do not allow advertisement on television, some the number of time allocated for advertising is limited, and some homes in developing countries do not have television sets.
For example, in Germany advertising time in a day is twenty (20) minutes on the government-owned stations.
Media characteristics differ by countries in areas like: coverage, cost, quality of production, restriction, scheduling and so on.
Another problem is getting information on circulation figures, audience, profiles and cost.
The goal of international advertising is to select media vehicles that reach their target audience most effectively.
It should be noted that media selection is often localized even for a centrally planned globalized campaign.
78  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  List and explain the decision areas in international advertising.
4.0 CONCLUSION Advertising at international level is not a mean task, it requires the integration of all progressive elements that can easily aids its success.
Organizations with international presence often take for granted the indelible role of advertising research in the promotion of their products or brands in international market.
Some reasons given were low advertising budgets and high cost of conducting advertising research for foreign markets.
Howbeit, most brands when they start to hold market shares in international market that they begin to invest in research.
The truth is that, they want to protect their investments and keep their brands in the market.
More so, media selection and techniques should be critically examined by advertising agencies, this has significant impact in advertising cycle.
When media for an advertisement is wrongfully selected, automatically, the campaign would fail in delivery and result.
Every decision areas in international advertising is crucial to any advertising campaign.
If they are religiously executed, one can be sure of error-free or minimal errors in the advertising campaign.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit examined the decision areas in international advertising.
The areas that were examined are:  Centralization  Decentralization  Combination  Agency Selection  Advertising Research  Creative Decision and Media Selection Under the agency decision area, this unit suggested three alternatives that an organization can select from before deciding the advertising agency it wants to work with.
Furthermore, 10 criteria for agency selection were stated to assist intending and regular advertisers to make better-future decisions.
The unit stated five areas where international market research can help an organization make better advertising decisions.
Lastly, self- assessment question was asked to help student refresh his memory on what he has studied so far.
79  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT  How is decision making a care endeavor in life?
 List the decision areas of international advertising a stated in the book  List 10 criteria for selecting advertising agency.
7.0 REFERENCE/ FURTHER READING George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995).
Introduction to Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communications Perspective.
Irwin M.C.
GRAW-Hill, U.S.A. 80  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) MODULE 4 MAC 424 UNIT 4: PROMOTIONAL MIX ELEMENTS IN INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING.
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Sales promotion 3.2 Personal selling 3.3 Public relations 3.4 Publicity 3.5 Lobbying 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summery 6.0 Tutor-marked assessment 7.0 References / further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION International advertising requires optimum professionalism to achieve its goals.
When introducing a product to the international market, lots of promotional mix elements are needed to achieve its successful arrival and settlement.
Advertising campaign is a part of the whole process, it can only provide paid publicity to the brand.
However, there are some other elements that are not pronounced in advertising process but are core mix for the acceptance of the brand.
These are the ones we shall examine in this unit.
Public relations, sales promotion, publicity and lobbying may be used to support and enhance advertising effort, they can be used to create or maintain favourable images for organizations in foreign markets.
For other companies sales promotion and personal selling may be the most crucial promotional elements while advertising plays a special role.
This final unit in this module considers the functions of these promotional mix elements in international advertising campaign program.
2.0 OBJECTIVE Students would understand the different promotional mix element of advertising; they would be able to explain and applied them as they pick up career in advertising.
81  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sales Promotion Sales promotion as a promotional mix element of international advertising is one of the fastest growing areas of marketing.
Most organizations with international presence increasingly rely on consumer and trade oriented sales promotion to help sell their products in the market.
Sales promotion is triggered by the advertising campaign projected by an advertiser.
When decision is made by organizations to promote its brands, the first step is to display a paid publicity which would sensitize the audience about the promotion.
Afterwards, sale representatives can visit markets and business environment in an experiential marketing crusade to propagate and sell the brands.
More so, to achieve a successful sales promotion, it is important to identify some promotional tools which would enable easy penetration and acceptance of the brand.
These are: i.
Free samples ii.
Premiums iii.
Event sponsorship iv.
Contest v. Coupon and vi.
Trade promotions These tools are used in foreign markets to gain patronage and large market share by multinational organizations.
For example, George et al (1995) cite that Haagen-Dazs estimates it game more than 5 million free tastings of its ice cream as part of its successful strategy for penetrating the European market.
They further reiterate that since taste is the major premium product, sampling was an appropriate sales promotion tool for entering foreign markets.
According to them in (1995:644), event sponsorship is the commonly used sales promotion tools in foreign markets.
Most companies identify with events that attract the attention of their target audience, and then sponsor the event in order to introduce their presence to the market.
Event like sports, concerts comedy shows and other activities in foreign countries are supported by companies in order to promote their products and enhance corporate image.
Another example is the sponsorship of Michael Jackson and Tina Turner’s musical concerts in various countries of the world by Pepsi.
Sales promotion unlike advertising cannot be done on a global basis; it must be adapted to local markets.
George et al (1995) citing Kamran Kashani and John Quelch identify several crucial dichotomies among countries that marketers must consider in developing a sales promotion program.
They stated the following: 82  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) a.
Economic development b.
Market maturity c. Consumer perceptions of promotional tools d. Trade structure and e. Legal restrictions and regulations.
a.
Economic development: what obtains here is that the economy of countries differ in terms of growth and viability while some countries are well to do economically, others are struggling to attain a break even.
So, it is wise if sales promoters would take cognizance and apply the appropriate tools for the right economic situations.
for instance, in a developed country like U.S, Britain, France etc, sales tools like coupon, sponsorship, contest, and so on can apply perfectly well, but in a developing economy, marketers must be careful not to used tools such as in-or-on-package premium that would increase product’s price beyond the purchasing power of most consumers.
Free sample and demonstration are widely used effective promotional tools.
Advertising alone cannot guarantee sample sales, though it can increase sales in the short run when combined with a specific promotional technique.
That is, direct response advertising (DRA).
A free gift attached to a product is a kind of sales promotion.
Sales promotion can be in form of cross coupon and discount coupon.
i.
Cross Coupon: this obtain when a marketer allows a buyer to buy another additional product made by the same manufacturer or a different manufacturer at a reduced price.
ii.
Discount Coupon: this is a sales promotion that is related to one brand of product or service, and it gives discount on the product or service.
Generally, the problem with coupons is with distribution and resistance from retailers.
Coupons are so popular with consumers in the United States.
In Britain and U.S, Coupons are mostly distributed through Newspapers or Magazines.
Because of low literacy rate in some country, print media distribution channel becomes challenging, hence, door to door, handed out in store, or placed in or packages becomes the alternative channels of distribution.
83  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Figure 1.1, Coupon redemption in various countries.
Number of coupons redeemed per household in 1993 80.9 32.7 18.5 15.5 4.3 1.5 1.4 U.S CANADA BELGUIM U.K ITALY SPAIN FRANCE SOURCE: George E Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995:645) (b) Market Maturity: Market development for products and services in different countries must be considered by marketers before designing their sales promotion.
To introduce a product to a country, promotional tools that are consumers oriented such as sampling and cross promotions with established product and brands are often effective.
Foreign market poses a competitive dynamic as a developmental stage of its market.
More competition that can alter or influence the types of sales promotion tools to be used in foreign market abounds around the brands.
84  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) (c) Consumer Perceptions: the perception of consumer of a brand on a particular sales promotion tools or programs should be considered before execution.
Consumer perception of various sales promotional tools vary from market to market.
For example, coupon is mostly appreciated by American women than Japanese women.
Premium offer should mostly be adapted to the tastes of consumers in various markets.
(d) Trade Structure: George et al(1995:645) point that “areas with highly concentrated retailing system such as Northern Europe, trade situation is much more like the United State and Canada as pressure grows for more prices-oriented trade is highly fragmented, hence, there is less trade pressure for promotions.
(e) Regulations: Legal restrictions and regulations affect the use of sales promotion in foreign countries.
Other countries in the world rather than United State have laws generally restricting sales promotion.
Some countries ban contest, games or lotteries out-rightly while others reduce the size of a sample, premium or price.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCE  Explain all you understand about sales promotion.
3.2 PERSONAL SELLING Personal selling is a promotional mix element of advertising that encourages person to person or door to door communication that promotes the sales of a product or service.
This communication is strictly between a sales person and a prospective customer.
This promotional mix is also called ‘SALESMANSHIP’.
Personal selling kind of product advertising has a few reach of audience which could be one or two or ten, as the case may be.
It has been regarded as the most effective of all the promotional mix.
Once, the salesman succeeds in convincing a buyer to purchase the brand, provided a brand gives the desired satisfaction, the customer would continue to patronize the brand until proven otherwise.
Personal selling allows encourages referrals syndrome; when a customer uses a product and gets the desired satisfaction from it, he goes out to tell others about the product, therefore giving the product or brand a free publicity.
Consumer product firm can use personal selling to woo distributors, wholesaler, or major retailing operation in foreign markets.
Because of low wages in developing countries, some companies employ sales staff to perform support selling and advertising effort.
Personal selling involve personal contact and communication, because of this, it is more culture bound than advertising.
85  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Most companies use sales representative in host countries and adapt personal selling activities and sales programs to each market through experiential marketing campaign.
There are two divisions of sales people, they are (i) order takers (ii) order getters.
(i) Order Takers: these operate on the assumption that people know what they want; therefore there is less need to influence people.
Order takers always have a standing point where prospective customers can see them and seek their services.
Some of their stand points are” petrol station, restaurant, fast food joint, hotel, kiosk, shop.
Etc.
(ii) Order Getters: These are field sales men who scout for customers.
These peddle products and seek customers where ever they may be.
Another name for order getters is “Street hawkers”.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXCECISE  Personal selling is more effective than other promotional mix elements in international advertising.
Explain.
3.3 PUBLIC RELATIONS As a promotional mix element, public relations design, installs and maintain a communication process between a brand and the target audience.
Public relations monitors foreign market trends, analyze it, predict its consequences and afterwards counsels organization leaders to organize a plan program of action that will create mutual understanding and benefits between their companies or its brands and its target market.
Public relations ensures that a cordial and beneficial relationship persist between or among brands and their consumers.
Public relations is a quality assurance check on a brand that is evolving in a foreign market.
Hence, the continuity of such brand lies in the effective functioning of the public relations campaign of the company.
Public relations cannot be practiced haphazardly; it requires a skillful, creative and professional implementation of strategies in order for a brand in foreign market to secure or is perceived positively and given almost support through patronage.
Public relations techniques that can help in the promotional quest of a brand in foreign market include the followings among others:  Drama  Documentary  Essay Competition  Social Responsibility 86  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424)  Debates  Sponsorship  Matriculation  Birthday Party  Inter-house Sport  Departmental Week  Commissioning Project  Road Shows  Advertorial  Articles  Souvenirs  Anniversaries  Speech presentations  Festivals  Special Days  Concerts  Comedy Shows  Reality shows on television  Dinner Party  Media Lunch  Press release  Press conference  Courtesy Calls  Courtesy visit  Familiarity calls  Emails and so on.
Primarily, public relations is concerned with creating mutual understanding and benefits between organizations, their customers and the society at large.
While advertising focuses on sales of brand and with full concentration on the external audience, public relation is all encompassing.
It does not just shows interest in sales message but how it could earn the loyalty of its public by caring and showing concern for their needs.
Pubic relation is an octopus promotional mix element, it antennas reach to diverse disciplines like marketing, advertising, business, communication and so on.
Hence, public relations is wider in scope than advertising.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Mention ten public relations techniques that can be used to introduce a new brand into foreign market.
87  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 3.4 PUBLICITY John-kamen (2006) posits that the word publicity is sometimes used interchangeably with advertising.
He furthers that advertising is the right and appropriate word.
According to him, people do not have to buy publicity, they get it whether they look for it or not.
John-kamen (2006) citing the definition of Dr. N.A Borden says, publicity is an “ information with a new value, design to advance the interest of a place, person, course or institution usually appearing in public print, as the publicity which is carefully and specifically prepared for campaign, often attributively; as a bureau.
This can be an action, spoken matter, written or printed which secure public attention, also, the attention to gained, as to seek publicity”.
The difference between publicity and advertising is the cost implication involved.
Advertising is regarded as a paid publicity but publicity is a non- paid promotion.
However, the role of publicity is significant to the success of a brand in foreign market.
Though in publicity, there exist no contractual agreement between the organization and the media: if there is no official payment, there is usually an indirect payment which comes informs of brown envelopes, launch, hampers, transportation fare, refreshment or gratifications of any kind.
Despite these gratifications, the media are not mandated to publish any story concerning the sponsor.
Publicity is factual information published in a newspaper at no cost; whereas the sponsor of an advertisement has control and dictates how, when, and where his advertisement should be placed.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain publicity as a promotional mix element of international advertising, explaining how it differs from advertising itself.
3.5 Lobbying Lobbying is one promotional mix element that aims at talking to law makers and enforcers on important issues on behalf of someone in order to have them make policies or legislations that would favour him/her.
Lobbyists are people who practice lobbying; they are wrongly viewed as questionable, mysterious, unscrupulous influence peddlers.
Most lobbyists have high level of influence with government’s officials, who would push their course in such that would give their clients favourable advantage over their competitors.
To get a brand into foreign market, it is crucial to understand the policy implication of the country the brand is going to, if it would be unfavourable 88  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) to the brand, then look for a lobbyist who would influence government officials make to introduce policy which would give the brand a presence in the local market.
For instance, during President Obasanjo’s regime, some foreign brands were bound from being sold in the country; even cements and rice were affected.
Later on, when President Goodluck Jonathan assumed office, he lifted the bound on cement and some other products.
This actions can only be made possible by lobbyists.
More so, a lobbyist is a public relations expert that lobbies on behalf of his client to gain favourable policy from government through direct contact with government’s officials by way of physical contacts, letters and telephone.
A lobbyist is also called pressure group because its aim is basically to influence government policies in favour of its members.
Lobbyists try to get information on upcoming government policies or laws, and also strive to get contracts in favour of their clients.
Mass media are used by lobbyists to high–light conflicting views in the society in-order to make government change it views in favour of their clients.
They sometimes place advertorials in newspapers to throw up debates on government policy that is not favourable to their members.
They see to it that due influence is put on government to ensure they change those unfavourable policies and compromise with them.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Lobbying is same as pressure group.
Explain.
4.0 CONCLUSION There are many other promotional mix elements of international advertising.
The crucial point in this unit is the supplementary roles these elements play in ensuring a successful campaign.
A focus organization would take advantage of sales promotion, personal selling, public relations, lobbying and publicity to get into foreign markets and also to benefit in the market share.
Promotional mix elements are spices and catalysts that support advertising campaigns.
Advertising alone cannot get a product to the international scenes without the indelible contributions of other elements like these, hence, effort should be made by every organization to employ personnel who are experts in the various fields of products promotions, These personnel should have great expertise in their chosen field and known how to play their games very well.
89  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 5.0 SUMMARY This unit considered the promotional mix elements in international advertising.
These are sales promotion, personal selling, public relations, publicity and lobbying.
While examining sales promotion, we considered sales tools like coupon, contest, concert, sponsorship and others which a marketer can use to promote his brand in foreign market.
Two types of coupons were explained to give students better understanding of this element of promotion.
Personal selling observes varieties like: order takers and order getters, hence, they were explained.
The remaining elements were explained with understandable examples for easy comprehension.
At the end of each element’s explanation, a self-assessment exercise was given to enable students cogitate and reflect on what they have read.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT  Mention and explain the various tools that can be used in sales promotion  Define publicity and state what makes it different front advertising  “Public relations is an octopus promotional mix element of international advertising”.
Explain.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995).
Introduction is Advertising and Promotion: An integrated marketing communications perspective.
Irwin McGraw – Hill publication.
U.S.A. John – Kanem A.U (2006).
Advertising: Genesis.
Education.
Principles.
Practice.
Snap Press.
Enugu 90  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) MODULE 4: ETHICAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY IN INTERNATIONAL ADVERTISING AND PROPAGANDA Unit 1: The Advertising Dimension of Adjusting Propaganda to Positive Uses Unit 2: Economic Effects of Advertising in a Free Economy Unit 3: Beyond Economic Gains: Using Advertising and Propaganda to Improve Human Dignity Unit 4: The Place of Ethics in International Advertising Unit 5: Social Responsibility Issues in International Advertising UNIT 1: The Advertising Dimension of Adjusting Propaganda to Positive Uses 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Advertising criticism 3.2 Propaganda and its positive usage 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Propaganda is a form of communication aimed towards influencing the attitude of the community toward some cause or position by presenting only one side of an argument.
Propaganda statements may be partly false and partly true.
Propaganda is usually repeated and dispersed over a wide variety of media in order to create the chosen result in audience attitudes.
On the other hand, Advertising is a form of communication intended to persuade an audience to purchase products, ideals or services.
While advertising can be seen as necessary for economic growth, it is not without social costs.
This unit shall x-ray the positive usage of propaganda in advertising, a microscopic view shall be given to topics like: advertising criticism, propaganda and its positive usage and perception management.
2.0: OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, students would understand how propaganda can be used positively in advertising process.
91  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Advertising criticism Advertising is an element of economic growth in any country.
However, unsolicited commercial email and other forms of spam have become so prevalent that they are a major nuisance to users of these services, as well as being a financial burden on internet service providers.
Advertising increasingly invades public spaces, such as schools, which some critics argue is a form of child exploitation.
Advertising frequently uses psychological pressure (for example, appealing to feelings of inadequacy) on the intended consumer, which may be harmful.
Criticism of advertising is closely linked with criticism of media and often interchangeable.
Critics can refer to advertising's  audio-visual aspects (cluttering of public spaces and airwaves)  environmental aspects (pollution, oversize packaging, increasing consumption)  political aspects (media dependency, free speech, censorship)  financial aspects (costs)  ethical/moral/social aspects (sub-conscious influencing, invasion of privacy, increasing consumption and waste, target groups, certain products, honesty) As advertising has become prevalent in modern society, it is increasingly being criticized.
Advertising occupies public space and more and more invades the private sphere of people.
“It is becoming harder to escape from advertising and the media.
Public space is increasingly turning into a gigantic billboard for products of all kind.
The aesthetical and political consequences cannot yet be foreseen.” Hanno Rauterberg in the German newspaper Die Zeit calls advertising a new kind of dictatorship that cannot be escaped.
Ad creep says, "There are ads in schools, airport lounges, doctors’ offices, movie theaters, hospitals, gas stations, elevators, convenience stores, on the Internet, on fruit, on ATMs, on garbage cans and countless other places.
There are ads on beach sand and restroom walls.” “One of the ironies of advertising in our times is that as commercialism increases, it makes it that much more difficult for any particular advertiser to succeed, hence pushing the advertiser to even greater efforts.” Within a decade advertising in radios climbed to nearly 18 or 19 minutes per hour, on prime-time television the standard until 1982 was no more than 9.5 minutes of advertising per hour, today it is between 14 and 17 minutes.
With the introduction of the shorter 15-second-spot the total amount of ads increased even more.
Ads are not 92  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) only placed in breaks but also into sports telecasts during the game itself.
They flood the Internet, a growing market.
Other growing markets are product placements in entertainment programming and movies where it has become standard practice and virtual advertising where products get placed retroactively into rerun shows.
Product billboards are virtually inserted into Major League Baseball broadcasts and in the same manner, virtual street banners or logos are projected on an entry canopy or sidewalks, for example during the arrival of celebrities at the 2001 Grammy Awards.
Advertising precedes the showing of films at cinemas including lavish ‘film shorts’ produced by companies such as Microsoft or DaimlerChrysler.
"The largest advertising agencies have begun working to co-produce programming in conjunction with the largest media firms", creating Infomercials resembling entertainment programming.
Opponents equate the growing amount of advertising with a "tidal wave" and restrictions with "damming" the flood.
Kalle Lasn, one of the most outspoken critics of advertising, considers advertising “the most prevalent and toxic of the mental pollutants.
From the moment your radio alarm sounds in the morning to the wee hours of late-night TV microjolts of commercial pollution flood into your brain at the rate of around 3,000 marketing messages per day.
Every day an estimated 12 billion display ads, 3 million radio commercials and more than 200,000 television commercials are dumped into North America’s collective unconscious”.
In the course of his life the average American watches three years of advertising on television.
Video games incorporate products into their content.
Special commercial patient channels in hospitals and public figures sporting temporary tattoos.
A method unrecognisable as advertising is so-called ‘’guerrilla marketing’’ which is spreading ‘buzz’ about a new product in target audiences.
Cash- strapped U.S. cities offer police cars for advertising.
Companies buy the names of sports stadiums for advertising.
The Hamburg soccer Volkspark stadium first became the AOL Arena and then the HSH Nordbank Arena.
The Stuttgart Neckarstadion became the Mercedes-Benz Arena, the Dortmund Westfalenstadion is the Signal Iduna Park.
The former SkyDome in Toronto was renamed Rogers Centre.
Christopher Lasch states that advertising leads to an overall increase in consumption in society; "Advertising serves not so much to advertise products as to promote consumption as a way of life."
93  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) The most important element of advertising is not information but suggestion – more or less making use of associations, emotions and drives in the subconscious, such as sex drive, herd instinct, desires such as happiness, health, fitness, appearance, self-esteem, reputation, belonging, social status, identity, adventure, distraction, reward, fears such as illness, weaknesses, loneliness, need, uncertainty, security or of prejudices, learned opinions and comforts.
"All human needs, relationships, and fears – the deepest recesses of the human psyche – become mere means for the expansion of the commodity universe under the force of modern marketing.
With the rise to prominence of modern marketing, commercialism – the translation of human relations into commodity relations – although a phenomenon intrinsic to capitalism, has expanded exponentially."
Cause- related marketing in which advertiser’s link their product to some worthy social cause has boomed over the past decade.
Advertising uses the model role of celebrities or popular figures and makes deliberate use of humor as well as of associations with color, tunes, certain names and terms.
These are factors of how one perceives himself and one's self-worth.
In his description of 'mental capitalism' Franck says, "The promise of consumption making someone irresistible is the ideal way of objects and symbols into a person’s subjective experience.
Evidently, in a society in which revenue of attention moves to the fore, consumption is drawn by one's self-esteem.
As a result, consumption becomes 'work' on a person’s attraction.
From the subjective point of view, this 'work' opens fields of unexpected dimensions for advertising.
Advertising takes on the role of a life councillor in matters of attraction.
The cult around one’s own attraction is what Christopher Lasch described as 'Culture of Narcissism'.” For advertising critics another serious problem is that, "the long standing notion of separation between advertising and editorial/creative sides of media is rapidly crumbling" and advertising is increasingly hard to tell apart from news, information or entertainment.
The boundaries between advertising and programming are becoming blurred.
According to the media firms all this commercial involvement has no influence over actual media content, but as McChesney puts it, "this claim fails to pass even the most basic giggle test, it is so preposterous."
Advertising draws "heavily on psychological theories about how to create subjects, enabling advertising and marketing to take on a 'more clearly psychological tinge'.
Increasingly, the emphasis in advertising has switched from providing 'factual' information to the symbolic connotations of commodities, since the crucial cultural premise of advertising is that the material object being sold is never in itself enough.
Even those commodities providing for the most mundane necessities of daily life must 94  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) be imbued with symbolic qualities and culturally endowed meanings via the 'magic system' of advertising.
In this way and by altering the context in which advertisements appear, things 'can be made to mean 'just about anything' and the 'same' things can be endowed with different intended meanings for different individuals and groups of people, thereby offering mass produced visions of individualism.” Before advertising is done, market research institutions need to know and describe the target group to exactly plan and implement the advertising campaign and to achieve the best possible results.
A whole array of sciences directly deal with advertising and marketing or are used to improve its effects.
Focus groups, psychologists and cultural anthropologists are ‘’’de rigueur’’’ in marketing research”.
Vast amounts of data on persons and their shopping habits are collected, accumulated, aggregated and analysed with the aid of credit cards, bonus cards, raffles and internet surveying.
With increasing accuracy this supplies a picture of behaviour, wishes and weaknesses of certain sections of a population with which advertisement can be employed more selectively and effectively.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Highlight the criticism of advertising stated in this topic.
3.2 Propaganda and its positive usage As opposed to impartially providing information, propaganda, in its most basic sense, presents information primarily to influence an audience.
Propaganda often presents facts selectively (thus possibly lying by omission) to encourage a particular synthesis, or uses loaded messages to produce an emotional rather than rational response to the information presented.
The desired result is a change of the attitude toward the subject in the target audience to further a political, religious or commercial agenda.
Propaganda can be used as a form of ideological or commercial warfare.
While the term propaganda has acquired a strongly negative connotation by association with its most manipulative and jingoistic examples (e.g.
Nazi propaganda used to justify the Holocaust), propaganda in its original sense was neutral, and could refer to uses that were generally benign or innocuous, such as public health recommendations, signs encouraging citizens to participate in a census or election, or messages encouraging persons to report crimes to law enforcement, among others.
Propaganda is generally an appeal to emotion, not intellect.
It shares techniques with advertising and public relations, each of which can be thought of as propaganda that promotes a commercial product or shapes the perception of an organization, person, or brand.
In post–World War II 95  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) usage the word "propaganda" more typically refers to political or nationalist uses of these techniques or to the promotion of a set of ideas, since the term had gained a pejorative meaning.
The refusal phenomenon was eventually to be seen in politics itself by the substitution of "political marketing" and other designations for "political propaganda".
Propaganda was often used to influence opinions and beliefs on religious issues, particularly during the split between the Roman Catholic Church and the Protestant churches.
Propaganda has become, propaganda was exemplified in the form of party slogans.
Also in the early 20th century the term propaganda was used by the founders of the nascent public relations industry to refer to their activities.
This usage died out around the time of World War II, as the industry started to avoid the word, given the pejorative connotation it had acquired.
In English, propaganda was originally a neutral term for the dissemination of information in favor of any given cause.
During the 20th century, however, the term acquired a thoroughly negative meaning in western countries, representing the intentional dissemination of often false, but certainly "compelling" claims to support or justify political actions or ideologies.
This redefinition arose because] both the Soviet Union and Germany's government under Hitler admitted explicitly to using propaganda favoring, respectively, communism and Nazism, in all forms of public expression.
As these ideologies were repugnant to liberal western societies, the negative feelings toward them came to be projected into the word "propaganda" itself.
However, Harold Lasswell observed, as early as 1928, that, "Propaganda has become an epithet of contempt and hate, and the propagandists have sought protective coloration in such names as 'public relations council,' 'specialist in public education,' 'public relations adviser.'
SOURCE: Wikipeadia:Propaganda to urge immigrants to move to California, 1876 96  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) SOURCE: Wikipeadia:American recruiting poster from World War I depicting Uncle Sam, the personification of the United States Some unusual and great leaders have used propaganda to their advantages, though they had said bye to the heathen, yet their impacts are written on black and white.
Some of their contributions are in this excepts: In his Rhetoric, Aristotle acknowledges that it would be better if we could make our case without either browbeating or flattering the audience; nothing should matter except "the bare facts."
Yet he laments, "Other things affect the result considerably, owing to the defects of our hearers."
— Stanley Fish, in his blog "Think Again" in the New York Times, 2008.11.09 "I soon realized that the correct use of propaganda is a true art which has remained practically unknown to the bourgeois parties.
Only the Christian- Social movement, especially in Lueger's time, achieved a certain virtuosity on this instrument, to which it owed many of its successes."
— Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, Volume 1, Chapter 6, "War Propaganda" "Through clever and constant application of propaganda, people can be made to see paradise as hell, and also the other way round, to consider the most wretched sort of life as paradise."
— Adolf Hitler "Propaganda," Goebbels once wrote, "has absolutely nothing to do with truth."
"In a time of universal deceit, telling the truth is a revolutionary act."
— George Orwell "This election is not about issues," Rick Davis, John McCain's campaign manager said this week.
"This election is about a composite view of what people take away from these candidates."
That's a scary thought.
For the takeaway is so often base, a reflection more of people's fears and insecurities than of our hopes and dreams.
— Judith Warner, New York Times, September 4, 2008 97  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) The efficiency of advertising is improved through advertising research.
Universities, of course supported by business and in co-operation with other disciplines, mainly Psychiatry, Anthropology, Neurology and behavioural sciences, are constantly in search for ever more refined, sophisticated, subtle and crafty methods to make advertising more effective.
“Neuromarketing is a controversial new field of marketing which uses medical technologies such as functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)—not to heal, but to sell products.
Advertising and marketing firms have long used the insights and research methods of psychology in order to sell products, of course.
But today these practices are reaching epidemic levels, and with complicity on the part of the psychological profession that exceeds that of the past.
The result is an enormous advertising and marketing onslaught that comprises, arguably, the largest single psychological project ever undertaken.
Yet, this great undertaking remains largely ignored by the American Psychological Association.” Robert McChesney calls it "the greatest concerted attempt at psychological manipulation in all of human history."
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain how propaganda can be used to achieve positive advertising, stating examples used in this unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION To achieve success in the usage of propaganda to achieve positive advertising, the subject of perception management would be of great concern to the advertiser.
Managing the perception of target audience is crucial to successfully use propaganda in a positive way.
Hence, perception management means the actions to convey or deny selected information and indicators to foreign audiences to influence their emotions, motives, and objective reasoning as well as to intelligence systems and leaders at all to influence official estimates, ultimately resulting in foreign behaviors and official actions favorable to the originator's objectives.
In various ways, perception management combines truth projection, operations security, cover and deception, and psychological operations.
"Perception" is defined as the "process by which individuals select, organize, and interpret the input from their senses to give meaning and order to the world around them" Components of perception include the perceiver, target of perception, and the situation.
Factors that influence the perceiver: 98  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424)  Schema: organization and interpretation of information based on past experiences and knowledge  Motivational state: needs, values, and desires of a perceiver at the time of perception  Mood: emotions of the perceiver at the time of perception Factors that influence the target:  Ambiguity: a lack of clarity.
If ambiguity increases, the perceiver may find it harder to form an accurate perception  Social status: a person's real or perceived position in society or in an organization  Impression management: an attempt to control the perceptions or impressions of others.
Targets are likely to use impression management tactics when interacting with perceivers who have power over them.
Several impression management tactics include behavioral matching between the target of perception and the perceiver, self-promotion (presenting one's self in a positive light), conforming to situational norms, appreciating others, or being consistent.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit elucidated the subject of positive uses of propaganda in advertising; it justified the topic by breaking the unit into two sub-heads.
Hence: advertising criticism and positive uses of propaganda in advertising.
In conclusion, perception management was explained to compliment the unit topic.
6.0 TUTORED-MARKED ASSESSMENT  Define what propaganda is.
 State the various criticism given to advertising in this unit  Highlight ways which propaganda can be positively used in advertising.
 Mention two factors each that influence the perceiver and targets 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, Joint Publication 1-02, 12 April 2001 (As Amended Through 17 December 2003) George, Jennifer.
"Chapter 4: Perception, Attribution, and the Management of Diversity".
Retrieved November 17, 2011.
99  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Goldman, Emily O.
(2004).
National Security in the Information Age: Issues, Interpretations, Periodizations.
Routledge (U.K.).
ISBN 0- 7146-5600-3., p. 149 http://www.ausairpower.net/Deception-IWC6- 05-Slides.pdf Hargis, Michael, and John D. Watt.
"Organizational Perception Management: A Framework to Overcome Crisis Events."
Organization Development Journal 28.1 (2010): 73-87. Business Source Complete.
EBSCO.
Web.
11 Nov. 2010.
Hindery, Roderick R., Indoctrination and Self-deception or Free and Critical Thought?
(2001) "The Religious Movements Page: Conceptualizing "Cult" and "Sect"".
Retrieved December 4, 2005.
Richard Alan Nelson, A Chronology and Glossary of Propaganda in the United States (1996) pp.
232–233 pp.
260–261, "The Function of the Propagandist", International Journal of Ethics, 38 (no.
3): pp.
258– 268.
100  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 2: Economic Effects of Advertising in a Free Economy 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Positive Effects of Advertising 3.2 Economic effects of advertising: An American case 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Although people often focus on the negatives when they discuss the effects of advertising, it is important to note that advertising does have its positive side.
In fact, some of our society's most important messages have come through advertising, like "Friends don't let friends drive drunk."
In addition to promoting important social messages, advertisements can also spark the economy by fostering competition and innovation.
2.0 OBJECTIVE After studying this unit students should be able to: Recognize the key role advertising plays in free economy.
Discuss the economic rationale for creating, accepting, and using advertising.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Positive Effects of Advertising Public service advertisements are often the first things considered when people discuss the positives of advertisements.
These advertisements market a social concept of importance to the general public.
Many public service announcements run messages about health, safety and national security.
In the United States, the Ad Council, a nonprofit organization, sponsors many public service announcements.
Their famous lines include "Loose lips sink ships," a 1942 advertisement run to promote national security during World War II.
However, other nonprofit organizations, the government, faith-based organizations and private companies also run public service marketing campaigns.
For example, the U.S. government has run a number of advertisements about the importance of disaster preparedness.
101  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) SOURCE: Demand Media.
Some advertisements are beneficial for their artistic value Three major benefits are associated with advertising in a free economy, they include the followings: a.
Social benefit b.
Economic benefits and c. Choice benefit Social Benefits In addition to public service advertisements, traditional advertisements that market a product or service can offer social benefits.
In fact, according to Megan VandeKerckhove, a student at the University of Florida’s Interactive Media Lab, advertising is free speech, and it can work to promote free speech.
According to VandeKerchkhove, this is especially true in countries where free speech has been suppressed.
Advertising there, especially when it comes from the Western world where free speech is embraced, can encourage the idea that free speech is important.
Furthermore, freedom of choice and advertising-supported entertainment, which is often a promoter of social change, are two important components of society that are both promoted through advertising.
Economic Benefits Advertising has a number of positive effects on economies both in the U.S. and abroad.
According to the International Advertising Association, advertising can encourage companies to compete and provide new products.
This encourages more consumers to buy because these products meet the needs and wants of more consumers.
Thus, the economy is positively affected.
In addition, advertising can help create more jobs.
As the demand for products and services goes up because of advertising, more people are needed to manufacture, supply, ship and test those products and services.
Thus, more jobs are created.
102  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Choice In addition to encouraging consumers to choose the products that are best for them, advertising, at least in democratic nations, allows individuals to learn about the wide variety of lifestyle and political choices available to them and choose the ones that they find best.
For example, in the United States, candidates for an elected position often run advertisements that discuss their strengths and the opponent's weaknesses.
These advertisements encourage Americans to compare and contrast the candidates and choose the one with whom they most agree.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain the 3 benefits of advertising in a free economy 3.2 Economic effects of advertising Linked to the bedrock principles that shaped our nation—free speech, competition and democracy—it has served the public since colonial times as a source of vital information about our open, market-based economy.
Two Nobel Laureates in economics, Dr. Kenneth Arrow and the late Dr. George Stigler, praise the value of advertising: “Advertising is a powerful tool of competition.
It provides valuable information about products and services in an efficient and cost-effective manner.
In this way, advertising helps the economy to function smoothly - it keeps prices low and facilitates the entry of new products and new firms into the market.” U.S. advertising accounts for about 2.5% of the $14 trillion Gross National Product.
American consumers rely heavily on advertising to influence how they spend some $9 trillion annually on various goods and services.
A 1999 study by the WEFA Group, one of the country's premiere econometric modeling firms and the Nobel Laureate in economics Dr. Lawrence R. Klein, further underscored this economic impact.
The study found that advertising played a key role in generating 18.2 million of the 126.7 million jobs in the United States in that year.
The report further concluded that advertising expenditures contributed between 12 to 16 percent of private sector revenues throughout the country, in rural as well as urban areas.
A later study, conducted in 2005 by Global Insight, demonstrated that advertising helps to generate more than $5.2 trillion in sales and economic activity throughout the U.S. economy annually.
That represents 20% of the nation’s $25.5 trillion in total economic activity.
This economic stimulus provided support throughout the economy for more than 21 million jobs, or 15.2% of the U.S. work force.
The purpose of the study was to quantify the economic and employment impacts of advertising.
The study removed intervening effects (like consumers simply buying a product to replace an old one or a depleted one) to measure the role of advertising itself.
103  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Advertising plays such a strong role in the economy because it: Provides useful information to consumers that tells them about product and service choices as well as comparing features, benefits and prices.
With more complete information, consumers and businesses often choose to purchase additional products and services.
“Causes an economic chain reaction that: a. Generates a net gain in direct sales and jobs due to the promotion of the industries' products and services, b. Generates indirect sales and jobs among the first level suppliers to the industries that incur the advertising expenditures, and c. Generates indirect sales and jobs among all other levels of economic activity as the sales ripple throughout the economy.” Advertising also plays a significant role in the business cycle.
As the broader economy shifts between periods of growth and recession, advertising shifts its focus.
During downturns, ads may focus on the price of a product or service.
If one company curtails advertising in order to cut costs during a downturn, another company might boost ad spending to grab customers and grow its market share.
Advertising helps stimulate economic growth.
In a country in which consumer spending determines the future of the economy, advertising motivates people to spend more.
By encouraging more buying, advertising promotes both job growth and productivity growth both to help meet increase demand and to enable each consumer to have more to spend.
Companies spend money on advertising because it increases sales of existing products, helps grow adoption of new products, builds brand loyalty, and takes sales away from competitors.
Although the exact return on investment (ROI) varies tremendously across industries, companies, campaigns and media channels, studies have found that a dollar spent on advertising returns $3 to $20 dollars in additional sales.
To compete and grow in todays diverse, ever-changing marketplace, businesses must reach their target customers efficiently, quickly alerting them to new product introductions, improved product designs and competitive price points.
Advertising is by far the most efficient way to communicate such information.
The economics of advertising extend to the media channels that depend on advertising revenues.
Many forms of advertising support the creation of content and make that content available at a much lower price (or free).
For example, roughly 75% of the cost of a newspaper is supported by advertising.
If newspapers contained no advertising, they would cost four times as much to buy on the newsstand.
Broadcast radio and TV rely exclusively on ads—people get news, music, and entertainment for free while advertisers get an audience.
Forms of media that the public takes for granted would be extremely expensive to the reader or viewer or would simply be out of business without the revenues advertising produces.
The demand created by advertising helps the 104  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) economy to expand.
Pattis, S. William.
Careers in Advertising.
Blacklick, OH, USA: McGraw-Hill Professional, 2004. p. 9.
Advertising supports the arts: musical artists visit ad agencies to meet with directors of music and pitch songs to them they can use in TV ads.
Advertisers need music that calls attention to the brand.
Artists come to agencies because they know that companies spend tens of millions of dollars on media buys.
“The major record labels don't have that kind of money,” says Josh Rabinowitz, senior vice president and director of music at Grey Worldwide.
What's more, “TV ads give you the kind of heavy rotation you can't get on MTV anymore.
In the very near future, some of the best bands will produce jingles.” For example, Jonny Dubowsky, lead singer and guitarist for Jonny Lives!
Uses corporate sponsorships to get exposure for his Indie band.
The band debuted a single on an EA video game and launched a video at 900 American eagle stores.
Fast Company, July/August 2007.
For those with (slightly) different musical tastes, it’s worth noting that “rock star” Barry Manilow wrote advertising jingles before he crossed over to recording songs.
The perspective called the economics of information shows how consumers benefit from viewing advertising.
By providing information, advertising reduces consumers’ search costs (time spent looking for products) and reduces disutility (unhappiness or lost value) from picking the wrong products.
Advertising provides information such as: Describing new products and what they do Alerting consumers to product availability and purchase locations; Showing consumers what to look for on store shelves Helping them differentiate among competitive choices; Advising them of pricing information and promotional opportunities Ultimately, advertising also saves consumers money by encouraging competition that exerts downward pricing pressures.
Advertising is a major industry.
It contributes to the economy directly (via the jobs it creates to produce ad messages) but also indirectly as it stimulates demand and provides information about other products and services.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain the economic effect of advertising from the American perspective.
4.0 CONCLUSION Advertising has a greater effect in a free economy than any other subject matter.
Advertising is an economy driver; it gives both individual and businesses precise publicity that would endear the right audience to them.
It has many phases, and in all the phases, it adds positively to the economy of the society.
More so, advertising creates jobs and engage both professionals 105  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) and non-professionals when discharging its duties.
It is a prosperity booster for any nation that encourages it.
The American study we enumerated showed the huge amount of money that advertising agencies play with periodically.it therefore shows that advertising industry can engage a large chunk of unemployed persons in the society.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit x-rayed the economic effect of advertising in a free economy.
Firstly, we journeyed into the three benefits that advertising can offer any free economy state; these included: economic, social and choice benefits.
Hence, the American scenario was considered in the sub-unit to justify the true nature of economic effects of advertising in a free economy.
This unit came to conclusion with self-assessment exercise questions to help students cogitate over what they have read.
6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSESSMENT  Explain what you understand by positive effect of advertising; stating the three types of benefits its offers.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Global Insight.
“The Comprehensive Economic Impact of Advertising Expenditures in the United States” http://www.naa.org/.../Public- Policy-The-Comprehensive-Economic-Impact-of-Advertising- Expenditures-in-the-US.aspx, accessed November 1, 2007.
Band-Aid song (“I am stuck on Band-Aids, and a Band-Aid’s stuck on me”) and the theme for State Farm insurance (“Like a good neighbor, State Farm is there).
http://en.allexperts.com/q/Manilow- Barry-511/Manilow-TV-jingles.htm, accessed July 17, 2008.
106  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 3: Beyond Economic Gains: Using Advertising and Propaganda to Improve Human Dignity 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How Advertising and Propaganda Can Improve Human Dignity 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Advertising and propaganda could be a great discovery and influence for people who buy things for themselves.
Advertisement shows a new product which differs from others that may ameliorate people's lives, while propaganda shows the position from which advertising could make a consumer wants the product without seeking alternative.
This unit shall enunciate the role of both advertising and propaganda to better human dignity in his daily endeavors.
These areas include personal lifestyle and business engagement.
2.0 OBJECTIVE Students would understand the roles of advertising and propaganda as they improve on human dignity.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 How Advertising and Propaganda Can Improve Human Dignity Nowaday advertising has become an industry, an important industry for many companies and business.
For a long time, every day, everytime, everywhere, we see many kinds of advertising of many products.
Some people say that advertising encourages us to buy things that we really don't need.
However, others say that advertisements tell us about new products that may improve our lives.
First, what is advertisement?
By the simple way, we can see that advertising is a form of communication intended to persuade an audience (viewers, readers or listeners) to purchase or take some action upon products, ideas, or services.
In like manner, propaganda presents advertisement an easy ride to its targets audience via its uses.
107  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Five Types of Propaganda Used in Advertising There are five types of propaganda used in advertising.
The first type is called bandwagon.
Bandwagon is persuading a consumer by telling them that others are doing the same thing (Propaganda Techniques in Advertising).
An example is in soft drink ads there will be many attractive young people having fun on a beach (Advertising Lecture).
The second type is called testimonial.
Testimonial is when a product is sold by using words from famous people or an authority figure (Propaganda Techniques in Advertising).
An example of testimonial is, “Nine out of ten dentists recommend this type of toothpaste” (Advertising Lectures).
The next type is transfer, which is when a product is sold by the name or picture of a famous person or thing, but no words from the person or thing (Propaganda Techniques in Advertising), for example political advertisements might use the American flag to help sell the product (Advertising Lecture).
The fourth type of propaganda techniques that is used is repetition.
Repetition is when the product’s name is repeated at least four times in the ad.
The last type is called emotional words.
That is when words that will make a consumer feel strongly about someone or something are used (Propaganda Techniques in Advertising).
For example, Ralph Lauren sells there perfume by showing a romantic love seen and just putting the word romance on the ad.
The five propaganda techniques can be extremely successful in selling a product.
Bandwagon Testimonial 108  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Transfer Repetition Emotional Words SOURCE: Riverdale.k SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain the five types of propaganda used in Advertising Many people prefer to buy things according to their understanding regarding the product that they will purchase.
By this, people tend to understand the information taught by the promoters of what their product makes it better than the other.
Furthermore, advertisement could be an impact to those who buy or get things according to its popularity.
People prefer to buy signature clothes, eat at popular restaurant, drink branded medicine, go to the popular malls, and others.
Hence, commercial promotion affects these activities of people regarding purchasing items in the malls or markets.
However, other people see advertisements as a bad influence especially to their children.
Children usually try to insist to their parents to buy those things they see in a commercial promotion because children find it interesting regardless of the importance of the product to their daily living.
Moreover, Advertisement could be a daily conflict between parents and 109  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) children every time children asserts for the things they want to have.
In my own experience, Commercial promotion served as my source of information when I was planning to buy a specific gadget.
It helps me to know which is better to purchase since I was about to spend a huge amount of money.
By that, I did a good choice considering that I have enough information taught to me by the advertisement.
Therefore, I believe that advertisement is a good factor that influence every person by means of giving away information that may help them choose from which is better to purchase and what makes it different from the other Advertising and Our Lives Advertising is an industry.
Companies which want to show their products and make many consumers interested in them, use advertisement like the main way to attract people.
And the organizations which help these companies to advertise and show their products on TV or internet, are often websites or television stations.
They get many money from these companies paying for those advertisements.
So that's the reason why advertising is an industry.
The first viewpoint, it isn't good for this industry, we can see like that.
The advertising encourages us to buy things that we really don't need.
In my own opinion, this viewpoint is wrong.
Maybe with this person, the product which is showed at advertisement is not necessary.
But maybe, just maybe too, with the others, this product is good and of course, they can find what they want easily without many time and ways to find.
They only must see the advertisement.
This viewpoint is only the personal idea of some people who hate advertising.
They don't want to see all the advertisements anymore.
Their lives don't have advertising.
Some people go crazy when they see or listen to some advertisements, and they have the bad impression about this industry.
So this's the reason why they say this viewpoint.
What a subjectivism!
The second viewpoint, Advertisement tells us about new products that may improve our lives.
It's right but not at all.
Because not all the products from advertisement is necessary for each people and families.
That one like this kind of product.
The other dislike it.
Everybody has the own favourite products.
However, all the advertisements show the products which there are people that need.
The companies or businesses can produce many kinds but these products must be necessary for life.
If not, that companies will incur losses and bankrupt.
So can't say the products from advertising aren't 110  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) necessary for life.
Let try to imagine!
One company produce the product that not be good for society.
The main way to show it of them is advertising.
Then consumers don't like it.
This company bankrupts.
So it doesn't have enough money that pay for advertising.
Finally, this advertisement will be banned.
All the advisements show the good products, but not for all consumers, just for some, no more.
In the other hand, some advertisements are so funny and interesting because they use cartoon or awesome music.
As a consequence, many people, especially kids like these advertisements.
They can relax with them.
You can like or dislike the advertising but can't say advertising is not necessary for life.
It's an important industry, a main way to show products of all companies that big or small.
Corporate Advertising – Improving the Name Awareness of the Corporation The use of business cards is both a simple and economical approach to corporate advertising.
This card allows the holder to spread the insights about the business by indicating the attractive feature of the venture.
Another strategy is the use of gift certificates which is an effective means to entice customers especially for the retail stores.
Online ads and print ads are great too.
Both can be done by contacting some websites or written media like newspapers to communicate the products or services you offer.
Using the popular YouTube channel to share out by posting videos about the business’ information is a good corporate advertising technique as well.
Other strategies are the door-to-door and direct mail.
The latter employs striking door hangers that can be dropped off in the neighborhood, while the former sends the advertisement directly to potential customers.
Company Advertising - Easy Promotional Tips and Guidelines Aside from the powerful media like TV, radio, newspaper, and internet, businesses can also grow through constant promotions.
This can be achieved by giving customers a wide range of incentives to keep on coming back, such as letting them obtain a discount coupon in every specific purchase, or making them buy four items and get the fifth for free.
Another effective company advertising tip includes partnering with other companies so that gift cards can be distributed for your frequent spenders.
Use of promotional products is an ideal company advertising approach as well.
By simply handing out business cards from the people you randomly meet, 111  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) or sponsoring academic teams and local sports with your logo exposed through the banners or as printed in their game uniforms, you can now promote your business.
Just make it sure that the service or product information are easy to read, clear, and prominent enough to be remembered.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Some people say that advertising encourages us to buy things that we really do not need.
Others say that advertisements tell us about new products that may improve our lives.
Which viewpoint do you agree with?
4.0 CONCLUSION One effective way to increase sales among business organizations is advertising.
Many advertising techniques are applied to suit the unique exposure need of every individual business.
These include the use of business cards, print ads, and media.
Nonetheless, several things also have to be avoided to make advertising a success.
In order for individual or business to avoid bad advertising, several principles about image/product placement, readability, and appropriateness have to be consistently considered.
Otherwise, your reputation/business would be a failure.
Some of the basic advertising rules to remember are the aversion from the use of inflammatory advertisement which tends to offend a minority group because paying a lawsuit is the quickest way to lose profit.
Advertising campaigns that create annoying noises through screaming yelling, or loud volumes aren’t effective too.
Other bad types of advertising are vague messages and poor placement.
Vague messages leave people in confusion, while wrong placement loses the ads’ relevance and significance.
Both manners do not, in any way, entice customers to avail the products or services being projected.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit explained the role of advertising and propaganda in improving human dignity.
Human dignity was the bone which advertising and propaganda were made to crack.
We x-rayed the five types of propaganda used in advertising and how they boost human dignity.
Picture samples were given to ground the understanding of the discuss.
112  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) More so, how advertising and propaganda affect the business endeavor of man was explained, adding to this are the opinions given to buttress the subject matter.
This unit was concluded with two self-assessment exercise.
6.0TUTORED-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Highlights the positive effects of advertising and propaganda as explained in this unit.
 List and explain the five types of propaganda used in advertising.
7.0REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS http://hs.riverdale.k12.or.us/~dthompso/exhib_03/tianaa/propaganda.html http://simplebooklet.com/publish.php?wpKey=bJuPoORXsKkUlDFpG7W ZPc#wpKey=bJuPoORXsKkUlDFpG7WZPc#page=0 113  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) UNIT 4: The Place of Ethics in International Advertising 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 International Advertising Ethics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 8.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As emerging economies all over the world open up their markets we hear a lot of buzzwords around global brand-building.
Multinationals are falling over themselves trying to "think globally and act locally".
Here is a case where acting locally has been manipulated into a calculated double standard.
Of course, all beauty advertising caters to culturally relative neuroses of what is beautiful but surely even the most naive marketing managers must have had a glimmering of doubt – "Wait a minute, is it racist to promote whitening?
Would we put these words in a billboard on Times Square?"
– Before they cleared the words, "White Perfect Re- Lighting Whitening Radiance".
This begs the question: what are the ethics of global branding?
As multinationals become more powerful than governments, what are the core principles that we as global and local customers should be able to hold them to?
Considering that some of these companies have GDPs higher than that of small countries, it is scary how unregulated international advertising is.
It is left to the individual customer to educate herself and make socially responsible choices.
This unit shall consider the international advertising ethics, basically, Ethical Advertising Standard’s (EAS) codes of ethic.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, students should understand advertising ethic from the international perspective.
114  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 International Advertising Ethics Simply stated, “ethics” refers to standards of conduct derived from moral values.
Those standards vary greatly from discipline to discipline and person to person, and even philosophers approach ethics from multiple directions (Spence & Van Heekeren 2005, 8).
But in its most basic form these are concepts of right and wrong behavior, not limited to what is required by law ( Drumwright & Murphy 2004 ; Communication and Law ; Advertising Law and Regulation ).
Law deals with only a limited range of “wrong” behavior, especially in the context of advertising.
In the US, for instance, the First Amendment, along with practical enforcement limitations, prevent it from addressing most issues (Right to Communicate; Freedom of Communication).
For the remainder, only the ethical standards of those involved in the advertising process stand as protection for consumers.
Public perception of advertising often is that “ethics” is a concept foreign to its practitioners.
An annual “honesty and ethics” poll by Gallup consistently finds the public ranks advertising among the least ethical professions (e.g., Saad 2006).
Indeed, study after study consistently finds that about 70 percent of consumers think that advertising often is untruthful (Calfee & Ringold 1994; Truth and Media Content).
This perceived ethical poverty, not surprisingly, leads to widely varying concerns ... log in or subscribe to read full text SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Define the term ethics  What is advertising ethics Ethical Advertising Standard (EAS) Definitions For the purpose of this standard:  the term "advertisement" is taken in its broadest sense, and means any form of advertising for goods or services, regardless of the medium used;  the term "product" refers to any good or service;  The term "consumer" refers to any person to whom an advertisement is addressed or who can reasonably be expected to be reached by it whether as a final consumer or as a trade customer or user.
115  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Basic Principles Article 1 All advertising should be legal, decent, honest and truthful.
Every advertisement should be prepared with a due sense of social responsibility and should conform to the principles of fair competition, as generally accepted in business.
No advertisement should be such as to impair public confidence in advertising.
Decency Article 2 Advertisements should not contain statements or visual presentations which offend prevailing standards of decency.
Honesty Article 3 Advertisements should be so framed as not to abuse the trust of consumers or exploit their lack of experience or knowledge.
Social Responsibility Article 4 1.
Advertisements should not condone any form of discrimination, including that based upon race, national origin, religion, sex or age, nor should they in any way undermine human dignity.
2.
Advertisements should not (without justifiable reason) play on fear.
3.
Advertisements should not appear to condone or incite violence, or to encourage unlawful or reprehensible behaviour.
4.
Advertisements should not play on superstition.
Truthful presentation Article 5 1.
Advertisements should not contain any statement or visual presentation which directly or by implication, omission, ambiguity or exaggerated claim is likely to mislead the consumer, in particular with regard to a. characteristics such as: nature, composition, method and date of manufacture, range of use, efficiency and performance, quantity, commercial or geographical origin or environmental impact; b. the value of the product and the total price actually to be paid; c. delivery, exchange, return, repair and maintenance; d. terms of guarantee; e. copyright and industrial property rights such as patents, trademarks, designs and models and trade names; f. official recognition or approval, awards of medals, prizes and diplomas; g. The extent of benefits for charitable causes.
116  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) 2.
Advertisements should not misuse research results or quotations from technical and scientific publications.
Statistics should not be so presented as to exaggerate the validity of advertising claims.
Scientific terms should not be used to falsely ascribe scientific validity to advertising claims.
Comparisons Article 6 Advertisements containing comparisons should be so designed that the comparison is not likely to mislead, and should comply with the principles of fair competition.
Points of comparison should be based on facts that can be substantiated and should not be unfairly selected.
Unassembled Merchandise Article 7 When advertised merchandise requires partial or complete assembly by the purchaser, the advertising should disclose that fact, e.g., "unassembled," "partial assembly required."
Testimonials Article 8 Advertisements should not contain or refer to any testimonial or endorsement unless it is genuine, verifiable, relevant and based on personal experience or knowledge.
Testimonials or endorsements that have become obsolete or misleading through passage of time should not be used.
Portrayal or imitation of personal property Article 9 Advertisements should not portray or refer to any persons, whether in a private or a public capacity, unless prior permission has been obtained; nor should advertisements without prior permission depict or refer to any person's property in a way likely to convey the impression of a personal endorsement.
Exploitation of goodwill Article 10 Advertisements should not make unjustifiable use of the name, initials, logo and/or trademarks of another firm, company or institution nor should advertisements in any way take undue advantage of another firm, person or institution's goodwill in its name, trade name or other intellectual property, nor should advertisements take advantage of the goodwill earned by other advertising campaigns.
117  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Imitation Article 11 1.
Advertisements should not imitate the general layout, text, slogan, visual presentation, music and sound effects, etc., of any other advertisements in a way that is likely to mislead or confuse the consumer.
2.
Where advertisers have established distinctive advertising campaigns in one or more countries, other advertisers should not unduly imitate these campaigns in the other countries where the former may operate, thus preventing them from extending their campaigns within a reasonable period of time to such countries.
Identification of advertisements Article 12 Advertisements should be clearly distinguishable as such, whatever their form and whatever the medium used; when an advertisement appears in a medium which contains news or editorial matter, it should be so presented that it will be readily recognised as an advertisement.
Safety and health Article 13 Advertisements should not without reason, justifiable on educational or social grounds, contain any visual presentation or any description of dangerous practices or of situations which show a disregard for safety or health.
Children and young people Article 14 The following provisions apply to advertisements addressed to children and young people who are minors under the applicable national law.
Inexperience and Credulity a. Advertisements should not exploit the inexperience or credulity of children and young people.
b. Advertisements should not understate the degree of skill or age level generally required to use or enjoy the product.
i.
Special care should be taken to ensure that advertisements do not mislead children and young people as to the true size, value, nature, durability and performance of the advertised product.
118  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) ii.
If extra items are needed to use it (e.g., batteries) or to produce the result shown or described (e.g., paint) this should be made clear.
iii.
A product that is part of a series should be clearly indicated, as should the method of acquiring the series.
iv.
Where results of product use are shown or described, the advertisement should represent what is reasonably attainable by the average child or young person in the age range for which the product is intended.
c. Price indication should not be such as to lead children and young people to an unreal perception of the true value of the product, for instance by using the word 'only'.
No advertisements should imply that the advertised product is immediately within reach of every family budget.
Avoidance of Harm Advertisements should not contain any statement or visual presentation that could have the effect of harming children and young people mentally, morally or physically or of bringing them into unsafe situations or activities seriously threatening their health or security, or of encouraging them to consort with strangers or to enter strange or hazardous places.
Guarantees Article 15 Advertisements should not contain any reference to a guarantee which does not provide the consumer with additional rights to those provided by law.
Advertisements may contain the word "guarantee", "guaranteed", "warranty" or "warranted" or words having the same meaning only if the full terms of the guarantee as well as the remedial action open to the purchaser are clearly set out in the advertisements, or are available to the purchaser in writing at the point of sale, or come with the goods.
Unsolicited products Article 16 Advertisements should not be used to introduce or support the practice whereby unsolicited products are sent to persons who are required, or given the impression that they are obliged to accept and pay for these products (inertia selling).
Claimed Results Article 17 Claims as to energy savings, performance, safety, efficacy, results, etc.
which will be obtained by or realised from a particular product or service should be based on recent and competent scientific, engineering or other objective data.
119  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Layout and Illustrations Article 18 The composition and layout of advertisements should be such as to minimise the possibility of misunderstanding by the reader.
For example, prices, illustrations, or descriptions should not be so placed in an advertisement as to give the impression that the price or terms of featured merchandise apply to other merchandise in the advertisement when such is not the fact.
An advertisement should not be used which features merchandise at a price or terms boldly displayed, together with illustrations of higher-priced merchandise, so arranged as to give the impression that the lower price or more favourable terms apply to the other merchandise, when such is not the fact.
Asterisks and Abbreviations Article 19 An asterisk may be used to impart additional information about a word or term which is not in itself inherently deceptive.
The asterisk or other reference symbol should not be used as a means of contradicting or substantially changing the meaning of any advertising statement.
Information referenced by asterisks should be clearly and prominently disclosed.
Commonly known abbreviations may be used in advertising.
However, abbreviations not generally known to or understood by the general public should be avoided.
Environmental behaviour Article 20 Advertisements should not appear to approve or encourage actions which contravene the law, self-regulating codes or generally accepted standards of environmentally responsible behaviour.
Responsibility Article 21 1.
Responsibility for the observance of the rules of conduct laid down in the Code rests with the advertiser, the advertising practitioner or agency, and the publisher, media owner or contractor.
a.
Advertisers should take the overall responsibility for their advertising.
b.
Advertising practitioners or agencies should exercise every care in the preparation of advertisements and should operate in such a way as to enable advertisers to fulfil their responsibilities.
120  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) c. Publishers, medium-owners or contractors, who publish, transmit or distribute advertisements should exercise due care in the acceptance of advertisements and their presentation to the public.
2.
Those employed within a firm, company or institution coming under the above three categories and who take part in the planning, creation, publishing or transmitting of an advertisement have a degree of responsibility commensurate with their positions for ensuring that the rules of the Code are observed and should act accordingly.
Rules apply to entirety of advertisement Article 22 The responsibility for observance of the rules of the Code embraces the advertisement in its entire content and form, including testimonials and statements or visual presentations originating from other sources.
The fact that the content or form originates wholly or in part from other sources is not an excuse for non-observance of the rules.
Effect of subsequent redress for contravention Article 23 while an advertiser's subsequent correction and appropriate redress for a contravention of the Code are desirable, they cannot excuse the original contravention of the Code.
Alarmist Marketing Article25 An advertiser should not engage in speculation or provide information intended to cause alarm and force action.
Such actions include overstating the legal implications of a non-defined action.
Substantiation Article26 Descriptions, claims or illustrations relating to verifiable facts should be capable of substantiation.
Advertisers should have such substantiation available so that they can produce evidence without delay to the self- regulatory bodies responsible for the operation of the Code.
121  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Highlight the numbers of articles in the Ethical Advertising Standard (EAS) 4.0 CONCLUSION It is clear that multinational companies have a lot of resources to spend on whitewashing and greenwashing themselves.
But at the end of the day, unethical global branding might be the same thing as short-sighted brand- building.
As customers become increasingly aware that purchasing power is a political power on par with voting, and the internet makes it difficult to keep secrets, multinationals who talk the talk but refuse to walk the walk will find out that pouring millions of dollars into creating elaborate corporate mythologies cannot replace consistently principled branding.
Customers are not stupid.
It is a lesson that should be learnt.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit examined international advertising ethics.
It x-rayed what ethic is, and its relevance in advertising.
The unit was justified by enumerating the typical international advertising ethic, precisely Ethical Advertising Standard (EAS).
The conclusion of this unit send a lesson to all advertisers that consumers are not stupid, thereby advising them to keep up an ethical practice at all time.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  What is advertising Ethic?
 List the article titles of Ethical Advertising Standard (EAS) 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Shahnaz Habib (2009) The Ethics of Global Branding.
theguardian.com, Sunday 22 February 2009.
122  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Unit 5: Social Responsibility Issues in International Advertising 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Corporate Social Responsibility in International Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Corporate social responsibility is a self-regulation by a company with the objective of embracing responsibility for the company's actions and creating a positive impact through its activities on its customers, employees, communities and the environment.
A company may build into its mission, strategy and everyday operations elements that serve to promote specific goals, for example, using recycled paper or organic hand soap in the offices to help save the environment.
Although direct effects haven't been proved and much criticism has risen around CSR, companies identify some obvious benefits.
Implementing the values and goals of CSR improve the judgment and reputation of the business among customers.
In a strong, competitive market it also makes the business stand out from its rivals.
CSR may also prompt current and potential employees to commit themselves to the company and promote its values in their private lives.
Social responsibility is not restricted to one industry and not another, it covers for all kinds of organisations.
Advertising industry is not left out as well.
In the unit, we shall examine some issues bothering on advertising social responsibility.
2.0 OBJECTIVE Students would understand what corporate social responsibility is from the international advertising perspective and be able to explain it on their own.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Corporate Social Responsibility in International Advertising Socially responsible advertising must first be truthful.
For an advertising campaign to be considered socially responsible, the advertising used in the campaign must meet an ethical standard.
Corporate social responsibility marketing has been a focus of several major advertising campaigns, but if 123  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) the advertisements used in the campaign are seen as deceptive by the public, the company is unlikely to be considered socially responsible regardless of the theme of the advertisements.
Scott Thompson (2010) states four elements of a socially responsible advertisement.
These are: a.
Truth in Advertising b. Messaging c. Corporate Social Responsibility d. Avoiding Public Cynicism Source: Demand Media- Scott Thompson Truth in Advertising Truthfulness is the first requirement for any socially responsible advertising.
However, this requirement is not as straightforward as it may appear.
Factual information can be presented in such a way as to deceive the viewer, while an image can be manipulated yet still create an accurate final impression.
For example, if an advertisement says a certain product is inexpensive without revealing that it will wear out very quickly, then the information is factually accurate yet deceptive.
Any customer buying the product would be likely to end up spending more money rather than saving, because it would have to be replaced so soon.
Another ad might use camera tricks to create the visual impression of a juicy steak, because the unmanipulated image of the steak would look dry and unappealing.
If the steaks being advertised are actually juicy, the ad is not deceptive even though the image is manipulated.
Messaging Socially responsible advertising should not promote or contribute to anything damaging to society.
If an advertisement makes use of racial or 124  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) sexist stereotypes, shows irresponsible parenting practices, encourages irresponsible use of alcohol or sexual behaviors, or attempts to emotionally manipulate a vulnerable audience such as children, then many would consider it to be socially irresponsible.
Of course, most of these standards are a matter of opinion.
Any advertising message could be considered emotionally manipulative depending on how you look at it, so in practice it comes down to a subjective assessment of what is appropriate and what is not.
There is always a risk that your ad campaign could unintentionally offend customers.
Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate social responsibility marketing is the practice of combining a company's charitable activities with its marketing campaigns.
Instead of just writing a check to a selected charity, the company would tie the amount of the donation directly to sales, and would make the fundraising campaign the focus of its advertising.
Corporate social responsibility can benefit the company in more than one way.
It can improve the public perception of the company, increase sales and improve employee morale.
Avoiding Public Cynicism While donating money to charity is a positive activity for its own sake, corporate social responsibility marketing can backfire on a company if it is perceived as cynical by the public.
For instance, if overuse of your product is associated with higher cancer rates and you run an ad campaign for cancer awareness, then some people might see the campaign as deceptive and unethical.
The same thing can happen if your ad campaign raises money for environmental causes by selling a product with high carbon emissions or excessive packaging.
Before you make social responsibility the theme of your advertising, you should first make sure there is no contradiction between your message and your business practices.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  List and explain the four elements of a socially responsible advertisement 10 Companies with Social Responsibility at the Core In the series of ten (10) columns being published in celebration of the ANA's 100th anniversary, Bob Liodice states and explains ten companies that rate high in the discharge of social responsibility in advertisement at the international market.
125  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Many companies believe they have a responsibility to "give back" to society.
This focus includes contributions of time and money, a duty to provide environmentally friendly products and services, and a desire to improve the lives of individuals here and around the globe.
Such socially responsible companies see to it that this "consciousness" permeates everything they do.
The following 10 companies stand out as prime examples of how social responsibility can be productively coupled with sound strategies to advance goodwill, while building sustainable and impressive businesses.
They provide the leadership to demonstrate how marketers can pursue both objectives simultaneously.
As such, socially conscious companies have stepped up their efforts with increasing effectiveness and productivity.
It is an impressive movement and one that invites society at large to do even more.
Let's use these as examples for "how to get it done" so that we can effectively expand our efforts to give back.
Go natural, through and through: Burt’s bees The focus for Burt's Bees has always been on wellbeing and "the greater good."
As part of the Natural Products Association, the company helped develop The Natural Standard for Personal Care Products, which created guidelines for what can be deemed natural.
Burt's Bees follows the highest possible standards for packaging sustainability, furthering its dedication to the cause as a member of the Sustainable Packaging Coalition.
Since the brand's start at a crafts fair selling $200 worth of honey, the company has since expanded to candles, lip balm and now more than 150 products.
In 2009, revenue topped $250 million.
126  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Using Its Ecomagination: GE To stay true to GE's mission, Ecomagination offerings include products that significantly and measurably improve customers' operating performance or value proposition and environmental performance.
Ecomagination helped GE build its business by increasing awareness of how the company is using renewable energy and reducing carbon emissions.
As proof of the effectiveness of GE's program, the Ecomagination portfolio has grown from 17 products to more than 80 today, with revenues reaching $17 billion in 2008, an increase of 21% over 2007.
The New Meaning Of Clean: Method As a cleaning product, Method hit the jackpot.
While cleaning products historically contained hazardous chemicals, Method was able to make safe and effective home and personal cleaning products derived from natural ingredients such as soy, coconut and palm oils.
The products also come in environmentally responsible, biodegradable packaging.
As one of the fastest-growing companies in the world, and with $100 million in annual revenue, Method proves that socially responsible products can be wildly successful.
127  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Beauty Comes From Within: The Body Shop The Body Shop is regarded as a pioneer of modern corporate social responsibility as one of the first companies to publish a full report on its efforts and initiatives.
Founder Anita Roddick led her company to stand up for its beliefs and champion causes such as self-esteem, environmental protection, animal rights, community trade and human rights.
From sponsoring posters in 1985 for Greenpeace to presenting a petition against animal testing to the European Union with 4,000,000 signatures, The Body Shop has contributed significantly to the causes it supports, and exemplifies how other companies can do the same.
Brewed Responsibly: Starbucks Coffee Since Starbucks Coffee started in 1971, the company has focused on acting responsibly and ethically.
One of Starbucks' main focuses is the sustainable production of green coffee.
With this in mind, it created C.A.F.E.
Practices, a set of guidelines to achieve product quality, economic accountability, social responsibility and environmental leadership.
The company supports products such as Ethos Water, which brings clean water to the more than 1 128  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) billion people who do not have access.
To date, Ethos Water has committed to grants totaling more than $6.2 million.
The Sweet Delight Of Giving Back: Ben & Jerry's Ben & Jerry’s founders Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield have infused the company with the notions of giving back in every way possible, as well as "linked prosperity" between the company, its employees and the community.
They started the Ben & Jerry’s Foundation, were founding members of the Business for Social Responsibility organization and set an extraordinary rate of giving to charitable organizations in the corporate world, donating a full 7.5% of pretax profits.
In their own words, they "strive to show a deep respect for human beings inside and outside our company and for the communities in which they live."
Unilever bought Ben & Jerry’s in 2000 and continues to support the foundation; it donated $2 million in 2009.
Social Awareness Can Look So Good: Kenneth Cole Since 1985, Kenneth Cole has been openly involved in publicly supporting AIDS awareness and research.
He uses fashion to promote awareness of, and help fight, various social issues.
After 25 years of addressing meaningful social issues, Kenneth Cole established the Awearness Fund, a not-for-profit initiative that uses partnerships, merchandise, events and its blog to celebrate, encourage and empower acts of service volunteerism and social change.
A full 100% of net proceeds of the Awearness products go toward the fund.
These efforts have helped fuel the success of the Kenneth Cole brand, a company with nearly $500 million in sales.
129  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) Lending A Hand To Man's Best Friend: Pedigree Pedigree dog food built its brand by focusing on the need for people to adopt homeless dogs.
Funding the support and care of these animals and sponsoring a national adoption drive, Pedigree's 2009 goal was to distribute $1.5 million in grants to 1,000 shelters and breed rescues.
Pedigree donates one bowl of food to animal shelters every time it gets a Facebook fan, and it did the same when the company's 2009 Super Bowl commercial was viewed online.
Pedigree's goal is to donate 4 million bowls of dog food, enough to feed every shelter dog in America for one day.
A Shoe For Me Is A Shoe For You: Toms Shoes Blake Mycoskie started Toms Shoes on the premise that for every pair of shoes sold, one pair would be donated to a child in need.
This innovative idea resulted from a trip to Argentina where Mycoskie saw an overwhelming number of children without shoes.
Toms Shoes recognized that consumers want to feel good about what they buy, and thus directly tied the purchase with the donation.
In just four years, Toms Shoes has 130  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) donated more than 400,000 shoes, evidence that consumers have clearly embraced the cause.
A Whole Lot Of Good: Whole Foods Whole Foods supports sustainable agriculture, promotes the reduction of waste and consumption of nonrenewable resources and encourages environmentally sound cleaning and store-maintenance programs.
The company created the Local Producer Loan program, which provides up to $10 million in low-interest loans to small local producers to help grow their businesses.
Whole Foods has also created Whole Planet Foundation, which fights poverty through microlending in rural communities around the world.
The foundation has raised $1.5 million to help 40,000 women lift themselves out of poverty by empowering microentrepreneurs.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  List the 10 companies that rated high in advertising social responsibility.
Explain how they did it.
4.0 CONCLUSION Through corporate social responsibility, businesses are committed to do more for society and the environment.
The term corporate social responsibility (CSR) first appeared in the late 1960s in reaction to the global challenges, such as climate change, financial crises, multiplying trade and investments, that started to evolve in the international sphere.
Companies have begun to realize that besides gaining economic profit they must take responsibility and incorporate actions into their business models to solve local or even global problems and improve social well-being.
131  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424) A number of an international Advertising Standard Association (ASA) codes have a requirement for ‘a due sense of social responsibility’ and a “high standard of responsibility’ is in the Code for Advertising Liquor, the Therapeutic Products Advertising Code, the Therapeutic Services Advertising Code, the Code for Weight Management and the Code for Advertising Gaming and Gambling in addition to the Code for the Advertising of Food and the Code for Advertising to Children.
What is socially responsible in advertising depends on the context, medium, audience, product and prevailing community standards.
One of the benefits of a principle and rule approach of the Advertising Codes of Practice is that the interpretation of the codes can move in response to what the community may find more or less acceptable.
A simple example is that Society today is more tolerant of certain words such as ‘bugger’ and ‘bloody idiot’, which would not have been acceptable 20 years ago.
On the other hand tolerance of violence in advertisements has become more conservative over the same time period.
It is also important to note that while a number of guidelines are included in the Codes to illustrate the principles of a due sense or high standard of social responsibility – the Complaints Boards are not restricted in their interpretation of the principle to the actual listed guidelines.
It is possible for an advertisement to be in breach of the principle without being in breach of a specific guideline.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit explained issues in social responsibility as its concerns international advertising practices.
Corporate social responsibility was our focus here.
There were four elements that trigger a socially responsible advertisement, hence, there were listed and explained.
We further considered 10 international companies that were rated high in international advertising social responsibility.
Afterwards, ASA’s points of view as regarding social responsibility was share in the conclusion of the unit to balance discussion on the subject matter.
Hence, self-assessment exercise were given to enable student refresh their memory of what has been studied so far.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Define corporate social responsibility  List the 10 companies that rated high in advertising social responsibility.
Explain how they did it.
132  International Advertising and Propaganda (MAC 424)  List and explain the four elements of a socially responsible advertisement 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Baker, R.A. (1990).
They Call It Hypnosis.
Buffalo, NY; Prometheus.
Nwosu, I.
(1997).
“Public Relations Versus Propaganda”.
Public Relations Digest, Vol.4.
Packald, V. (1957).
The Hiden Persuaders.
New York: Mackay Ries, A.
& Trout, J.
(1981) Positioning: The Battle for your Mind: New York: Warner Books Scott Thompson (2005).
The Impact of Corporate Social Responsibility on Organizational Stability.
http://smallbusiness.chron.com 133
