 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 421 COURSE TITLE: ADVANCED NEWSPAPER/MAGAZINE PRODUCTION 1Course Guide MAC 421: Advanced Newspaper/Magazine Production Course Developer/Writer: AGBANU, VENATUS NOSIKE venagbanu@yahoo.com Department of Mass Communication Anambra State Unuversity Igbariam Campus Developed for: National Open University of Nigeria Contents Page Introduction ……………………………………………………….. 1 What You Will Learn in this Course …………………………….. 2 Study Units ……………………………………………………….. 2 Textbooks and References ………………………………………… 4 Assessments ……………………………………………………… 4 Tutor Marked Assignment ……………………………………….. .
4 2Final Examination and Grading ………………………………….
4 What You Will Need in this Course ……………………………… 4 Facilitators, Tutors and Tutorials …………………………………..5 Conclusion ………………………………………………………… .5 Summary …………………………………………………………… 5 Introduction Welcome to MAC 421 – Advanced Newspaper/Magazine production.
This course is for 400 level students of the Department of Mass Communication with a bias in the print media.
It provides students with both the theoretical and practical knowledge of the theories and processes involved in newspaper/magazine production.
Students who go through this course will be able to know how newspapers/magazines are produced starting from the collection of news, copy flow, editing, page planning etc, till the product gets to the final consumer – the readers.
The course will also expose students to some of the basic concepts in newspaper/magazine production such as the mission statement, editorial policy and the house style which guide editorial staff members in the production process.
Also contained in this course is the new technique in newspaper/magazine production brought about by ICTs and the internet; and the challenges which newspapers and magazines face in a developing country such as Nigeria.
In doing this, a lot is required from the students.
They should be ready to invest their time and participate actively in class works including the tutor marked assignments.
The Self Assessment Exercises (SAE) and Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA) help the students to evaluate their performance to know whether they are lagging behind.
What You Will Learn in this Course 3This course will provide students with a mastery of and in-depth knowledge of the production process in newspapers/magazines, the personnel and the things that influence their activities.
Module one gave a brief background of the newspaper/magazine industry in Nigeria, their classification and the things that influence the activities of the practitioners in and outside the newsroom.
These include mission statement, editorial policy, house style etc.
Module two deals on the newsroom personnel, copy flow, the gate-keeping concept and the dual mandate which newspapers and magazines play in the society.
Module three deals on photographs, photo-editing and the legal and ethical issues newsmen consider during newspaper/magazine production.
Module four handles make-up, headline casting and counting while Module five dwells on the contribution of ICTs in newspaper/magazine production especially in Nigeria.
It is expected that at the end of this course, students will have a better knowledge and understanding of all the issues discussed in the five modules.
Study Units MAC 421 (Advanced Newspaper/Magazine Production) is a 3-credit, 400 level course for students of Mass Communication.
There are five modules in this course.
Module one consists of five units while modules 2 – 5 have four units each.
Thus, the entire course is made up of 21 units; and the topics are arranged in logical sequence.
The units are not of equal length.
The length of each unit depends on the issues discussed.
Also, the topics as discussed here are not entirely exhaustive.
Students are advised to consult some of the reference materials listed for more detailed information on the topics.
The five modules and the contents are as follows: Module 1: Newspapers and Magazines: An Overview Unit 1: Meaning and Brief History of Newspapers and Magazines Unit 2: Classification of Newspapers Unit 3: Classification of Magazines Unit 4: Mission statement, editorial policy, house style, editorials Unit 5: Function of editorial pages, opinion pages and editorial cartoons 4Module 2: Newsroom Personnel, Departments and Copy Flow Unit 1: Newsroom personnel and organization Unit 2: Copy flow and copy editing Unit 3: The concept of gate-keeping Unit 4: Conflict of Dual mandate and business interest Module 3: Photographs and Cartoons in Newspapers and Magazines Unit 1: Need for photographs and cartoons in newspapers/magazines Unit 2: Photo-selection and editing Unit 3: Legal and ethical issues in photo-selection and editing Unit 4: Legal and ethical issues in newspaper/magazine production Module 4: Editing and Page Make-up Unit 1: Why editing and page make-up Unit 2: Copy fitting and types of page make-up Unit 3: Elements of page make-up Unit 4: Headlines and their importance Module 5: Newspaper/Magazine Printing, Distribution and Challenges Unit 1: The printing process Unit 2: ICT’s application in newspaper/magazine production Unit 3: E-publishing Unit 4: Factors militating against newspaper/magazine production in Nigeria In each module is a list of the arrangement of its content.
These are: introduction, objective, main content, conclusion and summary of the unit.
Also contained in the list is a tutor-marked assignment 5and references/further readings.
The essence of the tutor-marked assignment is to evaluate students’ understanding of the topics discussed.
They are expected to work the assignment and submit for grading.
Textbooks and References Since the units here may not have discussed everything about the topics or treated them in all their perspectives, students are provided with reference materials for further reading at the end of each unit.
Though efforts have been made to provide the students with the basic and essential things they need to know about the course, they should consult the reference materials when the need arose.
They should not depend only on the classroom work but form the habit of consulting texts and crosschecking facts for greater assimilation.
Assignments Two types of assignment are provided in this course.
They are the Self Assessment Exercise (SAE) and the Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA).
The SAE is not expected to be submitted for grading but meant to be used by the students for self evaluation.
The SAE helps the student to know his/her level of mastery of the topic.
However, if the student has any difficulty with the self-assessment exercise, he/she should consult the tutor.
The TMAs on the other hand should be submitted for grading.
They account for 30 per cent of the total score in the course at the end of the semester.
Students should therefore accord them the seriousness they deserve.
Tutor Marked Assignments At the end of every unit is a tutor-marked assignment which you are expected to answer as instructed and submit for grading.
The tutor marked assignment will aid in evaluating your performance in the course.
Please take it serious.
Final Examination and Grading 6The final examination for the course will last for three hours and constitute 70 per cent of student’s total grade in the course.
The examination questions will be based on the topics discussed in class which are adequately reflected in the SAEs and TMAs.
Students are therefore advised to be serious with both the SAE and TMA.
What You Will Need for this Course This course is a continuation of or an advanced version of some of the courses the students did earlier.
Among these courses is newspaper/ magazine production.
The only difference is that this course treated some of the topics in detail.
In view of this, you are advised to revise the newspaper and magazine production which you did earlier.
You also need to visit a newspaper/magazine establishment to see the organization of the newsroom, the copy flow etc.
Also, if you are computer literate, you should use the page-maker to practice some of the things discussed in the different units.
Facilitators, Tutors, Tutorials There are fifteen (15) hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates and locations of these tutorials together with the name and phone number of your tutor as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments and keep a close watch on your activities in the class.
Send your tutor-marked assignments on time and feel free to contact your tutor if you encounter any difficulty in your Self Assessment Exercise or the Tutor Marked Assignments.
In any case, you are advised to attend on time and be regular at the tutorials.
Also, always pay attention to what is being discussed.
Conclusion This course involves both theory and practice.
So, to get the best out of the course you have to practice most of the things that you were taught.
Bring newspapers and magazines and use them to practice what you discussed in class.
Summary 7This course guide is designed to furnish you with the information you need for a fruitful experience in the course – MAC 421, Advanced Newspaper/Magazine Production.
But, how much you will get from the course will ultimately depend on what you put in.
You have to invest your time, effort and plan well to get the best out of this course and others that you will study this semester.
I wish you success in this course and the entire programme.
Thanks.
8Module 1: Newspaper and Magazine: An Overview Were it left for me to decide whether we should have a government without newspaper or newspapers without a government, I should not hesitate for a moment to prefer the latter – Thomas Jefferson.
The above classical statement by Jefferson, one time president of America succinctly shows the place of the print media in the society.
Despite being among the oldest in the mass media category, newspapers and magazines exert some influence in the society that people look on to them not only for the news of the day, but informed opinions on topical issues.
This course, MAC 421 – Advanced Newspaper/Magazine Production is meant to expose students to some of the basic processes, personnel and issues in Newspaper/magazine production, starting from the gathering of information (news) till the newspaper/ magazine goes to bed.
It is therefore pertinent to begin by reminding the students of what newspapers and magazines are and their roles in the society.
Unit 1: Meaning and Brief History of Newspapers and Magazines 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 Introduction The media of mass communication are divided into two broad categories - print and electronic media.
Newspapers and magazines fall into the print category.
One of the basic features of the print media including newspapers and magazines is their durability.
The readers are able to make reference to them at any time after the first contact.
This is not the case with radio and television programmes which are transient.
Once one misses a particular programme, he/she cannot get it at will from the station.
The only possibility is when there is a repeat broadcast which can only 9come if the station so desires.
Today, both the newspapers and magazine are changing with technological tends, from the dull early newspapers and magazines produced without photographs to the present editions that use photographs not only to attract attentions, but to beautify the pages.
2.0 Objectives After this unit, students will be able to appreciate the basic difference between newspapers/magazines and other media forms such as the electronic media.
They will also be able to trace a brief history of newspaper/magazine industry in Nigeria.
3.0 Main Content 3.0.1 What is a Newspaper?
A newspaper is defined as “an unbound publication issued at regular intervals, which presents information in words, often supplemented with pictures” (Sadman et al, 1976 in Okunna & Omenugha, 2012, p. 75).
Newspapers carry information on a broad spectrum of issues which include: news, advertisement, politics, education, science and technologic, religion, commerce etc.
The average daily newspaper contains far more news than available in radio, television or any other medium (Alozie, 2009, p.3).
Of all the print media, newspapers provide the most current information.
Newspapers are published either daily or weekly.
3.0.2 What is a Magazine?
A Magazine is another type of print media.
According to Alozie (2009, p.4), it is a bound printed publication which contains news and other forms of information on a wide range of recent and past events.
Magazines usually publish weekly or monthly.
Magazines are like newspapers only that they are better packaged, bound together, smaller in size and contain in-depth, better researched, investigated and news behind the news.
3.0.3 Brief History of Newspapers and Magazines in Nigeria The history of newspaper in Nigeria dates back to 1859 when an Anglican Priest, Rev.
Henry Townsend established the first newspaper- “Iwe Irohim fun awon Ara Egba ati Yoruba”, translated to mean “Newspaper for the Egba-speaking people and Yorubas” (Tador, 1996).
The newspaper was set up to help in the spreading of the gospel and literacy among the people.
It 10 combined cultural, political, social and religious commentaries in an effort to reach the readers.
The advent of Iwe Irohin was followed by other publications which later were used as a tool by the nationalists to oppose colonial rule.
Unlike the newspapers that made early impact in Nigeria political history, magazines did not enjoy early prominence.
It was not until early 1970s that magazines began to achieve reckoning in the media industry.
According to Nwabueze (2011, P.13), some of the early magazines include The Nigeria Gazette established in 1900, The Nigerian magazine established in 1927, The African Challenge established in 1947, The Drum established in 1964, the African Mirror established in 1960, Spear established in 1961, Lagos Life established in 1972, New Breed established in 1972, Times International established in 1974 among others.
Some of these magazines were short lived and did not make much impact.
The emergence of Newswatch in 1984 marked a turning point in magazine publishing in Nigeria.
The magazine published by a team of Nigerian journalists led by late Dele Giwa blazed the trial for cutting edge investigative journalism.
Today, people look forward to the publication of weekly magazines for news behind the news and in-depth analysis of issue and events.
4.0 Conclusion In the print media industry, newspapers provide the most current information.
They chronicle the daily events and report them early the following morning.
To be able to meet deadline, the newspapers are not as detailed as the magazines that usually produce once a week.
The magazines apart from engaging in investigative stories, gives background information to the news items reported by the newspapers, analyze them and put them in proper perspective for the readers to be able to form informed opinion.
5.0 Summary While newspapers are unbound publications that provide news to the people on daily basis, or at least once a week; magazines publish weekly or monthly.
Also, while newspaper publishing started in Nigeria during the colonial era, magazines came at the early 1900s.
Despite this, both had played an invaluable role in the nation’s socio-economic and political development that they occupy an enviable position in the nation’s history.
This is because of their ability to change the people’s attitude and opinion, set agenda and mould opinions.
Those who do not take their 11 opinions direct from newspapers and magazines, have their intellectual standards and their method of reasoning influenced by these media.
SAE: Why are magazines more detailed in their reportage than newspapers?
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment What is the advantage which magazines have over newspapers?
What was the reason for the establishment of the first newspaper in Nigeria?
7.0 References / Further Reading Alozie, V.O.
(2009).
The print media newspaper and magazine production, editing, graphics and Organization.
Owerri: Pilvic Communication.
Baran, S. J.
(2004).
Introduction to mass communication: Media literacy and culture.
Boston: McGraw Hill.
Hanson, R.E.
(2005).
Mass communication: Living in a Media World.
Boston: McGraw Hills.
Nwabueze, C.D.
(2011).
Magazine & newspaper management and production: An introductory text.
Owerri: Top Shelve Publishers.
Tador, M. (1996).
History of the Nigerian press.
In T. Momoh & G. Omole (eds.)
The press in Nigeria.
Lagos: Nigerian Press Council.
Okunna, C. & Omenugha, K. A.
(2012).
Introduction to mass communication.
Enugu: New Generation Ventures Ltd. Unit 2 Classification of Newspapers 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 12 1.0 Introduction Before embarking on the production of newspaper, the publisher and management team have an audience in mind.
This target audience must also have certain characteristics and needs.
To meet the needs of this target audience, the management team should package the newspaper in a particular way.
A newspaper that wants to meet the need of a wider audience should be able to circulate widely while those that need the attention of a specific audience interested in a subject should package the newspaper to meet such need.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, students will be able to identify the different classes of newspapers and see why such classification is necessary in the newspaper industry especially when the audience is variegated.
3.0 Main Content 3.0.1 Classification of Newspapers Newspapers are classified based on the following: 1.
Time of Publication: In this category are the morning, mid-day and evening newspapers.
The time of publication refers to the time of the day that the newspapers get to the news stand.
P.M. news, AM News, Guardian Express, Evening Times are examples.
2.
Frequency of Publications: It refers to the number of times a newspapers is published within a period of time (published daily), weekly newspapers (published once a week), and bi-weekly newspapers (published till a week).
In this category is the mid-week and weekend publication.
3.
Area of Circulation: This refers to the geographical area that the newspaper circulates.
It could be local, national or international.
4.
Size or Format: In this category is the tabloid and broadsheet newspapers.
Virtually all the newspapers in Nigeria are in tabloid form.
The broadsheet is almost double the size of the tabloid.
13 5.
Ownership: Newspapers are also classified according to the ownership.
These are the government owned and independent newspapers.
6.
Technology of Production: In this category are the print-based newspapers and the online newspapers.
While the print based newspapers print hard copies for circulation, online newspapers publish on the internet.
7.
Area of Interest: Some newspapers have specialized area and appeal to a target audience.
It could be sports, religion, politics, telecommunication etc.
8.
Language of Publication: Some newspapers are published in vernacular while others are published in languages that appeal to everyone.
Some of the vernacular newspapers include: Ogene (Igbo), Gaskiya (Hausa) etc.
4.0 Conclusion Every newspaper has a target audience.
Irrespective of the size of the audience, to make the desired impact, every newspaper is packaged in such a way that it will meet the needs of the audience.
This is the essence of producing, either in language, format or technology that would achieve a high level of efficiency.
5.0 Summary Newspapers are classified according to the following: frequency of publication, time of publication, area of circulation, size or format, ownership, technology of production, area of circulation and language of publications.
SAE: Why is it ideal to have audience segmentation in newspaper production?
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Pick all the copies of newspapers available in your neighborhood and classify them according to the categories listed above.
7.0 References/ Further Readings Alozie, V. O.
(2009).
The print media: Newspaper and magazine production, editing, graphics and organization.
Owerri: Pilvic Communications.
14 Nwabueze, C. D. (2011).
Magazine & newspaper management and production.
An introductory text.
Owerri: Topshelve Publishers.
Unit 3 Classification of Magazines 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Magazines just like newspapers play important role in the society as they educate, inform, entertain and set agenda for the people.
In doing so, every magazine has a target audience.
The audience whose needs the magazine wants to satisfy?
To be able to satisfy the needs of this particular audience, the magazine is packaged in a way that those needs are met.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, students will be able to identify the different classes of magazines and see why such classification is necessary in the magazine industry.
3.0 Main Content 3.0.1 Classification of magazines Magazines could be classified according to the following categories: 1.
Nature of the Target Audience: magazines are published with a target audience in mind.
Sometimes, the title of the magazine such as Women’s World, Children Arena etc say much about the target audience.
In some cases, the title remains silent on the audience especially when the magazine is expected to appeal to a wider audience.
2.
The Subject Matter: Most magazines are classified based on their area of interest.
Some of these include Health watch, sports world, maritime watch, IT & Telecom.
15  3.
Technology of Publication: Some magazines publish on the internet, other produce hard copies while others publish both the online edition and the hard copy.
4.
The Size or Format: Just like newspapers, magazines are also classified according to the size.
In this category is the life size magazine measuring about 101/ inches by 13 inches 2 and the time size measuring about 81/ inches by 11 inches.
2 5.
Area of Coverage/Circulation: In this category is the local, national and international magazines.
6.
Purpose of Publication: In this category is the training magazine such as the one used in training students and trade magazines that focus on activities in different industries or trade.
7.
Ownership: In this category is the independent and state-owned magazines.
The independent magazines are expected to be independent in discussion of public issues while the state owned magazines are accused of being the government’s mouthpiece.
4.0 Conclusion Every magazine has a target audience.
Irrespective of the size of the audience, to make the desired impact, they are positioned in such a way that they would meet the needs of the audience.
5.0 Summary Magazines are classified according to the following: The nature of the target audience, the subject matter, technology of production, the size or format, area of coverage/circulation, purpose of publication and ownership.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Pick all the magazines in circulation in your locality and classify then according to the categories listed above.
7.0 References/Further Readings Alozie, V.O.
(2009).
The print media newspaper and magazine production, editing, graphics and Organization.
Owerri: Pilvic Communication.
16  Baran, S. J.
(2004).
Introduction to mass communication: Media literacy and culture.
Boston: McGraw Hill.
Hanson, R.E.
(2005).
Mass communication: Living in a Media World.
Boston: McGraw Hills.
Nwabueze, C.D.
(2011).
Magazine & newspaper management and production: An introductory text.
Owerri: Top Shelve Publishers.
Tador, M. (1996).
History of the Nigerian press.
In T. Momoh & G. Omole (eds.)
The press in Nigeria.
Lagos: Nigerian Press Council.
Okunna, C. & Omenugha, K. A.
(2012).
Introduction to mass communication.
Enugu: New Generation Ventures Ltd. Unit 4 Mission Statements, Editorial Policies, House Style and Editorials 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Every newspaper or magazine wants to fill a gap.
This is the motivating factor that propels the publications into the industry.
And, this mission which the publication wants to embark on will be its first point of content with the people who will first want to know whether such a mission is worthwhile.
The mission statement will then give rise to the editorial policy which like a compass directs the activities of the editorial staff who presents the editorial matters in style (House style) peculiar to such an organization.
And, as a corporate citizen, newspapers contribute their views on topical issues in the society through editorials.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, student will know the meaning of basic newspaper and magazine concepts such as editorial policy, house style, mission statement etc.
17 3.0 Main Content 3.0.1 Mission Statement Every newspaper or magazine has a mission.
This is what such a newspaper or magazine intends to achieve in the society.
This mission is often encapsulated in one or two sentences and published in the first or maiden edition is called the mission statement.
The mission statement acts as a guide not only to the publication but also members of the public.
It is a compass that directs both the publisher and the management team in their activities.
When they know the impact their publication promises to make in the society, they formulated policies aimed at achieving those objectives.
The mission statement is important to the extent that some publications have the mission statement in every editor.
For instance the Sun newspapers one of the national newspapers in Nigeria has as its mission’s statement: To practice journalism in the classical newspaper tradition of presenting the news and features in an exciting style, with impact, objectivity and appeal that generate returns to all stakeholders: The society, the investors and the practitioners.
This mission statement is so important to the Sun newspapers that it is published daily in the editorial page.
Once seen by the staff, they remember their promise to the people.
3.0.2 Editorial Policy Editorial policy is the dos and don’ts that guide the activities of every editorial staff of a newspaper or magazine in carrying out their editorial functions.
Unlike mission statement, editorial policy is neither written down nor static.
It can change from time to time depending on the ownership, government policies, economic interest etc.
While carrying out their daily activities, every editorial staff consider the editorial policy of his/her media organizations and this policy determines the kind of news stories and features he/her writes, the news peg etc.
3.0.3 House Style House Style gives character or identify to newspapers and magazines.
It is the way newspapers and magazines present issues.
Students often fail to draw a line between editorial policy and house style.
While editorial policy deals with policy matters, especially those things that are not 18 physical, house style mostly deals with physical things such as the way a particular publication cast its headlines, the page make-up, placement of its logo, giving background to a story etc.
In most media organization, house style are not decreed, but evolve over a period of time that writers in such an organization see it as a way of life rather than a rule.
4.0 Conclusion Before a newspaper or magazine is conceived, it must have missions which the owners encapsulate in a mission statement.
This mission statement often gives rise to the editorial policy that guides the conduct of the members of staff in their daily activities.
5.0 Summary.
While the mission statement is a tentative statement that specifies what a publication intend to achieve in the society; the editorial policy guides the daily activities of the editorial staff.
House style refers to how the publication presents matters which gives it character while editorials refers to the opinions of a newspaper on a particular issue.
SAE: What is the relationship between mission statement, editorial policy and house style.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Pick about five newspaper, remove the name plate.
After that, find out if you can identify each of the publications.
If you identified any of the publication, why was that possible?
7.0 References / Further Readings Biagi, S. (2003).
Media impact: An introduction to mass communication.
Belmont: Wadsworth Thomson Learning.
Rodman, G. (2006).
Mass media in a changing world: Industry, history, controversy.
Boston McGraw Hills Sambe, S.A & Nyitse, G.T.(2004).
Essential of magazine and newspaper production.
Makurdi: Starix Communications.
Vivian, J.
(2009).
The media of mass communication: Boston: Pearson, Allyn & Bacon.
Unit 5 Functions of the Editorial Page, Opinion Pages and Editorial Cartoons 1.0 Introduction 19 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Newspapers and magazines contain two basic things, editorial matters and advertisements.
Editorial matters include all the editorial contents - news, features, cartoons, photographs, opinions etc that are not paid for while advertisements are paid for.
The editorial matters are contained in different section of the newspapers and magazines depending on the house style of the organization.
However, organizations place high premium on the editorial-page (the page where the opinion of the newspaper is expressed), the opinion pages and the editorial cartoon which often compliments the editorial 2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, students will appreciate the importance of editorials, opinions and the editorial cartoons in newspapers and magazines.
3.0 Main Content 3.0.1 Editorials /Editorial Page The editorial page has become a feature of newspapers.
Magazines seldom have editorial pages or use editorials.
At times, newspapers’ opinion is expressed in the editorial pages and such opinions are called editorials.
This opinion as expressed is neither the opinion of the publisher of the newspaper nor the editorial team but the opinion of the newspaper as a corporate body.
The most important item in the editorial page is the editorial.
However, the page often contains other items such as the editorial cartoons and the imprint.
3.0.2 Opinion Pages Presently, news has gone beyond the 5Ws and an H. People now want to know not only what happened.
They also need to know why it happened.
They need those issues to be interpreted and 20 put in proper perspective for better understanding.
They also want to know the opinion of the people on topical issues especially those whose opinion matters.
This also helps them in opinion formations.
Most newspapers dedicate a page for opinions.
Newspaper has its own corporate opinions.
But, the trend is changing.
Apart from the opinion page, newspapers are presently dedicating more pages including the bank page for opinions.
3.0.3 Editorial Cartoons According to Onwuchekwa (1991) in Nwodu (2011), a cartoon is a picture with or without words which on first exposure makes a devastating visual and intellectual impact and evokes laughter.
The author argues that cartoons have become a valuable mass media content which strike readers’ visual and intellectual cord while stimulating laughter simultaneously.
Apart from the stimulation of laughter, entertainment and education, cartoons still enlighten and educate the audience on social issues.
There are different types of cartoon which are often used to address social issues.
4.0 Conclusion The editorials, opinions and editorial cartoons have been important features in newspapers and magazines that people look onto publication for them.
SAE: Why are editorials and cartoons necessary in in newspapers and magazines?
5.0 Summary Editorial pages, opinion pages and editorial cartoon play important role in the society.
While editorials express the opinion of the newspaper, opinion express the views of individuals while cartoons in a satirical form, showcase social issues in the society.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Pick five cartoons from five different newspapers and classify them according to the function they play in the society.
7.0 References / Further Reading Itule, B. D. & Anderson, D. A.
(2003).
News writing and reporting for today’s media.
Boston: McGraw Hill.
21 Nwodu, L .C.
(2011).
Beyond fun: An analytical exploration of cartoon uses for national development.
In V. N. Agbanu and C. D. Nwabueze (eds.)
Readings in mass communication: Global perspectives on communication issues.
Enugu: Rhyce Kerex Publisher.
Shrivastava, K. M. (1991).News reporting and editing.
New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Private Limited.
Vivian, J.
(2009).
The media of mass communication.
Boston: McGraw Hill.
Module 2: Newsroom Personnel, Departments and Copy Flow The newsroom is the brain box or the engine room of the print media.
It is the collation point where reporters and editors bring together all they gathered from the field and process them for publication.
In every newspaper or magazine house, there is division of labour.
The newsroom is departmentalized that every individual or a group of individuals in a department perform the same or similar functions.
However, the activities of these individuals or departments are coordinated in a chain of command that they work to achieve the same goal – getting the newspaper or the magazine on the news stand.
Unit 1: Newsroom personnel and organization/departments 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/further readings 1.0 Introduction The newsroom is the melting point of activities in a newsroom or magazine house.
This is where the editorial staff beginning from the least reporter to the editor converge and their daily 22 activities are coordinated to produce what will go into the next edition of their newspaper or magazine.
In the newsroom, some of the departments are based on beats.
They are often referred to as desks – the political desk, business desk, etc.
2.0 Objective At the end of this tutorial, students will be able to know what a newsroom is, the key players in the news room, the chain of command in the newsroom and how the activities of these people are coordinated to achieve the desired result.
3.0 Main content 3.0.1: Newsroom personnel The newsroom is the “home” of all editorial staff irrespective of the ranking in the editorial hierarchy.
These include the different categories of reporters and correspondents, desk heads or line editors, the sub-editor and his/her colleagues, the assistant editors, deputy editors and the editor.
It includes anyone that has anything to do with the editorial process or the copy flow.
The newsroom personnel however vary from one media organization to the other.
This depends on the size of the organization and the organizational structure of the organization.
While rich and big media organization can afford to have an editor in charge of different news beats, others may not afford such.
In this situation, reporters report direct to the editor or the deputy editor as the case maybe.
3.0.2: Newsroom Organization/Departments No two media houses have the same organization; either in human resources and organization.
What is obtainable is every newspaper or magazine organization depends on the size, financial strength and orientation of the management team.
For instance, while a small and growing media organization may have only few editorial staff which may not give room for much division of labour, an established one may afford the luxury of having so many desk heads, assistant editors, editors in charge of different beats and well defined departments.
For example, while an international publication should have editors in charge of different foreign operations, a local publication has no business for such.
23 Some of the departments in the newsroom which are often referred to as desks are: the business desk, political desk, women affairs, judiciary, police affairs, labour e.t.c.
4.0 Conclusion Though major editorial activities in the newspapers and magazines take place in the newsroom, no two organizations have the same newsroom structure departments.
It differs depending on the needs of the management team and the size of the organization.
5.0: Summary The newsroom just like every human organization is made up of people and structures.
The people, through the established structures, co-operate and coordinate their activities to achieve the organizational goal of the particular newspaper or magazine.
This co-operation and coordination is more noticeable in the copy flow right from the reporter (the first gatekeeper in the chain) to the editor or editor-in-chief who takes the final decision in editorial matters.
SAE: Mention and discuss five of the departments in a newsroom.
6.0: Tutor marked assignment  Mention some of the departments in the newsroom and the jobs they do.
 Why is there a difference in the organigram of different newspaper houses?
7.0: References/Further Readings Alozie, V. O.
(2009).
The print media newspaper and magazine production, editing, graphics and Organization.
Owerri: Pilvic Communication.
Nwabueze, C. D. (2011).
Magazine & newspaper management and production: An introductory text.
Owerri: Top Shelve Publishers.
Ogunsiji, M. A.
(1989).
Introduction to print journalism.
Lagos: Nelson Publishers Limited.
Sambe, S. A.
& Nyitse, G. T. (2004).
Essentials of magazine and newspaper production.
Makurdi: Starix Communications.
Unit 2: Copy flow and copy editing 1.0 Introduction 24 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In media organizations especially in newspapers and magazines copy (news stories and other editorial matters) flow through a channel from the reporter to the editor.
The reporter who does the leg-work as the first gate-keeper cover newsworthy events and other assignments given to him/her by the editor and delivers same to the editor through other personnel in the editorial chain.
In the process, the copy passes through many media gate-keepers who make inputs so that the copy will conform to the organizational houses style, news value, ethics and legal standards.
In doing that, both the reporter and others in the copy flow chain are guided by so many factors which could be personal, socio-economic, political and religious factors.
2.0 Objective The objective of this unit is expose students to various personnel in the newsroom through whom a copy passed through before it is okayed by the editor and how these editorial staff members, include or exclude information in the submitted copy or alter them to meet specific needs and interests.
3.0: Main content 3.0.1: The News Flow In newspapers and magazines, there are so many intermediary communicators standing between an event and the ultimate receiver (the readers).
The nature of the information will determine the nature and number of the intermediaries.
These intermediaries are the gate-keepers.
For instance, a copy can flow from the reporter to the deputy political editor, to the political editor, deputy editor and then the editor.
Taking a hypothetical example, in newspapers and magazines, there are so many intermediary communication standing between an event and the ultimate receiver 25 (the newspaper and the readers).
The nature of the information will determine the nature and number of the intermediaries.
3.0.2 Copy editing Within the confines of a traditional newspaper or magazine newsroom, there may be dozens of different kinds of editors.
These editors make editorial judgments such as story selection and do other kinds of jobs such as: a.
Editing for facts b.
Editing for style c. Editing for grammar and spellings d. Editing for defamatory and unethical material e. Writing of headlines and captions f. Layout design/page planning 4.0: Conclusion As copies flow from one person to the other in a newsroom, the different intermediaries act as a check to ensure that all the information that get out to the people meet acceptable standard with the media house and the society.
This is the essence of the different “check-points’ as copies flow from the reporter to the editor.
5.0 Summary In different parts of the world, people place high premium on information especially those from mass media.
It is generally believed that the mass media moulds public opinion and influence people in their daily activities.
In view of this, media practitioners ensure that what gets to the people meets acceptable standard.
Hence, the need for the different people through whom copies pass through and who in their individual capacities ensure that those copies conform to the set standard.
SAE: What do you understand by copy flow?
Why is it necessary in newspapers and magazines?
6.0 Tutor marked assignment Support or oppose the view that copies should pass through different channels before publication.
26 7.0 Reference/ Further Readings Alozie, V. O.
(2009).
The print media newspaper and magazine production, editing, graphics and Organization.
Owerri: Pilvic Communication.
Friend, C; Challenger, D & McAdams, K (2000).
Contemporary editing.
Illinois: NTC/Contemporary Publishing Group.
Nwabueze, C. D. (2011).
Magazine & newspaper management and production: An introductory text.
Owerri: Top Shelve Publishers.
Ogunsiji, M. A.
(1989).
Introduction to print journalism.
Lagos: Nelson Publishers Limited.
Sambe, S. A.
& Nyitse, G. T. (2004).
Essentials of magazine and newspaper production.
Makurdi: Starix Communications.
Unit 3: The concept of Gate-keeping 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 Introduction As discussed in the last unit, in newspaper and magazines, items meant for publication pass through different individuals before it gets to the final consumers.
These people who are professionals act as checks and ensure that nothing goes wrong and that those items conform to the accepted standard.
These people are the gate-keepers.
Gate-keeping has become part of the production process in newspapers and magazines.
2.0 Objective After this unit, students will understand that news items do not just appear the way they are sent by a reporter, the need for gate-keeping in a media organization and the factors that influence gate-keeping activities in newspapers and magazines.
27 3.0 Main content 3.0.1: What is Gate-Keeping?
The concept; gate-keeping” came out of the work of White (1950).
The author argued that information flows along certain channels in media organization.
These channels, he added, contain “gate areas” where decisions are made by the gate-keepers as to whether the information will be allowed to pass through.
In newspapers and magazines, these are different stages of gate- keeping, each manned by a gate-keeper.
The gate-keeping theory is illustrated with the diagram below.
Gatekeeper I Gatekeeper II N1 N2 N1 N N3 N3 N3 M N4 N5 N5 N5 N6 N6 N - Source of new items N1 N6 N 1,2, 3, 4, 5, & 6 = News items M = audience N2 N4 N2 & N4 - news items dropped at the first gate.
N1 & N6 - news items dropped at the second gate White (1950) gate-keeping model adapted from McQuail & Windahl (1993) In the above diagram, the reporter had access to six news items N1- N6.
After considering so many factors, he selected news items N1, N3 and N5 and N6 discarding N2 and N4.
That is, news items N2, N3 and N5 and N6 were sent to the editor.
The editor on his part discarded news item N1 and N6, publishing news items N3 and N5.
While White’s original diagram recognizes one gate-keeper in the information flow channel, this modified model recognizes two gate- keepers – the reporter and the editor.
28 3.0.2: Factors affecting gate-keeping In newspapers and magazines, so many factors influence the gate-keeping function of the people.
These factors include:  Individual ideology and idiosyncrasies  Ownership Consideration/Advert interest  Legal and Ethical Considerations  News holes  Editorial Policy/House Style  Readers’ Interest  Activities of Competitors  News Value  Government Policy  Pressure Group Activities 4.0 Conclusion In newspapers and magazines, the gate-keepers are media professionals who ensure that the final product meets the standard set by the media organization, the government and the society.
They cross the Ts and dots the “I”, and in doing so, are guided by some many factors coming from the individual, the media organization, the government and the society.
5.0 Summary Gate-keeping is one of the functions that media practitioners perform.
Right from the reporter to the editor-in-chief, they perform one form of gate-keeping or the other all aimed at meeting the set objectives.
SAE: Visit a newsroom of your choice and indicate the gate-keepers in the newsroom 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment What is gate-keeping and what influences the gate-keeping function of the different gate-keepers in newspapers and magazines.
29 7.0 References/Further Readings Burton, G. (2005).
Media and society: Critical perspectives.
Berkshire: Open University Press.
Itule, B. D. & Anderson, D. A.
(2003).
News writing and reporting for today’s media.
Boston: McGraw Hills McQuail, D. & Windahl, S. (1993).
Communication models for the study of mass communication.
London: Longman.
Unit 4: Conflict of Dual Mandate and Business Interest 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Intor-marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In virtually every environment especially in a free enterprise economy, newspaper and magazines have dual mandate.
The first is the role which the society bestows on them as the fourth estate of the realm or the watchdog of the society while the second is their role as a business enterprise expected to break even or make profit for the owner.
This has been the greatest challenge to most newspaper/magazine industries in Nigeria.
That is the challenge of being socially responsible and at the same time, imbibe the business spirit and make profit.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, students will know:  The dual mandate phenomenon and its challenges.
 Why some media houses in Nigeria find it difficult to break even.
30 3.0 Main Content 3.0.1 Sources of Revenue for Newspapers/Magazines Newspaper and magazines earn their revenue from three main sources.
These are:  Sales  Income from adverts  Subsidy/Subvention from the owner These three items from the bulk of revenue that accrue to newspapers and magazines.
3.0.2 Business consideration Vs Dual mandate syndrome In a free enterprise economy, the main interest is profit.
In view of this, businesses do all sorts of things to survive, the principle in this kind of situation is “the end justifies the means.” Here also ethics and legal consideration are often relegated to the background.
But, this is not the case in newspaper and magazine businesses.
The publications owe a lot to the society.
While they try to make profit to remain in business, they always remember that they are socially responsible and societal watchdog.
With this social responsibility in mind, it could be rightly said that newspaper and magazine are not pure business outfits as business consideration are place side by side the social responsibly function.
This dual mandate has been the problem facing different media organization in Nigeria.
And, once the social responsibility function weights higher than the business function, revenue starts to dwindle and this may lead to the collapse of the outfit.
4.0 Conclusion In Nigeria for instance, Balancing social responsibility and the dual mandate has been a challenge to most media houses.
The government-owned media houses are not left out since the government has always insisted that its agencies should device means of self-sustenance.
So, it is either the paper continues with the social responsibly role and gradually go out of business or employ all business tactics while the social responsibly function suffers.
31 5.0 Summary In different parts of the world, the media especially newspaper and magazine are social institution.
They are the fourth estate of the realm and the watchdog of the society.
But, this function is being threatened due to the increasing need for them to generate revenue and fend for themselves.
SAE: Why is it ideal for editors to consider the social responsibility function in the discharge of their duties?
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment  Discuss the main sources of revenue for a newspaper or magazine.
 Should newspapers and magazines be run purely as a business outfit or social watchdog?
7.0 References/Further Readings Baran, S. J.
(2004).
Introduction to mass communication: Media literacy and culture.
Boston: McGraw Hill.
Hanson, R.E.
(2005).
Mass communication: Living in a Media World.
Boston: McGraw Hills.
Tador, M. (1996).
History of the Nigerian press.
In T. Momoh & G. Omole (eds.)
The press in Nigeria.
Lagos: Nigerian Press Council.
Module 3: Photographs and Cartoons in Newspapers and Magazines Before the advents of words, early men communicate by the use of signs and other illustrations.
Early newspapers and magazines came with little or no photographs.
Hence, they were full of grey matters and appeared dull.
Then editors resisted the use of photographs, insisting that they (photographs) waste space and clutter the clean unbroken columns of print (Friend, Challenger & McAdams, 2000, p. 447).
Later, people started to appreciate the essence of pictures and illustrations in newspapers and magazines.
Despite beautifying the newspaper/magazines pages and making them attractive to the readers, Photographs also help to tell the story.
32 Today, photographs have become an indispensable part of newspapers and magazines and help to lend credibility to the news.
The act of communicating by the use of photographs is called photojournalism which means pictorial communication.
While reporters paint mental pictures with words, photojournalists look for the shots that will also tell the story and bring readers closer to the scene of an event.
Unit 1: Need for Photographs and Cartoons in Newspaper an Magazines 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objective 3.0: Main Content 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0: References/ Further readings 1.0 Introduction In contemporary society, newspaper and magazines remain among the media of mass communication through which people are informed.
These newspapers and magazines are filled with photograph and cartoons that no one can at this time imagine or think of any of such publications without photographs and cartoons.
Indeed they have become an indispensable part of the print media especially when they contribute immensely in the process of informing, educating and entertaining the readers.
2:0 Objectives At the end of tutorials in this unit, students are expected to appreciate why print media practitioner use photographs and cartoons in their daily and/or weekly publications.
3:0 Main Content 3.0.1 Meaning of photojournalism Photojournalism means communicating to a mass audience by means of photographs or pictorial communication.
Reporters with the use of words, paint mental pictures in an effort to describe reality.
But, there are limits to which words can go in this effort.
So, to drive the point home or 33 bring reader closer to the scene, print media practitioner resort to the use of photographs.
Photographs add credibility to a story.
3.0.2 Meaning of cartoons Cartoons are humorous drawings or art work, often used in newspaper and magazines to communicate to the readers.
Although cartoons are often accompanied with words, a typical cartoon can exist and achieve the intended meaning without words (Nwodu, 2011).
Like photographs, cartoons have become an indispensable part of the print media that most often, some publication have editorial cartoon expressing the view of the publication in a satirical way.
3.0.3 Why newspapers/magazines use photographs There are so many reasons why newspapers and magazines use photographs in their publications.
These include:  To beautify the page or page make-up.
 As proof of reality/authenticity.
 Show that the media house was at the scene of the event.
 Attract the attention of readers.
 They could be used as fillers 3.0.4 Why newspaper and magazines use cartoons.
There are so many reasons why newspaper and magazines make use of cartoons.
These include:  It is use to beautify the page.
 Present serious issues in humorous way.
 To avoid legal action.
 Attract the attention of readers.
 Appeals to both literate and illiterate audience.
 Acts as a weapon against social vices.
34 4.0: Conclusion No doubt, newspaper and magazines resort to the use of cartoons to attract the attention of the readers, educate, inform and entertain them.
More so, cartoons present serious issues in a satirical way and can appeal to all and sundry irrespective of the social status or literacy level.
5.0 Summary Presently, photographs and cartoons have become a common feature of newspapers and magazines.
In this unit, students were exposed to the meaning of photojournalism and cartoons in newspaper and magazines, and why the newspaper and magazines use them.
6.0 Tutor marked Assignment Assuming you are in a review class discussing your departmental newspaper just published without photographs and cartoons.
Tell the editors why photograph and cartoons are necessary in such a publication.
7.0 Reference/Further Residings Nwodu, L .C.
(2011).
Beyond fun: An analytical exploration of cartoon uses for national development.
In V. N. Agbanu and C. D. Nwabueze (eds.)
Readings in mass communication: Global perspectives on communication issues.
Enugu: Rhyce Kerex Publisher.
Agbanu, V. N. (2011).
Photojournalism and the law, ethics and taste.
In V.N Agbanu & C. D. Nwabueze (eds.)
Readings in mass communication.
Global perspectives on communication issues.
Enugu: rhyce Kerex Publishers.
Friend, C; Challenger, D. & McAdams, (2000) Contemporary editing.
Illinois: NTC/ contemporary Publishing Company.
Unit 2: Photo-selection and Editing 1.0: Introduction 2.0: objective 3.0: Main Content 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0: References 35 1.0: Introduction Like reporters who are the first gate-keeper in the process of news collection and dissemination, photojournalists try to get newsworthy pictures that he/she intends to communicate to the general readers.
This photo-reporter whether a staff of the media house or a freelance delivers to the media house pictures of an event or action.
At this stage, these photographs remain raw materials that need to be processed by the editors.
First just like news stories, they need to be selected based on the need of the media house and those that did not pass the selection process for a production have to wait for another day or be thrown into the waste paper basket.
Then, those that are to be used for the production has to be processed or edited to meet the needs of the particular publication.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit students will be able to know how pictures just like news stories are selected in a media house.
They should also know the photo-editing processes which include photo-cropping, photo-sizing and cutline writing.
3.0 Main Content 3.0.1 Photo selection In newspaper and magazine houses, photographs just like news stories are expected to meet some basic requirements before they are selected or chosen for publication.
In fact, any photograph that passes through the editor’s gate must be newsworthy, not libelous or unethical, indecent or obscene.
However, this judgment depends on the nature of the publication and the purpose of the photograph.
If the photograph is to appear alone, it will be able to tell the story.
If it is to compliment a news story, such a photograph must be in concord with the news story which it compliments except when the editor intends to achieve certain effect such as irony or humour.
Photographs could also be used independently as photo-news or photo essay.
Writing on photo-selection, Shrivastava (2003, p.206) writes: while making selection of news pictures, the prime consideration should be the context in which the picture is being used.
The picture should have information related to the story with which it is to be used… A photograph should reflect the mood of the moment.
Event when selecting from file pictures, care should be taken to select a photograph which depicts the mood.
When a person is sacked a picture depicting him in a happy mood will be a misfit.
36 3.0.2 Photo-cropping Photo-editing comes in two different forms.
These are photo cropping and photo sizing.
When an editor picks up a photograph for publications a part of such photograph may contain irrelevant materials that are not needed in that particular production.
That unwanted portion(s) should be removed.
That is photo cropping - the elimination of unwanted portions of a picture (Anaeto,Solo-Anaeto&Tejumaiye,2009).
For instance, if an editor wants to publish a portrait of President Goodluck Jonathan and his reporter presents to him a group picture of President Jonathan and his wife - Patience, the editor is expected to crop out the first lady.
She is not needed at that time.
Also, if the photograph is an establishment shot that shows much detail about the background, this background which may be a distraction should be cropped out.
A photograph, has to be edited for size, shape and story content.
(Shrivastava,2003.
p.207).
While cropping, the emphasis should be on the story and what is in the picture.
One may remove irrelevant portion of a picture and emphasis could be added to the relevant portion of the picture.
While determining the size of a picture, emphasis should be on legibility and impact.
It is pointless to use a photograph if it is printed so small that the relevant detail is lost.
(p. 207).
3.0.3 Photo-sizing This is the fitting of photographs to the space allocated to it in the dummy.
Here, pictures could be enlarged or reduce.
If the enlargement or reduction is not done proportionately, it may lead to distorted image - the image will either get abnormal height or be too plump.
During photo-sizing, editors employ either the arithmetical method or the diagonal method.
But, the advent of computers has reduced this burden.
3.0.4 Captions/Cutlines Picture captions or cutlines are sentences that accompany a photograph explaining those that are in the photograph, where and when it was taken and any other information that the editor wants the readers to known about the photograph.
Just like news stories, cutlines should answer the 5Ws and an H of a photograph though in a brief form and only contain the basic and objective information without opinion.
Editors should ensure that cutlines conform to the picture they are explaining since a badly written cutline can mislead people.
37 4.0 Conclusion In every newspaper and magazine, photographs and cartoons form an important part of the editorial matter and communicate to the readers as much as news stories if not better.
In view of this, care must be taken in selecting and editing the photographs.
These functions form part of the editorial judgment of every editor.
Also, though pictures can stand on their own, at times, caption help to explain or give more details about the photograph and the story.
Hence, these captions should be written with care to communicate the intended meaning.
5.0 Summary Just like copies, (news stories), photographs pass through the process of selection and editing to tell the exact story and meet the desire of the editor.
Here, the editor’s expertise is also put to test, in selecting and editing photographs.
SAE: Why are captions necessary in a photograph?
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment You are planning a page and, a space was provided for the portrait of the chief executive of your institutions.
After so much search, you could only get a group photograph of the chief executive and members of his family.
Crop out the non-essential part of this photograph.
7.0 References/Further Readings Anaeto, S. G.; Solo-Anaeto, M. & Tejumaiye J.
A (2009).
Newspaper and magazine: Management, production, marketing.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers Limited.
Ogunsiji, M. A.
(1989).
Introduction to print journalism.
Lagos: Nelson Publishers Limited Shrivastava, K. M. (2003).
News reporting and editing.
New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Private Limited.
Unit 3: Legal and Ethical Issues in Photo-selection and Editing 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 38 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction From our earlier discussion, it has been established that photographs and cartoons could be used to communicate the same way reporters communicate with words.
In the same manner, they could be used to defame an individual or a group.
Discussed in this unit are how photographs should be used to defame people and the precautions that media practitioners could take to ensure that they do not run foul of the law while communicating with photographs.
2.0 Objective At the end of tutorials in this unit, students should be able to select for publication photographs that will not injure anyone and attract legal action against their organization.
3.0 Main content 3.0.1 Laws photo-editors contend with Just like reporters, photo-journalist or photo-reporters look for the unexpected, oddity and ultimately the scoop.
They want to get the best shot that will tell the story.
Photo-editors on their own part, while selecting and editing the photos, look for those that will make readers shout “Eureka, this is what happened”.
However, in doing this, they often come into conflict with the laws of the land.
The law remains an umpire.
Agbanu (2011) listed some of these laws as:  The law of defamation  State security and official secret laws  Copyright laws  Law of privacy 3.0.2 Ethical Challenges to Photo-journalists/Editors In their daily activities, editors try to adhere to the ethical standard established in the society where they operate.
In Nigeria for instance, though there is freedom of information, readers still frown at obscene and indecent publication.
Also, pornographic materials are not allowed especially in serious publications.
39 3.0.3 Photo-Manipulation Today, technology has changed the face of photojournalism and put to question the old saying that a photograph does not lie.
With the manipulation of camera lenses and the use of technology such as photo-shops in computers and mobile phones, photographs could be manipulated that they look quite the opposite of the original copy.
So, it is both illegal and unethical to manipulate photographs in such a way that readers are deceived.
Photographs are expected to tell the story or capture the action the way it is.
4.0 Conclusion From the primordial era to the present day, laws and ethics have attracted the attention of thoughtful person because of their ability to foster unity in the society.
In as much as the people have the right to know the law in some instances also protects them against the prying lens of the camera.
So, the reporter and/or editor should be able to know these rights and their limits to avoid legal action against his/her person and establishment.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have been able to discuss some of the legal and ethical challenges that photo- editors contend with in the discharge of their duties and the need to avoid those legal challenges and maintain the society accepted ethical standard.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment  Mention and discuss three of the legal challenges that a photo-editor has to contend with.
 Is photo-manipulation ethical?
Give reason for your answer.
7.0 References/Further Studies Agbanu, Ventus (2011).
Photojournalism and the law, ethics and taste.
in Venatus Agbanu & Chinenye Nwabueze (eds).
Readings in Mass Communication: Global Perspectives on Communication Issues.
Enugu: Rhyce Kerex Publishers.
(P.300-314).
Bunker M. (2006).
The writer and the law.
In Y.G Stoval (ed) Writing for the Mass Media.
pp.305-322.
Boston: Pearson Education Inc. Unit 4: Ethical and Legal Issues in Newspaper/Magazine Production 1.0 Introduction 40 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Journalists in their daily activities are guided by some ethical and legal considerations.
This is because they wield much influence in the society; and if not guarded, will end up misleading the people.
Ethics helps journalists to decide the right thing to do especially in their editorial functions.
Every journalist has to contend with the laws of the land in and outside the newsroom.
During the production processes, the editor must ensure that all his/her actions and inactions conform with the laws of the land.
Also, they owe ethical duties to the society, their professional bodies and their individual conscience.
2.0 Objective The essence of this unit is to introduce students to some of the laws and ethical considerations journalists contend with during newspaper/magazine production in and outside the newsrooms.
3.0 Main Content 3.0.1 Some ethical issues editors contend with during production The following, according to Anaeto, Solo-Anaeto & tejumaiye (2009, p. 138) are some of the legal and ethical issues that newspaper/magazine editors contend with during production are: Accuracy, truthfulness, objectivity, libel, sedition, contempt of court and right of privacy.
Accuracy: The ethics of the journalism profession requires reporters and editors to be accurate in presenting facts.
A popular axiom in the profession says: when in doubt, leave out.
What this means is that journalists in an effort to beat deadline should not sacrifice accuracy for speed.
They should crosscheck their facts before publishing so that they will not mislead the people either intentionally or unintentionally.
41 Truthfulness: Truth is the foundation of the journalism profession.
The reporters are expected to present matters and issues the way they are without adding their own opinion.
They should leave opinions to opinion writers and separate the opinions from facts.
As a societal watchdog, the society looks on to the media practitioners for facts and nothing more than that.
So in whatever they do, the practitioners must put this before them.
Objectivity: A journalist should be objective in his/her daily assignments.
This is one of the primary considerations in news writing.
It is also one of the provisions of the Code of Ethics of the Nigerian Union of Journalists (NUJ) which is an umbrella body that controls the activities of the Nigerian media practitioners.
Objectivity means presenting the facts the way they are without a deliberate effort to side any of the parties involved.
Libel: Libel is a defamation in permanent form.
Defamation matters in the newspapers and magazines are libel.
Both reporters and editors who want their organization to remain in business remove anything that will attract libel action against the organization.
And, once a newspaper/magazine starts to attract legal action, it will lose the confidence of the people despite the financial loss.
Sedition: Sedition is a more serious offence than libel.
It is a criminal offence against the state rather than an individual.
A seditious offence is one meant to incite the people against the state or disturb the peace and security or corporate existence of the state.
The law of sedition does not prevent the people from criticizing the government.
They should criticize but such a criticism must not be done in a malignant manner.
Such a criticism should be fair comment not a comment made with the intent to pull down a state or its government.
Contempt of court: This refers to publications that are likely to interfere with judicial proceedings or ridicule those charged with the responsibility of administering justice.
When a case is pending in court, journalists should be careful on how they report those issues.
Such reportage should not be done in a way that will interfere or influence the outcome of a case or muster public opinion in favour of one of the parties.
Also, judicial proceedings must be reported correctly and put in the proper perspective.
42 Right of privacy: The right of privacy is the right enjoyed by individuals in a society.
Every one has a right of privacy and should not be deprived of privacy even by the media.
While reporting, media practitioners should draw a line between a person’s private and public life.
However, as one becomes a public figure, the border between his/her public and private life begins to dwindle; and some of the things originally seen as his/her personal life become a concern to the public.
4.0 Conclusion Journalists, in every stage of their work have both the legal and ethical considerations at the back of their mind.
In news gathering, editing, proof reading, headline writing, cutline writing etc, they think of the law and the ethics of the profession.
So many media organizations had suffered because of the carelessness of one or more persons in the production process.
Those who made such mistakes pay dearly for it.
5.0 Summary Some of the legal and ethical considerations that guide the activities of media practitioners in the conduct of their duties include: accuracy, truthfulness, objectivity, libel, sedition, contempt of court and the right to privacy.
These laws and ethics are considered by media practitioners in every stage of the production process.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment List and discuss six of the legal and ethical issues that an editor will consider while editing a news page.
7.0 References/Further Readings Anaeto, S. G; Solo-Anaeto, M & Tejumaiye, J.A (2009).
Newspaper and magazine: management, production, marketing.
Lagos: stirling-Horden Publisher Limited.
Nwodu, L. C (2006).
Journalism practice: News, aesthetics, ethics and laws.
Enugu: Rhyce Kerex Publishers.
43 MODULE 4: Editing and Page Make-up In newspaper and magazine production, an editor who could be located at different stages of the production processes ensures that the newspaper/magazine content meet basic standard established either by the media organization or the society.
They act as a check on what gets to the final consumer.
Also, since the media are in a competitive industry, the editors and/or management team ensures that their products are appealing to the people.
This is done through packaging (both in form and content).
Also, because of the competition in the industry, page make-up has become an integral part of modern newspaper and magazine production since, the editors could, through that, attract the attention of the readers.
This, not only increases the appeal, but the financial success of the newspaper or magazine.
Unit 1: Why editing and page make-up?
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0: Introduction A newspaper or magazine’s goal of getting information to the readers dotted in different location is partly achieved when reporters turn in their copies.
The next step is the copy selection based on the news value, and the copy editing process.
At this stage, it is the responsibility of the different editors to prepare the copy for publication.
They edit the stories, removing the irrelevancies and adding the essentials that may have been ignored by the reporters.
According to Freguson, Patten, & Wilson (1998, P. 205), “This job is vital because if an error has crept into the reporter’s copy, it almost certainly will get into the paper unless the copy editor catches it.” Also, since the layout and design has become an integral part of visual communication, the final production is arranged in a way to attract and appeal to the readers.
Page design or layout is the 44 first point of contact that attracts or repels a reader.
Whether a potential reader will glance twice on a newspaper at the news-stand or ignore it depends on the attractiveness of the page make-up.
2.0: Objective After this unit, students should:  Know what newspaper and magazine copy-editing and mage make-up are all about.
 Understand the importance of editing and make-up in newspapers and magazines.
3.0: Main Content 3.0.1: Copy editing Editing constitutes a major aspect of treatment of contents in newspaper and magazine production.
It is crucial and dictates the editorial content and character of a publication (Nwabueze 2011, P.72).
No matter the nature of a story, its newsworthiness and relevance to the readers, poor editing could mess it up or even give an opposite meaning to the massage the publication wants to pass out.
Editing is a painstaking job which involves: Removing irrelevant or unwanted portions of a story including making corrections, rewriting portions of the story, and ensuring that the house style (accepted way of presenting stories by an establishment) is adhered to (Nwabueze, 2011, P.72).
(Empasis mine) It also involves the consideration of ethics, legal issues, ownership and advertisers interest.
Since media houses have dual mandate, one to the society and the other to the owners, the editors and management team try to balance these two mandates in their daily operation.
An editor must be a master of his/her publication’s stylebook, know the rules of grammar, spellings, punctuation and the use of titles.
He/she should also master the use of editing symbols.
Ogbuoshi (2003) cited in Anaeto, Solo-Anaeto & Tejumaiye (2009, P. 100-101) listed seven reasons for editing.
These are: 1.
Editing for correctness: This is editing to correct weak sentences, wrong spellings, etc 2.
Editing for grammar 3.
Editing for accuracy of facts 4.
Editing for balance 45 5.
Editing for safety 6.
Editing for clarity 7.
Editing for style Also, editorial matter could be edited for space.
This is to ensure that it fits into the news hole allotted to it in the dummy.
The table below shows some of the symbols used by editors during editing.
.Culled from Anaeto, Solo-Anaeto & Tejumaiye (2009, p. 102) 46  3.0.2: Page Make-up Page make-up is the arrangement of types, the type and style of headlines, the number and length of stories, the number and size of pictures etc, with a view to attract the attention of the readers.
Nowadays, visual communication has become an important area in journalism.
To attract reader, newspapers and magazines use graphic designs.
According to Ferguson, Pattern & Wilson (1998, P.204): Learning to design copy in a format that attract readers and makes a strong verbal-visual connection for them is a challenging and interesting task.
Today, audiences expect strong visual graphics and stories packaged to attract and hold their attention …Publication that chose to use the older, more traditional approach to design, featuring numerous small photos and headings, may lose many of their readers.
Today’s publication must feature strong story-telling photos, informational graphics, and carefully selected type to draw in the audience.
Most often, the three terms –page layout, page-make-up or page design are used interchangeably in newspapers and magazines.
4.0: Conclusion Editing is the process of checking a copy, improve it and making it suitable for publication.
In newspaper and magazine production, virtually all copies need editing.
When copies are published unedited, they do not only say things about the character of the publication and its editors, but may attract litigations.
All these, no doubt, may have serious consequence on the publication.
5.
Summary Copies for publications are edited for error of grammar, spelling, omissions, biases in reporting, libelous materials and other matters that may not only offend the readers but land the publication into serious problems.
Not only that editors check the story, they write the headlines and “package” the pages to make them attractive to the reading public.
6.0: Tutor-marked Assignment 1.
Discuss three reasons why a copy sent in by a reporter needs editing.
47 2.
Study the attached editing symbol.
Use it to edit a copy of a news story submitted by a member of your class.
7.0: References/Further Readings Anaeto, S. G; Solo-Anaeto, M & Tejumaiye, J.A (2009).
Newspaper and magazine: management, production, marketing.
Lagos: stirling-Horden Publisher Limited.
Ferguson, D: L; Patten, J.
& Wilson, B (1998).
Journalism today.
Illinois: National Textbook Company.
Nwabueze, C (2001).
Magazine & newspaper: management and production: An introductory text.
Owerri: Topshelve Publishers.
Unit 2: Copy-fitting and Types of Page Make-up 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- marked Assignment 7.0 References /Further Reading 1.0: Introduction Newspaper and magazine production starts with the reporter who is the first person in the process of news gathering.
However, the exploits of the reporter means nothing if the news they gather are not published or placed in a pattern that would attract the readers.
Editors place these editorial matters into news holes.
And, this is done in such a form that they attract the readers especially now that newspapers and magazines are in stiff competition for readers’ patronage.
The electronic media is also posing a challenge.
2.0: Objective It is expected that at the end of tutorial in this unit, students would be able to:  Know what copy-fitting means 48  Know why copy-fitting is necessary  Know the different types of page make-up or page design 3.0 Main Content 3.0.1: Copy-fitting Copy-fitting is the placement of editorial matters (headings, body text, photographs) into the news holes.
Copy-fitting helps editors and/or page planners know the space each of the items will occupy in the dummy and how a page will look like after production.
It also helps the page planner to know whether there is under-matter or over-matter in a page.
For efficiency in copy-fitting, editors usually give instructions on a copy.
This instruction which is copy-marking indicates the size of the headline, the number of columns a story will run, the font, point size or whether the lead of the story will be in bold or light.
With the use of computers and other software in page planning, the job of copy-fitting has been made easy since the computer can easily adjust the point size, etc to fit into the space allocated for the copy.
3.0.2 Types of page make-up According to Anaeto, Solo-Anaeto & Tejumaiye (2009, p.105), page make-up or page design could be classified into the following forms: i. Vertical Make-up: In this kind of make-up, elements in the newspaper or magazine are vertically placed.
ii.
Horizontal Make-up: This is a make-up where the elements in the page are horizontally placed.
iii.
Focus or Brace Make-up: This is a make-up pattern where focus or prominence is given to one story and its headline.
This story is given prominence with a bigger headline.
iv.
Modular make-up: A type of makeup where stories are arranged in modules or boxes.
Here stories are either tinted or separated by lines or boxes.
v. Circus Makeup: In this type of make-up, elements are arranged without regard to each other.
The arrangement does not follow any specific pattern.
Here stories and photographs compete for attention and none is given preference.
49 Irrespective of the method that is used, a page can either be balanced or not.
A balanced make- up attracts readers and makes reading easy.
4.0 Conclusion While copy-fitting helps editors know the length of a finished copy, and the space it will occupy in the entire page, page makeup helps them know how the entire page would look after production.
Both are two of the technical issues in newspaper and magazine production.
5.0 Summary Irrespective of what some people may have done behind the scene, the interest of a reader is what gets out in the news stand.
That is why professionals in the print media pay much attention in packaging their product, so that the final product will be appealing to the people.
This, they do through copy-fitting and page makeup.
A well arranged page is an asset to a newspaper or magazine since it is the first thing that draws reader’s attention to the publication.
6.0: Tutor-marked Assignment 1.
Discuss the five types of makeup you learnt in this tutorial.
2.
Why is copy-fitting and makeup necessary in newspaper and magazine production?
7.0: References/Further Reading Alozie, V. O.
(2009).
The print media: Newspaper and magazine production, editing, graphics and organization.
Owerri: Pilvic Communication.
Anaeto, S. G; Solo-Anaeto, M & Tejumaiye, J.A (2009).
Newspaper and magazine: management, production, marketing.
Lagos: stirling-Horden Publisher Limited Ferguson, D: L; Patten, J.
& Wilson, B (1998).
Journalism today.
Illinois: National Textbook Company.
Ogunsiji, M. A.
(1989).
Introduction to print journalism.
Lagos: Nelson Publishers Limited.
Unit 3: Elements of Page Make-up 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 50 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Competition in the newspaper/magazine industry is becoming stiffer.
So, every publication now competes for the people’s attention.
The advent of the electronic and the digital media is not helping matters.
Today also, the competition is not only in terms of content but also in aesthetics.
And, any medium that attracts and sustains the attention of the readers is the one that would make it to the next level.
During production, editors employ different techniques and use different elements to make the pages look better and attractive.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, students will know the elements editors use to make the pages attractive and how these elements could be used to achieve the desired results.
3.0 Main Content 3.0.1 Elements of make-up To produce a page that will attract the attention of the readers, editors use the following elements.
1.
Name plate: The placement of the nameplate in a page can make a difference.
In some newspapers and magazines, the logo runs across the entire columns while in others it runs across half of the columns or towards the end, creating an ear piece.
Also, in some publication, it is placed in the uppermost part of the front page while in others; it is lowered into the page.
Any of these arrangements adds to the page makeup or the aesthetics of the page.
2.
Body type contract: Variations in the body type in which stories are set contributes to the makeup.
Stories could be set in 10 points, 12 points etc or set in different fonts and across two or three columns to achieve variety.
It could also be set in bold types to draw attention to a story.
51 3.
Headline Pattern: Headlines are used to attract attention to stories.
They are also elements of page makeup especially when set in different type faces, different decks or different type sizes.
They could also be flushed left, right or centre in a bid to achieve a certain make-up pattern.
4.
Boxes: In page makeup, boxes are used to separate stories, draw attention to a particular story or for variety.
Once a story is “boxed” it makes the story distinct from other stories and attract the attention of readers.
These boxes also add variety to the items on a page.
5.
Photographs: In newspapers and magazines, photographs are not only used to tell the story, they are also an important element in page makeup.
Before the use of photographs in the print media, pages look dull because they are filled with only text.
Today, the story is different.
6.
Dashes and Rules: In newspaper and magazines, dashes, rules and other signs are used to separate stories, indicate the end of a story or simply for aesthetics.
Some of the signs used to indicate the end of a story are: (-o-), (x x x), (- - - -) etc.
7.
White spaces: White spaces are elements of page makeup when they are used to achieve aesthetic value.
Imagine a page that is clustered with text without any space and the one where there are spaces with other elements arranged in a particular pattern.
8.
Colour: As competition in the media increase, many newspapers and magazines introduce the colour element in page makeup.
Now, newspapers and magazines appear in different colour designs all calling for the attention of the readers.
In different pages, stories are typeset in colour or boxed in colours not only to attract readers but to add aesthetic value.
4.0: Conclusions With the ongoing competition, makeup has become an important factor in the success or failure of newspapers and magazines.
Hence, they employ different elements of makeup to make their pages attractive to the readers whose patronage sustains the publication.
5.0: Summary To survive the competitive business environment, newspapers and magazines employ different elements of makeup.
These include the placement of name plates or logo, variation in body type, arrangement of headlines, boxes, use of photographs, white spaces and colour.
52 SAE: Why is make-up necessary in newspapers and magazines?
6.0: Tutor-marked Assignment Pick a daily newspaper of your choice, look at the front page and identify all the elements used in the page makeup.
Rearrange the page using the same elements.
7.0 References/Further Readings Nwabueze, C (2011).
Magazines & newspapers: Management and production, an introductory text.
Owerri: Top Shelve Publishers.
Ogunsiji M. A.
(1989).
Introduction to Print Journalism.
Lagos: Nelson Publishers Limited.
Sambe, S. A.
& Nyitse, G. T. (2003).
Essentials of newspaper & magazine production.
Makurdi: Starix Communications.
Unit 4: Headlines and their Importance 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: Introduction Early in the morning, vendors flash newspapers and magazines on people going to work.
These vendors have only one Unique Selling Proposition (USP) which they use to attract these people; and this USP is the headlines.
Headlines are the shop window that tells people the content of a newspaper or magazine and whether such publication deserves the attention of the reader.
With headlines, people need not read stories to know what it is all about.
2.0 Objective After this unit, students will know the essence of headlines in newspapers and magazines, the types of headlines and the need for headline counting.
53  3.0 Main content 3.0.1: What is a Headline?
A headline is that bold caption of a news story in few words which draws attention to the story.
It summarizes and grades a story, telling readers the importance of each story in a newspaper or magazine (Alozie, 2009, P.109).
Also, Ogunsiji (1989, P.97) summarizes the essence of headlines thus: A headline is a summary of the main points in the lead.
It is expected to tell the readers at a glance what the story is all about.
It must be short, punchy, and attractive in order to catch the attention of the readers.
Headlines are cast purposely to index the news i.e.
to tell readers the value of news.
They are also expected to serve as a guide to readers about the seriousness and significance of the news.
Apart from providing some display, headlines sell a newspaper and denote its character.
3.0.2: Importance of Headlines Headlines in newspapers and magazines perform the following functions: a.
Attract the attention of the readers.
b.
They grade the news.
c. They sell news stories d. They summarize the stories e. They are elements of page makeup.
f. They facilitate reading and choice of stories 3.0.3: Headline Casting Writing or casting headlines may not be as easy as they may look.
They do not always follow the rule of syntax and avoid the use of unnecessary adjectives, adverbs, conjunctions etc.
They are also better cast in the present tense to give currency to the news.
Headline casting is an art.
And, since it is what newspapers/magazines use to attract readers, editors pay special attention to it and cast those flashy headlines that will draw the attention of people and lure them into buying the product.
54  3.0.4 Headline counting The essence of headline counting is to determine the amount of space the headline will occupy in the dummy.
Newspapers and magazines count headlines by units.
Horizontal spaces are measured in picas, points and units while the depths of the columns are measured in inches.
To determine the space needed for a particular headline, the total number of units for all the letter and spaces between words in the headline has to be counted.
Crowell in Ogunsiji (1989, p.106) says the general rule for a dependable line count is to count the letters as follows: Letter Units Cap: M Q W …….…………………………….
.2 Cap: I J ………… .……………………….. .. ½ (1) All other caps ………………………………....... 1 ½ Lower case m w ……………………………….
1 ½ Lower case f l i r t y ………………………………½ All other lower case letters ………………………..1 Figure 1 ………………………………………….. 1 Other figures …………………………………….
1 ½ Punctuation ……………………………………… ½ & N % ?
& ………………………………….. 1 ½ - (Dash) ………………………………………… .
2 Space between words …………………………….
½ Before the advent of computer and the page-maker, that is, during the time of letter press when headline counting were done manually, this headline counting system was in vogue.
But, with the advent of computers and their use in page planning, headlines are cast and placed with computer that editors do not have to go through the rigour of this counting.
4.0 Conclusion 55 Headlines and their placement in newspapers and magazines are vital in the production process and appeal to the readers.
And, in this era of stiff competition, the race is becoming keener.
Though the computer had removed the job of headline counting from the editors, their ingenuity is still required in the casting of headlines to put their publication ahead of others.
5.0 Summary Headlines are the hook that attract readers to a news story and at a glance tell them in a nutshell what the story is all about.
They grade the stories and help in the general page makeup.
They have become a major tool in the page makeup and an indispensable one indeed.
SAE: Why are headlines necessary in newspapers and magazines?
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment Pick a headline from your local newspaper and count the headline to determine the number of units it may require.
7.0 References /Further Readings Osho, S. (2001).
Graphics and Designs in Mass Communication.
Abeokuta: Ess Oh Consult Publication.
Friend, C.; Challenger, D. & McAdams, K.C.
(2000).
Contemporary editing: Illinois: NTC Contemporary Publishing Company.
Itule, B. D. & Andrew, D. A.
(2003).
News writing and reporting for today’s media.
Boston: Mc Craw Hills Publishers.
Module 5: Newspaper/Magazine Printing, Distribution and Challenges To the Economist, the process of production ends only when goods get to the final consumer.
In newspaper and magazines, though reporters and editors may have done their own beats, the production will only come to an end when the final product goes to bed and finally gets to the final consumer which is the reader.
This is why the printing and distribution of newspapers and magazines are so vital.
Imagine when the editorial team produces the best of newspaper in their imagination and such a product is messed up in the printing house.
Also, imagine when the printers produces the best of newspapers and/or magazines and those final products did not get to the people they are meant for - the readers.
All these scenarios are better imagined than 56 experienced because they could turn, to nothing, all the human and material resources efforts invested by the editorial and management teams.
Unit 1: The Printing Process Introduction Objective Main Content Conclusion Summary Tutor-marked Assignment References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Printing is not a new phenomenon.
It started from the primordial era till the present age.
According to Umechukwu (1997, P.34), printing could be trace to the Paleolithic cave dweller who nursed serious ambitions towards recording for posterity.
These cave dwellers, on the wall of their caves record events is paintings and drawings and that formed the first crucial step towards printing.
Nevertheless, this system harbored a lot of inadequacies and alphabets were therefore introduced.
These alphabets were adopted by the Egyptian who are the fore-runners of modern alphabets.
With the invention of alphabets, attention was focused on the invention of writing surface, an effort that led to the invention of paper on which prints are made.
2.0: Objective At the end of this unit, students will know the modern method of printing both newspapers and magazines, and the evolution that took place in the printing process.
3.0: Main Content 3.0.1: The Gutenberg Era In Germany, between 1453-1456, Johannes Gutenberg used movable type to develop a printing press.
This press produced the early books such as the Bible (Campbell, Martin & Fabos; 2006, P.350).
By this feat, Gutenberg and his colleagues did not only devised a way to promote knowledge across borders, but developed the prototype for mass production of printed matters (Hanson, 2005, P.74).
57 During this period, printing was time consuming and expensive.
But, this early effort led to the spread of information and knowledge outside their places of origin.
It led to the cross- fertilization of ideas and people began to have information far beyond their places of origin.
3.0.2: Modern printing.
More than a century ago, the demand for printed matters grew as a result of the increase in the literacy level.
Then, there was the need for a quicker and more mechanized printing process to satisfy the demand.
The evolution of steam-powered machines and the rotary press lowered the cost of printing.
Then came the era of offset lithography developed in the early 1900s.
this process allowed for printing from photographic plates instead of metal casts.
This also led to computer typesetting.
This latest production process made commercial production of newspapers and magazines possible.
With the emergence of the new media, some newspapers and magazines also publish on the web that people now read newspapers and magazines at the press of the buttons of their mobile phones.
4.0: Conclusion Today, newspapers and magazine get wider readership and coverage because of the improved printing technology which is not only cheaper but faster.
Also, the modern printing technology enables them to compete with the digital and electronic media that is the rave of the moment.
This would not have been possible without the modern printing technology.
5.0: Summary Right from the primordial age through the Gutenberg era, to the present digital age, the printing technology has gone through different stage, each improving on the one before it.
And, newspapers and magazine are benefiting from the evolution of the printing press.
This improved technology, Roger Fidler, cited in Biagi (2003, p. 42) called mediamorphosis - the rapid transformation in the media industry.
SAE: How has the mass production of printed matters contributed to the spread of knowledge?
6.0: Tutor-marked assignment Trace the evolution of the printing press from the Gutenberg era to the present age.
7.0 References/Further Readings 58 Biagi, S. (2003).
Media impact: An introduction to mass media.
Belmont: Thomson/Wadsworth Learning.
Campbell, R,, Martin, C. R & Fabos, B.
(2006).
Media and culture: An introduction to mass communication.
Boston; Bedford/St.
Martins Hanson, R. A.
(2005).
Mass communication: Living in a media world.
Boston: McGraw Hills.
Umechukwu, P. O. J (1997).
Mass communication in Nigeria: A student’s companion.
Enugu: JOEN Associates.
Unit 2: ICTs’ Application in Newspaper/Magazine Production 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-market Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading.
1.0 Introduction We live in a changing world and one of the developments that brought about changes in modern world is information and communication Technologies.
One of the industries that have benefited from the impact of ICTs is the print media industry.
According to Amadi (2011), gone are the days for notepads and pens which use to be the tool of the journalism trade.
They now belong to the past.
The author adds: Journalism practice in those days was a hard-on vocation, of course with the aid of the good old reporters notebook, midgets (tape recorder), and the ball point pen, journalists were trained to write their stories on the move, inside taxis or buses, the slow process of news gathering then made deadline a dreaded word in most news rooms.
The situation has changed.
From the Gutenberg era to the modern age of the world wide web, new technologies are being invented and they influence the way people gather information in 59 newspapers and magazines, process those information, print and distribute the printed or online copies.
On the influence of ICTs on newspapers and magazines, Anaeto, Solo-Anaeto & Tejumaiye (2009, p.132) writes: The use of ICTs in newspaper and magazine publishing has enable more cost effective in gathering and disseminating information, made the whole process easier, improves the quality of published materials and also reduce cost of production 2.0: Objective At the end of this Unit, students are expected to know the different ICTs used in newspaper and magazine production, how they are used and the stages of the production process where they are used.
3.0 Main Content Mentioned below are some of the ICTs newsmen use in newspaper/magazine production and their application in the production process.
 Computers:- In modern newspaper and magazine production, computers have become an indispensable asset.
They are used to type, store and process information.
They are also used in page planning, photo-editing and colour separation, copy-fitting etc (Amadi, 2011).
The used of computer in designing and preparing print publication is called desktop publishing.
 Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM).
The advent of GSM made the sharing of information easy.
With GSM which has become a household name, reporters can reach news sources, colleagues and their editors irrespective of the physical distance separating them.
It makes the contact between the reporters/editors and their source of information better.
With GSM, a reporter could in the comfort of his office conduct an interview, verify a story or get background information.
GSM made information dissemination not only easier, but faster.
E-mail services are also utilized by media practitioners and their clients to send news releases, feature stories, photographs from far distances to the newsrooms.
60  Fax Machines and Facsimile: This is a machine that not only sends and receives texts, but also can send photograph from one point to the other.
At the receiving end, the machine prints out the document or image that was sent.
Through the facsimile, photojournalist can send to the production centre, not only texts but also photographs.
 Internet: the internet is a web of computes located in different part of the world.
It served as a source of information to journalist who are always in need of background information.
The emergence of the internet has also led to e-publishing where newspaper and magazines publishing online editions.
The online editions make the newspaper and magazines accessible to greater number of people.
 Electronic Mail (e-mail): The E-mail is an electronic mail box in the internet through which people send electronic mails (texts and photograph).
With e-mail addresses, people could share private information.
With this technology, journalist could file in their reports from anywhere in the world and, in like manner, receive information.
 New developments in printing technology: With new developments in the printing process such as the photocomposing machines which is one of the latest developments in newspaper and magazine printing, images are easily transferred to films.
The result is that newspaper pages could be sent to different places as far as continents in a matter of minutes.
This is facilitated by high speed modems and satellite links.
 Page Facsimile transmission.
This is a new technique in newspaper and magazine publishing.
Before now, newspapers and magazines produce different editions to cover the vast distance.
Now, they print simultaneously in two or more locations.
This is possible because with the aid of ICT, planned pages could be photographed and transmitted from the main production centre to satellite printing plants.
This makes it possible for the printing operations to be carried out simultaneously in different locations.
For instance, ThisDay newspaper prints simultaneously in Lagos and Abuja while Champion Newspapers print in Lagos and Owerri.
4.0 Conclusion The advent of ICTs has made newspaper and magazine production not only easy, but faster and more efficient.
Media practitioners in different part of the world depend on different ICTs in their daily activities right from the gathering of information, processing, production and 61 distribution of the final product.
Today, newsrooms are no longer the usual mad house where reporters cluster to submit, proofread, edit and plan pages.
With ICTs, these functions could be performed better without reporters clustering in the news room or using typewriters 5.0 Summary For a reporter to effectively carryout his/her function in this age, he/she must depend on information and communication technologies.
Right from the gathering of these information to the processing, ICTs are needed.
And, in the newsrooms, the different professional need ICTs for editing, proofreading, storing and other activities.
In fact, ICT is the lifewire of modern newspaper and magazine production.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment List five of the ICTs that are used in newspaper and magazine production and discuss how they are beneficial to media practitioners right from news gathering stage to the printing process.
7.0 Reference/Further readings Amadi, R. N. (2011).
Uses and impact of ICT in the print media.
In I. S. Ndolo (ed.).
Contemporary issues in communication and society.
(pp.
141-154).Enugu.
Rhyce Kerex Publishers.
Anaeto, S. G; Solo-Anaeto M & Tejumaiye, Y.A.
(2009).
Newspaper and Magazine: Management, Production, Marking.
Lagos: Stirling-Horden Publisher Limited.
Ferguson, D. L; Patten, J & Wilson, B.
(1998).
Journalism today.
Illinois: National Textbook Company Unit 3: e- Publishing 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 62 1.0: Introduction The emergence of ICTs did not only impact on news gathering, production, and distribution.
It has also impacted on readership.
Gone are the days when people early in the morning gather at the news stands for the news of the day from the daily newspapers and magazines.
Now, some people read the daily newspapers/ magazines even before the print copies are made.
All these are as a result of the online editions that made it possible for people to read the newspapers/magazines without access to the printed copies.
This trend, no doubt has drastically affected the circulation of some of the newspapers and magazines which has for some time now, been dwindling.
With e-publishing, time and space no longer pose a barrier.
Publishers no longer talk of area of circulation since the newspapers and magazines could be read for everywhere.
2.0: Objective After this unit, students should know what e-publishing is all about and why so many newspapers and magazines now embark on e-publishing.
3.0: Main Content 3.0.1 What is e-publishing?
The term “e-publishing” also known as web publishing is self explanatory.
In the media industry, e-publishing means the online delivery of newspapers/magazines to prospective readers.
What this means is that it is only those that have access to internet will be able to receive the publication.
The fundamental difference between e-newspaper/magazine and print newspaper/magazine is that the e-newspaper/magazine is an electronic document devised to be read in a computer or special hand-held devices such as mobile phones.
Commenting on the services of e-publishing in newspapers and magazines, Owuamalam (2010, p. 202-203) writes: It is at the website that data are posted as publication for public consumption.
The potential consumer therefore requires to obtain the web address of the site where the needed publication is posted.
It is through logging into the web address that access to a posted document can be obtained.
The consumer who wishes to obtain the downloaded document in hard form, as a copy, uses the printer facility, connected to the computer to print.
The printed copy bears the information about its source, web address, and time of download and printing.
It is the publication as obtained that serves the reading desire of the consumer.
63 Electronic newspapers/magazines perform in the society, the same function which the print versions perform.
They inform, educate and entertain.
In fact e-newspapers/magazines have become more popular in recent years since most readers find it more convenient reading the online copies.
They have become a very good resource for learning as knowledge could be delivered and accessed instantly whenever and wherever one needs it.
It has amazingly become popular and is replacing the print copies.
This is because it has numerous advantages over the conventional print editions.
It is easy to both publish and circulate e-newspapers/magazines through the internet.
3.0.2 Need for e-newspapers/magazines In recent time, there has been an upsurge in the number of people that read newspapers and magazines electronically.
This no doubt is affecting the sales of the printed copies.
To be part of the technological revolution, many newspapers and magazines have joined the train and are publishing online editions.
In Nigeria for instance, that is the case.
But the situation is much more than that in other places that it seems the death of newspapers and magazines as predicted by Gutenberg may be near.
Newsweek one of the international magazines that has made a mark in the print media industry recently announced that from December 31, 2012, it would only produce the online edition.
The management of the magazine while making the announcement said such a measure became necessary because of the magazine’s dwindling revenue from sales which came as a result of many of its readers depending on the online edition.
4.0 Conclusion E-publishing is one of the latest development in the newspaper/magazine business.
Not only that it is cheaper, it makes it possible for newspapers/magazines to reach greater number people since distance is no longer a barrier.
But, it has reduced the circulation and readership of the printed copies and led to dwindling revenue to the publication.
With the trend, the death of the print copies is envisaged in the near future.
5.0 Summary E-publishing in the media industry means the online publication of newspapers and magazines.
The website is the base of e-publishing.
It is on the website that these newspapers and magazines 64 are published.
The websites have addresses known as the web address.
Only those who are connected to the internet and have the web address can have access to the electronic version of the newspapers/magazines.
SAE: What is the benefit on online newspapers/magazines to individuals?
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment What is e-publishing?
Mention and discuss one advantage and one disadvantage of e-publishing to the newspaper/magazine industry.
7.0 References/Further Readings Daniel, Y.
A.
(2012).
The e-book evolution format and design.
In J. O. Daniel; I. E. Ifidion & T. Okegbola (eds.)
Trends in library & information science in Nigeria: Festchrift in honour of Prof. Sam E. Ifidon.
Lagos: Elis Associates.
Owuamalam, E. (2010).
Principles of publishing: Books, periodicals, electronic.
Owerri: Top Class Agencies Limited.
Shrivastava, K. M. (1991).
News reporting and editing.
New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Private Limited.
Unit 4: Factors militating against newspaper/magazine production in Nigeria 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In Nigeria, newspapers and magazines face a lot of challenges.
These challenges range from socio-economic, political and legal challenges that at time hinder the production and circulation 65 of the products.
Some of these challenges have led to the death of some of the publications which at inception, came with lots of hope and the people expect them to make appreciable impact in the society.
Some of there challenge are discussed below.
2.0 Objective The essence of this unit is to acquaint students with some of the problem or constraints that newspapers and magazines face in a developing nations such as Nigeria.
3.0 Main Content Some of the constraints newspaper and magazine face in Nigeria include: 1.
Low literacy level: For one to be able to read either newspapers or magazines, that person must have attained certain level of literacy.
Unfortunately in Nigeria, the literacy level is low.
That affects the readership and sales of newspapers and magazines and the revenue they generate.
2.
Distribution Problem: Nigeria is a vast nation and has a difficult terrain.
This vastness and terrain affect the distribution of newspaper and magazine that some of the acclaimed national newspapers and magazine still find it difficult to distribute in the six geo- political zones.
To avert this problem, some newspapers either produce two different edition or print simultaneously in two different location.
3.
Financial Constraint: Newspapers and magazine publishing is capital intensive.
Each edition needs a new set of newsprint and circulation process.
Unfortunately, the cost of this newsprint is high.
This is quite different in the electronic media where once established, the owner only has to contend with the cost of maintenance.
Also, generally, the cost of doing business in Nigeria is high.
4.
Managerial Problem: Management problem is one of the issues that confront newspapers and magazines in Nigeria.
This has led to the success of some of the flourishing publication and the death of some other that stopped publication few months after establishment.
In Nigeria, some of the managers of newspaper and magazines were newspaper editors who turned manager overnight.
This affected their performance since only few acquire management training.
5.
Inadequate Advert Support: Advert revenue is one area that support newspapers and magazine and keep them afloat.
Unfortunately, since the reward for advertisement is 66 intangible, many Nigeria do not value advert.
This has led to dwindling revenue from advertisements.
Also some advert agencies find it difficult remitting advert revenue to media houses.
This affects the financial stand of these media houses.
6.
Owners Interference: In Nigeria for instance, because of the role which the media played during colonial rule and immediately after independence, media owners see their newspaper and magazines as a mean to advance their political and economic interests.
As a result of this, they interfere in the daily operation of the newspaper.
Those owned by the government are not left out since they are seen as government megaphone.
This affects public perception and patronage.
7.
Lack of Modern Communication Facilities: In ICT development, Nigeria is still lagging behind.
The absence of these facilities affect the operation of these media houses including newspapers and magazines.
Despite the introduction of GSM in the country, many people still argue that their services are epileptic 8.
Dearth of practicing professional journalists: Despite the huge number of people that graduate from journalism and mass communication schools, only few practice the profession.
To those who join other professions, journalism is stressful.
This attitude creates room for non-professional journalist to dictate the pace in different newspaper and magazines houses.
Definitely, the activities of these people who are not trained affect the operation and, distress becomes the order of the day.
9.
Non-payment of staff salaries: In many newspaper and magazine establishments, payment of staff salaries has become a privilege rather that a right.
This has led to all forms of unethical practices that affect the operation of the organizations and drag their name to the mud.
Some of the unethical practices in the news rooms could be traced to this non-payment of salaries and allowances of the media practitioners.
10.
Repressive laws: There are some repressive laws that affect the operation of newspapers and magazines in Nigeria.
Some of these laws were inherited from either the colonial masters or are the product of military rules.
Some of there laws are: the law of sedition, Official Secret Act.
etc.
The result of this is that newspaper and magazine have become watchdogs in chain.
11.
Censorship: newspaper and magazine undergo different forms of censorship in their daily operations.
Different government policies often affect their operation.
At times, 67 media houses are closed down or have their products confiscated.
Sometime, import duties are placed on imported raw materials such as newsprint needed by the media.
4.0 Conclusion The business environment in Nigeria has not been conducive for newspapers and magazines.
They face hostile environment from the socio-economic system, the government and event the employers.
These constraints prevent the people from getting the best out of the media houses.
5.0 Summary Newspapers/magazines in Nigeria for instance face a lot of constraints.
These range from non- payment of staff salaries to ownership interference, inadequate advert support and low literacy level.
Others include: financial constraints, distribution problems and management problems.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment List and discuss ten of the things that militate against newspaper/magazine production in Nigeria.
7.0 References/further readings Anaeto, S. G.; Solo-Anaeto, M & Tejumaiye, J.
A.
(2009).
Newspaper and magazine: Management, production, marketing.
Lagos: Stirling-Horden Publisher Limited.
Owuamalam, E. (2010).
Principle of publishing: Books, periodicals, electronic.
Owerri: Top Class Agencies Limited 68
