 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 423 COURSE TITLE: BOOKPUBLISHING AND THE LAW COURSE GUIDE MAC 423 BOOK PUBLISHING AND THE LAW COURSE TEAM COURSE WRITER Dr. John Danladi Galadima Department of Mass Communication University of Jos Jos, Plateau State +234-803-4506-433 +234-705-7423-070 galadimajohnd@gmail.com danladi@unijos.edu.ng HEAD OF UNIT Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
1 This course is titled: Public Relations in Practice.
The course code is MAC 425.
It is designed for undergraduate students of Mass Communication.
The course provides the students with applicatory knowledge of public relations practice.
At the end of the tutorials in the course, students are expected to have acquired sufficient knowledge of public relations skills processes and practice.
Students will also learn the relevant theories in guiding public relations practice.
Precisely, the students who have gone through this course would be expected to have in-depth understanding of the basic principles imperative for effective public relations practice.
Students would also be expected to acquaint themselves with mainstream literature in public relations principles and practice; the major discussion that embed the literature and be able to apply the basic and concepts of public relations successful public relations practice.
This course guide therefore, offers you with informative insights into the course contents.
It also provides you with a list of relevant materials you will need to gain adequate familiarity with in-depth understanding of the subject matter.
The course design is structured in such a way that would enable you gain far reaching insight into the course.
It will engage you into productive thinking through the underlying principles and theories of issues you will study.
It will also serve as a guide post to effective understanding of public practice during and after the course of your study.
Study Units MAC 425 which is titled Public Relations in Practice is a 400 Level course for undergraduate Mass Communication studies.
It is a 3 credit unit course.
The course is packaged in five modules of varying units and lengths.
The modules and the corresponding units are: MODULE 1: NATURE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1: Meaning of Public Relations Unit 2: Publics in Public Relations Practice Unit 3: Functions of Public Relations 2 Unit 4: Qualities of Public Relations Practitioners MODULE 2: PUBLIC RELATIONS PROCESS AND APPLICATION Unit 1: Public Relations Strategy Unit 2: Public Relations Tactics Unit 3: Research in Public Relations Unit 4: Budget and Budgeting in Public Relations MODULE 3: DOMINANT FIELD OF PUBLIC RELATIONS PRACTICE Unit 1: Community Relations Unit 2: Financial Public Relations Unit 3: Media Relations Unit 4: Government Relations MODULE 4: CORPORATE COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT IN PUBLIC RELATIONS PRACTICE Unit 1: Press Release Unit 2: Planning and Executing Press Conference Unit 3: Crisis Management Unit 4: Issues Management Unit 5: Speech Communication MODULE 5: RELEVANT THEORIES IN PUBLIC RELATIONS PRACTICE Unit 1: System Theory and Public Relations Practice Unit 2: Situational theory and Public Relations Practice Unit 3: Individual Differences Theory and Public Relations Practice 3 Unit 4: Innovation Diffusion and Public Relations It is important to note that every module offers you a listing of all the units that make it up.
Each unit also offers you the content outlines, introduction and objectives with the main content preceding each unit.
Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) will be provided to enhance learning, comprehension, internalization and retention of what you will be taught.
To further enhance learning and effectively monitor your progress on the course, every unit will end with one Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are to work on and submit for marking.
Textbooks and References Enormous effort was made to provide you with in-depth and useful materials you need to pass this course.
However, you will find at the end of each unit, a listing of relevant reference materials you may consult at your convenient time to enhance your understanding of the course.
I therefore, expect that you would make out time to consult as many of the relevant reference materials as possible within the time available to you even before attempting to do your exercises.
Assessment To excel in this course, you would undergo two important assessments.
These are Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) and Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA).
Though you are not to submit the answers to SEAs questions to your tutor, it is importance you take it serious as it would help you to assess your own understanding of the course.
It would also help you to identify the areas you need to improve on as the tutorials progresses.
The Tutor-Marked Assignment should also be taken serious and carefully answered.
It should be properly filled in your assignment file for submission and marking.
Your performance in this exercise counts a lot as 30% of your total score on the course depends on it.
You are once again encouraged to take it serious.
Tutor-Marked Assignment You will find at the end of every Unit, a Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA).
I expect that you will carefully answer the assignments and put them in your assignment file for submission as instructed.
Note that this course guide does not 4 contain any Tutor-Marked Assignment questions.
You will find them in virtually all the units of every module in the main course details.
Final Examination and Grading As a 3-credit unit course, the final examination for MAC 425 will last for three hours.
The examination will count for 70% of the total course grade.
Note again that the Tutor-Marked Assignment will be 30% of the total grade.
So, your score in the Tutor-Marked Assignment plus your score in the final examination will determine your final grade in this course.
The examination questions will reflect to a large extent, the SAEs and TMAs which you are expected to have answered while studies on the course last.
I advise you make proper use of the time you have between the completion of the units and the examination to revise the whole course.
You will find this exercise useful as it will help you to be familiar with SAEs and TMAs before your final examination.
What You Will Need for This Course To excel in this course, you will need to review your knowledge of Principles of Public Relations and Public Relations Straggles and Tactics.
This will certainly refresh your mind on the meaning and essence of public relations.
Although the main course manual is well detailed and comprehensive, you will need to purchase at least, two textbooks out of the number of textbooks recommended to you.
This will aid your mastery of the course.
You may also need to visit some websites for additional reference materials that will facilitate your understanding of the course.
Also, you will have need to visit institutional/organizational libraries for additional insights into their communication plans, strategies and actions in public relations process and practice.
Finally, you will need to cultivate quality time to rehearse what you learnt in the course on weekly basis.
This will further enhance your knowledge of the course.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Tutorials in this course will span through 24 hours.
The dates and locations of the tutorials as well as the name and phone number of your tutor will be communicated to you once you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments.
Your tutor will also monitor your progress in 5 the course and will be able to assist with your SAEs and TMAs.
I therefore, encourage you to feel free to contact your tutor in case of any difficulty and ensure prompt submission of your assignments.
Always attend your tutorials regularly and on time.
Also ensure you always participate actively in class discussions.
Conclusion This course is both theoretical and practical based courses.
The course requires in- depth understanding of the theoretical foundations underlying it and the ability to apply the theoretical knowledge to effective public relations process and practice.
You will therefore make the most out of the course if you cultivate the right attitude of mind of understanding how best public relations principles apply to the practice of the profession.
Summary This course guide is carefully packaged to give you tight insight into MAC 425 (Public Relations in Practice).
The course is designed to equip you with rich conceptual and theoretical as well as practical knowledge of public relations.
At the end of your studies in this course therefore, you would have learnt not only the conceptual/theoretical underpinning of the course but also, the strategic practical approaches to public relations practice.
However, your success in this course will depend more on the quality and quantity of time you put into your tutorials; the efforts you put into solving your SAE and TMA questions; and your strategic planning for engaged studying and revising of the entire course.
I sincerely wish you successful journey through your studies in the course and the entire programme.
Recommended Text 1.
Corporate Public Relations Management L. C. Nwodu 2.
Introduction to Public Relations By S. Black 3.
Public Relations Management: Issues and Application by I. E. Nwosu 4.
Public Speaking: Skill and for Success by T. J. Farrell and M. M. Farrell 5.
Understanding Business Communication by I. S. Ndolo 6.
Public Relations Writing: Form and Style By D. Newsome and B. Carrell 7.
Public Relations: Speech, Media Writing and Copy by I, E, Nwosu and S. O. Idemili 8.
Interactive Public Relations by W. Ademolekun and T. Ekundayo 6 9.
Public Relations Practice: Concept and Strategies by O. F. Nweke 10.
Effective Public Relations and Media Strategy by C. V. N. Reddi 11.
Public Relations Theory and Practice by J. Johnston and C. Zawawi 12.
Public Relations: The Profession and The Practice by D Lattimore et al.
13.
Environmental Public Relations Management: Principles, Strategies, Issues and Cases by I. E. Nwosu and O. Uffoh 14.
Journalism Practice: News, Aesthetics, Ethics and Law by L. C. Nwodu 7 COURSE OUTLINE ______________________________________________________________________________ COURSE CODE: MAC 423 COURSE TITLE: BOOK PUBLISHING AND THE LAW DEVELOPER: DR. JOHN D. GALADIMA MASS COMMUNICATION DEPARTMENT UNIVERSITY OF JOS PMB 2084 JOS – PLATEAU STATE.
PHONE: 0803-450-6433 0705-742-3070 MAIL: galadimajohnd@gmail.com danladi@unijos.edu.ng JULY, 2013 ________________________________________________________________________ 8 CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 1 Course Aim…………………………………………………………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives………………………………………………………………………………………….
1 Working through this Course………………………………………………………………………… 2 Course Material…………………………………………………………………………………………….. 2 Study Units…………………………………………………………………………………………………….
3 Assessments………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 3 Tutor-Marked Assignment…………………………………………………………………………….
3 Final Examination and Grading……………………………………………………………………… 4 Course Marking Scheme……………………………………………………………………………….
4 Presentation Schedule………………………………………………………………………………….
4 Course Overview………………………………………………………………………………………….. 4 How to Get the Most Out of This Course……………………………………………………… 5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials………………………………………………………………….. 7 Summary…………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 7 9 Introducton Welcome to MAC 423: Book Publishing and the Law This is a 3 credit unit course for undergraduate students in Mass Communication.
The course materials have been prepared with the Nigerian context in focus but with global perspective.
This Course Guide gives you an overview of the course content.
It also provides you with information, the organization and requirements of the course together with recommended texts.
Course Aims The aims are to equip you with the knowledge and understanding of book publishing and how you can use your writing skills to achieve its role in society.
These broad aims will be achieved by: i.
Introducing you to the basic concepts of books and book publishing.
ii.
Highlighting various types of books and their objectives.
iii.
Explaining the laws guiding book publishing.
iv.
Exposing you to book publishing as a way of earning a living.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, MAC 423 has an overall objective apart from the specific objectives of the various component units.
These units objective is spelt out at the beginning of each unit in the five modules.
You are strongly advised to read them before you start working through the unit.
You can as well consult it regularly as you progress with each unit.
Here are the wider objectives for the course as a whole.
By meeting the objectives you count yourself as meeting the aim of the course.
On successful completion of this course, you should be able to: a.
Define book and book publishing b.
Explain the different types of books.
c. Explain the importance of book publishing d. Explain classification of books e. Discuss the history of book publishing f. List and explain the professions in book publishing g. Explain the roles of book professionals.
h. Understand the economics of book publishing i.
Be conversant with book publishing laws j. Explaing book publishing procedure k. Understand manuscript assessment and acquisition 10 l. Discuss book editing and design m. Understand book indexing n. Be conversant with sales and circulation of books.
o.
Explain the challenges of book publishing.
Working through this Course To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
You will also need to undertake practical exercise under the supervision of your facilitator.
The exercises are to aid your bridge the gap between what obtains in the classroom with what obtains in the publishing houses.
At the end of the course, you will be required to write and pass the final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: i.
Course guide ii.
Study units iii.
Assignment file iv.
Relevant textbooks.
v. As a beginner, you need to socialize with publishers by visiting publishing companies and newspaper houses on your own.
Study Units There are 28 units (of five modules) in this course.
They are listed.
Module 1 Unit 1 Definition and Objectives of Publishing Unit 2 Books/Types of Book Unit 3 Books Classifications Unit 4 History of Book Publishing Unit 5 Book Publishing Houses Module 2 Unit 1 Professionals in Book Publishing Unit 2 Functions of Book Publishing Professionals 11 Unit 3 Economics of Book Publishing Unit 4 Training the Requisite Personnel Unit 5 Challenges in Book Publishing Module 3 Unit 1 Writing Books for Publication Unit 2 Manuscript Acquisition and Assessment Unit 3 Book Editing Unit 4 Book Design and Layout Unit 5 Book Indexing and Production Module 4 Unit 1 Sales Strategies Unit 2 Sales Outlets Unit 3 Problems of Reading Books Unit 4 Role of ICT Module 5 Unit 1 Book Publishing Agreement Unit 2 Copyright Law Unit 3 ISBN Requirement Unit 4 Law of Defamation Unit 5 Law of Privacy Unit 6 Law of Contempt Unit 7 Official Secret Act Unit 8 Sedition Assessment An assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the tutor marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks, with the Tutor Marked assignment acting as your Continuous Assessment (CA).
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for final assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment 12 file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignment You will have to submit a specific number of the (TMAs).
Every unit in this course has a Tutor Marked Assignment.
You will be assessed on four (4) of them but the best three performances from the (TMAs) will be used for your 30% grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with the Tutor Marked Assignment form to your Tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submission.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date, unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a test of three hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Find time to read the units all over before your examination.
The final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignment you have previously encountered.
And all aspects of the course will be assessed.
You should use your time between completing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment: Best Three Out of Four 30% Marked Final Examination 70% Total 100% Professional Schedule The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the day of completing the study units and the dates for examinations.
13 Course Overview Unit Title of Work Weeks Activity Course Guide Module 1 1.
Definitions and Objectives of Book Week 1 Assignment 1 Publishing 2.
Definitions of Book Week 2 Assignment 2 3.
Types of Books Week 3 Assignment 3 4.
Book Classifications Week 4 Assignment 4 5.
History of Book Publishing Week 5 Assignment 5 6.
Book Publishing Houses Week 6 Assignment 6 Module 2 1.
Professionals in Book Publishing Week 1 Assignment 1 2.
Functions of Book Publishing Week 2 Assignment 2 Professionals 3.
Economics of Book Publishing Week 3 Assignment 3 4.
Training the Requisite Personnel Week 4 Assignment 4 5.
Challenges in Book Publishing Week 5 Assignment 5 Module 3 1.
Writing Books for Publication Week 1 Assignment 1 2.
Manuscript Acquisition and Assessment Week 2 Assignment 2 3.
Book Editing Week 3 Assignment 3 4.
Book Design and Layout Week 4 Assignment 4 5.
Book Production and Indexing Week 5 Assignment 5 Module 4 1.
Sales Strategies Week 1 Assignment 1 2.
Sales Outlets Week 2 Assignment 2 3.
Problems of Reading Books Week 3 Assignment 3 4.
Role of ICT Week 4 Assignment 4 Module 5 1.
Book Publishing Agreement Week 1 Assignment 1 2.
Copyright Law Week 2 Assignment 2 3.
ISBN Requirement Week 3 Assignment 3 4.
Law of Defamation Week 4 Assignment 4 5.
Law of Privacy Week 5 Assignment 5 6.
Law of Contempt Week 6 Assignment 6 7.
Official Secret Act Week 7 Assignment 7 8.
Sedition Week 8 Assignment 8 14 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning programmes, the study units replace the university lecture.
That means you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace.
This is one of the advantages of distance learning as long as you did not take things for granted.
Let your mind-set when you are reading the lecture to be the same with that of a listener to the lectrurer in the classroom.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study unit tells you where to read and which are your text materials.
The only difference is that the lecturer is not physically with you.
You are provided exercises to do at the appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an- in class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly prove your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be from the set books or from the reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor right away.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
i.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
ii.
Organize a study schedule: Design a course overview to guide you through the couse.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit, and how the assignment relate to the units.
iii.
Once you have created your own study schdule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
iv.
Turn to unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
v. Assemble the study materials: you will need your set of books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what source to consult for further information.
15  vi.
Always keep in touch with your centre for up-to-date course information carefully.
vii.
Before the relevant ddates of submission, strive to do your assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the dates they are due.
viii.
Regularly review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
ix.
Design a study plan and be sure to follow it strictly.
x.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objective, you can move to the next unit.
It’s advisable to precede unit-by-unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep your self on target.
xi.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
And when the assignment is returned, pay attention to your tutor’s comments, both on tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignment.
xii.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved both the unit objectives and course objectives.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to yourself during the course.
You must take your tutor marked assignments to the study centre well before the date due (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
On your own you can constitute a private tutorial with your colleagues to enable you share ideas.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor.
If you need help, contact your tutor if: 16  You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned reading.
 You have difficulty with the exercises.
 You have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
 When you are not sure of up-to-date information or development in your centre.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have a face- to-face contact with your tutor and your classmates.
It enables you to have instant answers to questions and share opinion.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in the discussion actively.
Summary The Course Guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches you the principles of book publishing and how the laws guide the operation of books generally.
We wish you success in this course and hope that you will find it both interesting and rewarding.
17 MODULE 1 BOOK PUBLISHING INTRODUCTION Book publishing has become one important industry in the world.
This is because the world is now surviving on information which books provide.
There are many people, groups and organizations involved in the business of providing different information through books and other printed materials.
The essence of this module is to expose students to the different areas of book publishing.
OBJECTIVES This module will discuss the evolution and development of book publishing, and the different issues involve in it.
The different types of book and how they are classified for easy identification and usage will be explained.
This module has the following units: Unit 1 - Definition and Objectives of Publishing Unit 2 - Books and types of Books Unit 3 - Classification of Books Unit 4 - History of Book Publishing Unit 5 - Book Publishing in Nigeria 18 UNIT 1 Definition and objectives of Publishing 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Publishing 3.2 Objectives of Publishing 3.3 Types of Publishing 3.4 History of Book Publishing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading UNIT 1 1.0 INTRODUCTION Book publishing is an interesting course that touches all aspect of literacy and formal education.
It is therefore central to all journalistic practice.
This unit introduces you to the definition of publishing, the objectives, and the types of book publishing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define the basic concepts in book publishing  Identify the objectives of publishing  Discuss the types of publishing  Explain book Publishing process 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Book Publishing Though it must be difficult to cultivate a generally accepted definition for publishing, scholars have developed generic terms for the process of producing literary works.
Nyeko (1999:1) opines that; it is “the process of producing for dissemination, books, films, computer programmes, records, newspapers, periodicals, discs, bulletins, magazines and other literacy materials.” Contextually, we can conclude that book publishing is that process that seeks to capture social and intellectual activity and storing same for the information, education and entertainment of the society.
19 Akpoko (2012:27) said book publishing “simply means to have a book or periodical printed out and distributed for sale.” He pointed out that publishing normally covers a wide range of activities, which include production of reports, books and other reading materials for the use of general public.
Oso and Biobaku (2008) explain that publishing is a generic term used to describe the process of producing literacy and information materials for utility.
Okwilagwe (2001:1) quaoted Chandler Grannis (967) who define publishing as: To make public – to send forth among the people – the words and pictures the creative minds have produced, that editors have worked over, and that printers have reproduced.
In this sense publishing is a process that involved creative minds who conceived ideas that want others to share.
Publishing is a process that, according to Okwilongwe (2001) consist of planning, selecting, editing, designing, producing, marketing and distribution of printed materials such as books, magazines and newspapers.
Specifically when applied to book, publishing is completed only when a manuscript has been transformed into a book and distributed to its intended audience.
3.2 Objectives of Book Publishing Book writing serves many objectives.
Oso, et al quotes Tuchman (1980) as saying that without books, history is silent, literature dumb, science crippled, thought and speculation at a standstill.
This assertion tells of the invaluable nature of books.
The objectives of book writing in this case, have been summarized into 5 classes: - To announce - To expound - For historical reason - To transmit knowledge or teaching - For economic reasons 20 1.
To Announce I.
Many writers have an inbuilt yearning to express an idea, have an intuition about a phenomenon which they believe is true, or a future idea which they think will occupy a significant space in our world of existence, and so on.
It is this desire that makes them to write books that contain such ideas.
II.
Just like the town crier of old, books serve the purpose of information dissemination.
It serves as a notice board for whoever cares about any information.
III.
Communication can be in the form of one person relating with the other or the writer relating with a mass of people.
The world consists of millions of people that are in different geographical locations, speaking different languages, have different colours, religions and creeds.
Book writing has achieved the function of communicating with these same people thereby bridging this diversity.
IV.
Writers especially, novelists provide a lot of entertainment value to the reading audience.
Though their writing might be fictitious or factual but they are always infuse with very enthralling features that makes the reading experience exciting.
2.
To Expound I.
Many historical events are not the same as we have them today.
This is because there was a time when certain knowledge was highly restricted.
There was a time when plants were thought to be organisms that you plan, they grow and you harvest them.
A bad crop does not produce well and a good one does well.
It was not known that plants could be ill as human beings hence their performances can be low.
It was not known that man’s present appearance is a function of his genetic make-up.
These are areas where new knowledge has been added to previous knowledge to bring us to the present.
II.
To challenge knowledge.
At a particular time, scientists believed that the world was as flat as a table and a continuous movement towards a particular direction will only bring you to the precipice and an eventual fall into an endless abyss.
In our present world, that knowledge have been challenged and found to be false.
III.
Book publishing has served the purpose of continuous re-evaluation of knowledge.
Most writers evaluate previous positions and theories, and establish new ones.
3.
Transmit Knowledge I.
Scholarly writing often refers to that body of writing that seeks to contribute new knowledge or contribute to existing knowledge.
21 II.
Whatever form the scholarly knowledge may take, be it in the form of confirmation, disputation and repudiation or expansion, scholarly knowledge always aims at transferring knowledge from one person to another.
The book is the tool of the teacher to achieve this aim.
Sometimes the book replaces the teacher.
4.
To Serve As Reservoir Book publishing serves as a reservoir of knowledge.
It is what we write today that eventually becomes history.
Africans have been found in the act of trying to re-write their own history.
This stems from the fact that most of their literatures were oral.
The written word has the ability for longevity while the oral one does not.
This was why the misinterpretation of the African realities by the European writers were widely condemned, and steps taken to right these wrongs.
Many writers like Descartes, Aristotle, and Sophocles achieved the status of immortality by writing.
These writings have become what we refer to today as history.
Book publishing has served as a reservoir of contemporary events.
5.
Economy The book publishing industry, especially in modern times, where society has become knowledge driven, has become a veritable source of wealth.
In super literate societies, writers live off what they write.
Many writers simply write wholly or partly to make money.
Many see this as derogatory but the fact remains that a good reason for writing is economic.
As long as a book holds appeal to a wide range of audience it will bring profit.
3.3 Types of Publishing Okpobo (2012) explained that there are three types of publishing arrangement that are commonly practiced today.
These are: (a) Corporate Publishing: This is the traditional publishing arrangement where the publishing houses accpets manuscripts from the author and undertake to produce the book.
Here the publishing organisation funds the publishing process right from editing, typesetting, page layout, filming, plating, and printing, binding, trimming, and finishing to the marketing of such books.
He pays royalty to the author based on the sale of such book in line with earlier agreement between 22 them.
The publisher is absolutely in charge of production and marketing of the book and bear all the risk involve in such business or the profits associated therein.
(b) Vanity Publishing: This is a publishing arrangmenet where you pay for the cost of publication of your book.
The publisher will accept to publish the manuscript first before he signs an agrement to publich such book.
He normally builds in his profit into the agreement to publish the manuscript.
(c) Self-Publishing: This is an arrangement where the author takes his manuscript to the publishing house, pay for the producton of the book and collects all the copies.
The author will then market the book or give them out freely.
Self- publishers take more risk financially even though they are always satisfied by seeing their names in print.
3.4 Publishing Process There are many processes and activities that take place during book publishing.
Some of the activities are the followings: (1) The Idea of a book: This is when the author conceived an idea of a publishable manuscript.
This can emanate from an author who write such manuscripts and submit same to a publisher.
(2) Submission of Manuscript after it has been written: Whether solicited or unsolicited, the book production process begins from manuscripts acquisition.
(3) Editing the Manuscript Acquired to Assess its fitness for publication: This is done by content editors and external assessors appointed by the publishers.
(4) Design of the Book: Here graphic designers and type setters will design the content and the cover of the book.
Typefaces and type sizes are always done at this stage also.
Headline sizes, margins and width columns are set here.
(5) Filming: Here the lithographers will film the art work so that it can be plated.
(6) Plating: The film of the art work will be turned into plates so that such plates will be used to print the book.
(7) Printing: Here the plate is inserted into the printing machine so it will run the impression thereby producing the required copies of the book.
(8) Binding: The printed impressions are bound into copies of individual books.
(9) Marketing of Books: Here printed books are sent out to sales outlets such as bookshops, newstands, etc.
23 Biobaku and Akinjobgin (2009:33) summarize book publishing process into three: conception, production and marketing.
Conception, according to them, has to do with coming out with a publishable idea which can emanate from an author who submits a manuscript to the publisher.
They also said that production stage involves four stages – editing, designing, typesetting and printing.
The last production process, according to them is marketing the books.
4.0 Conclusion This unit defines book publishing and the types of book publishing.
The qualities of book publishing organizations are also explained.
This will help us put the course in proper perspective.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we discussed the definition of book publishing and the types of publishing organizations in existence today.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is book publishing?
2.
Explain the types of book publishing organizations in the country.
7.0 References Okpobo, J.
(2012) Understanding Book Publishing Zaria: ABU Press Limited Adikpo, J.A.
and Ihwa, S.N (2009) Book Production, What You Need to Know Makurdi: Oracle Business Limited.
Okwilagwe O.A (2001).
Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. 24 UNIT 2: BOOKS AND TYPES OF BOOKS 1.0 Introductin 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What are Books 3.2 Types of Books 3.3 Structure of a Book 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction: There are different books that are produced to satisfy different needs of people in different fields of endeavour.
This unit discusses books and their different types 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should know:  Definition of books  Types of books  Structure of books.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 What are Books?
A book is an instrument that helps the author to communicate his thoughts and experiences to the larger public.
A book usually possesses the following characteristics.
- They are instruments of communication - They possess written or visual symbols to convey their meanings.
- They are published for wide circulation.
A book therefore can be defined as “a set of printed pages that are fastened inside a cover so that you can turn them and read them (Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary 6th Edition).
It is “a written (or printed) message of considerable length meant 25 for public circulation and recorded on materials that are light yet durable enough to afford comparatively easy portability’’ (The New Encyclopaedia Britanica).
A book is a very important medium of communication because it is seen as “an invaluable repository of thoughts and knowledge and a means of collating a considerable store of information in a small space and in a durable form” (MacBride, 1981:06).
Okpoko (2012:3) summarise the importance of books as follows: (a) Basic to our system of education (b) Repository of our culture and all types of knowledge.
(c) Medium of storing and retrieving information (d) Channel of communication (e) A part of national development (f) A print medium that store information from generation to generation – a historical document.
Ihwa and Adikpo (2009) describe books as materials that promote knowledge of all kinds.
They said books are set of non-periodical printed sheets of papers of at least forty-nine pages excluding covers that serve as media of access to knowledge of values, wisdom, aesthetics and human imagination.
They summarized the functions of books thus: (1) To serve as a form of communication (2) Serve as symbol that convey meaning (3) Use for the circulation and distribution of knowledge (Ihwa and Adikpo, 2009:4) 3.2 Types of Books Books are categorized into classes in order to organize the body of knowledge and to direct readers on where to seek same.
Books are generally categorized into the following types a. Fictional books: These are books which tell about imaginary events and people.
b. Non-Fictional books: They are factual books whose contents relate true information concerning people and events.
c. Realistic Fictional books: These are books and stories that are written as if they could happen today.
26 d. Historical Fictional books: These are books of stories of events of the past, which might not have happened.
e. Science Fictional books: These are books that deals with scientific facts, but situated in a futuristic form.
They deal with planetary travels and inventions, which could happen most probably through scientific advancement.
f. Fantasy books: These are books about situations which can hardly happen in real life.
g. Mystery books: These are books about unsolved life events.
The themes of such books often revolve around crime and murder.
h. Biography books: A biography is a book about a person’s life.
i.
Auto Biographic books: A book about the author’s life.
j. Poetry: Books that use rhythm and rhymes to explore and relate feelings, to make human minds see images.
k. Folklore, Myths and Legends: Books that tell of oral traditional stories of the people has been put down in print form.
l. Humour: These are books that encourage a read-laugh situation.
m. Classics: These are books that have become eternally relevant and people read them for many years.
These different types of books can also be broadly categorized into two: they are the educational books and the general books.
(a) Educational Books: Okpoko (2012: 6 – 7) explained that educational books are those prepared to and published based on a given syllabus normally released by an authority.
In Nigeria, such authorities may be Ministries of Education, Science and Technology, Justice, or agencies such as Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council, and such books are normally for use in schools and colleges.
(b) General Books: General books are all types of books written for general use by different people with no specific level or group.
Some of these general books include biographies, memoirs, autobiographies, novels, drama and poetry.
However, some of these general books can be used as educational ones.
27 3.3 Structure of a Book Every book should be produced with a formal standard structure for easy usage by readers.
Okpobo (2012:111) has explain that a book can be structurally divided into three parts namely (a) Prelimary mater which are the materials before the main text.
(b) The main text, and (c) The oddment which are materials that follows the text.
(a) Preliminary Matter The following are the materials that come before the main text in a book: (i) Half Title: This is also called bastard title because the page contains the title of the book.
It is called half page because it is only the major title of the book that is written on this page before the full title.
Sometimes it is followed by “pages of respect” which are blank which protect the half pages and the full titles.
(ii) Front Piece: This page normally appears on left-hand page called verso.
It is the page that comes immediately after the half title.
Sometimes authors use the page to present titles of their previous books.
(iii) Title Page: This contains the title of the book, the names of the author and the publisher with his official logo.
(iv) Imprint: This page house copyright, data of publication, date of impressions and editions, printer’s imprint and international standard book number (ISBN).
(v) Dedication: This page normally appears on the right-hand page of a book called recto.
It is always brief and devoted to a love one or ones by the author(s).
(vi) Forward: This contains notes from a well-known person other than the author.
It normally appear on recto (right-hand) page with the date, name of the writer and place where it was written.
(vii) Preface: This page normally summarise the work section by section or chapter by chapter but some books do substitute preface for forward.
(viii) Acknowledgements: This is the page where the author(s) express (es) appreciation for assistance received in the course of producing the book.
(ix) Table of Contents: This page contains chapters, section, titles and the pages where they appear.
It is the page that helps readers to locate the information they want to use.
28 (x) List of Illustration: It has all the list of illustrations in the book and the pages where they appear.
This page is only for textbooks with illustrations.
(b) The Text: This is the main body of a book and it should start on a new page.
Normally, it should begin with the titles which are set in capital (upper case).
(c) Oddments (Materials after the maintext) (1) Appendix: This is a page that has additional information about the subject matter.
The information on this page is meant to complement, illustrate and corroborate the text.
(2) Author Notes: These are pages where some clarifications are made by the author on the subject matter.
(3) Glossary: This is a page devoted to special words or terms used in the book which are arranged alphabetically for easy use by readers.
(4) Bibliography: This is the page that has the list of books, journals and other written works consulted.
People interviewed during the research for the book will also be documented here.
All bibliographies are normally alphabetically arranged but not to be numbered serially.
(5) Index: This is the list of words, phrases or expressions arranged with their reference pages.
All good books are produced with these structures for professional use and ease of reference.
4.0 Conclusion The book is the essence of this unit and we have treated and introduce you to the world of books.
This is to expose you to the different types of books in existence.
5.0 Summary This unit treated the definition of books and examines the different types of books.
The structure of a book was also treated in this unit.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What are the types of books that you know?
2.
Explain some of the materials that precede the text in a book.
29 7.0 References Adikpo, J.A.
and Ihwa, S.N (2009) Book Production, What You Need to Know Makurdi: Oracle Business Limited.
Okpobo, J.
(2012) Understanding Book Publishing Zaria: ABU Press Limited 30 UNIT 3 BOOK CLASSIFICATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Book Classification 3.2 Functions of Book Classification 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction There are many types of books in the market and in the libraries.
It is therefore difficult to locate books on the shelves in both the book stores and libraries.
To reduce this problem books are classified for easy location.
2.0 Objectives The ojectives of this unit is to expose you to (a) How books are classified (b) Know the main functions of book classification (c) Knowledge of current book classification 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Book Classification In order to provide solution to this complex problem of locating and using books in the libraries, steps have been taken to arrange books according to the features those books possess.
This also offers librarians and book users a guide to the books in their possessions.
31 3.2 Types of Book Classification Current book classification systems include: - Dewey Decimal Classification System (DDC) - Library of Congress Classification System (LCC) - Chinese Library Classification System - The Havard Yen hung Classification System - The ACM Computing Classification System - Here is an example of the Library of Congress classification system Letter Subject Area A General works B Philosophy, Psychology and Religion C Auxillary Sciences of History D General and Old World History E History of America F History of the United States, British, Dutch, French and Latin America G Geography, Anthropology and Recreation H Social Sciences J Political Sciences K Law L Education M Music N Fine Art P Language and Literature Q Science R Medicine S Agriculture T Technology U Military Science V Naval Science Z Bibliography, Library Science and General Information Resources.
32 3.3 Functions of Book Classification The main functions of book classification are: (a) To locate books easily on the shelves (b) To arrange books according to their features and genres.
(c) To arrange books systematically (d) To identify books on the shelf easily.
4.0 Conclusion Classification of books is relevant for easy identification and access to books on book shelves at libraries and bookshops.
It is therefore important for you to acquire the skill of classifying books for public use.
5.0 Summary This unit treated book classification, types of book classification and functions of book classification.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is book classification?
2.
Explain the functions of book classification 7.0 References Okilagwe O.A (2001).
Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Smith, D.C. (1989): A Guide to Book Publishing: Revised edition.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
33 UNIT 4 HISTORY OF BOOK PUBLISHING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of Book Publishing 3.2 Books and Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The introduction of written words and literacy lessons brought up the need for publishing of books and other printed materials.
This unit focuses on the history of book publishing generally and how books have aided development process in the world.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Know the hsitory of book publishing  Dscuss book and human development generally.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of Book Publishing Oso, et al (2008) sums up the history of publishing thus; “the historical development of publishing is anchored on three factors; writing, paper and printing”.
Publishing began after the monopoly of letter, which the priestly caste held, had been broken.
The earliest known books were the Babylonian clay tablets and the Egyptian papyrus rolls.
The books on clay tablets were made with water – cleaned clays which the writer used stylus to inscribe on curneiform character when it was still wet.
The Egyptian papyrus resembles paper, thus it is usually regarded as the direct ancestor of the modern book.
It was made of reedy plants that flourished on the river Nile valley.
Strips of papyrus pith were pasted at right angles on top of each other to make a lay roll.
In order 34 to make a book, the writer copied texts on a side of the sheets and rolled it up.
There are evidences of this form of book dating from the early third millennium.
The Chinese also made their books with wood or bamboo around 1300BC.
Emperor Shih Hung Ti burnt many of the books in 213BC, but some were able to survive.
The Greeks adopted the papyrus roll and passed it on to the Romans, but the adaptation was later substituted by codex system in AD400.
Codex was an invention that worked with leaves, but instead of fastening the leaves together on the top to extend in long strip; the books in codex were made from folded leaves bond together on one side.
The rivalry of library collection between Ptolemy V of Egypt and Eumenes II of Pergamum about 190BC led to the invention of vellum and parchment.
Vellum and parchment are materials derived from the skin of animals.
It was invented when Ptolemy V placed an embargo on papyrus in order to prevent Eumenes from having more library collections.
It was however in the 15th century when Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable type that gave rise to the development of modern book publishing.
3.2 Books and Development Oso and Biobaku (2009:23) said the development of book publishing has led to (1) Development of Cultural Activities: They said book publishing is a cultural activity because it preserves the history and tradition of a people.
It promotes the language and arts of the people.
(2) Development of book publishing business: many people are involved in the business of book publishing thereby contributing to the economic growth of all nations of the world.
Many authors are publishing all kinds of books and are gaining and getting royalties while publishing organizations are making profits from the business of book publishing.
(3) Book Publishing as Vehicle of Development: Book publishing facilitates literacy and literacy in turn help the development of nations politically, socially and economically.
This means book publishing has become vehicle of national development in the world.
Valdehusa cited by Oso and Biobaku (2009:27) says: The quality, quantity and diversity of book produced by a society are important indicators of that society’s level of 35 development, intellectual sophistication, capacity for technological innovation and industriousness.
(4) Book Publishing as Mass Communication: Books disseminates mass information or ideas to all kinds of people who read them.
Therefore books are media of mass communication just like radio, TV, Newspapers and magazines.
Books are normally conceptualized, written and published base on the people from different background, places and races.
Based on this, books are normally produced in large quantity and distributed to many people.
4.0 Conclusion History of book publishing was discussed.
This was explained in relation to the contribuiton of book publishing to the overall development of human beings and the world at large 5.0 Summary In this unit, the history of book publishing was discussed.
The contribution of book publishing to the development of cultural activities, business expansion, literacy and mass communication was also explained.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Explain how book publishing evolved.
2.
What are the contributions of book publishing to development in the world.
7.0 References Adesanoye F.A.
(1991) “Book editing and publishing problems in Nigeria” Umoh S.O (ed).
Tropical Issues in Communication Arts Uyo: Modern Business Press Ltd. Adesanoye F.A.
and Ojeniyi A.
(eds.)(2005).
Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heineman Educational Books Nigeria Ltd. Kalajaiye, J.O.
(2008) Problems, Opportunities and Prospects of Book Publishing in Nigeria.
In Oso, L. etal (eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications: London.
Okilagwe O.A (2001).
Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Oso, L. Osunbiyi, B. and Biobaku L., (2008): Book Publishing.
A practical guide.
Lagos: African Resource Communications.
Lagos.
36 UNIT 5 BOOK PUBLISHING IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Book Publishing in Nigeria 3.2 Book Publishing Houses 3.3 Departments of Book Publishing Houses 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to the development and expansion of book publishing in Nigeria.
This is very important to you because this course is mainly for this purpose.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to  Know history of book publishing in Nigeria  Discuss departments in book publishing houses  Explain book publishing houses.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Book Publishing in Nigeria In Nigeria, the historical account of publishing revolves around the activities of the missionaries, colonial administration, and the anti-colonial struggle.
The role publishing played in spreading the Christian mission, publicizing the activities of the colonial rulers and sensitizing people against the evils of colonial administration is significant.
The history of publishing in Nigeria can be traced therefore to the first press in Nigeria, which the Presbyterian Mission established in Calabar in 1846.
The press was set up with the primary aim of providing Christian literature to the new converts.
In 1859 Henry Townsend established another press in Abeokuta that published the first newspaper in Nigeria.
IWE IROHIN FUN AWON ARA EGBA ATI YORUBA.
Henry Townsend 37 was of the Church Missionary Society (CMS) so his press also published Christian literature.
Herbert Macaulay established the first indigenous newspaper called the LAGOS DAILY NEWS in 1926.
The same year the DAILY TIMES OF NIGERIA was also established.
In 1949 Oxford University Press (OUP) established a sales outlet in Nigeria.
Thus the foreign based publishing houses such as (OUP) Macmillan, Longman, etc.
followed suit by publishing for African readers.
In 1956 indigenous authors/printers such as Onibonoje took advantage of the free education programme and the establishment of modern schools in Western Nigeria to publish their cram books and pamphlets.
They also undertook the distribution themselves.
In 1963 the strong presence of the local branch of foreign publishing houses like OUP was strongly felt in Nigeria.
Works like IJALA ARE ODE, a Yoruba poetry genre by Temitan were published.
In 1972, the Nigerian Enterprise Promotion decree, which stipulated that any company operating in Nigeria must be incorporated in Nigeria and must also have Nigerian directors, also deepened the indigenous participation in the publishing business.
Some of the indigenous publishing houses that emerged at the period include Fourth Dimension, Aromolaran, Illesanmi, Litramed Publication, etc.
The book publishing business has continued to wax stronger in Nigeria ever since.
Today, some of the book publishing houses are; Heineman Publishers, Spectrum Publishers, Kraft Books Publishers, Stirling – Horden Publishers, University Press Plc., Macmillan Press, Longman Publishers and so on.
3.2 Book Publishing Houses Many people are of the opinion that book publishing and printing is one and the same thing.
They cannot be any further from the truth.
Printing is the final part of book publishing.
The publisher is responsible for the production of the book right from the manuscript to the final publication.
The publisher is the head of a publishing house.
The publishing house is a formal organization that undertakes the business of book publishing as its main function.
The publishing house establishes formal systems of sourcing manuscripts, producing books and consequently marketing same.
38 Okpoko (2012:14) explained that publishing houses produce and distribute books to the audience.
Oso and Biobaku (2009:33) said that the prospect of a publishing house depends on the quality of manuscript published.
This is because publishing houses perform the function of (1) conceptualizing ideas about books (2) get manuscripts (3) edits the manuscripts (4) design the book (6) types the work (6) print the book (7) bind the book and (8) market the book.
Every publishing house usually has its marketing people who handle the promotion and distribution of all published books.
3.3 Departments of Book Publishing Houses Every publishing house has different departments and sections that handle different functions listed above.
Oso and Biobaku (2009:36) said a typical book publishing house has the following departments (a) editorial (b) human resource (c) finance and accounts (d) production (e) marketing  The editorial department develops books, acquires manuscript and assesses them.
It is saddled with the responsibility of planning and preparing books for production  Human Resource department is responsible for recruitment, development and welfare of all staff in the organization.
 Finance and Accounts department is responsible for managing the funds of the organization.
 Production department is responsible for printing all books submitted to the organization for publication.
 Marketing department is responsible for promotion and distribution of all published books.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have dealt with the meaning and scope of book publishing from the acquisition to the organizational structures.
This is for easy understanding of the book publishing business.
5.0 SUMMARY In this topic we explained the meaning of book publishing, types of books, objectives of books, history of book publishing generally and in Nigeria in particular.
39 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is book publishing?
2.
Explain the different types of books in Nigeria.
3.
How are books classified?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Kalajaiye, J.O.
(2008) Problems, Opportunities and Prospects of Book Publishing in Nigeria.
In Oso, L. etal (eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications: London.
Okpoko, J.
(2012) Understanding Book Publishing Zaria: ABU Press Limited Sowunmi, F. (2008) Book Indexing: Practice Techniques: in Oso, L. etal (eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications.
40 MODULE 2 PROFESSIONALS IN BOOK PUBLISHING INTRODUCTION The importance of book publishing to human development has led to the growth of training and professionalism in the society.
It has now become a skill acquisition scheme of life that every aspect of the community needs their services for daily activities.
OBJECTIVES In this module, the students will be exposed to the different experts involved in the business of publishing in the society.
The financial and economic aspects of book industry will be discussed and the challenges facing professionals in the industry will be examined.
This module has the following units Unit 1 - Professionals in Book Publishing Unit 2 - Economics of Book Publishing Unit 3 - Training the Requisite Personnel Unit 4 - Challenges of Book Publishing 41 UNIT 1 PROFESSIONALS IN BOOK PUBLISHING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Main Professionals in Book Publishing 3.2 Authors 3.3 Editors 3.4 Printers 3.5 Publishers 3.6 Book Sellers 3.7 Other Players in Book Publishing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Book Publishing is a professional activity and people trained in the different aspect of printing and publishing work together to produce books.
This unit introduces you to the most important players in the publishing business.
In this topic we will discuss the people who are involved in the production and distribution of books.
We will look at their areas of speciality and competence in book publishing.
2.0 0bjectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Mention the professionals in book publishing  Discuss the role of professionals in book publishing  Explain the functions these professionals in book publishing.
42 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Professionals in Book Publishing What is a professional?
Shoki cited in Ajibola et al (2008:57) reason that professional is often taken to mean expertise, the gurus of some profession or career.
A professional is one who professed knowledge or skill in a given profession or career.
These are people who are erudite in the profession of book publishing.
They possess the skills by virtue of the training they receive to publish books.
Smith (1989:7) identifies four partners in book publishing.
The four are skillful in their areas but must work with the others towards the publication of the printed document called “Book”.
These partners are: The Author 3.2 The Author: The process of book publishing begins from the author whose creative zeal enables him to conceptualize the ideas and thoughts that can be published.
This could be his personal experiences or professional knowledge, the predicament of his society, contents meant to educate and mobilize his people.
From his creative reasoning, he can also develop a manuscript.
The role of the Author as a book publishing professional is basically that of writing manuscripts and handling it to the publisher.
His roles also include being the one who conceives of the ideas and thoughts that are developed into manuscripts.
3.3 The Publisher: The development of the manuscript involves the professional input of the publisher also known as Editor who with an eagle eye painstakingly goes through the work, correcting errors, drawing the attention of the author to certain ambiguous words and sentences, and the need for clarification.
Aniyi, cited in Oso et al (2009:191) reason that “editing in the field of publishing is everything that is done to make a manuscript become an endearingly readable piece.
It is for this reason that we have the post of Chief Executive Officer of most publishing houses called Publisher.” Citing (Adesanoye, 1995) Aniyi notes that ‘editing includes what is done from the time a book is conceived until it is made available to the readers.
The job of an editor is to publish books.” Akinfenwa, cited in Oso et al (2009:334) explains that “an author is not an island.
He needs the professional service of the publisher: without the publisher an author cannot 43 be “.
The reverse is the case here because the publisher cannot be if an author is not available.
The role of the publisher as a book publishing professional includes: i.
Receiving the manuscripts from authors ii.
Subjecting the manuscripts to professional treatments like editing, whereby corrections in spellings, wrong use of words and phrases are effected so as to make the manuscripts publishable.
iii.
The publisher sometimes determines the number of illustrations and their sizes.
3.4 The Printer: The printer acts on the manuscripts by typesetting, binding, printing and returning same to the publisher.
The printer may undertake certain works on the book in the process of manufacturing.
Based on his relationship with the publisher no charges are charged the publisher.
These works may include designing the book, page layout, binding, type and other things necessary in the manufacturing process.
Smith (1989:12) notes that in countries with developed book industries, every publisher has a designer, either on payroll or available on a regular consulting basis.
This explains why the relationship between the printer and publisher allows the publisher to enjoy certain privileges.
The printer is the professional who gives life to the manuscript and makes it presentable to the public.
He receives the manuscript from the publisher and subjects it to the final production processes which include composing, binding and printing.
He also performs other roles like: i.
Relating with the author throughout the production process.
ii.
Undertaking on behalf of the publisher, though sometimes with charges, the design, layout, selection of paper, copy editing and proof reading.
3.5 The Bookseller: The bookseller provides the link between the publisher and the buyers usually bookshop owners.
The transaction usually allows the bookseller to earn a discount and sells at a price he deems fit, or a price prescribed by the publisher.
This is so that the price of the book is not unduly higher at the bookshop thereby slowing down purchase and reproduction.
The book seller occupies a crucial position in book publishing.
The aim of publishing most of the time is to sell and make profit.
The book seller is the gateway to profit making.
The bookseller’s role as a professional in book publishing is to receive for sale the published books.
The books are sold to him at a discount which allows him to charge 44 any price at the shop or the publisher determines how much the book should be sold for the following reasons: i.
So that the books are sold at a controlled price affordable to the buyers.
ii.
A reasonably favourable price range will speed up sales, increase the demand for the book which in turn will step up production.
All the professionals involved in book publishing play complementary role in making books available to readers.
3.6 Editor Biobaku and Akinjogbin (2009:43) explained the different types of editors involved in the process of book publishing.
These editors are: (a) Acquisition or development editor (b) Managing editor (c) Content editor (d) Copy editor, and (e) Graphic editor (a) Acquisition Editor is responsible for acquiring manuscripts for publication.
Such editor is to select manuscript from the available pool of manuscripts or to request for a manuscript on any topic from experts in that area.
He/she keep in touch with several authors and authors’ agents for special projects.
(b) Managing Editor is responsible for all the manuscript selected for publication.
He/she works with the author to ensure that necessary corrections and changes are made on the manuscript.
(c) Content Editor ensures that the manuscript is in line with current argument in the area in which the publication falls into.
For example, if the publication is in the area of nutrition, then the content editor should ensure that the work is in line with the current argument about nutrition.
(d) Copy Editor’s main responsibility is to make sure that the use of language in the manuscript is correct and apt.
(e) Graphic Editor provides relevant illustrations, pictures, drawings and diagrams that will enhance the understanding of the messages outside and inside the book.
45 This area of partnership in book publishing requires special skill in handling.
Each of the partners must have undergone special training to be able to perform in the profession.
3.7 Other Players in the Professionals There are other professions and players in book publishing that we need to explain their functions in the process of publishing.
They are: (a) Book Designers: This is a person who designs the book.
Togunwa (2009:238) asserted that the designer of a book must be able to create a design that should suitably convey the message of that book.
This is because for a book to effectively communicate, it must have to attract attention of readers, be easy to read and to make a lasting impression on the audience.
To perform his work effectively, book designer have to work with all other professions in the process of book publishing.
Togunwa (2009:239) listed three stages that a designer has to pass through for him/her before achieving a successful design: (i) He must understand some intervening factors which are referred to as design determinants.
(ii) He must understand that creating a design involves interplay of some working tools known as elements of design.
(iii) He must appreciate that designing is guided by rules known as principles of designs.
Therefore, book designers should design books for legibility, readability, clarity and intelligibility.
The designer usually employ elements such as body types, display types, photography, illustrations, colour, borders and rules and open space in the design of a book.
He also uses principles such balance and contrast, rhythm, proportion and unity in the design of a book.
“The designer’s purpose is to plan a book not only to look good but to present the author’s and illustrator’s ideas in the clearest and most intelligible way” (Smith, 1990:72).
All design books always create right atmosphere for proper interaction between the content of the books and the readers.
46 (b) Indexer: An indexer is a person who compiles in a systematical way locations of words, names and concepts in books.
Sowunmi (2009:269) says “the index provides immediate access to the important terms, concepts and names scattered throughout the book, quickly and efficiently”.
He differentiates between human indexer and automatic indexing software programmers in the computers and concluded that indexing is an efficient way of tracing information.
Indexers add value to the books.
(c) Readers: These are end users of all books and therefore are the most important players in the process of book publishing.
Authors and publishers normally consider readers and readership trends when embarking on the business of publishing.
This is because if readers do not buy books publishers will not publish them and authors will not write them.
Biobaku and Akinjogbon (2009:46) listed the different types of readers to include: (i) Bibliographies: Who are the most enthusiastic readers who always devote time to reading many books in a year.
(ii) Casual: Who are readers that enjoy reading but read only few books a year.
(iii) The Required Readers are those who read extensively but read only what they need for their studies or jobs.
Most textbooks sales and classic literature depend entirely on required readers as students at all level.
4.0 Conclusion It is important that we know the people who are involve in book publishing and what each of them do in the process of book publication.
This is what this unit has done.
5.0 Summary In this unit different professionals such as authors, printers, publishers, booksellers and the different editors are discussed.
This is for you to know what they do in the process of book publishing: 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
List professionals in book publishing.
2.
What are the functions of book sellers?
47 7.0 References/Further Reading Okpobo, J.
(2012) Understanding Book Publishing Zaria: ABU Press Limited Adesanoye F.A.
and Ojeniyi A.
(eds.)(2005).
Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heineman Educational Books Nigeria Ltd. Adesanoye, F.A.
(1991) “Professional Book Publishing: The Principles and Practice” Umoh S.O (ed).
Tropical Issues in Communication Arts Uyo: Modern Business Press Ltd. Okilagwe O.A (2001).
Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. 48 UNIT 2 ECONOMICS OF BOOK PUBLISHING Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Economics of Book Publishing 3.2 Cost of Book Publishing 3.3 Income of Book Publishing 3.4 Types of Organisation 3.5 Growth Opportunities for Publishing Organizations 3.6 Challenges Facing Book Publishing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Furthing 1.0 Introduction The concept of economics of book publishing presupposes that book publishing is a profit making business.
Publishing apart from the fact that it brings knowledge to the reader, is also a means of livelihood and self – realization for all the professionals involved in the business.
However, the focus of economics in any endeavor is on managing resources.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define economics of Book Publishing  Discuss cost of book publishing  Discuss Income of book publishing  Types of publishing firms  Identify growth opportunities for publishing organizations  Discuss challenges facing publishing organizations 49 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Economics of Book Publishing Economics of book publishing is the management and utilization of scarce resources in the production of books.
It engages all the factors of production – labour, capital and entrepreneur toward the manufacture of books.
It involves all that is done towards a profitable book publishing.
Osunbiyi, cited in Oso (2009:56) notes that ‘publishing is an exercise that involves a lot of resources.
The publisher has to utilize financial resources to produce books and market them”.
This means that investing money in publishing books is done with the expectation that profit benefit will result.
In this case prudent and careful utilization of resources in publishing is important.
Smith (1989:24) is of the opinion that in book publishing one must consider the following: i.
Cost ii.
Income iii.
Cost versus income 3.2 Cost of Book Publishing This is what is to be expended or what it takes to get something done.
It could be cash, materials or time.
Anything that is incurred to get something of interest done can be referred to as cost.
Smith (1989:24) identifies three groups into which costs falls: (a) Editorial preparation costs: This is what the publisher expends on author, salaries or fees to the illustrator, editor, designer, translator and any other thing that has to do with text moderation.
(b) Physical manufacturing costs: This is payment to the printer, manufacturers of paper, ink, cloth, glue and thread and other material used in manufacturing.
(c) Marketing and Distribution Costs: This takes care of sales representatives, advertisers, and promoters Smith also identified other kind of costs as: (a) Automatically varying costs (b) Unvarying costs (c) Promotion costs (d) Overhead costs.
50 (a) Automatically varying cost: According to Smith, these are costs that automatically increase for a given book if the number of copies is increased.
These includes: (i) Royalty payments to the author, usually based on number of copies sold but sometimes a flat amount based on the size of the edition printed.
Of course, this means that the more the number of copies sold, the more royalty the author earns.
(ii) Payments to the printer for press work and binding.
Cost of this will also increase as the number of presswork increases.
(b) Unvarying Costs: These costs do not vary no matter the number of the books printed.
These includes: (i) Editorial preparation: Editing, illustration and cover design are all parts of editorial preparation whose cost will not vary with the number of copies printed.
(ii) Composition: This includes the typesetting, plate making and other stages in the making of book.
(c) Promotion Costs: This includes cost expended on items prepared to enhance the sale of the book.
Such items like fliers and handbills, charges on hire of hall where the book promotion takes place and so on.
(d) Overhead Costs: These are costs on very important aspects of running the publishing business.
They include rent, electricity charges, administrative costs like stationary and others.
Usually, in a publisher – printer relationship, cost of copies of books reduces when there are more copies to be printed.
The quality required to be published is usually used to bargain for low cost.
However, costs for certain services like typesetting, cover design and so on do not vary with the quantity of copies.
Therefore, the higher or lower the quantity of copies the publisher pays the same cost.
3.3 Income of Book Publishing This is a major consideration in any business and publishing is not an exception.
To determine whether a business is worthwhile, one must consider the income.
The income is weight against all deducted costs incurred in the process of production.
It is expected that when all expenses are deducted from the amount generated from sales 51 the actual income (profit) will be realized.
The interaction between the manufacturing cost of a book and its selling price is a major determinant of the profit expected.
Factors That Determine Income Smith (1989:27) identifies four major factors a publisher must have in mind in calculating possible income: (a) Selling price (b) Number of copies sold (c) Discount to booksellers and other purchasers.
(d) Incidental cost of marketing (a) Selling Price: The relation of the manufacturing cost of a book to the selling price is critical to calculating income.
All expenses incurred in the process of manufacturing must be taken note of and deducted from the gross so that a net income can be arrived at.
(b) Number of Copies Sold: The number of copies sold also determines the income.
Care must therefore be taken to ensure a reasonable quantity of the book is sold and less is given away as complementary copies.
If the left over are much and many are given away, the impact will be heavy on income.
(c) Discount to Booksellers: A number of people receive discounts from the publisher on purchase of the book.
If room is not created for discount when price of the book is being determined, income will fall.
(d) Incidental Cost of Marketing: Some unplanned and unbudgeted cost may arise in the process of sale.
Commission for carriages and sales representatives are examples of incidental cost of marketing.
This cost may not have been part of the budget plan but because marketing processes bring them up, they must be met.
Cost Versus Income: The consideration of cost and income is very crucial to the market performance of a book.
The relationship between cost and income in the life of a product is not just to create an avenue for profit though it is crucial too.
Questions like, how can I get the best product sold for an attractive price?
Can I compromise quality materials and yet have an attractive product?
If I use the best quality materials can the product move fast in the market, considering the need to turnover within a favourable marketing period?
The interaction between cost and income is very vital to the quality of books produced and what is expected as income.
52  It is contemplation arising from the romance between cost and income that led Smith (1989:28) to reason that “the real test of publishing wisdom comes when you try to fit the two together.
You would like to charge more for the book, but the higher the selling price might decrease the number of sale, you would like to encourage booksellers by allowing more discount, but that would reduce the sales income per copy sold, you would like to use cheaper paper, but the less attractive book may be so much less appealing to the public that your loss sales may be greater than your saving of expenses”.
A careful consideration of Smith’s reasoning will reveal that the concept of economics of book publishing is tied to considering how much goes into manufacturing a book and what comes out of it.
This includes non compromise of quality and a fair and attractive charge.
3.4 Types of Organisations Olajide (2005:36) Listed and explained the following forms of business units that operate in the publishing industry: 1.
One-man business, other wise called sole proprietorship.
2.
Partnership or its modified form called joint ventures.
3.
Private limited liability companies.
4.
Public limited liability companies (Quoted and Unquoted).
Sole Proprietorship This is the simplest of all business organizations because it is a sole proprietor.
The feature of such a formation is that the same person is not only the owner but is often the manager and may be the workforce as well.
Examples of sole proprietorship in the publishing industry are: freelance writers, authors and publishing consultants that are not incorporated.
The major disadvantages of this business unit are as follows:  The liabilities of the proprietor are unlimited.
 The business activities are often quite limited  The business normally dies with the proprietor.
Partnership This is very uncommon in the publishing industry.
However, in future publishing consultants entering into partnership as often done by medical doctors, lawyers, chartered accountants, etc.
may be witnesses.
53 Private Limited Liability These types of companies are in the majority in the Nigeria publishing industry.
They are companies: Whose membership is not more than 50 excluding past and present employees; and that restrict the transfer of their shares.
Public Limited Liability Companies These are companies that (i) Have more than fifty members (excluding past and present employees) and which (ii) Do not restrict the transfer of their shares.
These companies can be identified by the abbreviation PLC that is always added to their names.
Some public limited liability companies have their share quoted on the Nigerian Stock Exchange examples are University Press Plc.
and Longman Nigeria Plc.
There are however some public limited liability companies whose shares are not quoted.
The only example so far within the Nigeria Publishers Association is Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Plc.
Osunbiyi (2009:55) is of the view that these publishing firms analyse their environment to ensure that they know their strengths and weaknesses.
In doing so, each organizations do engage in (a) Product Analysis: Each publisher evaluates the titles to publish in relation to the market and the area to publish.
The titles to publish must be unique in terms of quality as compared to other titles in the market.
(b) Consumer Analysis: The publisher should evaluate the target audience of the title to be published by his/her organization before publishing such titles.
A thorough understanding of the characteristics of the target audience as groups, individuals or communities will be necessary for the success of the organization.
(c) Market Analysis: The publisher need to have adequate market information regarding book titles, sales rate and places where competitors thrives.
Such information will help the publisher to strategise for effective sales returns and profit-making for the publisher.
54 3.5 Growth Opportunities for Publishing Organisation Osunbiyi (2009:67) explained that every publishing firm aspires to grow.
Such an aspiration is expected to be in line with the steps to efficiently and effectively manage the resources for a desired goal.
Therefore, the organizations have to identify and explore every potential growth outlet.
There are three classes of growth opportunities available for publishing organizations.
These are: (1) Intensive Growth: When an organization has not maximized the prospects available for the markets of its present titles.
This can be achieved through market penetration, market development and publication of new titles.
(a) Market Penetration: This is when a publishing company embarks on getting a new market for its present titles.
Such efforts normally aimed at increasing sales of the existing titles.
This can be achieved through various book promotion strategies such as advertising the book, distributing samples of the book to teachers, organizing workshops for teachers and other stakeholders, and getting the books adopted for use in schools by relevant agencies of government.
(b) Market Development: This is seeking increased sales for backlist titles by taking them to new markets.
A publishing firm can appoint sales personnel, opening new offices in areas where the books have not been promoted before.
(c) Publication of New Titles: The publishing company can increase its sales by publishing new titles which will attract new readers Osunbiyi (2009:68) also listed and explained other growth operation such as: (2) Integrated Growth: The growth can take place through the following: (a) Backward Integration: This is when a publishing organization set up subsidiaries to engage in allied businesses such as selling printing papers or the establishment of a commercial printing press.
(b) Forward Integration: This includes establishment of bookshops, acting as other publishers’ agent and engaging in book importation.
(c) Horizontal Integration: This entails setting up another publishing company but with different focus or specialization.
55 The last set of growth opportunities explained by Osunbiyi is: (3) Diversification Growth: Diversification growth can be concentric diversification or horizontal diversification.
(a) Concentric Diversification: This means producing materials that have similar goals to the existing past titles that require similar promotional strategies as past titles.
(b) Horizontal Diversification: Horizontal diversification entails the production of materials whose usefulness are complementary to those of the publishers’ existing titles such as workbook, teachers’ guide and other supplementary titles which students who have already brought the publishers’ text also require.
3.6 Challenges Facing Book Publishing in Nigeria Publishing organizations in Nigeria are facing some challenges.
Apart from financial problems which they face, Okpoko (2012:69) outline other major challenges to include: 1.
Absence of Qualified Manpower Lack of qualified manpower in the field of book publishing industry in Nigeria is one issue.
This may be because publishing as an academic discipline is growing slowly probably because few Nigerian Universities or higher institutions offer publishing as separate course at degree or even HND level.
However, publishing as new course is being introduced into the curriculum of mass communication even though it is not yet an autonomous discipline.
2.
Finance Publishing is a capital intensive business which requires a lot of money to survive.
Many authors cannot publish their works because of high cost.
Publishers cannot afford to publish for some authors on the basis of royalty.
There are competing jobs demanding finance too which the publishers will not do on their own without financial assistance.
The Nigerian publishing industry is faced with acute financial shortage which is affecting the growth of the industry.
3.
Poor Reading Habit Poor reading culture in the country dissuades publishers from investing in book publishing.
This is coupled with a high level of illiteracy in the country.
Publishing can only thrive when a majority of the population has interest in reading books.
56 4.
Production Cost Book publishing is an expensive venture in the country as a result of high cost of publishing and printing materials such as paper, ink, machinery and equipment etc.
This makes the cost of book to be very high.
5.
Inadequate Channels of Distribution Channels of book distribution are old libraries and the existing ones are poorly equipped to keep many books.
Bookshops are very few and small in sizes hence many books cannot stored in such shops.
6.
Limited Market Many publishers in the country have narrow and limited scope of market for their products.
Absence of book clubs, little number of government and private libraries, little number of bookshops and poor infrastructural facilities, has limited the extent of the market for the Nigerian publishers.
7.
Foreign Exchange Problem Foreign exchange is difficult to get because of government stringent regulation.
It is difficult to import equipment and materials needed to facilitate book publishing especially materials that cannot be sourced within the country.
8.
Piracy Piracy is one of the problems facing book publishing in the country.
Many people are stealing the intellectual property of authors thereby discouraging authors from writing because they do not always get the benefits of their intellectual properties.
9.
Problems of Copyright Law Most of the laws relating to publishing are outdated and no longer in tune with current realities.
This gave rise to piracy, plagiarism and other problems which are discouraging book publishing in the country.
10.
Lack of Motivation and Interest There is lack of motivation by the government to intellectuals and literary experts in the country.
There are no incentives by the government or conducive atmosphere in our educational institutions to motivate writing.
In fact industries are not protected from the activities of multi-national publishing companies that drive the indigenous publishing companies out of operation.
Writing is not lucrative in Nigeria as no one can make a living through writing alone.
57 4.0 Conclusion This unit explains the processes and challenges of book publishing from the perspectives of cost, income and opportunities available for growth of the industries.
5.0 Summary In this unit, economic, cost and income of book publishing were explained.
The growth opportunities and challenges facing book publishing were discussed.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Explain different types of publishing organisations.
2.
What are the challenges facing book publishing in Nigeria?
7.0 Refrences/Further Reading Okilagwe O.A (2001).
Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Okpobo, J.
(2012) Understanding Book Publishing Zaria: ABU Press Limited Kalajaiye, J.O.
(2008) Problems, Opportunities and Prospects of Book Publishing in Nigeria.
In Oso, L. etal (eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications: London.
Adesanoye F.A.
(1991) “Book editing and publishing problems in Nigeria” Umoh S.O (ed).
Tropical Issues in Communication Arts Uyo: Modern Business Press Ltd. Adesanoye F.A.
and Ojeniyi A.
(eds.)(2005).
Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heineman Educational Books Nigeria Ltd. Adesanoye, F.A.
(1991) “Professional Book Publishing: The Principles and Practice” Umoh S.O (ed).
Tropical Issues in Communication Arts Uyo: Modern Business Press Ltd. 58 UNIT 3 TRAINING THE REQUISITE PERSONNEL Contents 0.0 Introduction 1.0 Objectives 2.0 Main Content 2.1 Definition of Training 2.2 Origin of Personnel Training for Book Publishing 2.3 The Role of APNET in Personal Training 2.4 Importance of Training in Book Publicity 2.5 Promotion of Professionalism in Book Publish 3.0 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 6.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Trianing the required personnel in book publishing touches every aspect of the book industry.
It is very important because there is the clamour for professionalism in the publishing field generally in the world and Nigeria in particular.
This unit introduces you to the importance of training different manpower required in the profession.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define the basic concepts of training.
 Explain the history of training in Nigeria.
 Discuss the role of APNET in personnel training.
 Enumerate the importance of professionalism in book publishing.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Training?
To train is to impart certain knowledge and skill on an individual or individuals to make them behave in a given way or to exhibit certain character.
Fasemore, cited in Adesanoye and Ojeniyi (2005:220) explains that the most basic form of training is by 59 induction or through parental/family influence or practice.
A child imbibes the parents’ cultural habits and mores through mimicry and repetition in speech, language, etc”.
This tells us that training is a process and it allows the trainee to acquire skills which enables him to exhibit certain behaviour.
Who is a Requisite Personnel?
A requisite personnel is one who is needed to carry out certain task or responsibility.
Such a person is “required” of course to exhibit peculiar behaviour.
Training the requisite personnel therefore refers to the process of imparting knowledge and skills on the individual to enable him carry out certain activities knowledgeably.
In our case here, it is for him to carry out book publishing activities.
3.2 Origin of Personnel Training for Book Publishing in Nigeria Fasemore cited in Adesamoye and Ojeniyi (2005:220) explains that book publishing started in Africa (Nigeria inclusive) to satisfy the demands of multinational companies which opened branches in their colonial territories to further their marketing interest.
As a result we had branches of Longman, Hachette, Cambridge and Oxford University Press.
They promoted publication and titles of the parent companies and ensured that their local employees followed the guidelines and procedures of London, Paris, Oxford or Lisbon.
This can be said to be the beginning of training in book publishing, because if the parent corporation insisted that their guidelines and procedures of publication and title must be followed it means that people must be equipped with skills in the procedures and guidelines of publication.
Following this background, and to ensure required colonial standards were maintained, (Fasemore), notes that “the African employees (usually, Sales Representatives or Branch Managers) were occasionally (once a year) sent to Headquarters for one or two weeks briefing (or courses) which were essentially aimed at schooling them properly in house styles and procedures of the parent companies.
This lasted between the early 40s and the late 80s.
3.3 The Role of APNET in Personnel Training Coordinated publishing training began with the establishment of the African Publishers Network on February 17, 1992 in Harare, Zimbabwe.
Fasemore cited in Adesanoye and Oyeniyi (2005:221) notes that APNET activities were to be funded by a few donor organizations and government agencies, which shared its vision “to transform African people through books”.
APNET’s mission statement according to Fasemore was “to strengthen African Publishing through training, networking and trade 60 promotion, to fully meet Africa’s need for quality books relevant to African social, political, economic and cultural realities”.
The mission statement of APNET clearly indicated that training in publishing in Africa would experience a new dawn for the emergence of skillful African publishers of books.
Because of this mission, APNET established a publishing institute known as African Publishing Institute (API).
API was established in 1993.
It designed a training programme to cater for the needs of the publishing business.
It has well informed objectives which are: (a) To equip African Publishing personnel with relevant, up-to-date skills for the production of quality book and reading materials; (b) To familiarize African publishers with the latest marketing skills, which will enable them to compete favourably in the international book trade; and (c) To raise a corps of African publishing trainers and develop a database of APNET resource persons.
These objectives were reflected in further activities of APNET like development of materials for training which include the API curriculum, training manuals and database of trainers.
Effects of APNET Training Programme on Publishing in Africa.
The effects of APNET training programme - It has provided the needed skill acquisition and up date to practicing publishers.
It introduces new certificate courses in some African Universities to provide opportunity for learning in higher degrees in relevant requisite skills in publishing.
- It has also created a database of publishing trainers around Africa who can on their own pursue the business of training in publishing.
It has also provided a rich curriculum design towards meeting the needs of African publishers who may want to conduct training seminar and workshops.
All these endowments have led to the production of manuals in book publishing such as publishing procedures, marketing, etc.
61 3.4 Need for Profession / Importance of Training in Book Publishing Okilagwe (2009:4) cited Hassan who said: Book Publishing at the University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana was informed by the following guidelines: (a) It should be comprehensive so that it provides a professional background for all the functionaries in the book industry viz, authors, translators and editors, book designers, illustrators and printers, book-sellers and distributors and publishers.
(b) It should be accommodating so that the entrants to the course may be able to specialize in a few important branches of their choice and not necessarily in all.
(c) It should be flexible so as to cater for needs and situations.
(d) It should be work-oriented and have proper provision for practical work and apprenticeship… Based on the above guidenlines, the course covers different modules as follows: 1st year – foundation course in Book Publishing, 2nd – 3rd years – any two of the following options: (1) Editing (2) Book Designing and Illustration or Typesetting, Printing and Binding and (3) Marketing, Sales Promotion and Distribution In Nigeria, the awareness has been developed and the zeal to give professionalism in publishing a solid footing was enkindled by the committee on the structure and course content of the Book Publishing Course at Yaba College of Technology, Lagos.
This was due to the recognition that: (a) In general most of the people entering the publishing industry in Nigeria do not possess any formal training in the profession due mainly to the non-availability of any local traning course in the country; (b) Lack of formal professional training is a serious drawback and a contributory factor in the low level of productivity and efficiency in our publishing industry; (c) Most publishers in the country now send their trainees to overseas institutions with the attendant adverse effect on our foreign exchange situation and limited relevance of such overseas training; (d) A local training programme will provide the necessary comprehensive, informed, articulated training that adequately meets the needs of a modern publisher.
62 3.5 Promotion of Professsionalism in Book Publishing The current trends in promoting professionalism in publishing have been made possible by a number of factors such as: (a) The fact that book publishing which has been traditionally regarded as a profession requiring little formal study has moved into the industrial age.
With the recent development of electronic devices, book publishing methods and techniques have undergone tremendous changes.
(b) The fact that book publishing has become an academic discipline.
(c) The fact that the theoretical approach combined with intensive practical work are most suitable and effective methods of trianing the book industry personnel; (d) The fact that in both developed and developing world, book publishing has been integrated into the curriculum of institutions of higher learning (Hassan, 1988).
Book publishing is a full-fledged profession although at various stages of development in different countries of the world.
It is highly sensitive to the current and rapid academic and technological developments, and always delicately prone to advance according to the demands made on it by the environment which it services.
Therefore, in order to effectively promote professionalism in the industry, personnel who should be able to “maintain themselves at the forefront of changes both technological and structural taking place in publishing and related industries should be tained”.
Thus, it is mandatory that the developing nation’s particularly African nations urgently consider for implementation the recommendations that: (a) The general technical competence be improved through workshops, in-service training and particularly through the establishment of printing schools with high standard and modern equipment; (b) The universities with schools of library studies to introduce some forms of training for authorship; (c) Some African universities, particularly those already offering degrees in library science, add courses on publishing to their curricular so as to help establish a group of young, progressive and professional publishers from which indigenous houses could recruit new staff; and (d) Universities and other educational institutions in the Africa region should, in association with the relevant professional associations, offer training courses for book production personnel such as editors, managers, publishers, ilustrators, distributors, designers etc.
(Hassan, 1988).
63 In the United States of America, there are many academic institutions and professional organizations that offer publishing training programmes.
4.0 Conclusion Training is an integral part of book publishing and all publishers always ensure that they employ qualified personel.
This unit gives an overview of such training programme in Nigeria.
5.0 Summary This unit explained training requisite for book publishing and training programme in Nigerian book publishing industry.
The need for professionalism in book publishing was also examined.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is the importace of training in book publishing?
2.
Why is professionalism important in book publishing?
7.0 References/Further Reading Adesanoye F.A.
and Ojeniyi A.
(eds.)(2005).
Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heineman Educational Books Nigeria Ltd. Okwilagwe O.A (2001).
Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. 64 UNIT 4 CHALLENGES IN BOOK PUBLISHING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Challenges in Book Publishing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Every profession has challenges that it encounter in the practice of such profession and book publishing is no exception.
This unit focuses on some of the challenges that book publishers face.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will know  The different challenges facing book publishing.
 The need to solve these problems.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Challenges in Book Publishing Any human endeavor is likely to encounter certain challenges in its conduct.
Book publishing is not an exception.
Thomas cited in Adesanoye and Ojeniyi 2005:144 summarize the problems of the book publishing industry as: (a) The lack of a reading audience outside the ‘school book’ and ‘recommended list’ (b) Inadequate technical expertise in the various stages of the publishing process; (c) Lack of confidence and trust by authors in the production, distribution, marketing and royalty accounting capabilities of local publishers; and (d) The high costs of local manufacturers of books in the absence of local sources of inputs and the presence of unfavourable exchange rates, import taxes and tariffs.
Kalejaiye in Oso, et al (2008:72) added the following problems.
(e) Finance 65 (f) Piracy: among others already cited above by Akin Thomas.
Let us look at these problems as challenges of book publishing.
(a) Lack of a reading audience outside the “school book” and “recommended list”.
Nigeria among other nations is known to have a poor reading culture and this affected the market for book publishing.
Tiamiyu in Adesanoye (2005:146) citing Adegoke observed that the “majority of people who are literate hardly read for pleasure.
Students for example, tend to read just to pass their examinations.
Many hardly read books outside discipline (sic) except when they are compelled” This means that one can only measure people’s attitude to reading within the context of compulsion either to prepare for exams or as a training requirement.
(b) Inadequate technical expertise in the various stages of the publishing process.
The process of publishing requires the expert participation of the author, assessors, publishers, marketers etc.
It is deplorable that most of these experts lack the skill in their various areas and the result is, according to Kalajaiye (2005) “badly written, badly edited and poorly produced books in the market place”.
Kalajaiye blame this situation partly on government for not putting in place well thorough manpower training and development programmes for the book publishing industry.
(c) Lack of confidence and trust by authors in the production, distribution, marketing and royalty accounting capabilities of local publishers.
Tamiyu (2005) pointed out that there is mutual suspicion among other players.” For instance, authors carry the false impression of the publishers.
Many of them believe that publishers make a lot of money but give so little as royalty and this makes them to demand unrealistic charges.” This situation constitutes a major challenge to book publishing.
It has caused many publishing efforts to be abandoned because individualism rather than synergy in the process has come to play.
(d) High costs of local manufacturing of books in the absence of local sources and inputs and the presence of unfavourable exchange rates, import taxes and tariffs.
According to Kalajaiye (2005) the economy of the country is in a parlous state.
Government policies have never been favourable to the real sector of the economy.
Policies like SAP – Structural Adjustment Programme, SFEM – Second Tier Foreign Exchange Market, abolition of import License Scheme were not publisher friendly.
Kalajaiye and Akangbe cited in Kalajaiye 2005 reasoned that VAT – Value Added Tax worsen the problem of equipment acquisition.
High tariff charged on imported printing materials such as ink, plate, film, paper etc.
also 66 constitute a major challenge to book publishing in the country.
One can reason with Kalajaiye and Akangbe because if so much money is expended on publishing a book it means that the cost of the book will be relatively high.
This is likely to affect demand for the book.
(e) The activities of second-hand book sellers is also a major challenge because new copies are hardly patronized as copies already purchased from the market are been handed down to new users instead of buying newly published books.
This can cause stagnation in the book publishing business.
(f) Finance: closely related to (e) above is the issue of finance.
The cost involved in setting up a book publishing company is enormous and outside the reach of most qualified publishers.
Costs of office accommodation, procurement of machinery and stationery etc.
are high and unaffordable from the purchasers’ perspective.
Most literate readers cannot afford certain books of interest to them, partly because they are low income earners and cannot simply afford to buy a book in the face of pressure from other demands.
(g) Piracy: This is the worst of all publishing related crimes.
Perpetrators of this act benefit free of charge from publishers efforts.
Piracy is the unauthorized copying and sale of books.
Overtime publishers suffer great losses through piracy.
It becomes so frustrating when a publisher does not make much profit from his efforts, yet others are making fortune from it.
All the problems discussed poses serious challenges on the book publishing business.
Unless conscious efforts are made towards addressing them, minimal progress will be recorded in the business.
The publishers through their associations can prevail on government to intervene in the economic and social environment (piracy and low reading interest) of book publishing.
4.0 Conclusion The different types of challenges facing the book publishing industry have been explained in this unit.
The essense is for you to know and be prepare to face such challenges in your career in the industry.
5.0 Summary This unit has treated professionals in book publishing and laid out the roles/functions of the professionals involved in book publishing.
It also discussed the economics of book 67 publishing, training the requisite personnel and challenges encountered in book publishing.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Explain the importance of professionals in book publishing 2.
In publishing a book what would be the functions of professionals involved.
3.
Discuss the challenges in book publishing in cognizance with the situation in Nigeria.
7.0 References/Further Readings Adesanoye F.A.
and Ojeniyi A.
(eds.)(2005).
Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heineman Educational Books Nigeria Ltd. Fasemore, A.
(2005) Training Requisite Book Publishing Personnel: Challenges and Prospects, in Adesanoye, F.A.
& Oyeniyi, A.
(eds) Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria).
Kalajaiye, J.O.
(2008) Problems, Opportunities and Prospects of Book Publishing in Nigeria.
In Oso, L. etal (eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications: London.
Osunbiyi, B.
(2008) The Economics of Book Publishing: in Oso L. etal (eds): Book Publishing” a Practical Guide (2008): Mushin: African Resource Communications London.
Sowunmi, F. (2008) Book Indexing: Practice Techniques: in Oso, L. etal (eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications.
Tiamiyu M. (2005) “Prospects of Nigerian Book Publishing in the Electronic Age” in in Adesanoye, F.A.
& Oyeniyi, A.
(eds) Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria).
68 MODULE 3 BOOK PUBLISHING PROCEDURE INTRODUCTION This topic will look at the process of publishing books from conceptualizing the idea of a book to writing and producing manuscripts for publication.
OBJECTIVES The aim of this module is for students to be exposed to the skill of Writing books for publication and to know how to acquire and assess manuscripts.
The knowledge of editing and designing books for publication will also be discussed.
The essence of book indexing and production will also be examined.
This module has the following units Unit 1 Writing Books for Publication Unit 2 Manuscript Acquisition and Assessment Unit 3 Book Editing Unit 4 Book Design and Layout Unit 5 Book Indexing and Production 69 UNIT 1: WRITING BOOK FOR PUBLICATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Book 3.2 Writing 3.3 Publishing 3.4 Writing for Publishing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference 1.0 Introduction Since man sought a way of documenting his thoughts, and communicating the same to his peers, children and friends, the imperatives of writing and writing on something evolved.
Writing can be traced to the ancient Egyptian, whose hieroglyphics or sacred inscription – a form of picture writing-accounts for the first forms of writing known to man.
These inscriptions were carved and painted on stone walls pictorally to depict a story.
The phoenicians, a people reputed for their extensive trading and sea expedition in the mediterranean, were known to have inventing writing with 24 letters.
The word alphabet – aleph and bet – were derived from the first two Phoenician letters.
All these forms of writing however needed a surface to find expression.
The written material, as it is known in the contemporary times, did not have its current format.
Writing was first done on stone, walls, tablets of stone as in the mosaic era, wood and bamboo especially by the Chinese, pieces of clothes and consequently paper.
Books are good sources of knowledge.
It is important to know how these books are written and published.
This unit focuses on these apsects of book publishing.
70 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students are expected to know the following: (i) Writing books for publication (ii) Manuscript assessment and acquisition (iii) Book editing (iv) Book design and layout (v) Book indexing and production 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Book A book is generally an organised document containing printed ideas and knowledge.
Akingbola cited in Ajibola et al (2008:50) supports this description of a book.
She sees a book as a collection of written or printed matter consisting of pages bound in volume for ease handling and storage.
She further explained that, a book has either a paper or hard cover with title and author shown.
Being an organized document, the contents are organized that readers are guided on where and how to locate information they need through the help of pages and numbering.
Information about the author, publishers, year and town or city of publication is equally captured.
Books inform, entertain and educate in a variety of ways.
The book has gone through a metamorphosis over the years.
First writing was on stone, wood, bamboo, clothes and then paper.
In modern times the book has been defined by the Macmillian English Dictionary as “a set of printed pages fastened together inside a cover that may contain a story, information, poems or other forms of writing”.
The Longman Dictionary of contemporary English explains that a book is a set of printed pages that are held together in a cover so that you can read them”.
Chambers Twentieth Century Dictionary says “a book is a collection of sheets of paper etc.
bound together or made into a roll, either printed, written on, or blank”.
The DK illustrated Oxford Dictionary sees it as “a written or printed work consisting of pages fixed together along one side and bound in covers; a literary composition intended for publication; a bound set of blank sheets for writing on’ …a main division of a literary work or of the Bible.” 71 Akingbola cited in Ajibola (2008:50) supports this description of a book.
This author sees a book as a collection of written or printed matter consisting of pages bound in volume for ease of handling and storage.
Akingbola further explains that a book has either a paper or hard cover with title and author shown.
Being an organised document the contents are arranged such that readers are guided on where and how to locate information they need through the help of pages and numbering.
Information about the author, publisher, year and town or city of publication are equally captured.
Books inform eterntain and educate in a variety of ways.
These definitions though very much a yard stick for describing a book does not draw flacks from critics as Stockman, Bengston, and Repo (2002) tells us however that : “there is no unambiguous definition of what a book is”.
The above definition of a book as you might have noticed draws its strenght from the outward physical appearance of the book.
Lai Oso et al (2008) posit that: “these ambiguous definitions of what to regard as books, have not only been confusing to individuals and institutions over the years, but have also regularly confused even nations and professionals in the trade.
For instance in the Annual Book Statistics for 1998 – 1999 compiled by the Suomen Kustannysyhdistys (Finnish Book Publishers Association SKY) all printed matters sold at 8% VAT are classified under the heading of books.
Some nations, institutions and libraries just simply take all publications having International Standard Book Number (ISBN) as books.
For example, most book databases in Finland are constructed using ISBN as a unique search for them.
The United National Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has come up with its own definition or explanation of book.
UNESCO “for statistical purposes” defines a book as “a non periodical printed publication that consists of at least 49 pages, not counting the covers.” 72 We can now see the descripancies involved in the definition of a book as some view it through sales, pages, size, etc.
However, a most concise definition of a book is given by the Encyclopaedia Britanica as “a written (or printed) message of considerable length, meant for public circulation and recorded on materials that are light yet durable enough to afford comparatively easy portability”.
3.2 Writing What is writing?
Writing is a kind of documentation done through graphics representation of symbols.
It is communication whereby, human thoughts, ideas and feelings are represented by symbols.
The symbols are presented in such a way that meaningfully expresses the idea conceived of in the human mind.
Encarta Encyclopaedia cited in Adikpo and Ihwa (2009:24) explains that writing is a form of human communication by means of a set of visible marks that are related by convention to some particular structural level of language.
Of course, the presentation of thoughts by means of representation follows an organised pattern to enhance readability and understanding.
First the symbols selected to represent thoughts are organised into syntax and sentences and through the sentences, human thoughts are expessed by the one who conceives the thoughts and understood by the reader.
Writing is what generally defines the concept of a book.
Writing centers around three stages.
First, the idea, message or content must be conceived of.
Secondly, the concepted idea is put in writing.
Thirdly, writing the idea may call for restructuring.
In the first instance, the writer thinks up an idea of both personal and public interest.
In some cases the idea is of purely personal interest but the author wishes to share with the public.
In the second stage, the idea is put in writing with the help of sentences and paragraphs that best describe and presents the idea.
Thirdly sentences, words or phrases used may not support the main ideas in the writing therefore, they may be eliminated resulting in the restructuring of the writing.
Adikpo and Ihwa (2009:29) pointed out three stages involved in writing.
These include: conception of ideas (inventing), writing and rewriting.
Each of these plays significant role in the overall perspective of the writing.
3.3 Publishing What is publishing?
Publishing is the process involved in bringing to the knowledge of the public; learning, entertainment and informative materials.
Okwilagwe cited in Akingbola (2008:49) explains that publishing activities involve the manufacturing of newspapers, magazines, books, newsletters, journals, reports and many other printed 73 materials.
To publish is to make public what ideas, opinions and messages that have been conceptualised, organized and developed by an individual or group of individuals for the purpose of sharing with others.
However contemporary thinking does not want to isolate publishing to the printed matter in any book or publication.
The thinking is that good content alone cannot make a good book.
Many books have excellent content but are viewed as ‘sub standard’ because of the finishing of the printed material.
Instances abound where the text of such books are hardly legible, or because of the poor binding the books seem to be falling apart before it gets to the hands of the end users.
Most times, these problems can be traced to the “self publisher syndrome”.
This is a situation where, the author in order to maximize profit tries to publish his own works.
This is why modern thinkers frown at self publishing no matter the enormity of the gains inherent there in.
They are rather encouraged to enlist the services of a reputable book house to undertake the business of book publishing on their behalf.
Infact to be a great book writer, an author not only needs to publish his book with a registered book publisher, he also needs a recognised and reputable one at that.
There is a public relations dimension to book publishing.
Great publishers are often times reputed to showcase a string of notable writers, and when you are on their stables, you are often considered as one.
3.4 Writing for Publishing Writing is one of the most ardous task that authors face.
Writing for publishing demands quite a handful from the writer, this begins from personality of the writer in question.
The work of a writer can either be creative or stem from an ardous research work.
If his work is creative writing for publishing begins with conceptualization of ideas; putting the ideas on paper by graphic representation and the use of symbols, organising these symbols in sentences and paragraphs capable of conveying the authors ideas to the readers.
However, if the writing is a product of research, the writer will have to organise his work to follow a logical sequence that is both endearing and appealing to his readership.
Publishing begins with conceptualization of ideas; putting the ideas on paper by graphic representation and the use of symbols, organizing these symbols in sentences and paragraphs capable of conveying the authors’ ideas to the readers.
This process can also 74 be described as manuscript development and allows for other process like assessment and editing.
Writing book for publishing can also be defined as scripting of an author’s idea or ideas meant to be shared with others, subjecting the scripted ideas to proper scrutiny and processes necessary for the emergence of a meaningfully composed and designed document.
Generally, good books demand two fundamental qualities from their prospective authors and publishers.
First and foremost, the ideas that the author plans to share with his audiences have to be appealing to them; and then the language and method of delivery too has to be lucid, fascinating and binding.
While it might not be so easy to write a block buster, there is the need for a prospective author to develop some of these characteristics that can easily convert him into a prolific writer.
(1) It is important for a writer to carefully choose the subject matter he wants to deal with.
Subject matters of human interest like love are always appealing and have a universal audience.
The catch however, is that these themes are often over stretched so, there has to be a new and refreshing dimension for it to have appeal.
(2) Recognise your target audience.
For example fashion appeals prepondently to the youth, a book on that should also target the youth.
(3) Aim at writing a classique, that is, a book that is so good that it never really goes out of fashion.
Does Chinua Achebe’s “Things Fall Apart” ring a bell?
(4) A good book is never written over night so a good writer should consider the following i.
Are you up to date concerning the subject matter?
ii.
Is the subject mater still a burning issue or has it been overtaken by time?
iii.
Study the most contemporary trend on the subject matter.
iv.
If all of the above are in place, check whether your presentation has sequence, suspense and logic.
(5) Read and reread your manuscript and you will find out that you don’t have such a perfect material afterall.
It might be worthwhile to have a trusted and competent colleagues look at your work for further corrections.
75 (6) He should try to familiarise himself with the basic elements of a standard book.
Ideally, a standard book has three segments.
They are; the front matters, the text, and the back matters.
Here is a checklist.
(1) Front Matters: 1.
Half title page (The Title of the book only) 2.
Advertisement page (optional) 3.
The title page (title of book, authors name, publisher, town of publication and year of publication) 4.
List of illustration 5.
Copyright notice 6.
Dedication page 7.
Table of Content 8.
Preface and forward 9.
Acknowledgement page 10.
Introduction (2) The Text The text is the main body of the book.
It contains the main idea which the author has to share with his audience.
The ideas are arranged sequentialy in chapters in the text of the book.
(3) The Back Matters: 1.
Appendixes 2.
End Notes 3.
References 4.
Bibliography 5.
Glossary 6.
Index 7.
Colophon 4.0 Conclusion This unit discussed the method of writing for book publication considering what book is, the process of writing book and how written books are published.
76 5.0 Summary In this unit we try to see how man invented, the book through writing and the early ‘winds of books’ we had.
We defined what a modern book is like and examined what writing for publication means.
We also saw the intricacies of writing for publication, the characteristics that a good author should develop and what the content of a good book is.
The current thinking that authors should refrain from “self publishing” was also emphasized.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is writing for publishing?
2.
What are the characteristics of a good author?
7.0 References Alikabeli, L; Sesan A.A. and Akindelen I.
(2009) Basic Grammar and Writing.
Abeokuta Jedidiah Publishers.
Ajibola, Adejumoke S. & Oluyide Esther (2008) Book Publishing & The Reading Culture in Nigeria: Ibadan.
Manifold Grace Publishers.
Day, A. Robert (1996) How Write and Publish A Scientific Paper (Forth Edition) Cambridge.
Cambridge University Press.
D.K.
Illustrated Oxford Dictionary, London: Arling – Kindersley Limited and Oxford University Press.
http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopaedia.
76155800/calligraphy.html.
The New Encyclopaedia Britanica Vol.
2.
Micropaedia Ready Reference (5th Edition) London: Encyclopaedia Britanica Inc. 77 UNIT 2 MANUSCRIPT ASSESSMENT AND ACQUISITION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Unsolicited Manuscripts 3.2 Solicited Manuscripts 3.3 Sources of Manuscripts 3.4 Factors That Influence Availability Of Manuscripts To The Publishers 3.5 Manuscript Assessment 3.6 The Process of Manuscripts Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction: When an author conceives an idea, he writes the sketch of that idea before the drafting.
It is this text that is gennerally regarded as a manuscript.
Manuscripts are generally handwritten or typed documents containing the authors concern on or about issues and ideas for publication.
The manuscript is the foundation block upon which other book publishing requirements are erected.
Before the advent of typewritters and computers, manuscripts were handwritten but the modern age of advanced technology, ideas can first be handwritten and then typeset.
This does not stop the soft proof material from being regarded as a manuscript.
Areo cited in Ajibola et al (2008:33) explains that manuscripts are classified into two groups namely: (1) Unsolicited manuscripts (2) Solicited manuscripts 2.0 Objectives This unit will expose you to the process of manuscript assessment and evaluation and how this is done.
78 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Unsolicited Manuscripts Unsolicited manuscripts are those manuscripts that the publisher did not sought for.
On the other hand, it is the author that actually sought for the publisher to help him accomplish the task of bringing his ideas to the public.
In this instance the author or institution seeking publication voluntarily submits his/her manuscripts to the publishing company for publication.
Most established publishing houses are always bombarded with unsolicited manuscripts.
Over 90% of them are always rejected because often times they fall short of the required standards.
The rejections are not deliberate.
Many unskilled authors see writing as a past time that requires little skill only to be met with huge dissapointment.
Since fictional writing, prose and inspirational books have no standard format for writing, and at most times requires no intensive research and costs, it is the most abused area in book publishing.
3.2 Solicited Manuscripts Solicited manuscripts on the other hand are manuscripts that publishing houses request from writers/authors and institutions for publication.
Solicited manuscripts otherwise known as “commissioned manuscripts” have been known to be more successful both in the market, and in the publishing process.
Commissioned authors are specialists and professionals who have vast experience in their various fields and bring same to bear on the academic or contemporary issues to be dealth with.
The selected authors are often given a brief or the assignment at hand.
The publishing house usually handles details as accommodation, feeding, transportation, etc.
This arrangement usually is separate from the contract agreement between the author and the publishing hosue.
This arrangement subsists when the publishing house schedules the author giving him a time period to accomplish his task.
At other times the publishing house might require the service of more than one author and in such cases, so writing workshops may be required.
A writing session is a guided writing arrangement whereby selected writers are camped in a comfortable secluded area for a period of time to write manuscripts on a chosen subject.
The workshop runs for as long as the arrangement is comfortable for both parties.
79 Whatever the writing arrangement, the next task before the author(s) is to develop the manuscripts.
In order to do this effectively the author is provided with some matierals to help him discharge his duty.
They may include: (1) Relevant Reference Materials: School books, journals, examination reports, question papers and marking guides from a veritable source as guides to authors.
(2) Curriculum: schools often work with syllabi administered by the Ministry of Education.
They syllabus already provides areas which the schools are expected to cover so the author’s tasks has already been defined.
(3) Competing Titles: Most times authors generate competing titles by taking a close look at the competition.
When the strenght and weakness of the competing title has been ascertained it gives the author the basis to generate his own manuscripts.
(4) House Style: Every publishing house has its style/way of doing things.
Some publishing houses have styles of giving students work activity to accomplish after every unit and text while others might state the objective of the study before proceeding to the text.
Whatever the house style, it is expedient that the author is furnished with it.
3.3 Sources of Manuscripts: Since manuscripts are the bedrock of publishing it is pertinent that the publishing house be furnished with good and veritable ones.
Sources for manuscripts are very varied but generally publishers obtain their manuscripts through the following sources: (1) Editorial Travels and Tours (2) Book Fairs (3) Tertiary Institutions (4) Research Institutes (5) Topical problems (6) Great and Notable events (7) Public debates (8) Workshops, seminars and conferences.
Editorial Travels The publishing house is essentailly a business like most other businesses.
They have the responsibility to keep the business (publishing) on going.
This, they do by soliciting for 80 fast selling titles so that they can cash in on their sales and make reasonable profit “publishers travel far and wide visiting bookshops to see the fast selling titles; visit teachers, lecturers and researchers” in order to ascertain and discuss” existing books on different subjects and disciplines, dwelling on their strenghts and weaknesses.
On getting these information publishers seek the conscent of writers to ascertain whether they can publish their work.
Their visits to educational administrators arm them with the latest educational policies and developments in government circles.
Examination voices are also a veritable source of potential publication materials.
The change from the 6-5-4 system of education to the 6-3-3-4 system was very adverse to publishers who are not abreat of the governmental policies of the day while it was quite a rewarding period for those that were prepared for it.
The new Universal Basic Education (UBE) of nine continuous years just introduced by the government has made publishers to troupe to the Ministry of Education for policy facts concerning the new education policy, in order to be guided in their publication.
Book Fairs The book fair has become a platform for the international round table conference of publishers, writers, educationists, booksellers, printers, etc.
to meet and exchange manuscripts.
Many publishers, especially the established publishing houses have made the attendance of book fairs a ritual.
This helps them in making new contacts with and within the book world.
The Nigerian International Book Fair Trust (NIBFT) annually organises The Nigerian International Book Fair.
There are also many international book fairs around the world like the London Book Fair, Frankfurt Book Fair, etc.
These, book fairs help the publishers to see the latest display of books, creates a veritable opportunity for marketing collaboration, reprint negotiation and translation permission among publishers.
It is a very potent source of manuscripts acquisition.
Tertiary Institutions The tertiary institutions like the University, Polytechnics and Colleges of Education are the highest academic institutions in the country.
The lecturers and students are engaged in various forms of academic endeavours from lecturers to research.
Their finding at 81 most times become manuscripts for publishers especially when new grounds are broken in the academic frontiers.
Research Institutions These are specialized institutions that are engaged in research on different subjects and disciplines.
They have the onerous task for daily pushing the frontiers of knowledge to a new level.
They discover new uses for old materials.
A recent study by an American research institution have shown that coffee, apart from the fact that it is a delightful beverage to drink, is also very good to control hypertensive situations and it is also an energy booster.
Without these reports being published, it will not get to you and me.
So expectedly the findings of these research institutions must be published.
NIPSS, NISER, NIIA etc.
are some of these research institutes in Nigeria.
Topical Problems Arguably, it can be said that nothing has generated so much debate, has held public opinion, and has been in the front burner of public debate in the past two decade like the health pandemic such as Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).
Even its source and existence has generated so much debate and there has been extensive literature concerning both.
Many countries have dedicated a large sum of their annual budget not only to the management of the disease, but also to preventive measures.
These have taken the form of public enlightenment concerning the disease.
This was where ghonorea was a scourge just like AIDS and Malaria too before their cures was found.
Great and Notable Events Great and notable events have been documented for posterity sake across the globe.
The name of Louis Armstrong has become indelibe in the human mind because of the space expedition Apollo II.
He is noted to be the first man to set his foot on the moon.
This expedition exposed man to other worlds separate from their won, and man has continually exploited avenues seeking to know whether some day man can live in these new worlds.
The first and seond world wars have been events that have been greatly written on.
Closer home, we have the Nigeria Civil War that lasted for almost three years.
It has been recounted that about 2 million lives were lost in that dark period of our history.
82 Publishers are aware of all these events and they do not allow these opportunities to slip by without capturing them Public Debate There has never been any issue that has probably drawn more public debate in Nigeria more than the International Monetary Fund (IMF) loan that the Ibrahim Babangida administration sought to source in the 80s.
For the first time in Nigeria there was almost an unequivocal response to the Nigeria government, resisting the said loan.
So much literature began to emanate concerning that body (IMF) and its antecedences.
There was a well publicised Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) that the government said will cure the country of its many economic woes.
Many economists wrote extensively criticising government’s position, citing many countries who had adopted the same measures and were the worst for it.
All these arguments became a source of manuscripts for the publishers and it was quite a book time for publishers.
Workshops, Seminars and Conferences When academics, professionals and captains of industries gather, a lot of publications are generated from their workshops, seminars and conferences.
Books of reading, journals and conference proceedings become veritable sources of publishable materials Publishers are quick to compile and package workshop presentations into book forms.
This is with the consideration that it is tasking current issues and will generate income for both authors and publishers.
3.4 Factors That Influence Availability of Manuscripts to the Publishers 1.
The Publisher Reputation Many authors run to famous publishers to harness the goodwill, fame, and publication expertees that the publishing houses have ganered over the years.
That is why only one percent of the unsolicited scripts that get to these publishing houses get to see the light of the day.
As the potential authors know that being published and marketed by a famous publishing house could mark the beginning of their rise in the publishing world, so does the publisher who knows that a poor publication could dent the image that has been laborously built over the years “the most outstanding qualification of a publisher who competes for the publication of a particular book is good reputation” (Okpolo:80).
83 2.
Authors’ Reputation: Many outstanding authors do not wish to offer their works to inferior publishing houses.
Just as the author’s works are highly sought after, so does the author seek for the best houses and the best deals.
3.
Author’s Agents: The author’s own agents are also known as ‘literacy agents’.
These literacy agents represent the author.
They receive the manuscripts from the author, and try to negotiate a favourable term of contract for their respective clients.
Their decision is greately influenced by their previous experiences, with different publishing houses.
Though the literary agent is renumerated by the author after the contract has been signed, the publishing house might give incentive to an outstanding agent, considering the fact that his works has been largely very marketable.
4.
Publishers Agent: Just as the literary agent represents the author, so does the publisher agent represent the publisher.
These external “literacy scouts” look for manuscripts for publication and direct them to the publisher who pays them an agreed sum, based on the number of copies of the book sold after publication.
The literary scouts may also be paid off by the publisher immediately they have successfully gotten the manuscript.
5.
Editorial Staff: Manuscripts acquisition is the responsibility of the editorial staff.
The editorial staff of a publishing company has the responsibility of canvassing for, and bringing manuscripts to their publisher.
This responsibility has been designed for ‘mature editors’ that is those with years of experience, or senior editors.
6.
Price Offered by Publisher: The price offered by the publisher often times influences the choice of the publication.
Since the author seeks to make maximum benefits from his works, the highest bidder often times gets the job.
The author might also consider factors like the terms of payment of royalty.
If they are favourable, he will be disposed to working with the said publishing house.
7.
Editor’s Creativity: Though the editor might not be an author; it is not surprising to find many editors who are quite creative in their own work.
For instance an editor can persuade scholars to write on areas that are of interest to readers but are virgin areas for 84 authors.
His creativity will involve his skill to persuade authors to delve into these virgin areas.
He will also have to persuade the author that his job will not go unrewarded, because there is a readership that awaits such writing.
3.5 Manuscript Assessment Most publishing houses do not bother to assess unsolicited manuscripts.
Solicited manuscripts however, go through a long scrutiny.
Commissioned manuscripts require a rigorous process of evaluation.
Some publishers carry out evaluation at the initial stage when the manuscript enters chapter one or so may be evaluated before subsequent chapters.
But when the author is a well trusted or capable hand, the publisher might allow the entire manuscript done before evaluation.
3.6 The Process of Manuscripts Evaluation The process of manuscripts evaluation involves detecting and eliminating illogical and irrelevant materials in a manuscript.
The moment a manuscript comes in, its journey to acceptance or rejection equally begins.
In a publishing house where unsolicited manuscripts are not welcome, they don’t go through any process of evaluation because they are outrightly rejected.
But in a house where they are welcome, they go through two stages: 1.
Internal evaluation 2.
External evaluation Be it internal or otherwise when a manuscript is received by a publishing house, it issues a letter of acknowledgement to the author, while a copy is kept in the office file for official use.
Internal Evaluation Internal manuscript assessment is usually done by the assistant editor, or a young editor who writes to ascertain (i) The significance of the work (ii) The quality of the writing (iii) Relevance of the subject matter (iv) Recommendations for further assessment or outright rejection.
When the report of the young editor is favourable then further processing of the manuscript commences.
The editor in charge of the particular discipline that the book 85 title falls under takes possession of the manuscript.
He now assess whether the company has the capacity and competence to publish the content of the manuscript.
He also checks the language and style and size of the manuscript.
He also tries to see that other authors’ works are not copied without citing the original sources.
Other considerations by the editor will include compliance with the curriculum, the existing competing titles, etc.
Dessauer (1974) gives a checklist or questions which the editor’s report must answer.
1.
Are there other books on the subject?
2.
How are those titles doing in the market?
3.
Is there any title on the subject being expected soon?
4.
Is there any title on the subject now out of print?
5.
How well did it sell and why is it not reprinted?
6.
Is the contribution of the current work good enough to assure them of demand?
7.
Can sufficient copies be sold profitably?
8.
Are there cultural consideratiosn that strongly recommend the publication of such books at the time?
When these processes have been successfully accomplished, most publishing houses would recommend an evaluation meeting.
However it is the practice in some publishing houses to send the manuscript to an external assessor for further scrutiny and if that is the case, then the following process ensues.
External Evaluation The moment a publisher sends out a manuscript for consideration of an external assessor, the company has started incuring cost on the said script.
The external assessor is usually a very skillful professional who is adept at this kind of work.
The assessor or assessors have to be paid adequately, and return mailing cost might be incured if there is a considerable distance between the external assessor and the publishing company.
Before an external assessor is chosen, extreme care has to be taken to ascertain how efficient he will be on the job.
For an educational book, though the assessor might not be an academic, he should be an educationist who is conversant with the level which the manuscript targets.
Some other qualities of an external assessor are listed below: 86 Areo in Ajibola et al (2002) provided the following consideration for an assessor.
1.
He must be known or presumed not to be a colleague or friend of the author.
The reason is that the personal relationship does not influence the assessor’s objectivity.
2.
He must be kept anonymous.
The general consensus is that anonymity will allow for rigorous assessment of an author’s work.
3.
His education, relevant experience and status must not be below the authors.
The opinion expressed here is that of credibility.
Whether a less educated assessor can assess the work of someone more educated than him.
Even where acceptable, can the assessment be justified and the verdict accepted?
4.
He must be known to be always objective.
This characteristic of an assessor is essential in determining the validity of an assessor’s job.
5.
He should be assured of payment of adequate fees.
People are most willing to work and work well if payment for the effort is guaranteed.
When the character of the assessor has been guaranteed, he must be furnished with relevant information to act as a term of reference when he writes his report.
The following is what Oso et al, (2008) said are what should be looked for.
(1) Logicality (2) Treatment of the subject (3) Legal, moral and copyright issues (4) Relevance and appropriateness of illustration and diagrams.
(5) Adequacy of examples, exercise or questions (6) Simplicity and fluency of expression.
(7) Justification section for bibliography/references glossary etc.
(8) Target audience/users and recommended level of education (9) Chances of the book in the market among the competing books.
4.0 Conclusion Manuscript assessment has been explained different types of book evaluation were discussed with the characteristics of an assessor also discussed.
87 5.0 Summary Manuscripts are handwritten or typewritten document by an author who seeks to publish his work.
There basically two types of manuscripts namely; the solicited and the unsolicited manuscripts.
There is a preponderance of unsolicited manuscripts which mostly never really gets published.
The solicited manuscripts often get published because it is the publishing house that usually commission writers to undertake such endeavours.
Sources of manuscripts are usually through editorial travels and tours, book fair, tertiary institutions, research institutions, topical issues, great and notable events, public debates, workshops, seminars and conferences.
The publishing houses are not only in the business of disseminating information, there are several issues the publisher is conscious of therefore, the manuscripts he acquires must be able to: offset the production cost which covers the acquisition fees and expenses, printing etc.
so he has to do his utmost to attract the best authors to his stables.
In doing this he should consider the following: his own reputation, the writers reputation, agents etc.
on getting the manuscripts.
The publisher does an internal assessment of the manuscript when that is not adequate, or if the publishing houses have the tradition of engaging an external assessor he does so.
When the internal and external assessors have given a positive recommendation, a decision to publish is now taken.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What is a manuscript?
2.
What are processes of evaluating a manuscript?
7.0 References Butcher Judith (1983): Copy-editing.
The Cambridge Handbook, 2nd Edition Cambridge.
Cleaver, Pamela (2002): Writing Children’s Books, How to Books, Oxford.
Alkaeli, L. Sesan, A.A. and Akindele, I.
(2009): Basic Grammar and Writing.
Abeokuta, Jedidah Publishers.
Oso, L. Osunbiyi, B. and Biobaku L., (2008): Book Publishing.
A practical guide.
Lagos: African Resource Communications.
Lagos.
88 UNIT 3 BOOK EDITING: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is editing?
3.2 Book Editing 3.3 Stages in Editing 3.4 Characteristics of a Good Manuscript 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction Editing goes beyond the mere fact of correcting grammatical errors, or arranging sentences in a way that can be easily understood.
It should never be seen like that because editing encompasses much more than that.
2.0 Objectives This unit will discuss editing and the process of editing books.
This will expose you to the different types of editing 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is editing?
Before publishing a book editing is an imperative.
To edit is to work for publication.
Editing is the putting forth of written, graphic or photographic materials for public consumption in a meaningful, readable and logical format.
Editing makes an author’s work legible by correcting spellings, para-phrasing long sentences, remark of unnecessary explanations and unaccurate language and inconsistent use of words.
Besser cited in Adikpo and Ihwa (2009:46) notes that editing is correting erros.
Editing is essential in book publishing procedure because it ensures unity and cohesion of author’s ideas and makes legibility easy and interesting.
89 Similarly from the technical/functional print of view, editing in the field of publishing is everything that is done to make a manuscript become an endearing readable material.
3.2 Book Editing Book editing is the process that subjects both the context and text of a book to critical examination.
3.3 Stages in Editing There are four interrelated stages in editing a book for publication.
(1) Acquisition editing (2) Content editing (3) Copy edition (4) Graphic editing 1.
Acquisition Editing Many people believe the process of editing starts after the manuscript has been acquired, and then the editor begins to look at the content therein.
This is far from the truth.
The truth is editing actually starts before the manuscript gets into the publishing house.
At the stage of acquiring, unsolicited scripts, up to 95% gets edited.
This process is already a cumbersome process of trying to sort what is needed from the unwanted one.
On the other hand, if it is the solicited script, the editor still prescribes the general attitude of the content.
When the content is unsolicited, the editor will do a lot of patch work here, and there to satisfy in-house policy, but when the work is solicited from a reknown writer, the book size, design and production processes have to be streamlined in accordance with standard book production processes by the acquisiton editor, before he makes his recommendations to the editorial board.
In line with this argument (Merrian Webster 1998) Adesantoye (1995:57), cited in Oso et al lists the fundamental tasks of an acquisition editor to include: 1.
That the manuscript does not conflict in any way with the books already accepted.
2.
That the list is not already crowded with similar texts.
90 3.
The subject matter of the book is not one which has proved unsuccessful for the particular house in the past and, 4.
There is a market for the book if eventually published.
2.
Content Editing Just as the name implies, this is the job of editing the content of the manuscripts.
At this level the editor scritinizes the work painstakingly to check the possibility of plagiarism, insists on the clarification of assertions that are ambiguous, insist on identification of source, information and more importantly that the content reflects the author’s ideas, scope and organisation of thoughts.
Some materials might be obscene, some defamatory and libelous.
Proper content editing, will identify these defects, eliminate them and pave way for the emergence of a book free of breach of copyright laws Amori (1975:6) cited in Oso et al posited that editing at this stage focuses on the task of (a) Ensuring factual accuracy (e.g.
name, date, place, sources of reference, acknowledgement, dedication, copyright details and completeness of copy).
(b) Ensuring that the subject matter is devoid of ambiguity and unnecessary repetition.
That the representation is intelligible to prospective readers.
Apart from the legalism in book publishing and, the aspect of avoiding litigation, the content editor has to bear in mind, especially books that are educational not prose or fiction, that the work must be factional.
As books are considered to be reservoirs of knowledge, there must be ardent effort to make them remain so.
To say Mount Kilimanjaro is in the South Eastern part of Nigeria will be wrong.
Though close to Nigeria in the Cameroons it will only be appropriate to give it its proper siting.
Another consideration would be if the writing is on the cutting edge of today’s knowledge driven society.
In a world where sexism has come to the front burner in everyday discuss, an editor must be sensitive to these trends.
For example feminists have argued that actress, managess; hostess etc.
are discriminatory and canversed for masculine equivalents, and so have words like blackmail, blacklist, etc.
been considered to be racial, so the editor has to be sensitive to these facts.
Editing technical writings may pose unique content editorial challenges to the editor.
This is because such writings contain professional jargons which may means something else to the professionals in that field.
The word professional jargon itself to the layman 91 means professional nonsense, but it infact means a language, restricted to the professionals, in that field of study.
For instance, the engines of aeroplanes drone while that of cars hum, engineers bid for contracts, while advertising agencies pitch for accounts.
When the editor is not versed in these knowledge, he will eventually produce a book full of this technical errors.
It is the job of the content editor to ensure class literacy.
3.
Copy Editing In modern times the work of the copy editor is growing as complex as the work of the substantive editor.
This is because he stands in the process that leads to the emergence of a publishable manuscript.
Merriam – Webster (1998:276) observed that: Copy editing is often the most important stage in preparing a manuscript for publication especially at a time where editors, in-house editors are feeling increasingly presured to acquire large numbers of books and have less and less time for properly vetting them.
So this job more often than not falls into the hands of the copy editor.
A copy editor therefore must be a perfectionist so to speak.
The copy editor must impose through consistency and formal correctness on a manuscript.
A copy-editor must be somebody with impeccable savvy in formal grammatical rules and good mastery of styles so that he brings these experiences to bear and to enhance but not to alter the work of the author.
3.4 Characteristics of a good Manuscript There are certain characteristic that a good manuscript should have, which should have been imposed by the copy editor.
1 Legibility Every letter of every word of the manuscript must be not only readable but so quickly and easily read that the printer can concentrate entirely on the difficult technical job of setting type without worrying about what the author meant to write.
If there are too many corrections and insertions to be made in the manuscript the copy editor should have the messy parts retypes.
This is meant to have all letters and words legible.
92 If the manuscript is in hopeless condition where the copy editor from his experience knows that such script cannot be quickly sorted out by the printer, he has the authority to ask the author to take it back and resubmit in better form.
This though is not punitive but to the author’s interest because the eventual mix-up in writing will only cost more and distort the fact the author is trying to put across.
2 Consistency: Some people talk about a copy editor “correcting” a manuscript and some actual corrections are made as we shall note below.
But a much bigger job is the effort to give the manuscript some sort of consistency in the choice between alternate forms of spelling, punctuation and so forth.
Even if both of the two alternative spelling, for instance, are “correct”, that does not justify the author in varying back and forth between them in the course of one book.
Such inconsistency can be very disturbing to the reader and its upsetting effect on the typesetter is almost sure to increase the cost of printing.
The copy editor – whether accepting some reference work as a guide or making up rules along the way, is responsible for seeing that the manuscript has consistency from the beginning to end.
Here are ways that we seek to achieve these consistency.
(a) Spellings: This is not merely a question of systematic differences within a language, such as the British, “labour” verses the American “labor” but especially problems of plurals (“buses” versus “busses”) and of course in choosing between alternate correct forms, the copy editor must correct the many wrong spellings of which most authors are guilty.
(b) Punctuation: Copy editing in general is an art not an exact science but this is especially true in the case of punctuation.
There are some kinds of punctuation that are directly related to good grammar, but for the most part the question of punctuation relate more to tasle and style than to right and wrong.
The copy editor’s respnsibility is to see that when the transcript goes to the printer, it is punctuated in a way that help the reader understand what the author wanted to say and that the punctuation is reasonably considered according to some acceptable system.
A test is to read the sentence aloud and see where natural praises occur.
93 (c) Abbreviation: This too is not a matter of right or wrong like the punctuation but a matter of consistency for example “Maj.
Gen. Ahmed” and “Major General Ahmed”.
(d) Alternate Forms: This arises from the issue of settings and locality.
Beyond its locality most easterners in Nigeria are referred to ask ibos while in their locality they are referred to as Igbo.
The copy editor sometimes is faced with the choice of using either the local or international variant.
(e) Uniform Style or Auxillary Material: This situation arises mostly concerning scholarly and scientific books.
The copy editor aims at presenting uniform tables, graphs, foot notes, mathematical models and legends for illustration.
(f) Others: There are other problems that the copy editors have to tackle in order to achieve consistency in writings for example capitalisation.
Federal Government of Nigeria vs. federal government of nigeria, compound words or textbook and text- book, etc.
GRAMMAR One of the copy editor’s job is to make sure the grammar is correct in the manuscript as it goes to the printer.
Though the subject of what constitutes good grammar is a source of great debate but, there is a baseline of what is acceptable in educational community that is encouraged to be used.
There are other sundry details to observe but these few will suffice for now.
Graphic Editing Though the diction exist that says a book should not be judged by its cover, but how many times does the reader listen to it.
The first attraction to a book often times is how catchy the cover page is.
After a manuscript has gone through the rigorous stage of working and re-working, it is only meaningful to make sure that the graphics of the book does not destroy what would otherwise have been an excellent job.
The graphic editor has the responsibility of making sure such important factors as photographs, illustration, collation and cover design, meet the required standard.
Minute details like the cover page, ISSN/ISBN number, front and end matters are adequately taken care of.
Sometimes very complex textual presentations can easily be explained by the use of a simple graph or like the Chinese would say, a picture is better than a thousand words.
By this the graphic editor will make sure the specifications are duly followed ensuring that illustrations, graphs and pictures match the textual explanation given in the text.
94 Imagine an agricultural book that the green vegetation being described in the text, is pictorally represented by very weak, yellowish green plants.
The picture and the text must make a match to give a good explanation of what the author intends.
He needs to get the author to see a print out copy for possible correction before the final copies are produced.
Other sundry issues in editing includes 1.
Copyright 2.
Typography 3.
Illustration 4.
References and Bibliography 4.0 Conclusion The importance of book editing cannot be wished away.
This is because it is central to the production of a good book.
5.0 Summary Book editing is the act of preparing a book for publication.
The process of editing starts from the acceptance and rejection of the manuscripts.
After the acceptance of a manuscript, it goes through four stages of editing: acquisition editing, content editing, copy editing and graphic editing.
It is when these processes have been complete that the manuscript is ready for the printer.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Explain the process of editing a book.
2.
What are the characteristics of a good manuscript?
7.0 References Amon Peju (1975) “Content Editing” in the Book Publishing Process, Ibadan: Nigeria Publishers Association Farar John (1998) Manual for Writers and Editors Springfield: Merriem Webster Incorp.
Oloruntoba Oju, Taiwo (1997) “Sources of Ambiguity in Nigerian Newspaper Stories” Journal of Communication Language Arts Vol.
I/ 58 – 70.
Oso, Lai; Osunbiyi, Bidemi & Biobaku, Lanre (2008).
Book Publishing A Practical Guide, African Resource Comunication.
95 UNIT 4 BOOK DESIGN AND LAYOUT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Designer 3.2 Design Determinants 3.3 Elements of Design 3.4 Principles of Design 4.0 Concluson 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction When the task of writing the manuscript has been completed, it must be turned into a book.
That task of turning a manuscript into a book lies with a designer.
Often times publishers, especially in small publishing houses double as designers.
This is not the ideal case because book design involve so many specialised intricacies that an untrained hand might just end up destroying a hard earned job.
But whether or not the designer is a specialist or anyone in the printing plant somebody has to do the design anyway.
2.0 Objectives This unit will focus on book designs.
It discusses book design; elements of designs and the different types of designs.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Designer: There are so many issues to take congnizance of when a book is being designed.
These details include; the size of the page, the kind and size of the type, the width and margins and the position of the type on the page, the space between the lines, the arrangement of chapter headings, and page numbers, the plan for illustration and tables, the kind of paper, the kind of binding, the kind and colour of cloth or paper for the cover and the thousand and one other details that affect the physical appearance of 96 the book.
You can see by what we have mentioned that the designer has no small task before him when the task of book design is the question.
However whatever the case may be, the designer must have a sense of book publishing economics as well as artistic design in his repertoire and must know something about the size of the edition that is planned, how the book will be sold and other business considerations.
In a nutshell, there are three major considerations a book designer must overcome before he attempts a successful design.
They are (1) Design determinants (2) Elements of design (3) Principles of design.
3.2 Design Determinants The two basic design determinants are (a) Book Content (b) Cost (a) Book Content: The content of a book goes a long way in determining the design.
In terms of the cover page for instance; it should help to tell the story the author plans to communicate.
A book on science should reflect such and not be crowded with unnecessary aesthetics that might characterise a story book meant for pleasure reading.
(b) Cost: The second determinant will be the cost of the design.
Expense must be kept constantly in mind not only for the sake of the publisher, but also for the sake of the reading public.
If the designer specifies a method of production that will result in a selling price too high for mass sales that is a betrayal of both the publisher and the reader.
By extension the argument is for the designer to look for the best possible design at the least possible cost.
97 3.3 Elements of Design Certain elements are prevalent in book design.
Togunwa cited in Oso et al (2008:241) identifies a number of elements of book design and they include: i.
Body types ii.
Display types iii.
Photographs and illustrations iv.
Colour v. Borders and Rules (i) Body Types: Body types are used for typesetting the main body of a book.
The body type of a book should be set with a type of 12 points or 14 points.
Types that measure 12 points or less are called body type while type face refers to a particular style of type.
Knowledge of this is very important because it allows the designer to select suitable typefaces for publication.
Example of type faces are Time New Roman, Carlson, Bodoni, Bernhard, etc.
(ii) Display Types: Display types are used in cover design, chapter titles, title page and for special effects and emphasis in a book design.
They are bigger than those used in body types because their purposes are to create distinction and emphasis.
They are set between 14 to 72 points.
(iii) Photographs and Illustration: They are meant to amplify the message in the body text apart from their decorative and beautification function.
They are made of pictures, hand drawings, cartoons and informational graph such as maps, graphs and charts.
Togunwa (2008) said that the essence of photographs and illustration is to provide pictorial evidence of the messages contained in a book and to help in enhancing understanding of the content.
Some messages lend themselves to pictorial treatment before they can be better understood.
Pictures can be attractive and their attractiveness can generate patronage.
(iv) Colour: Colour plays a vital role in book design.
It is known to have added value to the overall book design of a book and present it to the appeal of readers.
Tosunwa (2008:244) pointed out that in choosing the colour combination for the elements in book design, the designer will be guided by how best the information could be relayed, using one or more of the colours.
This is true because colours can portray a book in a bad light if they are not properly selected and applied, knowledge of the three primary colours red, yellow and blue and how they can be mixed to produce a secondary colour is important.
98 (iv) Borders and Rules: These are used to separate are elements from another.
They can also be used to emphasize a section of the book or demarcate a drawing or picture in the book.
The borders are used to create a frame for a picture.
3.4 Principles Of Design This refers to guide towards good book designing.
They are meant to order the way books can best be designed.
Bowles and Boden cited in Togunwa (2008:248) explain that “good order is the foundation of all good things”.
According to Togunwa (2008) the basic principles are balance, contrast, proportion, rhythm and unity.
(a) Balance: Balance in book design is a way of achieving equillibrium in distribution of elements on the pages of a book as well as the pages themselves.
They can be formal and informal balance.
Togunwa (2008) explains that when you divide a book page vertically into two and the weight of design elements are evenly distributed on both sides, there is a fomal balance.
Informal balance according to him is more flexible in terms of placement of elements.
For example several small elements on one side of the page may balance one large element on the other.
(b) Contrast: This is used to attract attention to some parts of the book, shape and size can be used to bring contrast to the book page.
To achieve contrast is to make emphasis on certain elements on the page in order to project it so that the projected elements becomes the dorminant element and is capable of drawing the attention of readers.
(c) Rhythm: This has to do with eye movement especially in the desired direction.
The way design elements are arranged and their location cause the eye to move in the direction of the design elements.
If they are placed upward or sideways, the eyes move in their direction.
(d) Proportion: Proportion simply suggests that when using design elements, the designer must ensure that the disparity on either size must be fair.
The usage of the elements must give room for equilibrium in proportion.
This is to ensure that undue transportation and overshadowing of elements is not allowed.
(e) Unity: Has to do with harmony and equity in the contribution of designed elements to the emergence of one whole design.
The design elements have to play a participatory role towards a harmonous design.
Here, consistency is very important among the various pages of the book.
As an example, the type face and the size being used for body text should be used consistently throughout the 99 book except in a situation where certain part of the text is being highlighted for emphasis.
The application of the principle of unity in book design shows that the designer was in touch with the entire design effort from the beginning to the end and it shows that the book has gone through thoroughness as evidence in the copy.
4.0 Conclusion This unit discussed book designs, elements of book designs and the basic principles of designs.
5.0 Summary The effort of a book designer is never lost after the copy has been printed.
His mastery of the proponents of design determinants, elements of design and the principle of book design should be above board.
The essence of book design and layout is to ensure that there is a painstaking effort in organising and apllying book design elements, and procedures that will allow for the emergence of a quality product that will attract the attention of the readers and givem them value for their money.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Explain the different elements of designs.
2.
What are the principles of book design?
7.0 REFERENCES Areo, A.
(2008) Manuscript Assessment and Editing; in Ajibola, A.A and Ohyide, E. (eds) Book Publishing.
The Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan.
Grace Publishers.
Okilagwe, O.A.
(2001) Book Publishing In Nigeria, Ibadan Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig) Ltd. Smith D.C (1990) A Guide to Book Publishing, Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
100 UNIT 5 BOOK INDEXING AND PRODUCTION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Indexing 3.2 Relevance of Indexing in Book Publication 3.3 How to Write an Index 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction Book indexing is an important aspect of book publishing procedure and the aim is to oderly and systematically arrange concepts, names, words and calssified terms in a manner that allows their easy retrieval by readers.
2.0 Objectives The essence of this unit is to explain book index and the relevance of indexing in book publication.
At the end of this unit you will be able to explain  The meaning of book indexing.
 The relevance of book indexing 3.0 Main Content 3.1 indexing First of all index is an ordered arrangement of words, names, concepts and references that enables information seekers or readers of books and other publications to locate certain information with ease.
This form of arrangement is usually by alphabet or figures.
Sowumi cited in Oso (2008:268) explains that an index provides a gateway to ideas and information that is accessible to others.
He cited the Penguin Encyclopaedia’s explanation of indexing which said that indexing is “the compiling of systemic guides to the location of words, names and concepts in book and other publications.” Indexing 101 therefore is a process of ordering and sequencing information like concepts, names, words and other classified terms in book with the aim of enhancing their easy location and retrieval.
3.2 Relevance of Indexing In Book Publication The relevance of book indexing is enormous.
Readers are comfortable with spending less time in locating information from books.
Therefore, they prefer the book which allows them easy and timely access to the information they need.
This suggests that books with proper indexing are more likely to enjoy better patronage of the readers.
Sowumi in Oso et al (2008: 269) provides the following as relevance of indexing in book publication: (a) The index provides immediate access to the important terms, concepts and names scattered through out the book quickly and efficiently.
(b) It discriminates between useful information on a subject and a passing mention.
This means that some information may be vital in understanding the content of the author’s thoughts while others are passive.
(c) It has headings that are concise, accurate and unambiguous, reflecting the contents and terminology used in the text.
(d) It has enough cross references to connect related terms: and appropriate alphabetization and page references format to assist with reading.
(e) It anticipates how readers will search for information.
This is because its primary purpose is to guide the reader.
(f) It reveals the inter-relationship of topics, content and names so that the reader need not go through whole index or events in the book to find what they are looking for.
Indexing normally add value to the quality of a book and gives it an edge in patronage than a book without index.
Index also assists the reader in highlighting the major points or arugments in a particular passage of the text.
Indexing plays a very crucial role in the relationship between a book and the reader: that of a guide.
3.3 How to Write an Index Writing an index requires vast knowledge of the book.
It is a process of arranging words, ideas and concepts.
It is a pain-staking process which involves not just meaningfully arranging concepts and ideas, but also with brief definitions of such ideas and concepts.
The index writer must carefully read the entire book and in the process, identify the 102 concepts and ideas which will form part of the index.
The indexer must decide between what is worthy of being indexed and what is not.
He must take note of the pages, where what is to be indexed can be located.
He must be bale to place the index worthy concepts and ideas under meaningful headings.
4.0 Conclusion The importance of book indexing in publishing is to ease reading of such books.
5.0 Summary This unit discussed indexing in book publication and how indexing is very relevant to publishing industry 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (1) Discuss the relevance of idea to an author in writing a book for publication.
(2) Why does a manuscript have to be assessed before acceptance?
(3) Discuss the necessity of indexing book before publication.
7.0 References Areo, A.
(2008) Manuscript Assessment and Editing: In Ajibola A.S and Oluyide, E. (eds) Book Publishing.
The Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Grace Publishers.
Okilagwe, O.A.
(2001) “Book Publishing in Nigeria Ibadan.
Stirling – Horden Publishers Nig.
Ltd. Smith D.C. (1990).
A Guide to Book Publishing in Nigeria, Lagos; University of Lagos Press.
Sowumi, F. (2008) Book Indexing: Practice Techniques: Oso, L. et al (eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications.
103 MODULE 4 BOOK MARKETING AND CHALLENGES INTRODUCTION: This topic will treat the different methods and strategies of sales, circulation and distribution of books that are published by different publishing organisations.
It will also discuss the importance of Information Communication Technology (ICT) in book publishing.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this topic, it is expected that the student should have knowledge of: (i) Sales strategies (ii) Sales outlets (iii) Book reading and problems of book reading.
(iv) Role of information communication technology in book publishing.
This module has the following units Unit 1 Sales Strategies Unit 2 Sales Outlets Unit 3 Problems of Reading Books Unit 4 Role of ICT 104 UNIT 1 SALES STRATEGIES 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Book Sales 3.2 Sales Strategy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction When books are produced, they need to get to the relevant users.
In this unit appropriate methods of distributing books to the appropriate users are disssuxed 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to  Explain the methods of book sales.
 Discuss different sales strategies.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Book Sales Book sales are those processes the publisher engages in, in order to get the published materials to the hands of the book reader.
There are several methods the publisher uses to make sure the readership gets his materials.
The selling of a book does not actually start at the point where the printing of the book ended.
On the other hand, the sale of the book actually starts before the book is printed.
There is actually no point in printing a book that we know or have an incline it might not sell.
One of the delibitating problems of book publishing is the cost of inventory or books that have not been sold due to bad publishing decisions.
This is the decision to publish books which should not have been published because they would not sell.
105 How then do we know books that will sell?
This is a question that might be very difficult to answer straight on because there are many factors that makes a book to sell.
Ordinarily because of their function, certain books sell more than others especially in developing countries like Nigeria.
Books are widely categorised into three groups; (1) Educational books (2) Specialist books and (3) General books The rapidity in the sales of these books is also in that chronological order.
In Nigeria the reason for this cannot be far-fetched, considering the fact that educational books are widely used across our educational institutions, and specialist books also for particular trades and professions.
They impose upon themselves a compulsion that constrains the reader to purchase them.
General books however are mostly for leisure.
The strategy for book sales depends on several factors including, book tittlings, marketing, distribution etc.
Book Title: Ogunleye (2005) posits that many authors and publishers have lost sales because of poor book tittling.
Excellent manuscripts which would have otherwise become best sellers have been confined to the scrap heap of unsold books because of poor titles.
The title of a book encapsulates the content of the book.
It tells you of the unread literature in the book.
There are instances however where the title of the book is of very little significance in tittling a book.
These are educational books where buyers usually use the authors name rather than the books title because there are several other books probably with the same title.
Advanced reference books are another set of books where the author’s name is identified with the whole discipline.
Marketing: Marketing mix is the unique blend of price, promotion, product and distriution to enhance mutually satisfying exchanges with a target market.
Price: Pricing is a key element of the marketing mix.
Nyeko (1999) describes pricing of books as a very tricky business.
It is a concept that does not only allow the publisher to sell books at a reasonable profit but must allow the buyer reasonable assurances of value when he purchases a book.
She further stresses that, to fix the price of a book, these considerations should be put in mind; (1) The nature and size of the book, with the consideration of similar books in the market and customers perception of how much such a book should cost.
106 (2) The objective of the publisher: does it want to get maximum return on its publication or to reach as many intended audience as possible even if it does not make much profit.
(3) The direct production expenses: Cost of copy-editing design, proof reading, printing cost, paper, ink, other consumables used in the production of the camera ready copy.
(4) The Print Run: The more the copies, the lower the unit cost.
(5) Promotion and distribution cost.
(6) Indirect taxes (overheads and administration) (7) Royalty and any payment for reviewing the manuscript (8) Discounts to booksellers or distribution agents.
(9) The Status of the Buyers: for example an international company, universities in the first world or rural farmers.
3.2 Sales Strategy A sales strategy is the process of mapping out how to dispose published books to the general public for consumption.
These include book launching, call on the vendors and distributors to subscribe to new published books or new introduced books already published that have not been in circulation.
Other sales strategies are putting or circulating copies to both state, national and school libraries where it is displayed on the shelves for conspicuous sighting, posting the title of the book on internet, face book, taking the books by the vendor to both primary, colleges/secondary schools, and other higher institutions where they are needed for sales, display of the books by the newspaper vendors who displays it along side with the newspapers for easy sighting etc.
Distribution Channel: This is the function of making a product available to the customer when and where it is wanted.
The book distribution channel will include the following: Bookshops Sale Representatives Libraries Book Clubs Subscription Vendors Research Institutions 107 Book Agents Book Depots Book Promotional Strategies: Belch and Belch (2001) cited in Oso et al sees promotion as another key concept in the marketing mix which helps to bring about mutually satisfying exchanges with the target markets by informing, educating, persuading and reminding consumers about the benefits of an organisation and its product.
It comprises personal selling, advertising, sales promotion and public relations.
Zell (2011) identifies the following promotional strategies for an effective book sale; (1) Advance information sheets (2) Catalogue and new book lists (3) Jacket and covers (4) Leaflets and flyers (5) Press releases (6) Direct – mail promotions (7) Advertising (8) Book reviews and presentations (9) Exhibitions and displays (10) Examination inspection copies (11) Book launching (12) Point of sale materials and freebies.
4.0 Conclusion The methods of disposing published books and the strategies for getting these books to relevant consumers were also explained.
5.0 Summary This unit discussed sales strategies by book publishers and the methods of publishing the availability of new books 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Explain how books can be distributed to relevant consumers.
108 7.0 References Okpobo, J.
(2012) Understanding Book Publishing Zaria: ABU Press Limited Adesanoye F.A.
and Ojeniyi A.
(eds.)(2005).
Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heineman Educational Books Nigeria Ltd. 109 UNIT 2 SALES OUTLETS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Bookshops and Bookstores 3.2 Books Launching Venues 3.3 Trade Fair Centres 3.4 Conferences/Seminar/Workshops 3.5 Newspaper Stands 3.6 School Libraries 3.7 State and National Libraries 3.8 Hotels 3.9 Venues of Public Functions 3.10 Churches/Mosques Premises 3.11 Internet Facilities 3.12 Book Vendors 3.13 Distributors 3.14 The Authors 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction There are many places where books can be disposed to users.
This unit focuses on some of the major outlets use for distribution, purchase and sales of books.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you would be able to:  Explain the various outlets use for the sales of books.
 List some of the available outlets in your area.
110 3.0 Main Content These are places where the books published are taken to for onward consumption by the consumers.
The sales outlets include: (a) Book launching venues (b) Trade fair centres (c) Conferences/seminars/annual book review conferences (d) Bookshops (e) Newspaper stands (f) School libraries (g) State and national libraries (h) Internet facilities (i) Book vendors (j) Distributors, (k) The authors.
(l) Hotels (m) Churches (n) Mosques (o) Venues of public functions such as wedding, installations, concreations, inductions etc.
3.1 Bookshops and Bookstores.
The most popular places where people go to look for books are bookshops and stores.
These shops are available in all major cities, school premises and other public places.
They are established primarily to purchase books from authors and publishers and sell such books to the public.
Some of these bookshops are Modern Bookshop Jos, University of Ibadan Bookshop, Unijos Bookshop, ABU Bookshop, Zaria, etc.
3.2 Books Launching Venues Authors and publishers sometimes orgnaise launchings for their new books.
During such occasion, people purchase not just the new books but also the existing ones that are brought to the venues.
Most book launch are organised for books written on puplar issues and prominent persons.
Most of these are biographies and autobiographies.
Okwilagwe (2001:8 – 9) quoted some scholars such as Sotumbi who said “the culture of book launching… has come to stay in Nigeria” because “money 111 normally flowed in like August rain, from the gathered assembly into the pockets of the publishers and their authors” (Osofisan, 1990).
Okwilagwe (2001) explained that the reasons for book launching in Nigeria could be seen as a survival strategy by the publishers who are facing harsh business environment in the century.
3.3 Trade Fair Centres Trade fairs of all types normally take place at different places annually and by different economic and business groups.
During such trade fairs, publishers and bookshop owners do paid for popular stands where they usually displayed different books for sales.
In Nigeria, Lagos, Kaduna and Enugu international trade fair are done annually at Ikeja, Kaduna and Enugu cities and normally organised by chambers of commerce of such places for the purpose of promoting new and available goods and services.
3.4 Conferences/Seminar/Workshops Different professionals usually organise their conferences annually.
At the venues of these conferences vendors do display different books for sales by those attending such conferences.
The same apply to seminars and workshops that are organised annually by government and non-government organisations.
3.5 Newspaper Stands Newspaper stands, are where vendors displayed different newspapers and magazines for sales.
At these stands many important books are normally displayed for sales.
So news stands are popular venues of getting new books.
3.6 School Libraries All schools are expected and suppose to establish libraries and this is mandatory for all educational institutions in the country.
So school libraries buy books of all types for the use of their students, teachers and researchers.
This makes school libraries an important sale outlet.
3.7 State and National Libraries In Nigeria, the states and federal government are mandated to establish or open a public library in each state capital (for federal government) and in each local government headquarters (for state governments).
Therefore, these libraries are 112 expected to be stocked with all types of books for the use of people from all fields of endeavour.
So these public libraries are good sales outlets for books.
3.8 Hotels In most hotels, there are provisions made for the marketing and sales of printed materials such as books, newspapers and magazines.
Many standard hotels of international statues have these provisions.
This means that hotels are good sales outlets for books.
3.9 Venues of Public Functions There are many public functions that usually take place at popular places.
Activities such as induction of professionals like engineers, accountant, and lawyers and so on; or installations of leaders such as traditional and community leaders; or wedding receptions and convocations are some of the occassions where books can be sold.
Most times you see book vendors with all types of books for sale at the venue.
3.10 Churches/Mosques Premises At the premises of most popular religious buildings, books related to the faith such as religious groups are always available for sale.
In Nigeria, many church and mosque buildings have facilities for the display and sales of all types of books.
So religious institutions are good outlets for book sales.
3.11 Internet Facilities Today internet facilities are available for the publicity, purchase and sales of books globally.
Both e-book and hard copies can be purchased easily through internet.
Things such as ATM, POS and other methods of ordering and paying for books are available on the internet.
3.12 Book Vendors There are book vendors who are in the business of marketing books of all types.
They purchase book and sell them at public places, public gatherings and bookshops.
They normally earned commission or make a minimal profit from the sales of such books.
113 3.13 Distributors These are business men or organisation that purchase books in bulk and distribute such to bookshops and libraries.
Distributors normally are registered with book publishers and when new books are produce, they will take delivery and pass them to those who are his representatives in different locations in the country.
3.14 The Authors In disposing published books to the relevant consumers, some authors do serve as outlets.
Such authors normally will collect copies of the book from the publisher and sell them to the target audience of such books.
Some lecturers of tertiary institutions who produced books do sell such books to their students personally.
4.0 Conclusion The need to know the different outlet available for the sales of books is very necessary in book publishing industry.
This will facilitate the development and growth of the industry.
This is what this unit has tried to explore.
Book reviews and book fairs are also important outlets.
5.0 Summary This unit explained some of the outlets available for the distribution of books.
Some of outlets are bookshops, school libraries, public libraries, book vendors and news stands.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
List all the available book outlets in your area.
7.0 References Okwilagwe O.A (2001).
Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Adesanoye F.A.
(1991) “Book editing and publishing problems in Nigeria” Umoh S.O (ed).
Tropical Issues in Communication Arts Uyo: Modern Business Press Ltd. 114 UNIT 3 BOOK READING AND PROBLEMS OF BOOK READING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Book Reading 3.2 Problems in Book Reading 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction Book reading and the problems associated with it is worth discussing.
This is because reading books is become a difficult action even to students of higher institutions.
This unit focuses on the problem of reading books.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Discuss the problems of book reading  Give examples of difficulty in book reading 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Book Reading The reading culture in Nigeria is not very encouraging in the sense that; with every passing year, performances in the West African Examination Council (WAEC) General Certificate for Education (GCE) SSCE and Joint Admission and Matriculation Board (JAMB) examinations, have recorded progressively poor results.
For instance, out of a total of 1.7 million students who sat for the University Matriculation Examination of 2013 only 700 passes was recorded.
These poor performances are a result of the poor reading culture in Nigeria.
Sogbein cited in Ajibola et al (2008) laments that many Nigerians do not buy a book of any sort, or any reading material, after exiting the formal school setting.
He said that the 115 Nigerian reading habit is largely utilitarian and the reading is mainly in pursuit of a certificate and not necessarily knowledge.
This poor reading culture has affected the quality of leadership in our country.
After obtaining certificates in the discipline of their choise, most professionals stop reading thereafter, and so they experience stagnation in growth in their chosen profession.
3.2 Problems of Book Reading The poor book reading culture is not however peculiar to Nigeria alone.
It can be regarded as a universal phenomenon, since even in the United States of America, several steps have been taken to enhance the reading culture among their people.
In the recent past, it is on record that former President Bill Clinton sent the America Reads Challenge Act of 1997 and Reading Excellence Act of 1998 to Congress in order to further the reading culture of that county.
Before one can really proffer solutions to the poor reading conditions in Nigeria, it will be worth while to ascertain the causative agents of poor reading.
Ajibola et al (2008) sample the opinion of publishers, writers, parents, marketers, teachers etc.
concerning what the possible causes of the poor reading culture in Nigeria might be.
And they cited the following as possible causes: (1) That many young people get more attracted to practical learning experiences than the fictional experiences that books provide.
(2) That many children are plagued with reading disability that makes them operate below their mental capacity.
(3) That in a situation where the student does not suffer from any of the above mentioned issues, sometimes the student does not even have access to the required books that he wants.
(4) That there is little parent participation in the learning of the student.
Parents have left the issues of learning entirely in the hands of teachers without supporting the student to cultivate a reading habit right from home.
(5) The total collapse of the school, state and national libraries have not in a small way contributed greated to the collapse of the reading culture in Nigeria.
(6) Another major impeachment to books and invariably to reading in Nigeria is the lack of basic infrastructures for the efficient production and distriubution of printing materials.
116 (7) High illiteracy rate is also a problem of reading in Nigeria.
Many times you find illiterates who confess to their interest in reading but because of their poor literacy level, they cannot.
(8) Poverty is another militating factor against reading.
There has been poor enrolment in schools because parents claim not to have the wherewithal to sponsor their children’s education, and some have enrolled but cannot purchase textbooks.
(9) The advent of Information Communication Technology has made the interest of youths in self development through book reading to dwindle.
Many find it quite more interesting playing computer games than reading.
(10) Government has a great role in developing the reading culture in the country.
This they can do by legislation like in America and the provision of infrastructures, quality teachers, libraries, etc.
Other problems noticeable in book reading are: the use of other literary styles such as personification, euphemism, oxymoron, etc.
which make them problematic for some readers that do not understand or comprehend literary devices.
Some other problems of book reading as explained by scholars such as Abimbola (2008:98) are: 1.
Unfriendly Presentation of Materials: This is where authors present ideas in repulsive ways that do not attract readers to information therein.
Books are supposed to be attractive and appealing to readers but this is not the situation readers will not read such books.
2.
Grammatical errors put readers off: Abimbola explained that books that have errors such as synthetical, punctuations, typographic, spellings, verbosity, tautology, malapropism, hanging sentences, awkward constructions and other grammatical problems normally discourage readers.
3.
Upgraded Materials: Books written above the age ranges of readers will not be read by people of such age.
Books meant for pupils, youths and adult should be graded accordingly for such people to read easily.
4.
Literacy: The issue of illiteracy is the major problem of reading because the high level of illiteracy makes reading difficulty.
5.
Utilitarian approach to reading: Many people engage in reading for the value of it.
This explains why it is mostly students who read to past examinations than just reading for the pleasure of it.
117 6.
Reading Disability: This is a situation where a child read books that are below their mental ability.
According to Sogbein (2008:105), reading disability is the discrepancy that is not caused by vision, hearing or motor handicaps, mental retardation, emotional disturbance or environmental disadvantages, but rather by a presumed underlying neurological difficulty.
Osogbein (2008) also said that other factors like the vocabulary level, background knowledge and personal motivation also create impediments to reading.
7.
Poverty: Salako and Akinbode (2008:112) said that many parents are too poor to provide basic needs of their children including books for them to read.
So parents leave the issue of book reading by their children to only schools.
This does not encourage the habit of book reading at home by children and students because they grow up to believe that they can only read when they are back to schools.
8.
Language: Most books are written in the second languages (English in the case of most Nigerians) and not in the first language or mother tongue of readers.
This does not encourage many people who are fluent in their mother tongues to have interest in reading books.
Coupled with the problem of illiteracy in such second languages, this becomes one of the major problems for book reading.
9.
Learning Situation: Most homes in Nigeria are devoid of books and other reading facilities and so both adults and children do not read at homes.
So if adults do not read, how then can the child be motivated to read?
This is why the only learning situation is mostly done in schools where there are libraries and other reading facilities.
10.
Computer Facilities: Abimbola (2008:121) listed video games, computer games and chatting as some of the problems affecting book reading.
According to this scholar, nowadays student prefer watching dramatic films on television and using internet facilities than reading books.
3.3 Solving Problems of Book Reading Salako and Akinbode (2008:115) have made the following recommendations as ways of solving the problems of book reading: 1.
Parents should visit their children in schools regularly to ensure that they are reading the books in school libraries.
They should also ensure that they read their books at home.
118 2.
Parents should regulate the time their children spend watching television and using their computer facilities so that the children would not use all their time on these media without reading books.
3.
Parents should create libraries at home and earmark time for reading in these libraries.
4.
Parents should buy books, newspapers and magazines and encourage their children to read them.
5.
The National Library of Nigeria should partner with schools to establish Readers’ clubs in schools.
6.
Every school should establish standard library with all reading materials.
7.
Parents should buy books regularly for their family use.
8.
Publishers should donate books to schools as a means of encouraging reading culture.
3.0 Conclusion There is need to find a lasting solution to the problems reading in Nigeria.
This is what this unit focuses on.
4.0 Summary The problems of book reading were explained.
Necessary recommendations were also made.
The aim is to solve the problems that are retarding the growth of book industry.
5.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Explain the problems of book reading in your community.
2.
What are the possible solutions to the problems of book reading in Nigeria?
6.0 References Abinbola, A.O.
(2008) “Reading Culture in Nigeria: Challenges and Opportunities: The Marketer’s Perspectives” in Ajibola, A.
& Oluyide, E. (eds).
Book Publishing and Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Manifold Grace.
119 UNIT 4 ROLE OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY IN BOOK PUBLISHING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 ICT and Book Publishing 3.2 Trends in Global Book Publishing 3.3 E-Learning Opportunities 3.4 Problems of Publishing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction The development of the new information technologies has change the face of book publishing worldwide.
This unit looks at how this new technologies have affected the book publishing industry globally.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to explain  The role of ICT in publishing  Emerging global book publishing 3.0 Main Content 3.1 ICT and Book Publishing The pace with which technology is changing the world is amazing.
Since the ICT revolution, information on any given area of knowledge or event now moves across the globe at the speed of light.
The book publishing industry has not been left out in this technological revolution.
The traditional book publishing processes from manuscripts development through book production, distribution and marketing and the process of actual sales is going through tremendous transformation, due to the global information and electronic revolution.
120 Some countries around the world now have 40% of their book publishing endeavours credited to the electronic media.
Electronic media has made it possible to expand the readership of books and also bring comfort to the prospect of study.
Some of the methods in this emerging global publishing trend include: (a) Audio books (b) E-books (c) E-publishing (d) Print on Demand Apart from the fact that the issue of cyberspace has made books available through the use of the electronic media, aspects such as design, typesetting etc.
has been enhanced by computers.
Some of the ways in which ICT can be used for books publishing include: (a) Designing of the book covers.
(b) Writing of Titles of Books (c) Writing of the name of the author or authors.
(d) Printing of the pictures of authors (e) Cropping of pictures where necessary (f) Preserving pictures, words, figures and colours of books (g) Arrangement of the pages (h) Editing of books through correction of spellings (i) Printing of books 3.2 Trends in Global Book Publishing With the growth of the information and communication technologies (ICT), book publishing has been affected.
Akinjogbin, (2009:309) explained that the pace of technological development has changed the traditional publishing in many ways.
Some of these ways are: 1.
Audio Books: According to Akinjogbin, these are books on tapes and disks that are written into book form.
Publishers now produce complete text books in recorded forms using different types of voices to represent the characters in such books for the visually impaired to be on the same level with those who are reading those books.
The ICT has helped in this direction.
121 2.
E-Books: These are books that are produce in digital forms and files.
Many hard copies of books are now having the soft copes on CD-ROMS.
Buyers can download e-books from the internt but many of such books are usually formatted for specific hardware which cannot be used outside such hardware.
Authors can decide to produce only e-books which can only be accessed on the internet without hard copies while some authors prefer to produce both.
3.
E-Publishing: This is when the publication of books or journals is done exclusively on-line.
This is the new way for authors to share their ideas with other people with less hindrance.
E-publishing organizations are concerned with publishing e- books that can be used on internet facilities such as laptops, handsets and other computer devices.
4.
Point on Demand (POD): This is a form of e-publishing where all printed materials such as books, mazagines, journals etc.
are stored digitally and only printed when they are demanded for by consumers.
Many such POD publishers exist and their main activities are to print, bind and sell books that are demanded by individuals and organizations.
3.3 E-Publishing Opportunities Akinjogbin (2009:314) believed that there are many opportunities for publishers and readers in the field of electronic publishing.
Some of these opportunities are: 1.
E-book technooogy will reduce the cost of books and make book distribution easy.
2.
It will make books more available and no book will be out of print.
3.
Many companies will specialize on publishing books on demand (POD) 4.
E-books reduce the problem of censorship by governments due to political problems, religious beliefs or ideological differences.
Books banned by government can be place on the internet now by groups and supporters of such books.
5.
E-books can be read online where such digital books allows you to also read other related books globally.
6.
E-publishing helps new authors to be published instantly and be known globally by readers.
7.
Authors of E-books usually get their royalty from the publishers regularly than authors of traditional books.
122 8.
Most e-books can be downloaded by readers at a less cost and use at the convenience of the readers.
So e-publishing will benefit the readers both in time and money.
3.4 Problems of E-Publishing There are some challenges that e-publishing have.
Akinjogbin (2009:215) say that e-publishing: 1.
Has drawn the attention of publishers and authors to the problems of inadequate copyright laws as it affects this new field of publishing.
2.
The problem of inadequate and non-available electricity for the use of computer and internet facilities to access the e-books.
3.
The problem of computer literacy facing many readers in the country.
4.
The issues of interest by readers to change from the use of traditional books to the modern e-books.
5.
The poverty level of readers in relation to the access and ability to purchase the computer and internet facilities that will be used for e-book reading/publishing.
4.0 Conclusion This unit discussed the role of ICT in book publishing.
The new trends in book publishing were explained and the opportunities highlighted.
This is to help understand the changing field of book publishing.
5.0 Summary This topic discussed the role of ICT in book publishing and circulation.
The new trends in publishing and the opportunities were treated.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How does sales strategy promote book sales and circulation process?
2.
Discuss how diction and use of literary styles may encourage or discourage book reading?
3.
Discuss the relevance of information Communication Technology to book publishing in this age.
123 7.0 References/Further Reading Adesanoye F.A.
(1991) “Book editing and publishing problems in Nigeria” Umoh S.O (ed).
Tropical Issues in Communication Arts Uyo: Modern Business Press Ltd. Tiamiyu M. (2005) “Prospects of Nigerian Book Publishing in the Electronic Age” in in Adesanoye, F.A.
& Oyeniyi, A.
(eds) Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria).
Akinjogbin, K. (2009) “Book publishing in Electronic Age: opportunities and threats” in Soso, L; Osunbiyi, B.
& Biobaku, L. (eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide Lagos: African Resource Communications.
Oso, L., Osunbiyi, B., Biobaku Lanre, Book Publishing a Practical GuideMushin African Resource Communications 2008.
Tiamiy, M. (2005) “Prospects of Nigerian Book Publishing in the Electronic Age” in Adesanoye F.A.
and Oyeniyi A.
(eds) Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria, Ibadan: Heineman Educational Books (Nigeria).
124 MODULE 5 BOOK PUBLISHING LAWS INTRODUCTION Under this module, the need to recognise the rules and regulations guiding book publishing shall be looked into as part of laws guiding publication of books.
OBJECTIVES This course introduces students to the study of book publishing and the laws in Nigeria.
Emphasis will be placed on such elementary book publishing laws and laws related concepts that guide the art of book publishing as well as the scope and definition of book publishing and the law.
The history of printing, types of books, roles/essentials of books to the society, characteristics of good books, sales and circulation process, law on plagiarism, theft of intellectual property, registeration of book on ISBN, etc.
will also be discussed.
This module has the following units.
Unit 1 Book Publishing Agreement Unit 2 Copyright Law Unit 3 ISBN Requirement Unit 4 Law of Defamation Unit 5 Law of Privacy Unit 6 Law of Contempt Unit 7 Official Secret Act Unit 8 Sedition 125 UNIT 1 AGREEMENT/CONTRACT LAW 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Book Publishing Agreement 3.2 Components of Book Publishing Agreement 3.3 Legal Concepts Relating to Publishing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction The process of publication starts with the author but requires a pletora of people to get the printed work to the reader.
Because of the varied interests in the publication process there is a need to protect each party and interest in the venture.
This is the readon why it is advisable to go into contractual agreement to protect and strenghten the process.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to explain the reasons for agreement in book publishing and what the agreement entails.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Book Publishing Agreement/Contract The term law has almost defied definition because many scholars have tried to give it an all encompassing definition, all in vain.
However a working definition of what law should be regarded as is given thus: “a body of rules designed or formulated to guide human conduct or action which is enforced among the members of a given state or society”.
Agreement (contract) on the other hand, means a consensus between two or more parties to carry out an act which is legal.
A contract entails offer and acceptance or invitation to treat, that is, an offer made to the general public.
There are four main kinds of agreement.
126 (1) The outright sale of copyright (2) A profit sharing agreement (3) The royalty system and (4) Commission agreement 3.2 Components of Book Publishing Agreement An agreement, according to Okilagwe (2001) may contain the following items: (a) Rights (i) Volume rights (controlled by the publisher) (ii) Subsidiary rights (controlled by the publishers) and sometimes by the author’s agents) (b) The main features of an agreement (i) The Work: The title of the work must be identified.
(ii) Form of the Manuscript: Two copies of manuscript with artwork, illustration by the author in a form agreed with the publisher.
(iii) Damage or Loss: Publishers are not held responsible for loss or damage.
(v) Conditions of Acceptance: If a manuscript falls short of the stipulated standards of extent, character or othersiwe, a publisher can refuse to publish it.
(vi) Inclusion of other text and illustration: To avoid plagarism etc.
publisher should make thorough enquiries.
(vii) Extra Matter (viii) Author’s correction (ix) Publisher’s responsibility (x) Indemnity (xi) Abridgement of work (xii) Copyright granted (xiii) Sum payable as royalty (xiv) Other rights (xv) Tax (xvi) Statement of sales (xvii) Free copies (xviii) Revision of work (xix) Remainders (xx) Reversion of rights 127 (xxi) Determination of contract (xxii) Arbitration (xxiii) Recording in Braille 3.3 Legal Concepts Relating To Publishing We shall try to acquaint ourselves with legal concepts relating to publishing.
They include:  Libel/slander (defamation)  Contempt  Copyright  Threat to security: sedition  Disclosure of official secrets  Indecency and obscenity (1) Defamation is an attack on a persons’ reputation by false publication with the intent of damaging, character association, etc.
to cause the person to be less than who he is in the public eye.
Defamation is of two type (a) Libel: Libel is a defamatory statement that has permanence in form of print (b) Slander: This is defamation in a spoken or transcient form.
(2) Defences: In an action for libel, the following defences are available to the defendant (a) Unintentional defamation (b) Innocent defamation (c) Consent (d) Justification (e) Fair comment (f) Absolute privilege (g) Qualified privilege (h) Offer of amends (3) Contempt: Meyile (2008) see “contempt as any act or conduct which constitutes disregard, ridicule, hinderance or disrepute to rules, constituted authority or administration of law.
Here are some instances where a publisher may be seen to have committed the above 128 (a) Court proceedings which are meant to be kept secret, when published can be seen as contempt.
(b) When biased publications are made while matter is in litigation it can sway the judge or the public and this can also be seen as contempt (c) Publishing any piece that tends to misrepresent the true position of things in a law suit.
(d) Matters that will serve as a hinderance or distraction of the court processes, when published can be regarded as contempt.
(4) Copyright: Copyright, like most legal phenomena, evades apt definition.
This is further compounded by the 1959 Act that laid no definition of the subject matter.
The decree simply enumerated the works that should be eligible for copyright.
Elias in his word defines copyright as the right of author to prevent others from publishing or producing his work without his or her consent.
Obatisan Ogunkoye defines it as “copyright simply put, is the exclusive right given under the law to the owner of copyright to control the reproduction of the work which is the subject of copyright law”.
Interestingly, the two indigenous definitions above, a common phenomena running through the definitions is the exclusive right so conferred on the copyright owner, the right so conferred on the copyright owner is exercisable by him alone or by another person with his/her consent.
However, the Black’s Law Dictionary defines copyright inter alia: “The right of literary property as recognised and sanctioned by positive law.
An intangible in corporal right granted by statutes to the author or originator of certain literary or artistic production, whereby he is invested for a limited period, with the sole and exclusive privilege of multiplying copies of the same and publishing.” It is apposite to spotlight by way of emphasis, the features of copyright as highlighted in the above definition.
In the first place, copyright is a personal right which is not of a tangible nature.
Secondly, it is a creature of statute.
Thirdly, it is vested in the author or originator of protectable work.
The above mentioned ingredients are on all forms of the generality of our copyright law or act.
The definition is circumscribed to certain literary or artistic works under the law.
The following works are eligible for copyright protection: (a) Literary works 129 (b) Musical works (c) Artistic works (d) Cinematography/films (e) Sound recording and (f) Broadcasts In what seems to be more encompassing definition, the Mozely and Whitey’s Law Dictionary defines copyright thus: Copyright in relation to an original literacy, dramatic or musical work is an exclusive right to do, or to authorize other persons to do, certain acts in relation to that work.
Such acts includes reproducing the work on any material form, publishing it, performing it in public, broadcasting or making any adaptation to it.
This type of copyright, generally speaking last during the life time of the author or fifty years after his death.
Copyright similarly subsists in artistic works, sound recording, cinematography films, television and sound broadcasts.
Copyright is not a right to do anything but a right to stop others from doing something.
Copyright is a right to stop privacy.
It is a negative right because it is not a right to but a right not to.
It is the right of a maker of a work protected by law to restrain others from interfering with his/her right to work.
Copyright in a work is the right to reproduce the work in any material forms, to communicate the work to the public and to broadcast the work, thus the copyright owner has the right to restrain third parties from doing any of these acts which subject to some exceptions will be infringement of copyright.
Exceptions to the Rule The following are the instances in which works that are under copyright rules can be dealt with without the permission of the copyright owner.
(a) When the copyright product is to be used for educational purposes.
(b) When the copyright product is needed for research purposes (c) Private use of materials that are copyrighted.
130 (5) Threat to State Security: Sedition When a statement is made by a publisher and the intention of the said statement is meant to cause civil unrest, contempt or hatred against government and of course especially when such statements are false, it is considered to be sedition.
It usually carries its penalty.
Disclosure of Official Secret It is an offence under the civil service law for an officer in whose care government entrust official secret, for the said person to make such secrets public.
Indecency and Obscenity It is in the interest of the publisher to be mindful of the statutory provision of the constitution that prohibits the publication of indecent and obscene materials.
By this, assertion we can see that the publisher should not only avoid, but he has the ethical responsibility of maintaining the moral standards of the public.
Pornography is prohibited under this law.
Note: This legal terms relating to publishing is explained in detail in unit 2 to unit 8 3.4 ISBN Requirements The accronym ISBN means International Standard Book Numbering.
It is a number given to published book for easy identification in a series of books.
The essence of ISBN is to protect a book from being pirated.
ISBN requirements are as follows: (1) The book to be numbered must be original: This mean it has to do with the book emanating from the original author or authors.
(2) It must not be a pirated book.
(3) The name of the author, firm or company, that undertook the publication work, must be on the book.
(4) The topic of the work or the heading of the work must be there.
(5) A word or words having no direct reference to the character or quality or title of another book should be provided.
(6) The procedure for ISBN registration must be adhered to, etc.
131 4.0 Conclusion ISBN has been treated in this unit and legal terms relating to publishing have been explained in brief.
Book publishing contract was also examined.
5.0 Summary This topic treated book publishing laws in Nigeria.
It has treated elementary book publishing and law related concepts that guide the art of book publishing as well as the scope and definition of book publishing laws.
Laws of plagiarism, theft of intellectual property, registeration of books on ISBN etc.
are treated.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss the position of contract as it relates to book publishing.
2.
Discuss the concept of copyright law as it protects authors’ rights.
3.
List and explain the ISBN requirements for book publishing.
7.0 References Adesanoye F.A.
and Ojeniyi A.
(eds) 2005.
Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan.
Heineman Educational Books Nigeria Ltd. Adikpo, J.A.
and Ihwa S.N.
(2009) Book Production, What You Need to Know.
Makurdi: Oracle Business Ltd. Sanni, A.O.
(ed) Introduction to Nigeria Legal Method, Kuntel Publishing House 1999.
Tiamiyu M. (2005) “Prospects of Nigerian Book Publishing in the Electronic Age” in Adesanoye, F.A and Oyeniyi, A.
(eds) Issues, in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Book (Nigeria).
132 UNIT 2 LAW OF DEFAMATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Law of Defamation 3.2 Meaning of Defamation 3.3 Slander 3.4 Libel 3.5 Defences for Libel 3.6 Evidence of Defamation 3.7 Proof of Defamation 3.8 Differences between Slander and Libel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignemnt 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit focuses on the law of defamation which prevents an author from writing books that will affect the character of somebody negatively.
The essence of knowing the provisions of this law is to avoid litigation.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to know:  The maning of defamation  Discuss different provisions of defamation  Types of defamation and  Explain the defences against defamation.
133 3.0 Main Content: 3.1 Law of Defamation Although Section 39 of the 1999 constitution give the individual the right to receive and impart information, this provision is with a clause.
This freedom of expression is subject to the law is reasonable for the purpose of protecting the freedom of others.
Defamation is the law which seeks to protect individuals from indignity, ridicule, disrepute and other social embarrassment of which the persons may be disposed to through malicious publication.
This law tries to protect the reputation of people in the society by striking a balance between the two extremes in life of a writer.
Between one is the duty of the author to collect and disseminate information especially exposing wrong doing.
On the other hand, since some writing concern probing the activities of those who do wrong, doing this could lead to invasion of privacy of people.
The people’s right to reputation (through privacy) and the writer duty to inform is what this law tries to balance.
3.2 Meaning of Defamation According to Elias (1969) legally, defamation means the publication of any matter which tends to lower a person in the estimation of right thinking members of the Society; of which tend to make people shun or avoid him.
Defamation is of two types: libel and slander.
1.
Libel: This is a written and permanent printed matter that lowers the person’s reputation.
2.
Slander: This is a verbal and temporary matter or utterances that lower reputation of a person.
Here, the concept of third party is the bulwark of defamation since he is to serve as the witness.
3.3 Slander Slander is divided into two: 1.
Vulgar Disease: are slanderous words said out of anger.
For instance, when you insult a person while quarelling.
In such a situation, a person cannot be sued for defamation because it was said during a quarrel between the two parties.
2.
Actionable Slander: are words which are said out of envy or malice without prior quarrel.
Here, a person can sue because the act was done deliberately to lower the reputation of the complainant.
134 3.4 Libel There are different types of libel.
These are: 1.
Libel par se: Here the act being complained of is already published.
If you publish that a man is a thief, it means you commit libel parse if he is not a thief because you have already published it.
2.
Libel per Quod: When seemingly “Innocent” words are interpreted by people with special knowledge to uncover their deeper meanings which are defamatory to the complainant.
It is also called libel per innuendo, libel per words or libel per association.
3.
Civil Libel: This is a kind of libel with a bandwagon effect.
Here, once a person is attacked, other people would be affected by implication and this would lead to civil disturbance e.g.
when you defame a tribal leader.
This is a civil wrong or tort for which damages can be claimed.
4.
Criminal Libel: The offence is considered so grave that monetary compensation is not enough a penalty.
Such libel does result in imprisonment.
There are three kinds of criminal libel: sedition, blasphemy and obscenity.
(a) Sedition: This is committed when words that are likely to disturb the pease of a nation, government or its functionaries are used by an individual or groups of individuals thereby bringing hatred or contempt on such government or its functionaries.
This law stipulates that it is an offence to print, publish, sell or offer for sale, distribute or reproduce any seditious materials or publications.
It is also an offence to import seditious materials into the country.
The enabling law in Nigeria is the “Seditious law: criminal Code.
Note: When you defame the government, it is sedition but when you defame an individual, it is libel.
(b) Blasphemy: This is a type of libel where words use has the tendency of vilifying or annoying a particular faith or group.
Such publication can cause breach of peace by outraging the believers of that faith, Examples: “The Satanic Vers”, a book by Salman rushdie which the Muslims said blasphemed their religion (Islam) and a film produced in America: “The Least last temptation of Christ”, which Christian faith said blasphemed their religion.
As an author, if you write or publish your book in such a manner that offends any faith, then it is blasphemy.
This law revolves around religion and 135 glasphemous cases are prosecuted only be the state because it falls under criminal libel.
Blasphemy is very sensitive in a multi-religious setting like Nigeria.
(c) Obscenity: When you use words that are liable to deprive your audience thereby causing immorality among people by corrupting their morality, then you have commitited obscenity.
Any publications which can corrupt or deprave people generally are always considered obscene.
Examples are Blue films, pornographic magazines like Ikebe, Lolly, Better lover, Dauda and the sexy guy, etc.
3.5 Defences for Libel There are two types of defences for libel; Minor and major.
1.
Minor Defences: The minor defence for libel are as explained by Galadima and Embu (2000), these are: (a) Statue of Limitation: In this defense, you must bring an action within a stipulated time as enshrine in the enabling law.
We have six months within which to file a case if you feel you have been libeled.
Failure to do so will put a limitation to any subsequent act you may take.
(b) Accord and Satisfaction: If you defamed someone but before the defamed person goes to court, you apologise and he agreed, he cannot go to court for the same publication.
If he goes, then you can bring accord and satisfaction.
However, this defense only mitigates but does not exonerate.
(c) Violent Non Fit Injuria: This defense means that he who consents cannot complain.
When a writer publishes information from a consented discussion or interview, that person who consented to the interviewed or discussion cannot sue the writer for such.
If he does, the author can tender a witness or copy of the agreement or consent.
(d) Resjudicata: You bring this defence when the same case was adjudged by a court of co-ordinate jurisdiction.
This implies that a case cannot be given a second hearing at the same level of court.
A case already adjudged and decided upon cannot be entertained in a court of the same jurisdiction.
It can only be entertained on appeal.
A case already adjudged in magistrate Court can only be heard in Court of Appeal and not in another magistrate court.
136 (e) Death of Plaintiff: If a person bringing the action dies, the case die with him.
In civil proceeding, an action for libel dies with the plaintiff.
But in criminal case, it does not die because the state serves as the plaintiff.
2.
Major Defences: (a) Un-intentional Defamation: Though ignorance is not an excuse, the law recognises that a writer can unknowingly defame somebody in the course of his work.
Therefore, as a writer, you can plead unintentional defamation when: i.
The words contained in the statement are not libelous per se.
ii.
You did not know of any special circumstances that could form the statemenet into libel, innuendo or per Quod.
iii.
You made the statemenet innocently without meaning bad.
iv.
You offer correction and apology.
(b) Innocent Dissemination: When a statement is made by someone else and a second person unintentionally become involve in the dissemination of such defamatory statement, then that second person can plead innocent dissemination.
This defence deals with all those who help in the distribution of libelous statements such as vendors, publishers, booksellers, news agent, etc.
(c) Justification: Here, if you can prove the statemenet to be substantially true, then you will be freed by the court.
This defence is based on the truth or veracity of the publication.
In law, the court will normally proceed on the assumption that the statement is false until proved otherwise.
So, if you called some one a thief and you can prove that the statement is true you will be free when you are charged to court for libel and you justify it.
(d) Fair Comment: Every member of a society has the freedom to express his opinion on any matter of interest and importance.
However for you to plead fair comment, you must: i.
Comment on issue of public interest such as government affairs.
ii.
Comment on the administration of justice; conduct of public and private business affecting the nation.
iii.
Comment on any issue that attracts public opinion.
Malice destroys this defence.
(e) Privilege: We have qualified and absolute privileges.
When somebody makes malicious statement and he is not sue, then that person has 137 absolute privilege while qualified privilege has a protection that is limited.
Journalists have qualified privileges.
This defence is based on the recognition by law that some issues in the society are so important that people should speak out freely without litigation.
You can plead this defence when: i.
A defamatory statement was made in the course of fair reports of the case by a journalist.
ii.
A defamatory statement is published in the course of reporting the legal proceedings.
3.6 Evidence of Defamation You can know if a person is defamed when: i.
The statement exposes him to hatred, ridicule or contempt.
ii.
Such a statement lowers his/her reputation in the estimation of rational members of the society.
iii.
The same statemenet belittle him or disparage him in his profession or calling, and iv.
The statemenet makes him to be shunned or avoided.
3.7 Proof of Defamation When you feel you have been defamed then you must prove two things.
1.
Publication: You must prove that the defamatory statement was published or communicated to the third party.
By communication and publication, it includes letters, telephone, telegraph, newspapers, magazines, and televsion and radio stations.
2.
Identification: Here you have to prove that you are the person being talked about in the material.
One way of doing this is by the name which may be direct or indirect.
3.8 Differences between Slander and Libel Slander: Is a defamatory statement in transitory form.
This may include any audible signs like neon signs, gestures, or spoken words.
Libel: is a defamatory statemenet in permanent form.
This includes statues, drawings, effigy etc.
Defamation Act of 1961 considers broadcasting and draamtise statements as libel.
Therefore, 138 1.
Libel is defamation in permanent form while slander is in transitory form.
2.
In slander you need a witness to support you but in libel you need only to tender where the statement was published.
3.
Libel is actionable parse that is, punishing without the defendant having to prove how the damage is done.
Slander is not actionable parse except if the statement inputes a crime, contagious or affecting diseases or unchastity with a girl or a woman.
4.0 Conclusion From the explanation of the different types of defamation, you can clearly see that this law is made for clear and smooth business of publishing devoid of crises between peple and authors in their writings.
This also means that authors must be careful in their comments on people and groups to avoid legal tussles and conflicts that will arise from their publications.
5.0 Summary This unit treated the meaning of defamation, explained the different types of defamation and discussed the defences arising from legal tussles that may arise against any author as a result of his/her writing.
The difference between libel and slander was also explained.
1.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 1.
Explain the meaning of defamation and the different types of defamation that you know.
2.
What are the eviedences of defamation?
7.0 References Galadima, D.J.
and Embu, R. (2000) Laws and Ethics of the Nigerian Press.
Jos: Satolgraphic press Elias, T. (1969).
Nigerian Press Law.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Akinnola, R. (1996) Rights and Limitation of Nigeria Press.
Lagos: Rich Consult.
Osinbago, Y.
& Fogam, K. (1991).
Nigerian Media Law.
Lagos: Gravitas Publishers Ltd.
Memorandum on Media Independence: Freedom & Expression and Access to Information by Media Network on the Review of the 1999 Constitution, 2012.
139 UNIT 3: LAW OF PRIVACY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Law of Privacy 3.2 Invasion of Privacy 3.3 Defences of Privacy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction The importance of privacy to individuals is very relevant and important for societal peace and tranquility.
This is what the unit focuses on the law of privacy as it affects the business of publishing.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Discuss the importance fo the law of privacy  Explain when a person’s privacy is invaded, and  Examine the differences for privacy invasion 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Law of Privacy This law seeks to restrain the press from invading people’s privacy.
It revolves around news worthiness of a person.
If you hold public office or you hold or about to hold public office that commands newsworthiness, then this law will apply to you more than an ordinary man.
Everybody has a private life which should not be made public unless occasion demands.
A person in high public office has less privacy and more privacy law.
Secondly, this law seeks to protect the exposure of the individual goods and property.
The press is prevented from going deeper into the private life of an individual which is not relevant to his office.
140 This law is one of the problems facing investigative journalism.
It puts a limit to which a journalist can go in his investigation beyond which is Invasion of privacy, a bridge of the law.
3.2 Invasion of Privacy You invade a person’s privacy when you do any of the following: 1.
Appropriation: This means using someone’s image without his consents, be it expressly or by implication.
For example when you use somebody’s picture without his consent.
Advertisers face this problem.
However, when such picture is obtained in public functions then he cannot sue.
2.
Placement in False Light: When you attribute to someone else the views which he does not hold.
It occurs, also when you use one’s picture wrongly.
3.
Physical Intrusion: This is defined as “unreasonable intrusion upon the privacy of a person’s life”.
This is tresspass in legal terms.
We have three types of tresspass: (a) Tresspass to Person: Is an attempt, a threat or physical attack on a person.
(b) Tresspass of Goods and Property: Here if some one removes a page in another’s book, the he has trespass.
(c) Trespass to Land: Anything done on the land without the permission of the owner.
For example, building, farming, pictures etc.
on the land.
4.
Public Disclosure: Unreasonable publicity given to the private life of someone even when you have facts which are true is an invasion of privacy.
The more you expose embarrassing facts about a person’s private life, the more you face the wrath of this law because truth has no defence in this case.
5.
Confidentiality of Source: This means the breach of confidence through the disclosure of a source of confidential information.
Here you can sue for breach of trust and privacy.
It should be noted that when a person obtained information during his service or when employed anywhere, that person will not reveal such information when he leaves the organization.
If he does he will be sued for that.
6.
Conspiracy: When you work together with another person to do something which is illegal, then you will be charged for conspiracy.
When a journalist and a camera man illegally photograph someone’s private life without his consent then they have invaded his privacy through conspiracy.
141 3.3 Defences for Privacy When you are charged to court for invasion of privacy, you can plead any of the following defences: A.
The right of privacy is the right to be left alone but this is achieved by the person’s ability to attract less or more public attention.
Those who attract public attention more invariably sacrifice most of their private life to the public.
B.
He who volunteers or consent cannot complain.
This means when you grant the press interview you should not turn around and sue them for invading your privacy.
C. Public Interest: You can say you publish the book based on the importance of that information to the public, especially when the information concerns public interest and welfare.
D. Permanent Publication: The right of privacy can only be violated by permanent publication and not by words.
Rumours and hearsay is not accepted by this law.
However, if the third person is involved, then you can prove your case when your privacy is invaded verbally.
E. News Worthiness: Is the major defence because when an individual is prominent, especially in areas that affects people’s lives, then he has lost his privacy example are human rights activitist, a social critic, government officials, leaders, etc.
4.0 Conclusion From our discussion of the law of privacy, it is clear that there are periods where and when activities and events cannot be written about because are in realm of privacy.
So authors are not to write about all information in their possession.
5.0 Summary This unit discussed the essence of privacy and the law guiding such private affairs.
The methods of invading people’s privacy were and the defences invaded people’s privacy were also explained.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment  Explain how a person’s privacy can be invaded.
 What are the defences for the law of privacy?
142 7.0 References Galadima, D.J.
and Embu, R. (2000) Laws and Ethics of the Nigerian Press.
Jos: Satolgraphic press Elias, T. (1969).
Nigerian Press Law.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Akinnola, R. (1996) Rights and Limitation of Nigeria Press.
Lagos: Rich Consult.
Osinbago, Y.
& Fogam, K. (1991).
Nigerian Media Law.
Lagos: Gravitas Publishers Ltd.
Memorandum on Media Independence: Freedom & Expression and Access to Information by Media Network on the Review of the 1999 Constitution, 2012.
143 UNIT 4 CONTEMPT 1.0 Introductin 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Contempt of Court 3.2 How contempt is committed 3.3 Uses of Contempt 3.4 Types of Contempt 3.5 Guidelines for Reporting Criminal Procedures 3.6 What cannot be reported 3.7 Exceptions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction The courts are temple of justice.
They need absolute concentration to deliver justice to whoever is due.
So they should not be distracted hence the law to protect the court from such.
Contempt of the courts is the focus of this unit.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Explain how contempt of court takes place.
 Discuss the uses of contempt.
 Differentiate the types of contempt.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Contempt of Court This means the intentional disrespect to a court, that is, the person of a judge, the proceedings and the premises and buildings of the court.
For the journalists, that law seeks to ensure that good judgment is achieved without any biase report against the parties involved in a case.
The guiding principle, as contained in 144 section 33(5) of the suspended 1979 constitution, is that the press is “having the ability to” and “trying to” influence the judge’s decision (if possible) during pre-trial period if the press just publish reports on those involved in the case without restrain.
3.2 How Contempt is Committed This is done by: 1.
Any act which brings the integrity of the judge to question.
2.
Any imputation of an improper motive(s) to those empower with the administration of justice.
3.
Any interference with the course of justice.
4.
Defiling the court by refusing to be sworn-in or to talk.
5.
Lowering the reputation of the court.
6.
Publication of any matter that would interfere with the administration of justice.
3.3 Uses of Contempt Contempt law has many uses.
Some of them are: 1.
To deal with erring publication and stop pre-trial publication that will affect fair judgment.
2.
The judge can issue gag order to the press to prevent photographs of the accused.
3.
Can prevent the press from publishing the defendants conduct in court.
4.
To identify and testimonies of witnesses concerning the accused/defendants can be gagged.
3.4 Types of Contempt There are two types of contempt: 1.
Contempt-in-Facie: This is contempt in the face of court.
It means any word or act done in the premises of the court which is likely to obstruct or interfere with the due process of justice or calculated to do same.
For example: if you assault anybody within the court premises, or, interrupt court proceedings through shouting or talking, or when a witness refuses to be sworn in or taking photographs or statues and building without permission.
2.
Contempt-ex-Facie: This is contempt out of the face of court.
It means any intentional disrespect to the court outside the premises of the court.
This include a.
Publication which are intended to prejudice fair trial.
b.
Publication which scandalizes or lower the authority of the court.
145 c. Any act which interfere with person having a duty to do in court.
d. Any act which interfere with person having a duty to do in court.
e. Any act which bridge or infringe on the duty of persons connected with court or its proceedings.
3.5 Guidelines for Reporting Criminal Procedures In reporting criminal cases, you try to strike a balance between the public’s right to be informed and the accused person’s right to fair trial.
Therefore, the following can be reported or published: 1.
Biological information about an accused person, name, sex, age, resident, employment, marital status.
2.
Substance of the case: The complaint and identity of the parties making the complaint.
3.
The identity of the investigating or arresting agency and the nature of the investigation.
4.
The circumstances surrounding the arrest, that is, when, where, how, any escape?
Any items recovered or seized.
3.6 What Cannot Be Reported Just as the things that can be reported favours the public, what cannot be reported favours the accused persons.
Therefore, the following cannot be reported during the trial of the accused person: 1.
Opinion about an accused character’s guilt or innocent.
2.
Any previous record of an accused person.
3.
Admission, confession or content of a statement made by an accused person or Alibi tendered by him.
4.
Names of the jury and any official statement from the court considered detrimental to the accused person.
5.
Statement concerning the credit or anticipated testimony of witnesses.
6.
Result of the investigative procedures, for example; ballistic test, lab test, finger print, lie detector test, etc.
146 3.7 Exceptions: The above does and don’t notwithstanding, there are exceptions which are as follows: 1.
Information about an accused person can be reported only if it is necessary for the apprehension of the culprit or if it will save any other public interest.
For example; an armed robber who is declared wanted.
2.
Photograph of an accused can be published BUT must be obtained in public place or outside the court premises.
3.
Photograph obtained in court of public places can be published if it will help in the arrest of the culprit.
4.0 Conclusion The use of contempt in court law is to ensure that complaintnats get justice from the courts.
Therefore, this law controls the authors from interfering with the work of the courts by publishing information that may affect the delivering of justice.
5.0 Summary This unit examined contempt of court law and explained the importance of such law to the administration of justice.
This type of contempt law and the guideline for writing about criminal procedures were treated in this unit.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What are the procedures for reporting criminal cases in courts?
2.
Explain how contempt of courts is committed?
3.
What is the information you cannot publish when such cases are in courts?
7.0 References Galadima, D.J.
and Embu, R. (2000) Laws and Ethics of the Nigerian Press.
Jos: Satolgraphic press Elias, T. (1969).
Nigerian Press Law.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Akinnola, R. (1996) Rights and Limitation of Nigeria Press.
Lagos: Rich Consult.
Osinbago, Y.
& Fogam, K. (1991).
Nigerian Media Law.
Lagos: Gravitas Publishers Ltd.
Memorandum on Media Independence: Freedom & Expression and Access to Information by Media Network on the Review of the 1999 Constitution, 2012.
147 UNIT 5 COPYRIGHT (INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY) LAW 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Copyright (Intellectual Property) Law 3.2 Ownership of Copyright 3.3 Copyright infringemen 3.4 Penalty for Infringement 3.5 Defences 3.6 Compensation for Infringement 3.7 Copyright Protection 3.8 Assignemnt and Licence 3.9 Length of Copyright 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction Everybody is entitled to the fruit of his labour.
So every author should enjoy the benefit of his work.
This explains why there are laws governing the use of other people intellectual products.
This unit focuses on the copyright laws that regulate the use of printed materials.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Define copy right law.
 Understand the ownership right.
 Know infringement of copyright law.
 Explain the penalty and defences for the infringement of this law.
148 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Copyright (Intellectual Property) Law This is the law that seeks to protect the originality of artist and creative work from being put in jeopardy.
Copyright law gives the right to the originator to continue producing and using the artistic or creative work of his mental capability instead of copying from others.
It stops anybody from copying another person’s work.
This revolves around the originality and creativity of a person’s mental production.
For the mass media, the law protects the artistic formal and arrangement of news and not the news itself.
This law operates only on original works.
There is no law for titles but you can bring a PASSING OFF case against the person who uses a similar title e.g.
prime people VS Vintage people.
This means when the first title owner is losing customers and patronage due to the activity of the second title owner.
Analyst of Jos Vs Analyst of Kaduna, Newswatch Vs. Newswave.
Here the first owner of the title can ask for an injunction restraining the second person from using the title.
3.2 Ownership of Copyright Copyright should belong to the originator of an artistic or creative work.
When you write a book, you are the copyright owner of that book and when you write a book on behalf of somebody then you are the owner of the Copyright.
However, if the writer writes the book on contract for somebody, then the writer is not the copyright owner but the person on whose behalf it is written.
In the media, all reports written by reporters for their media and publish by these media does not belong to the reporters but the media organizations.
The media organizations are the owners of the copyright of all reports used and not reporters.
However, reporters can sue for breach of copyright law if the media use their reports for a purpose other than the original purpose for which it was meant.
And you will succeed only if there is no contractual agreement which touch on that aspect.
A freelance journalist, for instance, has no contractual obligation with a particular medium.
149 3.3 Copyright Infringement Any unauthorized use of a person’s work is a breach of this law called infringement of copyright.
When this happened you can sue for an injunction and damages, journalists, especially feature writers always face the danger of this law.
3.4 Penalty for Infringement Infringement of copyright is a civil wrong punishable by a monetary compensation to a person whose work might have been infringed upon.
This penalty might be: 1.
General Damages: For general wrong done by the act.
2.
Special Damages: For a particular loss incurred by the copyright owner during the period.
3.
Punitive Damages: As means of punishing a person and to deter him from doing so again, and 4.
Token Damages: To ridicule a person by making him pay a small token as compensation.
3.5 Defences Those who are charge to court for copyright infringement can plead: 1.
Fair Dealing: You plead fair dealing that you did not publish substantial part of the work.
But this defence will fail if you publish a substantial part of the work.
2.
Academic Purpose: Though every writer writes to educate, inform and entertain, there is a commercial benefit he expects.
Therefore, you can plead academic purpose of the work if really used as such.
3.
Public Enlightenment: This applies to journalist mostly those who review new books.
If he is sued, he can say his review was to inform the public of the bad and good sides of the book.
4.
Acknowledging the Sources: Even if you plead all the above mentioned defences, it will not be accepted if you do not acknowledge the source of the work.
These defences will only mitigate and not exonerate you.
3.6 Compensation for Infringement There are many ways copyrighted works can be compensated.
The owner of a copyrighted work can be: 1.
Paid Damages: Monetary compensation ordered by the court about the work complained of.
150 2.
Allowed Injunction: An order by the court restraining the commission or continuous doing of the work complained of.
We have two types of injunctions.
Interlocutory and perpetual.
Interlocutory injunction restrains the action until the final determination of a case while perpetual injunction stop the action indefinitely.
3.
Call for Profit: To return all the profit gained from the work.
Damages and call for profit cannot be awarded at the same time.
4.
Retrieval of Plates/Matter: An order for retrieval of everything concerning copyright materials.
3.7 Copyright Protection All copyright works are protected by the international convention, in all countries under: A.
The country, publisher, author of the work that subscribe to that convention.
If a person whose work is copyrighted is not a member of the convention, then he cannot sue.
B.
The work must be marked with copyright symbol.
C. With the author’s name, year of publication.
3.8 Assignment and Licence Copyright work can be transferred from the creator to another person.
When this is done, it means it has been assigned and the creator ceased to be the owner of the copyright.
If he assigned his material to the second person for a particular period, it means he has licensed his work during which he loses the right to sue.
3.9 Length of Copyright Copyright belongs to the owner through out his life except by assignment.
When he dies, copyright belong to him for fifty years after which his children will enjoy the benefit.
If a work is publish posthumously, copyright belong to the author fifty years from the date of the publication.
4.0 Conclusion This law is very important to authors as it control and ban the indiscriminate use of their works without proper permission.
This law encouraged authors to continue their works as they will reap where they sowed.
151 5.0 Summary This unit examined copyright law and explained how this law can be infringed upon.
The different methods of infringement and the compensation for such infringement were also discussed.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment  Explain how copyright law can be infringed.
 What is the difference between aissngment and licence of a copyright product?
7.0 References Galadima, D.J.
and Embu, R. (2000) Laws and Ethics of the Nigerian Press.
Jos: Satolgraphic press Elias, T. (1969).
Nigerian Press Law.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Akinnola, R. (1996) Rights and Limitation of Nigeria Press.
Lagos: Rich Consult.
Osinbago, Y.
& Fogam, K. (1991).
Nigerian Media Law.
Lagos: Gravitas Publishers Ltd.
Memorandum on Media Independence: Freedom & Expression and Access to Information by Media Network on the Review of the 1999 Constitution, 2012.
152 UNIT 6 OFFICIAL SECRET (1891) 1962: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objecitves 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Official Secret (1891) 1962 3.2 Reasons for this Act 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction For every government to operate efficiently there is need to protect the dissemination of government information.
This is why every government in the world does keep some of their information in secret.
This unit so examined the official secret law in Nigeria.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Discuss the Official Secret Act.
 Explain the provisions of the Act  Know why the Act is relevant to government organisations 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Official Secret (1891) 1962: The State Security can be defined as all the means at a government disposal for securing the nation state from the danger of subjugation either by the external power or internal insurrection.
The U.N.O’s 1948 fundamental human rights provisions which seeks to prevent human being from inhuman treatment, personal liberty, etc., are prohibited by a series of exception.
These provisions are not suppose to be at variance with societal defence public order, public moral and/or public health.
153 This can be regarded as the rationale for the enactment of the Nigerian official secret Act of (1891) 1962 to boost state security.
It is the duty of the government in any nation to muster personnel and resources at its disposal to maintain its continuous independence and autonomy as a country.
Government uses these resources on any person or group whose activities are likely to bring about the collapse of the nation or help promote its elimination by an outside country.
Activities which are likely to generate insecurity are espionage, spying, snooping and disturbances.
It is against this background that government from time to time does classify certain documents into secret ones whose contents should not be reported or seen by unauthorized person and/or publish.
The classification of documents as secret can either be document and areas.
1.
Classified Documents: These materials are all information that has bearing on security of the state.
All documents become classified matters when government wants them to be so.
2.
Protected Areas: These are places where sensitive activities are taking place or will take place.
The protected areas are banks, military formations, sea ports, airports etc.
Where there is a military disaster, for example, air force plane crash, the area (one hunded metres away from the spot of the crash) becomes a protected area.
Under normal circumstances, pictures are not taken at airports, seaports, presidency, and government houses etc.
you can interview a military officer but not to photograph military formations.
Prevention: For classified documents it is not an offence to say you did not know.
However, when you find out, you should report to the nearest Police Station and surrender the documents to them.
For protected areas, you should retrace out when you found out that you are in a prohibited area.
However, if you photograph any part of the secret document or areas and keep with you, then you are guilty for not surrendering all the documents to the authorities.
The penalty for the infringement of this Act is imprisonment for life or stipulated years.
154 3.2 Reasons for This Act The official secret Act was promulgated by the colonial government in 1891 to deter or curb the rate of leakage of government secret by the civil servants to the public.
In 1962, the Balewa government modified this act to curtail not only the civil servants but also the press which might publish any government secrets in order to boost the sales of their newspaper without consideration for the state security.
4.0 Conclusion The usefulness of the Official Secret Act to the government can be seen from the perspective that only those in authority can have access to such information.
This is for the smooth running of government activities.
5.0 Summary This unit examined the history of Official Secret Act and the reasons for the enactment of such Act explained the documents which the Act protected.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment  When was official secret act enacted  What the documents protected by this Act  Why is Official Secret Act necessary?
7.0 References Galadima, D.J.
and Embu, R. (2000) Laws and Ethics of the Nigerian Press.
Jos: Satolgraphic press Elias, T. (1969).
Nigerian Press Law.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Akinnola, R. (1996) Rights and Limitation of Nigeria Press.
Lagos: Rich Consult.
Osinbago, Y.
& Fogam, K. (1991).
Nigerian Media Law.
Lagos: Gravitas Publishers Ltd.
Memorandum on Media Independence: Freedom & Expression and Access to Information by Media Network on the Review of the 1999 Constitution, 2012.
155 UNIT 7 SEDITON 1.0 Introductin 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Sedition 3.2 Seditious Offence 3.3 Defences/Exceptions/Safeguard to Sedition 3.4 Ingredients of Sedition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction Every country has laws that protect the position of those in authority.
This is to enable them to be stable enough to govern the country effectively.
So this unit focuses on the law of sedition.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Know the history of seditious laws  Explain the components of the seditious law  Discuss the ingredients of seditious law  Discuss the exceptions of sedition.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sedition This is one of the several laws fashioned to curtail the operation of the press.
It is believed that the press can do and undo any government and so the colonial government enacted “sedicious offence ordinance” of November 6, 1909 to restrict the press report of the railway scandal which was widely publicized by nationalists-journalist like Herbert Macaulay.
156  Historically, the period of 1800 to 1960 saw the rise in the activities of the nationalists in their struggle to gain independence for Nigeria.
This period also witnessed the rise of privately owned newspapers which become the tool in the hands of these nationalists for their struggles.
Among these nationalists were Herbert Marcauley, J.B. Benjamin, Richard Blaize, J.P. Jackson, Nnamdi Azikiwe and Obafemi Awolowo.
In 1908, Macaulay accused the then Governor-General of Nigeria (Governor Egerton) of missapropriation of railway’s money.
Though it was the Governor’s friend who embezzled the money, the Governor was not happy with the publicity Macaulay’s paper gave the case and so he promulgated seditious offence ordinance of 1909 of November 6, to deal with the situation.
It was the first sedition law in Nigeria.
The ordinance provided for a penalty of two years imprisonment or an option fine for those who contravene the law.
The Law stated that Anyone who by words, either spoken or written or by any sign or any visible representation or otherwise brings or attempted to bring unto hatred or contempt or felling of enmity, disloyalty or dissatisfaction towards her majesty, shall be guilty of an offence of this law.
However, only J. Davies was tried under this law in 1915.
And when the country gained her independence in 1960 this law was still retained because: 1.
The leaders, at independence, know the power of the press.
2.
They believed that the press might be used against their government by detractors.
Therefore, they proceeded to reshape the 1909 ordinance to suit the Nigerian (sovereign) country instead of the majesty.
There were two major changes in the Act as: a.
The offender was no more answerable to the Queen of England in event of contravention of the law.
b.
The Nigerian criminal code replaced the words “feelings of enmity towards her majesty” with “feeling of enmity towards the government or the constitution commits sedition”.
157 3.2 Seditious Offence Generally, you can be charged to court for sedition if you: 1.
Utter, print, sell or offer for sale, distribute or reproduce any seditious publication.
2.
Import any seditious publication.
3.
Attempt to do any act, to make preparation, to conspire with any person(s) to do any act with a seditious intention.
4.
Having in his/her possession a seditious publication without any lawful justification.
3.3 Defences/Exceptions/Safeguard to Sedition When charged with sedition, you can offer the following as defences: 1.
Publication showing that the president/governor was misled by his adviser or mistaken in the policy or programme under attack.
2.
Publication pointing out error or defects in government constitution, legislative or administration of justice so as to correct such error.
3.
Publication persuading Nigerians to change any matter through lawful means.
4.
Publication which points out matter that tends to produce or produce feelings of ill-will and enmity between different classes of Nigerians.
Truth is no defence in sedition and the more truthful you are the more implicated you are involve.
However, sedition just like any law is determined by the trial judge and the prevailing political climate at the time.
3.4 Ingredients of Sedition For a person to face sedition charge, the following must be established: 1.
The materials must be published: Section 50 sub-section 1 of criminal code defined publication as “all written or printed matter or note containing and visible representation or by its form, shape or in any manner capable of suggesting words or ideas and every copy for reproduction of any publication”.
Likewise, cartoons and sky writing are included in this definition.
But publication by wireless is not included.
For example: Ogidi, a member of political party was found guilty for writing and sending copies of a telegram meant for the police to the press.
He was complaining of the maltreatment of its members by the Action Group Party and soliciting for Police protection yet he sent copies of the telegram 158 to the press.
When he was taken to court, he was found guilty of trying to bring disaffection against the government in power which was Action Group Members.
2.
Express a Seditious Intention: Section 50 sub-section 2, of the same criminal code defined this as Any statement which has its object the incitement of hatred or contempt against the government otherwise than by lawful means.
3.
Proof of Publication: A.
The Words Used: Here when the words used directly means the government then you will be found guilty.
Here the words used will be used as proof.
B.
Intention Conveyed by the Statement: The intention as conveyed by the statement will be used as proof of sedition against you.
4.0 Conclusion The publication of government information or publishing information that put those in authority in bad light is not good for stability of each government.
Therefore, the law of sedition was enacted to control such publication by authors and writers.
5.0 Summary This unit discussed the history and reasons for the enactment of sedition laws in the country.
The different methods of seditious activities were explained.
The ingredient of sedition was also explained.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Why was sedition law promolgated?
2.
Explain the ingredients of sedition.
159 7.0 References Galadima, D.J.
and Embu, R. (2000) Laws and Ethics of the Nigerian Press.
Jos: Satolgraphic press Elias, T. (1969).
Nigerian Press Law.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Akinnola, R. (1996) Rights and Limitation of Nigeria Press.
Lagos: Rich Consult.
Osinbago, Y.
& Fogam, K. (1991).
Nigerian Media Law.
Lagos: Gravitas Publishers Ltd.
Memorandum on Media Independence: Freedom & Expression and Access to Information by Media Network on the Review of the 1999 Constitution, 2012.
160 BIBLIOGRAPHY Abinbola, A.O.
(2008) “Reading Culture in Nigeria: Challenges and Opportunities: The Marketer’s Perspectives” in Ajibola, A.
& Oluyide, E. (Eds).
Book Publishing and Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Manifold Grace.
Abiola, A.
(2010) egal Issues in Writing and Publishing Mass Communication and Communication Textbooks in Nigeria”.
In Okwilagwe, A.O.
(Ed) Nigeriana Stirling – Horden Encyclopaedia of Mass Media and Communication.
Vol.
2 (421 – 433) Ibada: Stirling – Horden Publishers Ltd. Adesanoye F.A.
(1991) “Book editing and publishing problems in Nigeria” Umoh S.O (ed).
Tropical Issues in Communication Arts Uyo: Modern Business Press Ltd. Adesanoye F.A.
and Ojeniyi A.
(eds) 2005.
Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan.
Heineman Educational Books Nigeria Ltd. Adesanoye F.A.
and Ojeniyi A.
(eds.)(2005).
Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heineman Educational Books Nigeria Ltd. Adesanoye, F.A.
(1991) “Professional Book Publishing: The Principles and Practice” Umoh S.O (ed).
Tropical Issues in Communication Arts Uyo: Modern Business Press Ltd. Adikpo, J.A.
and Ihwa S.N.
(2009) Book Production, What You Need to Know.
Makurdi: Oracle Business Ltd. Adikpo, J.A.
and Ihwa, S.N (2009) Book Production, What You Need to Know Makurdi: Oracle Business Limited.
Ajibola, A.S. (2008) “Reading Culture in Nigeria: Challenges and Opportunities: An editor’s perspective” in Ajibola, A. and Oluyide, E. (Eds).
Book Publishing and the Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Manifold Grace Publishers.
Ajibola, Adejumoke S. & Oluyide Esther (2008) Book Publishing and The Reading Culture in Nigeria: Ibadan.
Manifold Grace Publishers Akinjogbin, K. (2009) “Book publishing in Electronic Age: opportunities and threats” in Soso, L; Osunbiyi, B.
& Biobaku, L. (Eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide Lagos: African Resource Communications.
161 Akinnola, R. (1996) Rights and Limitation of Nigeria Press.
Lagos: Rich Consult.
Alikabeli, L; Sesan A.A. and Akindelen I.
(2009) Basic Grammar and Writing.
Abeokuta Jedidiah Publishers.
Amon Peju (1975) “Content Editing” in the Book Publishing Process, Ibadan: Nigeria Publishers Association Areo, A.
(2008) Manuscript Assessment and Editing: In Ajibola A.S and Oluyide, E. (eds) Book Publishing.
The Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Grace Publishers.
Areo, A.
(2008) Manuscript Assessment and Editing; in Ajibola, A.S. and Oluyide, E. (Eds) Book Publishing.
The Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Grace Publishers.
Areo, A.
(2008) Manuscript Assessment and Editing; in Ajibola, A.A and Ohyide, E. (eds) Book Publishing.
The Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan.
Grace Publishers.
Butcher Judith (1983): Copy-editing.
The Cambridge Handbook, 2nd Edition Cambridge.
Cleaver, Pamela (2002): Writing Children’s Books.
Oxford: oxford University Press.
D.K.
Illustrated Oxford Dictionary, London: Arling – Kindersley Limited and Oxford University Press.
Day, A. Robert (1996) How Write and Publish A Scientific Paper (Fourth Edition) Cambridge.
Cambridge University Press.
Elias, T. (1969).
Nigerian Press Law.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Farar John (1998) Manual for Writers and Editors Springfield: Merriem Webster Incorp.
Fasemore, A.
(2005) Training Requisite Book Publishing Personnel: Challenges and Prospects, in Adesanoye, F.A.
& Oyeniyi, A.
(eds) Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria).
Galadima, D.J.
and Embu, R. (2000) Laws and Ethics of the Nigerian Press.
Jos: Satolgraphic press Galadima, D.J.
and Embu, R. (2000).
Laws and Ethics of the Nigerian Press.
Jos: Satohgraphics Press.
162 Kalajaiye, J.O.
(2008) Problems, Opportunities and Prospects of Book Publishing in Nigeria.
In Oso, L. etal (Eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications: London.
Memorandum on Media Independence: Freedom & Expression and Access to Information by Media Network on the Review of the 1999 Constitution, 2012.
Okilagwe, O.A.
(2001) “Book Publishing in Nigeria Ibadan.
Stirling – Horden Publishers Nig.
Ltd. Okilagwe, O.A.
(2001) Book Publishing In Nigeria, Ibadan Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig) Ltd. Okpobo, J.
(2012) Understanding Book Publishing Zaria: ABU Press Limited Okwilagwe O.A (2001).
Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling – Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Okwilagwe, O.A.
and Obinyan, G.A.
(2010).
“Impact of Information and Communication Technologies on Book Publishing in Nigeria Problems and Prospects” in Okwilagwe, O.A.
(Ed).
Nigerianan Stirling – Horder Encyclopaedia of Mass Media and Communication.
Vol.
4 (pp.394-405) Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers Ltd. Oloruntoba Oju, Taiwo (1997) “Sources of Ambiguity in Nigerian Newspaper Stories” Journal of Communication Language Arts Vol.
I/ 58 – 70.
Osinbago, Y.
& Fogam, K. (1991).
Nigerian Media Law.
Lagos: Gravitas Publishers Ltd. Oso, L. Osunbiyi, B. and Biobaku L., (2008): Book Publishing.
A practical guide.
Lagos: African Resource Communications.
Lagos.
Oso, Lai; Osunbiyi, Bidemi & Biobaku, Lanre (2008).
Book Publishing A Practical Guide, African Resource Comunication.
Osunbiyi, B.
(2008) The Economics of Book Publishing: in Oso L. etal (Eds): Book Publishing” a Practical Guide (2008): Mushin: African Resource Communications London.
Oyerokun, B.
(1991) “Studies in Textbooks Production as Communication Media” Umoh S.O (ed).
Tropical Issues in Communication Arts Uyo: Modern Business Press Ltd. 163 Salako, O.
& Akinbode, D. (2008) “Reading Culture in Nigeria: Challenges and Opportunities: The Marketer’s Perspectives” in Ajibola, A.
& Oluyide, E. (Eds).
Book Publishing and Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Manifold Grace.
Sanni, A.O.
(ed) Introduction to Nigeria Legal Method, Kuntel Publishing House 1999.
Smith D.C (1990) A Guide to Book Publishing, Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Smith D.C. (1990).
A Guide to Book Publishing in Nigeria, Lagos; University of Lagos Press.
Smith, D.C. (1989): A Guide to Book Publishing: Revised edition.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Sogbein, O.
(2008) “Reading Culture in Nigeria: Challenges and Opportunities: The Publisher’s perspective” in Ajibola, A. Oluyide E. (Eds).
Book Publishing and Reading Culture in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Manifold Grace Publishers.
Sowumi, F. (2008) Book Indexing: Practice Techniques: Oso, L. et al (eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications.
Sowunmi, F. (2008) Book Indexing: Practice Techniques: in Oso, L. etal (Eds) Book Publishing: A Practical Guide (2008) Mushin: African Resource Communications.
The New Encyclopaedia Britanica Vol.
2.
Micropaedia Ready Reference (5th Edition) London: Encyclopaedia Britanica Inc. Tiamiyu M. (2005) “Prospects of Nigerian Book Publishing in the Electronic Age” in in Adesanoye, F.A.
& Oyeniyi, A.
(Eds) Issues in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria).
Tiamiyu M. (2005) “Prospects of Nigerian Book Publishing in the Electronic Age” in Adesanoye, F.A and Oyeniyi, A.
(eds) Issues, in Book Publishing in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Book (Nigeria).
164
