 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: AEM 715 COURSE TITLE: MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL 59 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL COURSE GUIDE AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONNEL Course Team Dr. A.O.
Akinsorotan (Course Developer/Writer) – University of Ibadan Dr. S.D.Y Alfred (Course Developer/Writer) - FUT Akure NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 60  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Abuja Office 5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058-964-3 All Rights Reserved 61 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………….
iv What you will Learn in this Course………………………… iv Course Aims………………………………………………….
iv Course Objectives…………………………………………… v Working through this Course………………………………… v Course Materials……………………………………………… vi Study Units…………………………………………………… vi Presentation Schedule………………………………………... vii Assignment File……………………………………………….
vii Assessment ………………………………………………….. vii Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs)………………………… viii Final Examination and Grading……………………………… viii Course Marking Scheme…………………………………….. viii How to Get the Most from this Course……………………… ix Facilitation/Tutors and Tutorials…………………………….
x Summary……………….…………………………………….
xi 62  INTRODUCTION Management of Agricultural Extension Personnel is one of the fundamental courses for a Masters Degree Programme in Agriculture (M.Sc.)
in any university.
This course will also be suitable as an elective course for anyone who intends to study Administration and social science-related professional programmes particularly, those that are concerned with human resource management.
This Course Guide has four modules broken into 18 units.
The first module starts with an introduction.
This gives a focus on the concept, meaning and objectives of personnel management.
The second module focuses on the scope and functions of personnel management.
This module will acquaint you with what effective human or personnel management and control could achieve in any task of agricultural production.
The third module will bring you to the realm of organisations and departmentalisation required in personnel management and to also sensitise you with the qualities that must be possessed by good extension personnel.
The fourth model is to expose you to the possible problems that could be faced by an extension personnel manager.
The understanding of the likely problems in personnel management is to prepare you for the search of the possible causes and to proffer appropriate solutions.
In this module also you will learn about staff appraisal, budgeting, agricultural policy and management of human resources.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE You will learn about the concept, meaning, objectives and scope of personnel management in agricultural extension and also the problems inherent in the subject and what the qualities of good extension personnel are.
COURSE AIMS The aim of this course is to create in-depth knowledge of what personnel management is and to emphasise the qualities of a good extension personnel and the manager.
This will facilitate the interaction between the extension personnel, the manager and other agencies associated with extension practice and ultimately agricultural production.
Thus, the aim of the management of Agricultural Extension Personnel Course is to: 63 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL  define the concept, meaning and objectives of personnel management  explain the scope and functions of personnel management  discuss the organisation, departmentalisation and personal qualities of good extension personnel  specify the problems facing an extension personnel manager  discuss the formulation of good extension policy  examine the departmentalisation and the role of the extension personnel manager  state the objectives and manpower planning in Extension.
COURSE OBJECTIVES In order to achieve the course aims, there are some overall objectives set for the course.
Besides, each module and each unit has its respective objectives which you and your course facilitator must constantly refer to, so that no objective is skipped.
At end of the course, you should be able to:  acquaint yourself with the meaning of personnel management  explain the scope and functions of personnel management  discuss how personnel management is organised and departmentalised  identify the personal qualities of a good extension personnel  mention the problems facing the extension personnel manager  discuss the formulation of good extension policy  state the objectives of manpower planning in extension WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read each study unit of this study material and read other materials which may be provided by the National Open University of Nigeria.
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises for this course and at certain points in the course you would be required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
The course should take about a total of 17 weeks to complete.
Below, you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course on time and successfully.
I would advise that you avail yourself the opportunity of attending the tutorial sessions where you have the opportunity of comparing knowledge with your peers.
64  COURSE MATERIALS The main components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References/Textbooks 4.
Assignments 5.
Presentation Schedule STUDY UNITS The course is divided into modules that are made up of units.
The modules and units in this course are as follows: Module 1 Concepts, Meaning and Objectives of Personnel Management Unit 1 Concepts of Personnel Unit 2 Managerial and Administrative Qualities Unit 3 Basic Processes of Management/Administration Unit 4 Extension and Extension Education Unit 5 Personnel Management in Extension Module 2 Scope, Functions and Training of Personnel Managers Unit 1 Scope of Personnel Management Unit 2 Functions of Personnel Management Unit 3 Extension Training Unit 4 Extension Supervision Module 3 Organisation, Departmentalisation and Qualities of Extension Unit 1 Concept of Organisation Unit 2 Departmentalisation Unit 3 Extension Personnel and Functions Unit 4 Coordination Module 4 Agricultural Extension Policy, Manpower Planning and Staff Appraisal Unit 1 Types and Purpose of Staff Appraisal Unit 2 Budgeting in Extension Management Unit 3 Staffing and Personnel Management Unit 4 Agricultural Extension Policy 65 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL Unit 5 Management of Human Resources Each unit consists of one to two weeks work and includes an introduction, objectives, reading materials, exercises, conclusion, summary, tutor-marked assignment (TMA), references and other resources.
The units direct you to work on exercises related to the required reading.
In general, this exercise questions you on the material you have just covered.
Together with TMAs, these exercises will help you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE Your course materials give you important dates for the early and timely completion and submission of your TMAs and attending tutorials.
You should remember that you are required to submit all your assignments by the stipulated time and date.
You should guard against lagging behind in your work.
ASSIGNMENT FILE In your assignment file, you will find all the details of the assignments you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final marks you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself, and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
There are many assignments for this course, with each unit having at least one assignment.
These assignments are basically meant to assist you to understand the course.
ASSESSMENT There are three aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are self- exercises, second are the tutor-marked assignments and third is the written examination/end of course examination.
You are advised to be sincere in attending to the exercises.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor/facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course work.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final or end of course examination of about three hours duration.
This examination will count for 70% of your total course marks.
66  TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT The tutor-marked assignment (TMA) is a continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You are required to submit at least four (4) TMAs before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The TMAs would be given to you by your facilitator and returned after you have completed them.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading and your study units and, references.
However, it is desirable to demonstrate that you have read and researched more into other references which will give you a wider view point and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your facilitator on or before the deadline given in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The end of course examination for agricultural science education will be about 3 hours’ duration and has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which will reflect the type of self-resting, practice exercise and tutor-marked assignment problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Utilise the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the whole course.
You might find it useful to review your self-tests, TMAs and comments on them before the examination.
The end of course examination covers information from all parts of the course.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 4 (four assignments) best three of the four account for 10% each = 30% of the course marks.
End of course examination accounts for 70% of overall course marks.
Total of 100% covers best three assignments and end of course examination.
HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE 67 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the greatest advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some readings to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or recommended books.
You are provided exercises, to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
 Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do, by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
 The main content of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your references or from a Reading section.
 The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or visit the study centre nearest to you.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
 Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment  Organise a Study Schedule – Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available at the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
 Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
68  Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
 Assemble the study materials.
You will need your references and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
 As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
 Visit your study centre whenever you need up to date information.
 Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), visit your study centre for your next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
 Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to space your study so that you can keep yourself on schedule.
 When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignment.
 After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
FACILITATION/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are 14 hours of tutorial provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of these tutorials as well as the names and phone number of your facilitator, as soon as you arelocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor or facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress on any difficulties you might encounter and provided assistance to you during the course.
You mail your tutor-marked assignment to your tutor before the schedule date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e-mail and discuss problems if you need assistance.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help 69 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL necessary.
Contact your facilitator if: 1. you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings 2. you have difficulty with the self-test or exercises 3. you have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your course facilitator and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain much benefit from course tutorials prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in active discussion.
SUMMARY Social Relationship and Behavioural Change is a course that intends to provide you with the concept extension communication process.
Upon completing this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of the nature, scope, tasks of the extension worker, principles and concepts of social relationship, human behaviour, communication and adoption process.
Thus you will be able to plan programmes in agriculture and manage them.
In addition, you will be able to answer the following type of questions:  what does social relationship mean?
 what is behavioural change?
 give examples of the nature of social change  discuss the importance of group dynamics  of what significance is the measurement of social change?
 identify the various strategies for introducing change in agricultural communication  discuss why people resist change in agriculture  explain the basic elements of communication process  discuss the factors affecting the adoption of new technologies of course, the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the foregoing lists.
We wish you success in the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
Wishing you the best of luck!
70  MAIN CONTENT CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Concepts, Meaning and Objectives of Personnel Management………………….
1 Unit 1 Concepts of Personnel…………………….
1 Unit 2 Managerial and Administrative Qualities…………………………………… 6 Unit 3 Basic Processes of Management/ Administration…………………………….
10 Unit 4 Extension and Extension Education…….. 14 Unit 5 Personnel Management in Extension…… 19 Module 2 Scope, Functions and Training of Personnel Managers…………………….
24 Unit 1 Scope of Personnel Management……….. 24 Unit 2 Functions of Personnel Management…….
27 Unit 3 Extension Training……………………….
31 Unit 4 Extension Supervision…………………… 36 Module 3 Organisation, Departmentalisation and Qualities of Extension…………………... 41 Unit 1 Concept of Organisation………………… 41 Unit 2 Departmentalisation…………………….. 46 Unit 3 Extension Personnel and Functions…….
49 Unit 4 Coordination…………………………….. 55 Module 4 Agricultural Extension Policy, Manpower Planning and Staff Appraisal…………….
59 Unit 1 Types and Purpose of Staff Appraisal…….
59 Unit 2 Budgeting in Extension Management…….. 65 Unit 3 Staffing and Personnel Management……… 71 Unit 4 Agricultural Extension Policy…………….. 75 Unit 5 Management of Human Resources……….. 82 71 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL MODULE 1 CONCEPTS, MEANING AND OBJECTIVES OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Concepts of Personnel Unit 2 Managerial and Administrative Qualities Unit 3 Basic Processes of Management/Administration Unit 4 Extension and Extension Education Unit 5 Personnel Management in Extension UNIT 1 CONCEPTS OF PERSONNEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Personnel 3.2 Staffing and Staffers in Organisations 3.3 Manager 3.4 Management 3.5 Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Most of you will realise that there are different types of institutions that render various services to people in the society.
Such institutions include government agencies (offices), like ministries, and even private organisations like banks, companies, etc.
People are employed to carry out certain activities in these institutions to achieve their objectives.
For example, universities employ staff – both academic and non academic, to produce different types of trained people (man power) men and women to man the employment and/or production sectors of the society.
The staffs have certain activities to carry out in order to achieve the organisational goals.
It is when these activities are properly carried out by the right people, at the right time with the minimum costs, etc.
according to their objectives that the organisation is said to be viable and productive.
72 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define the concept of personnel  describe a manager  explain management  illustrate administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Personnel First of all, it should be noted that personnel is quite different from the word personal.
Personal is the adjective formed from person.
An example is this: This is my personal opinion.
Now, personnel is the terminology assigned to persons working in any enterprise, service, establishment, institutions or any productive organisation.
Although the word personnel appear in the form of a singular word, it is usually referred to a group of workers (staff) in an organisation or any enterprise.
Personnel can be considered as the most important component of any work force.
This is because when all other components such as infrastructure, funds are provided in the appropriate environment, without the right type of personnel, the organisational goals cannot be achieved.
Later in this course, the processes of staffing which includes: staff selection (getting the right person into the right job), development and supervision, will be covered.
3.2 Staff and Staffers in Organisation Staff has several meanings, but this course shall concentrate on the one dealing with “a person, male or female, young or old, employed to work in any establishment to achieve the desired goals.” One of the most important components of any organisation is the staff.
The reason is that even when all the necessary material and physical facilities for production are provided, the staff to knit together and manipulate all these facilities is highly essential.
These excellent facilities cannot be productive without staff.
Often, the general comment about employees and employers is that “an organisation is as good as the people working in it.” (Griffiths, 1960) Therefore, under any condition or situation, if the staff of an establishment is good, then that establishment must be good.
This is also true vice versa.
Staff and staffing procedures are therefore very important in terms of the performance of the organisation.
73 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL Staffers referred to members of staff in an organisation.
Generally it is an expression used to describe a group of people working in a company or organisation.
It connote reference to all the members of staff of that organisation, thus it is usually in the plural form.
However, it can be used interchangeably with staff.
3.3 The Manager Manager is from the word “manage.” To manage means to control the movement or behaviour of something or people.
It also means to handle, manipulate carefully or take charge of a group.
Therefore anybody who carries out the above functions is a manager.
According to Webster’s New World Dictionary (1970), management is the act, art or manner of managing, or handling controlling, directing a business, an enterprise, a group of people or any worthwhile activity.
3.4 Management Management is variously defined as “getting things done through others”; “efficient utilisation of resources”; or “a process or form of word that involves the guidance or direction of a group of people towards organisational goals or objectives”.
Management means setting objectives and making decisions for the planning and control of finance (money), personnel (men and women), production and marketing.
Management involves the creation and maintenance of an environment in which individual employees work together in groups towards the accomplishment of common organisational goals.
Good management implies acting with purpose, imagination, foresight (forethought) and common sense.
It involves forming balanced judgment that is, making rational decisions.
Therefore, a good manager:  is prepared to take decisions at the time they need to be taken, rather than postponing or side-stepping issues (procrastination is the thief of time!
);  chooses goals that are not inconsistent with one another, and also that are as appealing as possible without being unrealistic; and  through active coordination and supervision, makes the best possible use of the resources and opportunities available to him or her to achieve the chosen goals.
Any organisation, such as the organisation or agency for Agricultural and Rural Development Programme, or agency for poverty alleviation, is a combination of human resources with defined duties and responsibilities.
The human resources are brought together to accomplish some desired objects.
An organisation therefore, affects the people, that is, employees, who work for it in the following six ways: 74  1. the organization divides work among its members by giving each employee a particular task and thus limits and concentrates his or her attention on that task; 2. the organisation establishes standard practices by working out detailed procedures, it relieves employees of the need to determine such procedures, each time they use “crossways”; 3. the organisation transmits authoritative decisions by dispatching such decisions downward, upward and horizontally (crossways); 4. the organisation provides a communication system; and 5. the organisation trains and indoctrinates its members by providing for the “internalisation” of influence relating to knowledge, skills and loyalties; training enables employees to make decisions as the organisation would like them to.
6.
An organisation also makes provision for sanctions, that is, rewards and punishment.
Management is also used to describe the topmost officers of an institution.
Such officers include the chairman or managing director, the directors, the general manager and his assistant(s).
These cadres of officers are the financiers and/or policy formulators of the institution.
However, this tends to be colloquial.
3.5 Administration Administration has a lot of roles to play to make any type of social system to exist, viable and profitable.
Although the structures of different social systems differ, but the methods of tackling their problems, that also differ remain the same.
The problems involved in administration are usually connected with: organising, selecting executives or personnel, establishing plans, measuring results, coordinating, controlling and delegating activities, etc.
Administration is interpreted as:  giving direction and making decisions;  formulating policies and plans;  implementing the formulated policies and plans, and monitoring them;  maintaining interpersonal relationships with others such as subordinates, those at the same level or peers, in other sections, departments, organisations and superiors or super ordinates;  using management techniques for planning, execution and evaluation of operatives; and  providing administrative services such as clerical, accounting, financial, etc.
75 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL The term “administrator” (or administration) and manager (or management) are therefore used interchangeably in this text, with reference to those who hold responsible positions at various levels in government, quasi-government and private sector organisations, including Non-governmental Organisations.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt the concept of personnel and have equally been acquainted with the definitions on staff and staffing, management and administration.
Personnel have been defined as the terminology assigned to persons working in an enterprise while staff refers to the one dealing with a person, male of female.
So also, to manage means to control the movement or behaviour of something or people while management means getting things done through people and resources.
You have also learnt that administration play a lot of roles to make any type of social system to exist, viable and profitable and that the terms “administration” and “management” are interchangeably used in the text.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that:  personnel is the terminology assigned to persons working in any enterprise  staff is the person employed to work in any establishment to achieve a goal  management is the act of controlling and enterprise; and  administration is the coordination of the various activities involved in realising the goals of an organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i. Differentiate between personnel and staff.
ii.
Distinguish between management and administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Griffiths, D.E.
(1960) “Administration as Decision –Making and National Agricultural Extension” In: R.C Clark and R.H. Abraham (Eds.).
Administration in Extension.
National Agricultural Centre for Advanced Study, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin.
Webster’s New World Dictionary (1970).
76 UNIT 2 MANAGERIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE QUALITIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Agricultural Administration 3.2 Characteristics of Agricultural Administration 3.3 Qualities of an Agricultural Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We shall be discussing in this unit what agricultural administration is.
You should therefore, pay much attention to see if administration in agriculture really differs from those of other establishments or organisations.
You will learn of what agricultural administration is characterised and what good qualities an administrator must possess.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain agricultural administration  mention the characteristics of agricultural administration  identify the qualities of a good administrator.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Agricultural Administration This is basically the guidance, leadership and the control among all the clients of agriculture related activities (Nwankwo J. I.
1981).
Effective agricultural administration requires professionally trained and well- informed people.
The chief role of the Programme Manager, Managing Director or Director is to get results by effectively directing the work of other members of staff.
To achieve this lofty role, the Manager or Administrator must adhere to the philosophy that hinges on: 77 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL  respect for the worth and dignity of the individual employees;  faith in the employees’ ability to make rational decisions;  maintain moral and spiritual values in interpersonal relationships;  shared and collective responsibility for the common goal of the organisation;  respect for the dignity of labour; and  promotion of the emotional, physical and psychological health of all employees, regardless of their tribe, religion, sex and political learning.
Dealing with people, however, presents many complexities due to the differences in personalities, attitudes or emotional levels, learning styles, communication skills and technical competencies.
Despite all these differences, the mission object of managers is to get the task accomplished.
Additionally, managers are supposed to motivate employees to perform their responsibilities better.
The Programme Manager must masterfully work towards employees’ satisfaction to achieve organisational goals.
3.2 Characteristics of Agricultural Administration Chief Executives must constantly capitalise on the following characteristics of an effective and efficient Agricultural Administration, including, among others: 1.
Agricultural administration demands an efficient organisation of the available man-power and physical resources with a view to ensure the greatest amount of goods for the largest number of people, in the least possible time and with minimum amount of energy.
2.
Good Agricultural administration always endeavours to be readily available and ever willing to solve the problems of the people as soon as these are brought to the notice of its personnel.
It is also one of the tasks of agricultural administration to bring about awareness among the people about the problems not readily perceived by them and to sensitise them to foresee their problems and be effective in solving them.
3.
Agricultural administration operates through understanding rather than dogmatic pressure, through building confidence by offering assistance in helping the workers at the successive lower levels.
4.
Agricultural administration allows enough freedom to its officials to discharge their responsibilities both efficiently and effectively.
For this purpose, powers are delegated to the maximum extent and centralisation of the administration is kept 78 to the barest maximum.
A good agricultural administrator is therefore ever willing to render assistance to any one who needs it and is always there to set a good standard of service and cooperation, i.e.
leadership by example.
5.
Agricultural administration helps to create and maintain an efficient organisation manned by well trained and qualified personnel with the proper bent of mind and aptitude so as to convey the latest technology and scientific innovations to the people speedily in such a manner that the people can put them into practice.
6.
Decentralisation drives up the functions of decision and authorisation to the top management; it leaves action, when decided upon, to be carried out by the subordinate authority.
7.
Coordination involves some supervision over the work of units, components, departments or divisions, but effective administration ensures that supervision does not lead to friction nor does it retard the growth of the lower level local authorities.
3.1 Qualities of a Good Agricultural Extension Administrator Apparently, not every agricultural specialist or professional can function effectively as a Manager, Administrator or Director.
It is one thing to be able to manage, administer or direct agricultural programmes and personnel effectively.
More importantly, it is not every body that can motivate staff to perform in order to achieve the agricultural organisational goals.
In order to be effective in teaching, advising and motivating farmers and staff, the Agricultural Manager, that is, Programme Managers, Administrators, Managing Directors and Zonal Managers must, in addition to their academic qualifications, possess the following qualities:  integrity  fairness and sound judgment  good health  decisiveness  faithfulness  courage  initiative  versatility  sense of humour  credibility  ability to cooperate and work with others  ability to listen  ability to communicate 79 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL  empathy (willingness to identify with the needs, problems and aspiration of the staff and farmers).
The above qualities or attributes point to the fact that management is the art and science of getting results through people –the employees.
It is the marshalling or effective utilisation of all the four “Ms” of administration, to accomplish organisational goals and objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION Having gone through this unit we have been able to learn that agricultural administration is basically the guidance, leadership and control among all the clients of agriculture -related activities.
We have also learnt that for effective and efficient agricultural administration certain characteristics are pertinent just as certain qualities are germane to be possessed by the administrator.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that:  effective agricultural administration requires professionally trained and well-informed people  an administrator must constantly pay attention to certain characteristics for efficient agricultural administration  a good administrator must possess certain personal qualities in addition to academic qualifications.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Mention the roles of a good agricultural administrator.
ii.
State the characteristics of agricultural administration.
iii.
List the personal qualities of an effective administrator.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981).
Education Administration and Supervision.
Ibadan, Nigeria: Heineman Educational Books Nig.
Ltd. 80 UNIT 3 BASIC PROCESSES OF ADMINISTRATION/MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Planning 3.2 Organising 3.3 Staffing 3.4 Supervising 3.5 Control 3.6 Budgeting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will learn in this unit that Agricultural extension administration is not uniquely different from the basic processes of administration.
In essence, it is the application of the latter, using the basic agricultural knowledge.
The human, physical and even material resources involved are the same.
However, Ekpere (1990), broadly defined Agricultural Extension as “the discipline which seeks to develop professional competencies essential to the operation of a system of services which assist rural people through educational programmes of improved farming methods and techniques, increased production efficiency and income, level of living and achievement of a more fulfilling rural life.” These processes of administration (listed below) are the major functions performed by administrators.
Thus, to analyze what an administrator does is to know the “what” and “how” of administration.
This is involved in the following six basic processes of administration: planning, organizing, assembling of resources, supervising, control and budgeting.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  list the basic processes of administration  explain each of the basic processes of administration.
81 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Planning  Clarification of objectives  Establishment of policies  Mapping of programmes and campaigns  Determining specific methods and procedures  Fixing day-to-day schedules  Survey the environment  Forecast future situation  Evaluate proposed actions Revise and adjust the plan in the light of control results and changing conditions  Communicate throughout the planning period.
3.2 Organising  Identify and define what to be done  Break work down into duties  Group duties into positions  Define position requirement  Group positions into manageable and properly related units (Departments)  Assign work to be performed, accountability and extent of authority  Revise and adjust the organisation in light of control, results and changing conditions  Communicate throughout the organising process 3.3 Assembling Resources  Determine the human resources required  Recruit potential employees  Select from the recruits  Train and develop the human resources assembled  Revise and adjust the quantity and quality  Communicate throughout the staffing 82 3.4 Supervising This includes motivating, directing, coordinating, evaluating, etc.
through:  Giving directions that will give desired results  Issuing good instructions  Following up instructions  Explaining reasons for actions taken  Motivating personnel  Harmonising and coordinating programmes and policies  Devising effective means of communication  Instilling dominant objectives  Encouraging informal contacts  Coordinating through supervision 3.5 Control  Set standards at strategic points  (b Set standards to individual responsibility and note deviations  Concentrate on important activities  Use integrated budgets  Concentrate on exceptions  Observe personally  Design reports for action  Take corrective action  Balance control structure 3.6 Budgeting  Analysing the financial implication of the administrative activities  Sourcing for funds  Payment of wages and salaries  Procurement of resources 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit we have been able to identify the basic processes of administration, namely, planning, organising, assembling resources including staffing, supervising, control and budgeting.
Basic processes of administration can therefore, be referred to as the activities undertaken by the administrator.
83 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that:  agricultural extension administration is not uniquely different from the basic processes of administration  the processes of administration are the major functions performed by an administrator  processes of administration include; planning, organising, assembling resources, supervising, and control and budgeting.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the basic processes of administration.
ii.
Differentiate between organising and supervising in administration.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Ekpere (1990) 84  UNIT 4 EXTENSION AND EXTENSION EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Aim of Extension 3.2 Concept of Extension 3.3 Principles of Extension 3.4 Functions of Agricultural Extension and Extension Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In units one to three, we have been making references to agricultural extension and how administration takes place within it as an organisation, in this unit you will be acquainted with the meaning and concept of extension.
The knowledge of extension will afford you of the opportunity to appreciate the role of effective administration in an extension organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the meaning and concept of agricultural extension  state the principles of extension education  mention the functions of agricultural extension.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Aim of Extension Extension in its broad sense may be defined as “the extending of, or a service or system which extends the educational advantages of an institution to persons unable to avail themselves of them in a normal manner.” In other words, all forms of extension take education to the people.
By definition “extension” and “extension education” are synonymous.
Agricultural Extension takes to the rural people that form 85 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL of educational assistance best suited to their needs.
Agricultural Extension therefore is: a service or system which assists farm people through educational procedures in improving farming methods and techniques, increasing production, efficiency, and income, making better their level of living and uplifting (increasing) the social and educational standards of rural people.
In conclusion, extension is a system or service designed to help rural people to improve their own agricultural methods, incomes and levels of living.
Aim of Extension Work is to teach people living in rural areas how to raise their standard of living by their own efforts, using their own resources of manpower, materials, with the minimum of assistance from governments.
Since the basic concept of Extension is to help people help themselves to achieve sustainable better farming techniques, it is regarded as an educational process.
3.2 Concept of Agricultural Extension Extension is a term which is open to a wide variety of interpretations.
Each extension agent probably has his own understanding of what extension is.
Extension therefore is not a term which can be precisely defined, but one which describes a continual and changing process in rural areas.
The following explanations on extension would throw more light in the terminology.
1.
Extension is an informal educational process directed towards the rural population.
This process offers advice and information to help them solve their problems.
Extension also aims to increase the efficiency of the family farm, increase production and generally increase the standard of living of the farm family.
2.
The objective of extension is to change farmers’ outlook towards their difficulties.
Extension is concerned not just with physical and economic achievements but also with the development of the rural people themselves.
Extension agents, therefore, discuss matters with the rural people; help them to gain a clearer insight into their problems and also to decide how to overcome these problems.
3.
Extension is a process of working with rural people in order to improve their livelihoods.
This involves helping farmers to improve the productivity of their agriculture and also developing their abilities to direct their own future developments.
86  In conclusion, all the above statements showed that:  extension is a process which occurs over a period of time and not a single, one-time activity  also, that extension is an educational process which works with rural people, supports them and prepares them to confront their problems more successfully.
3.3 Principles of Agricultural Extension Extension activities are widespread throughout the developing world like Nigeria and most governments have set up formally structured extension services to implement extension programmes and projects.
However, the following principles guide extension activities.
1.
Extension works with people, not for them Extension works with rural people (involvement).
Only the people themselves can make decisions about the way they will farm or live.
Extension agents do not try to take these decisions for them.
Rural people can make good decisions themselves especially if properly guided by the extension agents.
By making decisions, they gain more confidence and become more involved.
2.
Extension is accountable to its clients Extension services and agents have two masters.
One is their senior officers and government, while the other are in their clientele i.e.
the rural people they are supposed to serve.
3.
Extension is a two-way link In this case, extension agents transfer knowledge and ideas about improved farming methods to farmers and their families.
Also the extension agents receive farmers’ ideas, suggestions or advice and even problem(s) from farmers for solution and consideration either at the ministry or research institutes or Faculties of Agriculture in the Universities.
4.
Extension cooperates with other Rural Development Organisations What is Rural Development?
It is defined as improving living standards of the mass of the low income population residing in rural areas and making the process of their development self sustaining.
Rural Dev.
= Community Dev.
+ Agricultural Dev.
Within these same rural areas, extension services and agents should work closely with the other organisations that provide essential services 87 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL to farmers and their families.
Extension is just one of the institutions seeking to change the farmers for the better in the rural areas.
Other are:  Political institutions, (local leaders etc)  Support Organisations, e.g.
fertiliser supply company, credit facilities, and marketing services.
 Health services  Educational Services e.g.
schools, colleges, adult literacy classes.
 Community development services – sports festival or cultural centers, town halls, etc.
5.
Extension works with different Target Groups Extension works with different types of people e.g.
big, medium, small- farmers, part-time or full time farmers, etc.
Extension agents must work with these different groups, using appropriate methods and tactics for each group.
3.4 Functions of Agricultural Extension/Extension Education From the foregoing, extension has 3 basic tasks: 1. disseminating useful information 2. applying it to the analysis of practical problems.
3. helping people to use the information to help themselves.
It means that the scope of extension is broad.
It is not just a matter of giving a farmer actual knowledge from new research and technology, but also to help him raise his efficiency.
It is more than this, in that it hopes to change his view of life, to persuade him and his family that they may reach and enjoy a higher and richer existence.
Extension education has 3 important functions: a.
The first is to persuade the farmers of the value of change.
Most farmers, particularly from the developing countries are still very traditional.
They always like to stick to their old ways.
Unless, they are convinced that any newly introduced technology is better and not risky, they will not accept it, thus the extension agents need to persuade and convince these farmers about the new technology.
b.
The second function is to transmit the results of research to the farmers and equally to transmit the problems of the farmers to the researchers.
To carry this out will require effective communication between the research organisation, the extension agency, and the farmers.
In some situations such as in the underdeveloped countries, the extension agents are not adequately trained to be very versatile about the technology to be transferred.
This situation must be corrected.
88 c. The third is to help the farmer learn to make wise decisions in farm management.
Here, the farmer must learn not just to follow the previous ways things are done, but to follow the present trend of changes in production processes taking place such as prices of resources, factors of production etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit has opened further our eyes to have the understanding of what extension is so that the role of its management can be appreciated.
We now know the principles and functions associated with extension.
The unit pointed out that extension is very significant in the question of rural development since it contributes in no small measure in the improvement of living standards of the mass of the low income population in the rural areas.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that:  extension is that form of service which assists farm people through educational procedures in improving farm methods and techniques  extension describes a continual and changing process in rural areas  extension has certain principles.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Define agricultural extension.
ii.
State the principles of agricultural extension.
iii.
What are the functions of extension?
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan (2006)… 89 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL UNIT 5 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Acquisition of Human Resources 3.1.1 Who Needs Staff ?
3.1.2 Types of Staff Required 3.1.3 Advertisement 3.1.4 Short Listing 3.1.5 Interview 3.1.6 Induction 3.1.7 Placement .
3.2 Development of the Extension Agents 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Personnel management in extension is that part of extension management which concerns itself with the effective utilisation of people (extension agents, farmers) within the farming business.
Personnel management is also the process of supporting the organisational goals through the continuous acquisition of human resources (i.e.
recruiting extension agents), proper integration of the extension agents into the farming enterprise, development of the agents’ potentials through training, and effective and efficient maintenance of the work force through supervision.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  determine who needs staff  identify the type of the required staff  explain advertisement in personnel management  discuss the purpose of short listing for personnel management  describe what interview, induction and placement are in personnel selection, and 90  emphasise what staff development is in staff management.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Acquisition of Human Resources 3.1.1 Who Needs Staff?
This is a very important process in agricultural extension management because assembling the right type of staff is the major recipes for a successful agricultural extension enterprise.
To achieve this, who needs the staff must first be established.
In achieving this involves considering the following:  setting up an organisation right from the scratch needs people to work in it, i.e.
to execute all the plans to achieve their objectives  expansion of an existing organisation needs additional staff to cope with the scope and responsibility  for replacement of lost staff through deaths, resignations, transfers, etc  staff to drive new innovations and expansion, e.g.
new types of services like computer programmes which are hitherto non- existing, or creation of an entirely new unit.
3.1.2 Types of Staff Required It is the expected job to be performed in the organisation that determines the staff to be employed.
Therefore, the management puts together, in detail, the types of tasks and quality of staff that can perform them in a package called “job description”.
3.1.3 Advertisement The job description, with the required gender, i.e.
male, female or even both genders, the academic qualification, the expected experience and in certain cases, the nature of the jobs to be performed are advertised in the newspapers, newsletters and even notice boards, depending on the desired catchment area for the recruitment.
The closing date for the entry is usually indicated.
3.1.4 Short listing After the last day of entry for the job applications, all the entries are collated, both from the solicited applications, and the unsolicited ones.
These applications are carefully scrutinised in line with the stipulated 91 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL qualification criteria in the advertisement.
Successful applicants are then invited for interview.
3.1.5 Interview This is to distinguish those believed likely to prove satisfactory.
The interviewers should have a pre-agreed standard to be used.
They should also have the idea of the jobs for which they are selecting.
The following areas should be covered during the interview: work history, family background, educational background, emotional stability, attitudes, personality, health and apparent physical appearance, integrity, and most probably, the anticipated remuneration.
Written or oral tests could be used to detect smartness and intelligence.
The interviewee must be briefed on the job contents expected to be performed if employed; he should be allowed to ask questions, if he has any.
Each panelist must grade each candidate from very poor, poor, good or excellent.
Some good performers who are not selected may be graded “appointable” so that they could be contacted to replace those selected, but fail to report.
Appointment letters are sent to the selected candidates.
3.1.6 Induction Selected candidates that reported for duty in the organisation are made to undergo an induction which may last for a certain period of time, usually 2-3 weeks, depending on the type of organisation.
During this induction period, the new employee is adequately briefed about the organisation.
He is made to know as much as possible about each unit and, the do’s and don’ts of the establishment.
This is to prevent him from making costly mistakes on posting.
This newly recruited staff would have been closely watched to determine his/her potentials during the induction period so that he/she would be placed in an appropriate place to work.
This is equivalent to orientation in some organisations.
3.1.7 Placement (Posting) Placement is the process, which ensures that individuals are actually put on schedules of responsibility, which they are most qualified.
The newly recruited staff that had been inducted would be finally placed in the appropriate unit or section to work.
There are some factors to be considered before posting.
They are: the programmes (objectives) or organisation needs, abilities and specialties of the individual, the job description developed for the particular position under consideration, the desires of the individual may be considered, ability to perform, qualification, temperament, technical competency, etc.
3.2 Integration and Development of the Extension Agents 92 This is basically through training.
Training implies preparation for a task or by role by ordered instructions (Benor et al, 1997).
Training implies preparation for a specific task or role by ordered instruction.
The source went further that academic sociologists often contrast training with education.
Training is carried out preparatory to employment, during the course of employment, or for domestic work or for any special skill required.
Training is a process whereby people acquire capabilities to aid in the achievement of organisational goals.
Training does not mean the same thing as development.
Development is broader in scope and it focuses on individuals gaining new capabilities useful for both present and future jobs.
It can in addition, be defined as a “planned process” to modify attitude, knowledge or skill behaviour through learning experience to achieve effective performance in an activity or range of activities.
Williams (1978) stated that training means to educate a person so as to be fitted, qualified, and proficient in doing some job.
He said training is the process of applying appropriate educational methodology to those situations in which improved performance can result from effective learning.
For an extension worker, training includes the education which aims at bringing a desirable change in his knowledge, skills, attitudes, values, beliefs and understandings so that he fits into his job and become qualified and proficient in communicating the desirable knowledge to his clients (target group).
4.0 CONCLUSION Personnel management plays a vital role in the sustainability of an organisation such as extension organisation.
This becomes pertinent since from time to time an organisation must take in new staff either to replace the retired or to fill vacancies that may arise due to the expansion of such establishment.
In doing this, it involves advertising the available vacancies, short listing of the applicants, interview for the purpose of selection from the pool of the applicants, induction for the selected and posting to duty positions.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has afforded you the opportunity of getting acquainted with the fact that:  assembling the right type of staff is the major recipe for a successful agricultural extension enterprise  the job description to be performed are advertised  applicants are short listed  an interview is conducted to select from the applicants 93 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL  the selected applicants are inducted and posted to where they are required.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Indicate where new staff may be need.
ii.
Explain the process involved in personnel management.
iii.
What is staff development?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Benor, D. & Harrison, J.Q.
(1977).
Agricultural Extension: The Training Visit System.
Washington D.C, The World Bank William, S.K.T.
(1978).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile-Ife, Nigeria: University of Ife Press.
94 MODULE 2 SCOPE, FUNCTIONS AND TRAINING OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Scope of Personnel Management Unit 2 Functions of Personnel Management Unit 3 Extension Training Unit 4 Extension Supervision UNIT 1 SCOPE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Scope of Personnel Management 3.2 Concept of Personnel Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have earlier defined personnel management as guidance or direction of a group of people towards organisational goals or objectives.
In this unit, you will be acquainted with the range or extent of the roles of personnel management in addition to having the grasp of how the term is conceptualised.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should to be able to:  discuss the scope of personnel management  explain the concept of personnel management.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Scope of Personnel Management What do you understand by scope?
Scope is the range or extent of action, inquiry or of an activity or concept.
It is also the length or the extent of the mind’s grasp, range of perception or understanding.
From 95 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL the definition, scope of personnel management connotes the fields of management or precisely the different areas of management.
According to Aromolaran (2000), management encompasses marketing personnel, production management, financial management, management information system and risk management.
Marketing management is the management process which is responsible for identification, anticipation and satisfaction of consumers’ needs at a satisfactory profit.
Personnel management is that part of management which is concerned with the effective utilisation of people and their relationship within an enterprise.
Personnel management is also the process of supporting the organisational goals through the continuous acquisition of human resources, proper integration of the employees into the business organisation, development of the employees’ potentials and effective maintenance of the labour force.
Production management has to do with the management of manufacturing process.
This is made up of various sequential production operations so that the best pattern of production activities is followed.
The best pattern is the one that encompasses various requested production orders to supply finished goods when desired at a minimum time and cost.
Financial management is the study of how firms make their investment and the financing decisions.
This is how much to invest in either physical or financial assets and how much of their current income to pay out to the owners of the firms and the amount and types of financial assets to issue.
Management information systems refer to the people and equipment used on the selection, storing, processing and retrieving information required in the management decision making process.
Management information systems aim at providing managers at every level of management with facts needed in order to facilitate decision making about the business concern.
Risk management has a relationship with insurance which is the provision which every prudent business person makes against future losses such as injury, danger, and even death.
Such risks should be managed by competent professionals in insurance.
96 3.2 Concept of Personnel Management The importance of personnel cannot be overemphasised in any establishment because without this element of the organisation, nothing could be achieved, especially as all the activities could not be automatically carried out by any known machine or technology.
At this point, it should be clearly stated that this is one of the most delicate parts of management.
The right purpose of recruiting staff must be known and the appropriate steps towards assembling the right type of staff must be put in place.
After this, the staff must be developed, trained, appropriately supervised, i.e.
motivated, coordinated and appraised periodically for optimum productivity.
Periodic appraisal should be done to assess the staff quality, reward and reprimand good and bad performers respectively, thereby sanitising the whole organisational system.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have learnt in this unit the scope and concept of personnel management.
Whatever the definition that has been given to management, the bottom line that should not be ignored is the fact that management makes human efforts more productive.
It also brings about better utilisation of resources and human relations in the society as a whole.
5.0 SUMMARY We have learnt in this unit that:  scope of management connotes fields or extent of management  there are personnel, production, marketing and financial types of management  in any establishment, nothing can be achieved without the element of the organisation as all the activities could not be automatically carried out by any machine or technology  the right purpose of staff recruitment must be known  staff that are recruited must be appropriately trained and motivated.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss the scope of personnel management ii.
Explain the concept of personnel management 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Aromolaran (2000).
97 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL UNIT 2 FUNCTIONS OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Planning 3.2 Organising 3.3 Staffing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Basically, agricultural extension administration implies the management of human resources and programmes available for agricultural extension and carefully using them systematically for the achievement of agricultural objectives.
Thus, the agricultural extension administrator or manager, whether in the State Agricultural Development Project, State Ministry of Agriculture, Federal Ministry of Agriculture, etc.
is essentially an organiser, planner, implementer of plans, policy maker and implementer, programme designer and executor, etc.
all in the efforts towards the achievement of agricultural development.
To achieve these lofty objectives, the personnel management must carry out these tasks through the following basic processes: planning, organising, staffing, directing and controlling, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain planning in personnel management  discuss organising as a management function  examine staffing in personnel management.
98 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Planning Planning involves working out of the broad objectives of the activities or things that have to be carried out by any individual, group or organisation.
It is also concerned with the methods to be employed in order to accomplish the goals and objectives of the organisation.
Planning is therefore the most basic of all management functions as it is the starting point from which all subsequent activities develop.
In essence, it is deciding in advance, what to do, how to do it, when to do it, who should do it and why it should be done.
Planning is very important in personnel management.
Aromolaran (2000) listed the merits of planning as:  it makes for purposeful and orderly activities  it points out the needs for future change  it answers “what if” questions  it provides a basis for control  planning encourages achievement  it compels visualization of the entirety  it increases and balances utilization of facilities and,  it assists managers in gaining status.
However, planning has the following demerits also:  it is limited by the accuracy of information and future facts available  it is costly  it has some psychological barriers since people tend to have more regard for the present than for the future, and  it discourages initiatives because some programme executors may not like to deviate from the plan.
Major steps in planning involve:  clarification of the problems (objectives)  obtaining complete information about the activities involved  analysis and clarification of the information  establishing the planning premises and constraints  determining the possible alternatives  choosing the best out of the alternatives  arranging detailed sequence and timing for the proposed plan (time table)  providing progress check-up to the proposed plan.
99 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL It should be noted that the success of a plan is measured by the results achieved.
3.2 Organising Organizing refers to the management function that focuses on allocation and arrangement of human and non-human resources so that planning and execution of activities can be carried out.
This is the setting out of the formal structure of authority and flow of work in such a way that the various sub-divisions, components, sections, branches or departments are carefully arranged, clearly defined and effectively coordinated in order to accomplish the objectives of the organisation (Ogunbameru, 2001).
The purpose of managerial function of organising is to make it possible for people to work effectively and cooperatively towards accomplishing the organisational objectives.
An organisational structure should be well defined to clarify the environment so that everyone knows what to do and who is responsible for what results in order to remove obstacles to performance caused by confusion and uncertainty of assignment.
Under an open system of administration, the organisational set up is such that there is an interaction between the super ordinates and their subordinates.
The subordinates feel free in discussing the problems of the organisation and ways and means of solving them with their super ordinates.
Whereas, in a closed system of administration, the subordinates only take directives and decisions from their super ordinates for implementation.
3.3 Staffing This involves selecting or recruiting competent people for the organisation and improving the competence of those already on the job.
The staff members in an open system of administration have access to training and their conditions of service are favourable.
Workers can demand for their rights and improved conditions of service.
While under the closed system of administration, the workers are relatively deprived of most of their benefits because they do not participate in deciding their conditions of service.
Staffing is an important administrative responsibility in any organisational set up.
This is because an organisation is as good as the people working in it 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit we have learnt about the functions of personnel management.
We identified planning, organising and staffing as some basic functions 100 of personnel management among many others as discussed in the earlier units.
The success of any establishment depends on the successful implementation of these basic functions.
5.0 SUMMARY We have learnt in this unit that:  the basic functions of personnel management include planning, organising and staffing  planning involves working out of the activities that have to be carried out by the organisation  organisation refers to the management function that focuses on allocation and arrangement of human and non-human resources so that planning and execution of activities can be carried out  staffing involves recruiting competent people for the organisation and improving the competence of those already on the job 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain planning in personnel management.
ii.
Differentiate between organising and staffing.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ogunbameru O.O.
(2001)… Aromolaran A.
(2000)… 101 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL UNIT 3 EXTENSION TRAINING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Benefits and Costs of Training 3.2 Types of Training 3.2.1 Pre-Service Training 3.2.2 Induction Training 3.2.3 In-Service Training 3.2.4 On-the-job Training 3.2.5 Industrial and Internship Training 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Training is very vital in personnel management.
According to Swanson (1984), when there is difference or gap between actual performance and what is needed or expected (i.e.
the standard), productivity suffers.
Training can reduce it, if it does not completely eliminate this gap.
The Agricultural Development Programme organisations in South Western Nigeria have developed a system whereby the weak areas of their field staff (Block Extension Supervisors, Village Extension Agents) are identified and sent for training.
This system is referred to as skill gap analysis.
The job of extension agents is basically to bring about desirable changes in the behaviour of their clients.
This job requires that the agent should know adequate technical subject matter needed by his clients as well as have the ability to train the clients on that subject matter.
In other words, extension agents should be trained in the subject matter areas, as well as the communication techniques.
In this unit therefore, you will learn about the available training methods.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At end of this unit, you should be able to:  state the benefits and costs of extension training  explain the types of training methods.
102  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Benefits and Costs of Extension Training Extension training stands to benefit the organisation in the following ways; (a) Benefits of Training Training provides:  increase in production capability  reduction in errors  reduction in staff turn over  less supervision  ability for advancement  new capabilities  attitudinal changes due to new orientations (b) Costs of Training Effective training is costly matched against the afore-mentioned benefits to the organisation.
The costs include;  Trainers’ salary  Materials for Training  Living expenses for Trainer and Trainees  Costs of facilities  Equipment  Transportation  Trainees’ salary  Lost production (opportunity cost) 3.2 Types of Training There are four main types of training.
They are: pre-service training, induction training, in -service training, on- the- job training, industrial and internship training.
3.2.1 Pre Service Training This is the type of professional training given to, for example, extension agents before their appointment.
It is usually carried out on full time basis in schools, colleges, or even universities lasting through a specific 103 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL period.
There are three levels of this professional training for the agricultural extension agents in Nigeria.
i.
Non Degree Diploma Course This is undertaken in two stages.
The first two-year certificate course leading to National Diploma (ND) is followed by another two-year diploma course leading to the Higher National Diploma (HND).
In most cases, two or more years of practical field experience is required between the ND and the HND.
ii.
The First Degree Course This course involves taking basic courses in the social and agricultural sciences.
Specialisation increases steadily in a specific area of agricultural science until graduation in the last year.
iii.
Higher Degree Course This higher degree course is undertaken at the postgraduate level leading to higher degrees such as M.Sc, M.Phil.
and Ph.D.
This course involves more intensive training and research in special problem areas of Agriculture.
3.2.2 Induction Training Induction course is given to newly appointed extension staff immediately they are employed.
This type of course is highly essential for newly recruited staff for the following reasons:  the new staff are protected from making costly mistakes  it makes them to know the general objectives, scope, opportunities, programmes, problems, policies, and detailed structures of the organisation  induction courses are also very necessary for newly employed officers to enable them gain self confidence and perform better to meet the desired expectations  to identify the best section or unit for posting the new staff.
The induction period varies from a few days to a few weeks.
3.2.3 In- Service Training This is the type of training is undertaken by the officer or staff while they are still in the employment of their institutions.
It is intended to update the officers’ activities at all levels.
According to Williams (1978), in service training is very necessary in such a dynamic field like modern agriculture in a developing country like Nigeria.
He went further that it should be regarded as a supplement to, rather than a substitute for the formal study programme.
This is particularly so when the formal 104 training given will be getting outdated.
Also, it is usually impossible to learn all the essential techniques required during the pre-service or induction training periods.
The period could be for attending a short course lasting few days or weeks, and it could be for a formal agricultural training lasting for two or more years.
3.2.4 On- the- Job Training This is the method used to acquire specific skills while the individual is on the job.
On the job training is required to improve the staff cadre who may have inadequate academic qualification for his job performance when he was employed, especially staff employed in a situation of acute manpower shortage.
This is also regarded as “Training within Industry or Training within Organisation Policy” 3.2.5 Industrial and Internship Training i.
Industrial Attachment Training This is the type of training given to students in between the regular course.
It is usually carried out outside the regular training venue.
It is to gain practical experience that would help to polish the main course.
ii.
Internship Training This is the type of training given to freshly qualified graduates in professional courses that require special skills in the performance of their job right from the beginning.
Such career areas are Medicine (Houseman ship), Pharmacy, Law and Engineering.
It usually lasts for one year, but must be under the guidance of a highly experienced career officer.
It is after this one year post qualification training, to be adequately equipped for the job, that the graduate can be employed by any relevant organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Training fills the gap between actual performance and what is expected.
When differences occur between the duo productivity can suffer.
It is this basis that consideration is being given to the training of extension personnel.
The types of training involved are subject the circumstance of the trainees, for example the newly recruited staff will much more benefit in induction training.
Other methods include; pre-service, in- service, on-the-job, industrial and internship.
5.0 SUMMARY You should by now be able to: 105 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL  state the benefits and costs of extension training  explain the types of training methods used in extension training.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
State the benefits of extension training to an organisation ii.
What do the costs of training entail?
iii.
Explain the type of training methods.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Swanson, B.E.
(1984) Agricultural Extension.
(A Reference Manual).
Rome :FAO.
William, S.K.T.
(1978) Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ile-Ife, Nigeria: University of Ife Press.
106  UNIT 4 EXTENSION SUPERVISION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Supervision 3.2 Functions of Supervision 3.3 Who is a Supervisor?
3.4 Principles of Span of Control 3.5 Elements of Supervision 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will come to learn that, after the qualified staff have been recruited and trained, it does not automatically lead to efficient performance or productivity if they are left alone to perform.
There is therefore, the need to oversee what the staff do and how they do it.
Some one must allocate responsibility and makes provision for the resources to be used to accomplish the goals of the organisation.
This in effect is supervision.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of supervision  identify who is a supervisor  state the functions of supervision  discussthe elements of supervision.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Supervision Supervision is the art of working with a group of people over whom authority is exercised in such a way as to achieve their greatest combined effectiveness in getting work done.
There is provision of leadership, guidance, control and delegation of authority, which are all 107 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL necessary for the satisfactory attainment of the organisational goals.
It involves helping subordinates to greater competency and growth.
The supervisor defines standards and regulates rewards and punishments.
He interprets government policies, coordinates all activities including budgeting and the physical facilities put in place.
Ogunbameru (2001), defines supervision in the agricultural extension service as the coordinated approach to provide guidance, direction and support to a subordinate staff in his work performance.
It is a process by which workers are guided to carry out duties with increasing satisfaction to themselves, to the people with whom they work and to the agency for which they work.
Supervision is selecting the right person for each job: arousing in each person an interest in his work and teaching him how to do it; measuring and rating performance to be sure that teaching has been fully effective; administering correction where this is found to be necessary and transferring to a more suitable work or dismissing those for whom this proves ineffective; and finally fitting each person harmoniously into the working group – all done fairly, patiently and tactfully, so that each person is caused to do his work skillfully, accurately and completely.
By good supervision, we can motivate people to do better extension work, and this is the aim of defining the term supervision so that we may be able to enlist a few factors that improve supervision in the light of helping extension workers to motivate.
As people differ in their attitudes and behaviour, the supervisor has to try many factors so that the persons he supervises may be handled in a better way.
In all the above cases, supervision is best performed in an atmosphere of good will and mutual cooperation on the part of all the people involved.
3.2 Functions of Supervision In general, the functions of a supervisor are similar to those of an administrator.
His primary role can contribute to the attainment of the extension services goals.
Consequently, his functions include various levels of decision making, planning, organizing, communicating and evaluating the efforts of others, especially the functions of the extension supervisors.
They include, among others:  induction of new workers into the service  training of extension workers on the job especially on the normal routine operations and standards  training extension workers on how to secure and develop leaders, contact extension officers, training the trainers that result into multiplying effect 108  assist extension workers in modifying and improving known extension teaching methods  assist extension workers and farmers to achieve better programming and planning  coordination of the duties of extension workers with those of the subject matter specialists  helping extension workers to determine progress and accomplishment through evaluation  motivating and arranging opportunities for professional improvement of subordinates  helping in the conduction of relevant research that would improve subordinates’ performance.
3.3 Who is a Supervisor?
A supervisor is anybody who is a superior officer to the officer he or she is supervising.
In other words, if an officer is senior to another person or groups of persons, the former can supervise the latter.
The supervisor should have greater experience in activities he expects his subordinate to perform.
By the rule of the thumb a supervisor should supervise between 15 and 20 number of staff depending on the level of complexity of the assignments.
He should have the authority to control the staff.
There are two types of supervisors; these are work conscious supervisor and workers conscious supervisors.
Work conscious supervisor uses roles commands to achieve goals, while worker conscious supervisor uses satisfying the psychological needs of the individual to achieve goals.
3.4 Principle of Span of Control This refers to the number of persons or organisation units for which one individual is responsible for supervising.
Usually, as one goes up in the hierarchy of any organisation, the span of control increase.
The usual acceptable span of control is anything between 6-15.
Efficiency is affected by the deviation from this span – more intense interaction with those close to him than those far away from him.
Each strategic point should be filled by very loyal and enthusiastic people because the supervisor should trust and rely on individuals whether near or far, as he cannot see those remote from him.
The factors affecting span of control include: o Extent of delegated responsibility in relation to the frequency and intensity of the need to see the chief administrator or supervisor; that is, the more you delegate the more subordinates you can 109 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL have.
You should delegate absolute power and authority and be responsible for the consequences.
Once you delegate, your subordinates will see you less often.
Extensive delegation leads to larger span of control.
o The magnitude of the problems: if problems are easy to solve, the subordinates will see less of the supervisor but if otherwise they will see him often for consultation o The organisation’s age and size: new company has less number of staff and simple problems o The organiational structure: if it is simple, the span of control will be simple and vice-versa o The professional competence of the staff o The importance of decision making which the supervisor must take o The degree of control that must be exercised, that is, whether the responsibility is that is of the chief executive.
3.5 Elements of Supervision Effective supervision can only be achieved through the activities of the supervisor which involves: o planning for self development and the development of subordinates o organising the proper use of time and the understanding of responsibilities o controlling to ensure that the job is done as planned o communicating the relevant instructions in the way the subordinates will comprehend o assigning responsibilities and delegating duties o Staff appraisal and accepting responsibilities for work done.
.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have seen in this unit that supervision ensures effective and efficient maintenance of the work force.
Supervision is the act of working with a group of people over whom authority is exercised in such a way as to accomplish the organisational goals.
The supervisor must be more experienced in the activities to be performed so as to be able to provide the right leadership.
Supervision, we have leant perform several functions in making the staff more productive while the elements involved in supervision include; motivation, delegation, coordination, direction and control and staff appraisal or evaluation.
110  5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that:  supervision is an act of working with a group of people over whom authority is exercised to achieve the goals of the organisation  by good supervision, we can motivate people to do better extension work  a supervisor is anybody who is a superior officer to the officer being supervised  the functions of a supervisor is similar to those of administrators  elements involved in supervision include motivation, delegation, coordination, direction control and staff evaluation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the concept of Supervision ii.
Who is a supervisor?
iii.
State five functions of extension supervision.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Ogunbameru O.O.
(2001) 111 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL MODULE 3 ORGANISATION, DEPARTMENTALISATION AND QUALITIES OF GOOD EXTENSION PERSONNEL Unit 1 Concept of Organisation Unit 2 Departmentalisation in Extension Organisation Unit 3 Extension Personnel and Functions Unit 4 Coordination in Extension UNIT 1 CONCEPT OF ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition and Concept of Organisation 3.2 Organisational Structure 3.3 Uses of Organisational Structure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will be learn about the definition of organisation and you will also be acquainted with the structures and their uses in an organisation.
Good administration in any establishment assumes the existence of an organisation in which individuals are assembled with distinct but interrelated and coordinated functions in order to achieve the organisation’s goals.
As earlier stated, administration, in its simplest form is the guidance; leadership and control of the efforts of a group to enable them achieve their objectives (goals, targets).
This unit deals with where the above takes place (organisation), types and its characteristic features.
It also deals with how the individuals perform their roles, functions and activities.
Finally, it recapitulates the essential features and attitudes good extension personnel should execute for the smooth running of the organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 112   define organisation  mention the different types of organisation  describe organisational structure.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition and Concept of Organisation An organisation is the formal structure of authority through which works of sub division are arranged, defined, coordinated and executed to achieve their objectives.
Another school defined organisation as a combination of the necessary human beings, materials, tools, equipment, working space and apparatus brought together in a systematic and effective coordination to accomplish some desired objectives.
From the above, organisation implies an establishment consisting of people of different cadres, each carrying out his or her own activities so that the group’s objectives are attained.
In Nigeria, there are public and private organisations.
The public organisation is established and run by the government agencies, while the private is constituted by non-governmental agencies or individuals.
In any organisation, different people occupy different positions and they all carry out different roles, functions and activities to enable them achieve their objectives.
The arrangement of positions and people occupying them in a hierarchical form, according to their activities is referred to as Organisation Structure.
3.2 Organisational Structure Organisational structure is like the architectural design between different position holders and their significance among others and helping in making adjustment in organisational arrangement.
Organisational structure deals with organisational assignments in an enterprise.
It describes the relationships existing between personnel of an organisation, usually with emphasis to the positions existing within the organisation.
The process of organising is the grouping of activities necessary to attain common objectives and the assignment of each group to a manager who has the authority necessary to supervise the people performing the activities.
Thus organising is basically a process of division of labour accompanied by appropriate delegation of authority.
Also, Griffiths (1960) said that organisational structures are the sets of building blocks that can be used to configure an organisation.
It is a pattern of 113 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL arrangement of employees of an organisation where responsibility of each employee is spelt out.
In administrative process, activities are classified into bundles or units of duties that can be assigned to individuals or groups in the organisation, all streamlined towards goal attainment.
This process determines the organisational structure.
When designing organisational structure, administrators should take into account the benefits of: 1.
Specialisation 2.
Limitation of functional authority and, 3.
Problems of communication and a variety of other specialised aspects of organisations.
Organisational structure can be developed by considering the following: (a) Primary departmentalisation: that is, division into major operating units.
(b) Focus of operating authority: meaning focusing on units, particularly the levels at which most of the operating decisions are made.
(c) Facilitating units: that are needed to guide and assist those charged with primary operating duties.
(d) Adequate provision for top management functions.
(e) Structural arrangement: that will add simplicity, consistency and otherwise contribute to the smooth working of the organisation.
3.3 Uses of Organisational Structure Organisational Structure helps to define and clarify lines of responsibility and authority to facilitate full mobilisation of talents, to maintain efficient reporting system.
It is also to identify possible bottle- necks situations.
The structure should be flexible, modifiable, and explicit and subject to continuous adaptation as conditions warrant.
Other uses are:  it is a useful tool for presenting or representing the overall set up of the organisation to anybody or group at a glance  it describes positions, roles, functions and activities of the staff and shows their inter-relationships in the organisation  it facilitates control, coordination, delegation, motivation, staff appraisal, budget preparation and execution and even general supervisory roles  communication channels are well laid out both vertically and horizontally  it leads to healthy rivalry because each unit can compete with others and aspire to be equally remunerated and productive 114  it can lead to rapid growth because some units can expand rapidly and thus become autonomous  it prevents overlaps or gaps in functioning.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have seen that organisation is the formal structure of authority through which works of sub-divisions are arranged and executed to achieve the goals.
An effective organisational structure gives room for effective administration.
However, when designing organisational structure, certain considerations must be made which include; specialisation, and limitation of functional authority among others.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that:  organisation implies an establishment consisting of people of different cadres, each carrying out his or her own activities so that the group’s objectives are attained  organisational structure deals with organisational assignment in an enterprise  the structure should be flexible, modifiable and explicit and subject to continuous adaptation as conditions warrant  organisational structure has many uses among which is that it represents the overall set up of the organisation to any group at a glance.
6.0 TUTOR/MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the concept of organisation.
ii.
What is organisation structure?
iii.
Discuss the uses of organisational structure.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Griffiths, D.E.
(1960) “Administration as Decision –Making and National Agricultural Extension” In: R.C.
Clark and R.H. Abraham (Eds.).
Administration in Extension.
National Agricultural Centre for Advanced Study, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin.
115 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL 116  UNIT 2 DEPARTMENTALISATION IN EXTENSION ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Departmentalisation 3.2 Criteria for Departmentalisation 3.3 Department and its Sub-Divisions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, efforts will be made to get you acquainted with the essence of departmentalisation in extension organisation and also with the criteria for creating departments.
It is hoped therefore, that, as an extension personnel, if you are opportune to head an extension organisation, you will know what to do to get going the activities that would enable you achieve the objectives on the basis of working with the appropriate departments.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of departmentalisation  state the criteria for grouping an organisation into departments  discuss the sub-divisions of departments in an organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Departmentalisation The department is the first and the largest sub-division of the administrative structure.
It is one step below the chief executive-the cabinet in parliamentary countries or the president in the presidential.
Its chief characteristic is its complete subordination to the chief executive.
Under it the line of authority runs unbroken, link after link from the chief executive at the top to the lowest employee at the bottom.
Neither 117 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL the department nor any of its sub-units or officers can claim any degree of autonomy or authority in their own right.
Whatever authority belongs to them comes from the chief executive through delegation.
This absoluteness and continuity of control from top to bottom facilitates the maximum of unification and it is completely mechanical.
3.2 Criteria for Departmentalisation Departmentalisation is the grouping of similar activities together to form a unit.
It can be easily done in simple organisations, but it is not quite easy in complex organisations.
The following criteria can be used: (a) Geographical location: Situations can occur where there are several branches in the different parts of the state or locality.
The cardinal points (South, East, North or West or even their combinations) can be used to describe the units.
(b) Activities: Activities within an organisation, such as secretariat, maintenance, information, engineering, etc.
can be used to departmentalise organisations.
(c) Organisation Customs: This is by using gender or age categories to partition the organisation.
Examples are children, men, women wards in the hospitals or sections in the departmental stores (d) By specificity of functions: This is where their major functions are used to classify the units, for example, Administration, Accounts, Establishment, Security, among others.
(e) By Duty Roster: Those running shifts such as Morning, Afternoon, Night workers etc.
are used to classify in some cases.
(f) By Products: In large organisations where different types of commodities are handled, the particular products can be used to classify the organisation e.g.
At the Cocoa Research Institute of Nigeria, Ibadan, Cocoa, Coffee, Kolanut and Cashew departments exist.
Similarly, Rice, Maize, Cowpea, Sugarcane sections exist at the National Cereals Research Institute, Badeggi.
Niger State.
It should be noted that each department will not exist and cannot function in isolation.
They all coordinate, complement, and contribute jointly towards the overall goals, objectives, aspirations, or targets of the organisation.
Departmentalisation takes advantage of specialisation, control and coordination concepts.
3.3 Department and its Sub-divisions 118 The department is subdivided into smaller units at several levels.
Some of the larger departments may be divided first into sub-departments and these can be sub-divided into divisions.
The divisions are split into branches and branches into sections and sections into individual posts.
The individual post or position is the smallest unit of an organization.
An organisation is a pattern of inter-related posts.
The actual work of administration is done by the incumbents of the several posts (high or low) which constitute the organisation.
The post comes into existence with the duties and responsibilities of the incumbents attached to it.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has afforded us of the opportunity of being acquainted with the concept of departmentalisation as the first and the largest sub-division of the administrative structure.
The grouping of the organisation into departments of similar activities to form a unit is based on certain criteria even though; each of these units is not existing in isolation of others.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that:  Department is the grouping of similar activities together to form a unit  criteria for grouping into departments could be geographical, activity- based, function- based, duty roster- based or product- based  the department is subdivided into smaller units at several levels.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the concept of departmentalisation.
ii.
Discuss the criteria for grouping into departments.
iii.
What are sub-divisions in departmentalisation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING ?
UNIT 3 EXTENSION PERSONNEL AND FUNCTIONS CONTENTS 119 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Extension Personnel 3.2 Functions of Personnel Department 3.3 Subject-Matter View Function 3.4 Directing and Control 3.5 Maintenance of Effective Control 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the most vital departments in extension organisation is the Personnel Department.
In this unit therefore, you will learn about the concept of personnel department and its various functions.
You will also have the knowledge of effective control in the personnel department and how such effective control can be maintained.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain extension personnel  state the functions of personnel department  discuss the administrative function from the subject-matter view  describe effective control and how it can be maintained.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Extension Personnel Personnel had been defined as employees or staff of any organisation.
Consequently, extension personnel mean extension staff or employees (Akinsorotan, 2006).
Technically, extension staff includes all cadres of staff in extension services, ranging from top, middle and lower level staff.
This also occurs at the management levels.
Senn (1990), states that agricultural management is in three hierarchies or levels, namely:  the top management level  the middle-management level  the operating lower-management level.
120 The top management level is concerned with planning, coordination and liaison with other organisations and agencies in the community.
The middle-management level is concerned with overseeing performance and controlling activities that move the organisation towards the determined goals and objectives.
The operating lower-management, the largest group of managers in the organisation, is essentially supervisory.
This level of management ensures that employees follow procedures in work situations (Ogunbameru, 2001).
The source went further that in whatever level or hierarchy one belongs to, it is imperative to function effectively.
To do this, a manager must lay emphasis on getting things dome timely, think ahead, discuss ideas, procedures and alternatives with others (open system) and make provision to cope with the unexpected changes.
With regards to managerial and administrative qualities of any organisation, particularly in the extension service system, not every agricultural specialist or professional con function effectively as a manager, administrator or director.
It is one thing to have the academic qualifications, but it is another thing to be able to manage, administer or direct agricultural programmes and personnel effectively.
Managerial and administrative qualities discussed in section 3.3 (Unit One) are applicable to the personnel managers qualities.
3.2 Functions of the Personnel Department There are different numbers of departments in any organisation.
Each department contributes to the achievement of the overall goals of the organisation.
Functions of general administration had been described in three different ways (Clark et al, 1960).
The first is Willoughby’s method.
He divided the principles of public administration into five major sections: 1.
General or overhead administration (including allocation of functions, directions, supervision and control), 2.
Organisation, i.e.
building up of administrative structure, 3.
Personnel management, 4.
Materials and supply, and 5.
Finance.
The second version is the Podscorb’s view.
Podscorb view is crystallised or coined round the functional elements indicated by the letters PODSCORB with its full meaning as follows: P: stands for planning, i.e.
working out, in broad outline the things to be done and the methods to be adopted for accomplishing the purpose in hand; 121 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL O: stands for organisation, i.e.
building up the structure of authority through which the entire work to be done is arranged into well- defined sub-divisions and coordination; D: stands for directing and control, i.e.
making decisions and issuing orders and instructions embodying them for the guidance of the staff; S: stands for staffing, i.e.
appointing suitable persons to the various posts under the organisation, and the whole of personnel management; C: stands for coordination, i.e.
inter-relating the various parts of the organisational work and eliminating gap or overlap and finally avoiding conflict; R: stands for reporting, i.e.
keeping both the superiors and subordinates informed of what is going on and arranging for collection of such information through inspection, research and records; B: stands for budgeting, i.e.
financial administration.
The third version is the subject-matter view.
3.3 Subjects-Matter View Function This view is of the opinion that besides the common house keeping activities or tools of administration covered by PODSCORB view, there are various line functions produced for people such as law and order, education, public health, agriculture, public works, social security, justice, defence, etc.
Some of these can be grouped under programmes like community development or even civic responsibilities.
These programmes or services have important and specialised techniques of their own which are not covered by “podscorb” activities.
Therefore, both views have to be combined for effective description of the scope of public administration.
Another school viewed public administration function as applied administration.
Applied administration has to be studied country-wise, departmental level-wise, historically and internationally.
The main functions of public administration according to this model include the following: 1.
Political function, 2.
Legislative – law makers 3.
Executive – Heads of ministries and governments 4.
Financial 5.
Defensive 6.
Educational 7.
Social administration 8.
Economic administration 122 9.
Foreign administration 10.
Local administration Now that the general functions of public administration had been outlined by various shades of opinion, the PODSCORB view had been selected as the closest to the functions of a personnel department and it is therefore adopted.
Even with the choice of “podscorb” certain functions had been discussed this series.
They are planning, organising and organisations and staffing.
Others that are to be covered now are: directing and control, coordination, reporting especially staff appraisal and budgeting.
3.4 Directing and Control Directing and control are very similar thus; they can be used interchangeably in administration.
However, since directing is a subset of control, that is, it involves elements of directing, it means control is broader and hence it is used in this text.
Control is an element of managerial tasks and it involves the measurement and correction of the performance of subordinates to make sure that the objectives of the enterprise and the plans devised to attain them are accomplished efficiently and economically.
Control involves:  setting standards  measuring performance against standards  feedback of results  correcting deviations from standards  need to control at different points is highly essential for overall achievement and goals of the organisation.
Control comes from the comparisons with standards showing the need for corrective actions and analysis of deviations so that future plans can be adjusted.
There are many types of control.
Here are few examples:  control of quality of products  morale  budgetary; and  non budgetary 3.5 Maintenance of Effective Control To maintain effective control, certain principles must be adhered to: (i) Controls must be set according to the nature of the job to be performed, e.g.
small firms need different systems of control from large firms, etc.
123 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL (ii) Deviations should be reported immediately.
In an ideal situation, notification is reported before deviations occur, but in practice, it is the reverse, i.e.
notification after deviations had occurred, or when it is too late.
(iii) Controls must conform to the pattern of the organisation.
Who is to do what and when and for how long, etc.
must have been stipulated.
This will make control easy.
(iv) Controls should show expectations at selected points (i.e.
exceptions to the normal expectation should have been previously indicated.
(v) Controls should be flexible and economical in operation.
It should be able to accommodate alternate remedies when a dead end is reached.
(vi) Controls should be simple to understand and should indicate corrective action.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have defined personnel as employees or staff of any organisation which may be at three levels namely; the top management level, the middle-management level and lower-management level.
Functions of personnel department had been explained by two methods, one by Willoughby and the other by Luther Gullick.
Directing and control can be used interchangeably in administration however, directing is a subset of control while control is an element of managerial tasks that involves the measurement and correction of the performance of subordinates to make sure that the objectives of the enterprise are attained.
5.0 SUMMARY You should be in the position by now, having gone through this unit to:  explain extension personnel  state the functions of personnel department  explain PORDSCORB as administrative activities  differentiate between directing and control.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What are the functions of personnel department?
124 ii.
State the principles of effective control and how can you maintain it?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan (2006)… Clark, R.C & Abraham, R.H. (1960).
Administration in Extension.
National Agricultural Extension Center for Advanced Study.
University of Wisconsin Madison, Wisconsin p.48 125 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL UNIT 4 COORDINATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Coordination 3.2 Uses of Effective Coordination 3.3 Methods of Achieving Coordination 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Coordination was mentioned when discussing supervision in extension.
So coordination is one of the major activities in supervision.
In this unit therefore, you will learn about what coordination is and uses of effective coordination.
You will also be acquainted with how you can be equipped with the possible methods of how to achieve effective coordination 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define and conceptualise coordination  state the uses of effective coordination  discuss methods of achieving effective coordination.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition and Concept of Coordination Coordination is one of the major activities involved in supervision.
It does not only ensure uniformity and consistency, it brings about fair and equal treatment of all the employees and prevents wastages, gaps and repetitions.
These activities smoothen the running of the organisation thereby making it easy to achieve its goals.
Coordination involves the harmonisation of the activities of all the employees in an organisation towards the achievement of a recognised 126 purpose.
It deals with the synchronising and unifying of actions of the group of people.
The coordinated operation is one in which the staff activities are harmonised, dove-tailed and integrated towards the common objectives.
It is the unification of the people’s activities, materials and other resources towards the achievement of their collective goal.
It is also the drawing together of a number of conflicting issues for resolution.
Clark et al (1960) stated that the aim of coordination is to secure cooperation and team work among the employees.
It removes conflicts, working at cross-purposes, gaps and overlaps.
3.2 Uses of Effective Coordination 1.
Coordination prevents gaps and overlaps.
When every member of a group is aware of each others’ activities, there will not be any important activity left undone and neither will anybody repeat each other.
This reduces the cost of running the organisations.
2.
If there is no coordination, there is a tendency among workers in charge of different functions to attach too much importance to their own works as to be unmindful of the needs of others and make encroachment on the latter sphere.
Without coordination, there is tendency to see their particular charge as not the part of larger whole to which it must be duly subordinate.
3.
Coordination can reduce or eliminate the greed for power and importance which the heads of some units or departments in the organisations have.
4.
Coordination ensures achievement of organisation’s goals timely, quantitatively and qualitatively.
3.3 Methods of Achieving Coordination Coordination can be secured under various methods, means, conditions and situations.
The following are some important ones:  Simplified Organisation: under this situation, programmes, policies, activities are clear cut, easily understood by most members and thus easily harmonised, dove-tailed and unified.
 Proper timing is important in coordination, so also is synchronisation.
 Good information flow should be put in place to ensure proper coordination.
Communication through the length and breadth of the organisation will make everyone to be aware of what is happening.
 Dominant objectives must be identified, highlighted and preserved.
Objectives that cut across all the units are of paramount importance in this case.
Understanding the widely accepted customs of the units is very necessary (e.g.
language, 127 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL norms and beliefs.)
before coordination can be easily achieved.
 Formal and Informal contact strategies are very necessary.
 The use of liaison men and women (representatives) whenever and wherever needed to effect coordination is essential.
 Use of committees for bringing together the main activities to effect coordination is highly essential.
 Coordination requires constant watchfulness on the part of those entrusted with it and it is a continuous function of the administration.
 Standardisation of procedures and methods facilitate comparison and measurement of results.
This ensures that every worker in the organisation will act in the same way under similar circumstance.
 Conferences organised between inter and intra-departments, representatives of units should meet to discuss issues of policy matters, etc.
Here, freedom of discussion and putting forward suggestions for improvement mutually finalised help to secure effective coordination.
 Aids to voluntary coordination – Here most of the coordination in an enterprise should take place through voluntary cooperation of members.
Dominant objectives should be emphasised and imposed.
 Coordination through personal guidance of the executive.
It follows from the fact that, if all the possible methods of securing coordination had been put in place, there wouldn’t have been work for the executive to do.
However, this situation is never completely achieved; hence, the administrator has the left over to do.
4.0 CONCLUSION In supervision, coordination is one of the major activities.
These activities smoothen the running of the organization thereby making it easy to achieve its goals.
Coordination, as per its role in supervision, has many uses among which is that it prevents gaps and overlaps and also eliminates or reduces greed for power among some heads of units in the organisation.
However possible methods avail for achieving effective coordination in extension organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that: 128  coordination involves the harmonisation of the activities of all the employees in an organisation towards the achievement of a recognised purpose  coordination, when effective has several uses  effective coordination is achievable through the use of several possible methods.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss the concept coordination.
ii.
What are the uses of effective coordination?
iii.
Explain the methods of achieving effective coordination 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Clark, R.C & Abraham, R.H. (1960).
Administration in Extension.
National Agricultural Extension Center for Advanced Study.
University of Wisconsin Madison, Wisconsin p.48 129 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL MODULE 4 STAFF APPRAISAL AND MANPOWER PLANNING Unit 1 Staff Appraisal Unit 2 Budgeting in Extension Management Unit 3 Staffing and Personnel Management Unit 4 Agricultural Extension Policy Unit 5 Management of human Resources UNIT 1 STAFF APPRAISAL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept and the Need for Staff Appraisal 3.2 Types of Staff Appraisal 3.2.1 The Informal Appraisal 3.2.2 The Formal Appraisal 3.2.3 Advantages of Formal Appraisal 3.3 Problems of Staff Appraisal 3.4 Methods of Effective Appraisal 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION Having considered what organisation and personnel management are within extension establishment, we must understand that, as part of personnel control, the staffs need being appraised at intervals.
This practice places value judgment on the activities of employees over a given period.
In this unit therefore, you will learn more about what staff appraisal is all about.
You will also be acquainted with the types of staff appraisal, constraints to effective staff appraisal and some techniques of ensuring effective staff appraisal.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the term ‘staff appraisal’  canvass the need for appraisal of staff 130  discuss the types of staff appraisal  mention the problems of staff appraisal  outline the methods of ensuring effective staff appraisal.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept and the Need for Staff Appraisal Assembling human and physical resources in any administrative set up and the utilisation of these resources to obtain their goals are the main functions of administrators in the organisation.
Appraisal is basically evaluation which means placing value judgment on the activities of employees over a given period.
The appraisal of the assembled staff will show the quality of staff recruited and also how well they are using the available resources with the direction, control and guidance (supervision) provided to achieve the organisational goals.
It will also show the potentials of the serving officers so that the management will know exactly what the organisation has in stock as far as human resources are concerned.
The quality of managerial performance in an organisation cannot be taken for granted.
Managers are always subjected to the judgment of others.
The task of appraising is so complicated that managers often hesitate to devote the efforts required by modern appraisal techniques.
Many managers distrust formal methods and prefer to avoid direct confrontation with those being appraised.
They often have a hunch, guess or decide the fate of subordinates by “whim” of the eye because they fear the criticisms and confrontation that systematic evaluation may evoke.
The result is often a poorly done appraisal.
The immediate purpose of the appraisal process is to identify and rectify deficiencies in performance and in organisational contest to build up an inventory of usable control information and using it to check up on the effectiveness of other administrative procedures.
A systematic method of assessing the performance of employees in their job with a view to helping management decisions on promotion, transfer, training or change in pay is the most authentic method of appraisal.
It means the continuous process of feeding back to subordinates, information about how well they are doing their work for the organisation.
The need to appraise staff performance includes the following:  to inform the job holder who is being assessed as to how he is doing 131 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL  stimulating the person to better performance if this is seen to be warranted by the current level of performance  it indicates which skills need improvement if the performance is to be improved  cataloguing the capabilities of the manpower on an organizational basis, serving as a memory bank of information on capacity  indicating the strengths and weaknesses of the organisation’s initial selection procedures  feed back to the appraisees (employers)  for salary review  for Career Counseling  for Succession Planning  as part of handover document between managers.
3.2 Types of Staff Appraisal There are two main types of staff appraisal namely; the informal and the formal staff appraisal.
3.2.1 The Informal Appraisal This is conducted on a day to day basis.
There is a close connection between behaviour and feed-back.
Informal appraisal quickly encourages checking of undesirable performance before it becomes entrenched.
Traditionally, appraisals have concentrated on individual’s personal characteristics, such as intelligence, decisiveness, creativity and ability to get along with others.
Today, however, appraisals are increasingly based on the individual’s performance – especially on how well the subordinate is helping the organisation to achieve its goals.
This is carried out by a “whim” of the eyes.
No record is kept.
No particular standard is used.
It is instant and most of the attributes used could be forgotten.
Therefore this method is relatively unreliable and it should only supplement the formal method.
3.2.2 Formal Appraisal This is the systematic appraisal method usually carried out semi- annually or annually on a formal basis.
It is usually done on a form titled “Annual Performance Evaluation Report” popularly called “APER” form.
Almost all well constituted organisations undertake this staff evaluation process.
The criteria used are basically the same.
It contains information on the employees’ attitudes and behaviour to peers and superiors, attitude to work, punctuality, decisiveness, intelligence, initiative, responsibility, tolerance, persistence, emotional stability, ability to cope with stress, etc.
These behavioural attitudes are graded or 132 rated from a scale spanning from highest to lowest.
Eventually, the overall performance is given from the summary of the whole grading.
The formal appraisal approaches are:  a superior’s rating of subordinates  a group of superiors rating subordinates  a group of peers rating colleagues (peer review)  subordinates rating their superiors 3.2.3 Advantages of Formal Appraisal The benefits accrued to formal methods of staff appraisal include:  it lets subordinates know formally, in exact terms, how their current performance is being rated  it identifies those subordinates who deserve merit rates and those that do not  it locates those subordinates who require additional training  it plays an important role in pinpointing those who should be promoted, demoted, left untouched or even those to be terminated.
3.3 Problems of Staff Appraisal Informal appraisals by managers are often ineffective in improving the performance of subordinates.
Individuals who were informally given criticism about their job performance once or twice a year tended to become defensive and resentful.
Their performance after the interview tended to decline.
However, many managers distrust formal methods and prefer to avoid direct confrontation with appraisals.
In this case, they play hunches, guess or decide the fate of subordinates by whim because they fear the criticisms that systematic evaluation evoke.
Reasons for these include:  inappropriate management philosophy  lack of objective standards of performance in many jobs  the unpleasantness of appraisal interview  lack of appraisal training  poor quality management  poor communication  lack or absence of recognition by companies for managers who effectively develop their staff (Akinsorotan, 2001).
133 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL 3.4 Methods of Ensuring Effective Staff Appraisal Though, effective staff appraisal is often difficult to obtain, certain methods when utilised, could help to reduce the difficulty.
These methods include: 1.
Shifting Standards Some managers rate each subordinate by different standards and expectations.
To be effective, the appraisal method must be perceived by subordinates as based on uniform fair standards.
2.
Rate Bias Some managers allow their personal bias (and prejudices) to distort the ratings they give subordinates (prejudices regarding sex, ethnicity, religion, style of clothing, age, etc.).
3.
Different Rating Patterns Managers differ in their rating styles.
Some managers rate harshly while others rate easily.
The lack of rating standard is:  unfair to employees who will become confused about where they stand  unfair to the organisation since it will become difficult to decide which  employees should be rewarded.
Differences in rating patterns can be avoided through precise definitions of each item on the rating form.
4.
The Halo Effect This is a tendency to rate subordinates high or low on all performance measures based on one of their characteristics.
Example, an attractive popular employee may be unjustifiably given high overall rating.
Also, the rating of the last officer may affect the rating of the current.
Rating employees separately on each of a number of performance measures and encouraging raters to guard against the halo effect are two ways the halo effect can be reduced.
4.0 CONCLUSION Managers are always subjected to the judgment of others.
The immediate purpose of which is to identify and rectify deficiencies in performance and in organizational contest to build an inventory of usable control information and using it to check up on the effectiveness of other administrative procedures.
Having that as our background, the unit has spelt out the need for effective appraisal and the types of 134 appraisal which the formal and informal appraisal.
The problems that staff appraisal could face were identified and the methods for ensuring effective appraisal were recommended.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that:  the appraisal of the assembled staff will show the quality of staff recruited and also how well they are using the available resources  staff appraisal has several purposes  staff appraisal is either formal or informal  there are constraints to staff appraisal  certain methods can be used to minimise ineffectiveness in staff appraisal.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is staff appraisal?
ii.
Discuss types of staff appraisal.
iii.
Explain the problems usually associated with appraisal activities 135 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL UNIT 2 BUDGETING IN EXTENSION MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Budgeting 3.2 Purpose of Budget 3.3 Budget Preparation 3.4 Revenue and Expenditure 3.5 Over and Under Expenditure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION The importance of budget and fiscal control cannot be over emphasised in any organisation.
This is because the human and physical resources put in place for production cannot be utilised without funding, the sourcing, spending and records of the materials produced per unit time.
With budgets, control can be effected in such a way as to regulate operations in confirmation with set procedures and plans.
Budgets help to determine sources of fund, how to use it within members of the organisation, what to produce with the fund and also to check how the organisation is progressing within the period covered by the budget.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of budgeting in extension organisation  state the purpose of budget  discuss budget preparation  differentiate revenue and expenditure.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Budgeting Budgeting is concerned with prediction and projection of what is likely to happen financially in an organisation.
Operating budgets include sales, production, and control which is thought of as a plan or a forecast of the “profit objective” of the firm’s operations.
In addition, the firm must have the ability to finance the plan or budget.
Budget requires 136 specific planning or a thorough understanding of objectives and future programmes of the organisation.
A budget is a formulation of plans of income and expenditure for a given future period, expressed in quantitative and qualitative terms.
Budgets can be stated in financial terms such as capital and revenue expenditure budgets or it can also be stated in non-financial terms such as units of production e.g.
litres of milk, meters of cloth, to be produced.
Budgeting is the work a manager performs to allocate the resources available to him for running the establishment.
It is done by considering how much it will cost to execute the organisational programmes while achieving the objectives within the limits established by the schedule (usually one year ahead).
The budget converts to monetary terms, the time of the people, equipment and facilities needed to get the job done.
Budgets can also be prepared for one month, three months or even six months, depending on the type of programme to be executed.
Some can be for a period of two or more years.
This is usually referred to as “n”-year Development Plan.
Budget do not usually exceed one year due to difficulty of forecasting the demand for products and supply situations, including labour conditions, prices, and unforeseen environmental and societal changes.
Very often, an organisation specifies the types of budget to be used.
It could be based on any of the following: (a) Historical data: by which is formulated based on the past experiences in the organisation (b) Zero-based data: where budget created and justified is based on line items according to programmes and priorities of the organisation.
(c) Management by Objectives (MBO) system: where specific objectives are funded.
(d) Programme Review and Evaluation Technique (PRET) system: here each programme is reviewed and assessed according to its condition to specific goals.
However, there are only a few of these budget systems in use.
Furthermore, in formulating budget for any organisation, certain key elements are very germane to the realisation of the goals.
These key elements are:  determining what line items are necessary in terms of objectives  determining the financial amount for each line  determining over head, surplus, and or profit margins  determining anticipated revenues from fees, grants, gifts, and contracts  drafting a budget with specific amounts and justifications, and  discussing and making adjustments to produce a working budget.
137 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL Based on the above, the budget then becomes a guide, which, however may always be in a state of change.
Budgeting is not just a once a year activity, it is a continual process of regular review and possible revision.
One should always be checking how one is doing, compared to how one anticipated.
3.2 Purpose of Budget  Budgets provide clear and unambiguous guidelines about the organisation’s resources and expectations  It helps to define the standards needed in all control system.
 It helps managers to coordinate (supervise) resources and projects  It allows authority to be delegated without loss of control (supervision)  It helps to facilitate performance evaluation of managers and units  It helps to correlate planning with action  Plans are reduced to specific figures, showing where money is going or where physical inputs (e.g.
fertiliser) were used and outputs (e.g.
tons of rice) were produced  Budgets are used as checks and balances on the actual results of a business  To know if there are derivations or not from the planned expenditure or revenue  To be able to use the results of the analysis for amendment in future budgeting  It enables members of the management to work together according to a clearly defined financial policy and to authorise specific expenditure to executive  Performances and costs can be traced to the people concerned  Over and under expenditures are detected, reasons given and amendments provided  Budget is a helpful device in anticipating problem and laying plans to meet the.
 It provides a basis for number of employees to be hired, temporarily laid off, or discharged, for arranging of bank loans and for similar activities  It provides a base from which to make either upward or downward adjustments when the level of business activity has changed sharply.
138 3.3 Budget Preparation Budget preparation varies considerably according to the scope of the organisation and the type of business.
But the general method is highlighted below.
Step 1: Top management issues a call for budget request and the head of each operating unit submits their request to their divisional heads (plant manager, regional sales manager, or college deans, etc.).
Step 2: Overlap, gap or inconsistent requests are corrected at this stage.
Step 3: Divisional budget requests are forwarded to a budget committee, which is usually composed of top managers with line authority.
Step 4: Review of budget and once again duplication and inconsistencies are corrected.
Step 5: Involvement and interaction, between the budget committee and the controller particularly with regards to policy issues.
Step 6: Final budget is sent to the president or Chief Executive Officer for approval.
Step 7: Passed to the governing board or Board of Directors for review and final approval.
Step 8:Final Budgets are then communicated to the divisions and operating units for implementation.
3.4 Revenue and Expenditure In any type of budget, there are two major sections: Revenue and Expenditure.
Revenue is the sum total of all the sources where fund could be realised for spending in the budget.
The sources could be external, i.e.
outside the organisation or internal, i.e.
generated within the organisation.
Examples of external sources are: grants, donations, gifts, government subventions, etc.
Revenue generated from internal sources are from sales of products, rents on properties including machineries, loans, shares and stocks, taxes, tenders’ fees and interest on savings.
Expenditure on the other hand is the spending of the money generated.
There are two basic types of Expenditure: Recurrent and Capital.
Recurrent expenditure is referred to as money spent on consumables.
Such spending keeps occurring at specific times and it is also used for maintenance and up-keep of the organisation.
Examples are salaries and wages, allowances, money for maintaining both human and physical resources (such as vehicles, buildings, and other facilities) used in the organisation.
Capital expenditure is money spent on resources that would last for a relatively long time and it is “once and for all” spending except such 139 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL facilities would be maintained/repaired with recurrent expenditure.
Examples are expenditure on infrastructures such as buildings, machines and equipment, road construction, vehicles, plants, battery cages, fishponds construction, etc.
3.5 Over and Under Expenditure Over expenditure is when a unit spends more than the money approved by the management in the budget.
This situation can arise as a result of the following: 1.
It can be as a result of improper management (mal-administration) on the part of the officer(s) concerned.
There must have been reckless spending without being adequately guided by the budget.
2.
Serious inflation might have set in after the approval of the budget.
Unforeseen circumstances that need attention may crop up in the production process.
The remedy here is for the concerned officers to present a supplementary budget which will absorb the excess, for management approval.
3.
It can also be as a result of misappropriation (also mal- administration).
Under expenditure is when a unit spends less than the money approved by the management in the budget.
This situation can arise as a result of the following: (a) inability to execute all the programmes planned for in the budget.
This may be due to shortage of appropriate manpower (b) it may also be due to poorly executed programmes, leaving out some very important aspects.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit gave a comprehensive definition of budget.
Basis and purpose of budget formulation were highlighted.
Basic steps involved in budget preparation were treated.
Also, types of revenue and expenditure were explained.
Budget was defined as a forecast or plan of expenditures and revenues for a specific period of time.
As a planning document, a budget enables business, governments, private organisations and even households to set priorities and monitor progress towards selected goals.
Budgets can be formulated based on historical data, on-going activities of the organization or even MBO principles.
Purpose of the budgets was listed as: guiding spending, streamlining activities according to plan, identifying who does what and to know the overall performance of the organisation at the end of the budget period.
Basic steps involved in the preparation of the budget were listed.
Revenue was defined as the sum 140 total of all the sources of money for the budget, while expenditure was also defined as the spending.
Over and under expenditures were explained, possible causes and remedies were indicated.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that:  budgeting is concerned with prediction and projection of what is likely to happen financially in an organisation  budget is formulated on the bases of historical data, zero-based data, management by objectives and by programme review and evaluation technique  the purpose of budgeting helps to correlate planning with action among others in an organisation  budget preparation varies according to the scope of the organisation and the type of business  in any type of budget, there are two major sections: revenue and expenditure  expenditure can either be under or over expenditure.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain what is meant by a budget.
ii.
Why is it necessary to prepare a budget in any organisation?
iii.
State the steps involved in preparing a budget.
iv.
List all the possible sources of funding in an organisation.
141 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL UNIT 3 STAFFING AND PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Recruitment of Extension Workers 3.1.1 Positive Recruitment 3.1.2 Passive or Ordinary Recruitment 3.2 Selection and Placement 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the tasks of an administrator borders around setting up the workforce.
These include recruitment, selection and placement, training and developing the assembled staff, supervising them and finally appraising them periodically to indicate their quality.
In this unit, focus will be on types of recruitment, selection and placement of extension workers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  mention the types of recruitment in extension organisation  explain selection and placement in recruitment exercise.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Recruitment of Extension Workers Recruitment in the field of administration means attracting the proper and suitable types of candidates for the various categories of posts.
In most cases, extension personnel may not pay adequate attention to the suitability of the candidates, but may introduce sentiments into this very important step.
There are two main types of recruitment;  Positive recruitment  Passive or ordinary recruitment which can be termed emergency recruitment.
142 3.1.1 Positive Recruitment Positive recruitment means when the employing agency attracts the right type of candidates.
This is very essential as any wrongly recruited staff will never function appropriately to attain the organisational goals.
To achieve positive recruitment, all the essential steps such as adequate briefing of the type of staff required wide advertisement short listing interview, selection indication and placement must be carried out.
The problems that the personnel administration can face here include inability to be able to go through all the listed steps involved.
There may not be enough funds to really cover the catchment area to sieve competent candidates.
Interview panels may not be adequately or appropriately assembled.
Again undue influence by members may not allow the selection of appropriate staff.
In most cases induction is not carried out before placement.
3.1.2 Passive or Ordinary Recruitment Passive or ordinary recruitment on the other hand is carried out under emergency or special situation under this method; all the essential steps listed for the positive recruitment need not be accomplished.
Advertisements may not be placed, interviews may not be held, but suitable candidates that could be available to take on the job temporarily are usually recruited.
However, this employment process is usually normalised later.
In this case, interviews and placement are usually carried out.
Incidentally, the activities and performance of the temporarily employed staff used to form the greater part of the permanent employment decision.
The passive or ordinary type of recruitment process is that which can harbour the greatest anomaly and abuse.
Influential people in the society, especially, the politicians, do seize this opportunity to find jobs for their supporters and relations, who may not be adequately, qualified.
With undue pressure and influence, such employed staff usually cause bottle necks in the organisation as they are difficult to remove, even after normalisation of the recruitment process.
3.2 Selection and Placement This is the last steps in staff recruitment or employment process.
After advertisement and shortlisting qualified candidates, interviews are arranged for all of them.
The interview is expected to screen very good and appointable candidates for employment while those appointable are kept in reserve, the good performers are given letters of appointment.
The process up to this stage is referred to as selection.
143 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL The selected candidates are now invited for induction to enable the organisation to place them at the most appropriate section.
This process is referred to as placement.
The problems of personnel administration here include among others the selection of appropriate candidate.
Apart from the probable undue influence and pressure during the interview process, some candidates may perform very well at the interview and thus score very high marks, but may not be a good performer when physically on ground.
Also the selected candidates sent for induction may show differential preference for some particular sections instead of the society.
The problems that the personnel administration can face here include inability to be able to go through all the listed steps involved.
There may not be enough funds to really cover the catchment area to sieve competent candidates.
Interview panel may not be adequately or appropriately assembled.
Again undue influence by members may not allow the selection for appropriate staff.
In most cases induction is not carried out before placement.
This is the type of recruitment process which can harbour the greatest anomaly and abuse.
Influential people in the society, especially the politicians used to seize this opportunity to find jobs for their supporters and loyalists who are incidentally not adequately qualified.
With undue pressure and influence, such employed staff usually cause bottlenecks in the organisation as they are difficult to remove, even after normalisation of the recruitment process, real vacant sections, etc.
finally, newly recruited staff may be source of the serving or existing staff.
The personnel management has to carefully synchronise both new and old staff by rational motivation of the latter 4.0 CONCLUSION Recruitment in extension administration is so important that any astute or shrewd administrator will never handle it with levity.
Recruitment may either be by positive or passive technique.
Positive recruitment refers to when the employing agency attracts the right type of candidates, while the ordinary recruitment is carried out under emergency or special situation.
After the short listing of the candidates, interview is conducted to place the successful candidates in the appropriate positions.
This concluding aspect is referred to as selection and placement.
144 5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that:  there are two types of recruitment; namely positive or ordinary types  positive type of recruitment refers to attracting the right candidates while passive or the ordinary type refers to that done under emergency  the interview is expected to screen for very good and appointable candidates  the selected candidates are placed in the right positions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the types of recruitment you have studied.
ii.
Differentiate between selection and placement in extension management.
145 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL UNIT 4 AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION POLICY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Agricultural Extension Policy 3.2 Scope of Agricultural Extension Policy 3.3 Forms of Extension Policy 3.4 Issues of Extension Policy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit seeks to address the general issues associated with agricultural extension policy such as the concept, scope, forms of extension policy, extension financing, the needs of clients, prioritisation of programmes, functions of extension, coordination between organisations and government inputs among others.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define agricultural extension policy  discuss the scope of agricultural extension policy  list and discuss forms of extension policy  analyse issues of extension policy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Agricultural Extension Policy Agricultural extension policy is a general plan of action in connection with agricultural extension.
It can be regulatory, directional or a guide towards a goal.
Formulating agricultural extension policies is very essential especially in developing countries where other aspects of the economy can easily overshadow it.
Lack of realistic policies could be as a result of lack of agreement or very negligible interest on the functions of extension, the clientele to be served, how extension will be financed, frequent changes in the organisational structure and programme 146 priorities, rapid turnover of the extension staff, and the proliferation and lack of coordination between different organisations that undertake extension work.
In Nigeria, the major problem of agricultural extension programmes is the frequent change of government.
This is because current governments usually abandon the immediate past government policies of agriculture generally.
Swanson et al (1997) observed that the importance of extension policy was recognised by the FAO’s Global Consultation on Agricultural Extension when it recommended that “all national governments should develop and periodically review their agricultural extension policy.” This policy should include the goals of agricultural extension in national agricultural development strategy.
It should be noted that agricultural and rural development is no longer a matter of just increasing food and agricultural production.
Other factors must be addressed by policy makers and the stakeholders in agriculture in formulating and implementing agricultural and rural development policy.
These factors should include: population factor, natural resources and environmental factors, the economics of extension, sustainable agricultural and rural development factor.
Population factor is a very important factor as far as policy formulation is concerned.
The reason is that there is a significant rise in world population especially in Africa and Asia.
This indicates that there is more pressure on the land, increased food and shelter demand, increased number of landless people, etc.
Even the few extension experts will be coping with more farmers thereby resulting into less effective coverage.
The economics of extension is a major factor in policy formulation simply because most developing nations do not adequately provide for extension in their fiscal budget consideration.
They tend to forget that roughly more than 60 percent of the population resides in the rural areas with agriculture as their main occupation.
The role of farmers is well recognised in sustainable agricultural and rural development, particularly in the management and conservation of soil, water and biological resources.
Farmers are the single largest group of users and managers of these elements throughout the world.
Majority of these farmers will need useful information, appropriate technology and sound technical advice not only to increase agricultural productivity and incomes, but also to make farming and rural life richer and more sustainable.
Thus this aspect is very crucial in the formulation of agricultural extension policy.
147 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL 3.2 Scope of Agricultural Extension Policy This refers to the range that the extension policy should cover.
Each country should have a comprehensive agricultural extension policy which provides for coordination with research, education, input supply, credit and marketing systems as well as some flexibility to reflect the dynamic nature of agricultural sector.
The policy should include the mission and goals for agricultural extension, the responsible agencies and personnel, the clientele to be served, the areas to be addressed and other relevant guidelines.
In developing national agricultural extension policies, representatives of all major groups of farmers should be directly involved and other relevant agricultural organisations should be consulted.
This is to ensure that the policy formulated will be practicable.
Idachaba (1988) categorised policies into desirable, undesirable, workable and unworkable.
He combined them into four types: workable and desirable, desirable, but unworkable, undesirable workable and undesirable unworkable policies.
He also coined four types of beneficiaries: workable policies for intended beneficiaries, unworkable policies for intended beneficiaries and unworkable policies for unintended beneficiaries.
Each of these categories exists in different proportions all over the world, but more of the desirable and workable ones exist in developed countries and vice versa.
3.3 Forms of Extension Policy Extension policy can be formulated in different ways.
In essence, we are talking about how the policy was conceived and delivered for execution, in this case, the circumstances leading to the evolution of the policy matters here.
Swanson et al (1997) outlined three main factors considered below.
The first one is the Provisional Extension Policies.
This is the most common form of extension policy in most developing countries.
In the absence of more formalised extension policies, or at the time when the formally enacted policy has been suspended a provisional or ad hoc (temporary) policy comes into play.
It is the workability of this provisional policy, with appropriate adjustment in it according to the existing situation that will assist in the formulation of the formal national agricultural extension policy.
The second type of policy is by decrees and proclamations.
This type of policy is usually formulated by heads of governments especially during military or undemocratic governments.
It is quite common within the developing nations.
Generally, this approach does not go through the 148 process of consultation and debate involving various stakeholders and beneficiaries.
The third type of policy is the legislated extension policy.
These are extension policies embodied by the country’s highest law-making authority such as congress, parliament, and national assembly in case of Nigeria.
These types of policies are the ideal ones because of several reasons.
First the policies emanated form the “user sources” or beneficiaries and they are adequately amended, adjusted and debated by the stakeholders first and finally by the legislators.
Such policies are usually very useful and sustainable.
All agricultural extension policies should follow this process.
3.4 Issues of Extension Policy a) Extension Mission and Goals Although extension has a wide and universal meaning, its mission and goals may need to be adjusted according to the national objectives, the context and stage of agricultural and rural development in a given country some countries, especially developing nations may concentrate on policies dealing with technology development and transfer.
Others may concentrate on consolidation of technologies already developed and transferred, and so on.
It depends on the agricultural development priorities of each nation.
In Nigeria, policy makers should concentrate on transfer of the developed technologies because we have quite a handful of them.
Also, policies on the conditions that would enable effective transfer and adoption to take place should be formulated.
b) Subject-Matter and Extension Personnel This depends on the goals and mission of the nation formulating the policy.
Subject-matter policy is good where there is adequate number of qualified personnel on the ground to execute it.
Some can focus on different aspects of agriculture such as livestock breeding, husbandry, processing and marketing, others on tree crops, food crops, harvesting and processing, mechanisation, etc.
But when staff strength is limiting, it will be better to formulate policies dealing with broad categories of agriculture such as farming systems, sustainable agriculture, rural development strategies, etc.
Here, fewer staff will be required.
c) Geographical Coverage Policies formulated according to the situation on ground and the needs of the beneficiaries are highly recommended.
To achieve the above, the policy formulation should emanate from the users.
It is then the final policy formulated will be according to the need of the people in the area.
In should be participatory.
For example, policies that involve 149 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL counterpart funding usually succeed.
For example, if the three tiers of government in Nigeria are to fund a programme, it is more likely to be sustainable than if its only for one of the three governments, why?
Its due to involvement.
Everyone will be guarding against failure due to the contributions made d) Extension Staffing Issues This is a very important aspect to be considered when formulating extension policies.
It is like the fuel required to operate a motor vehicle.
No matter how good the assemblage of a motor vehicle is, if it is not appropriately fueled, it will not function well.
The type of staff to be used is the first to be noted.
The quality and number must be taken into consideration.
This of course, depends on the type of extension programmes and projects on the ground.
For example, the number or farmers or farm families must be considered.
In developing countries like Nigeria, the number of farmers to an extension agent (EA) is very large (about 1,500).
It must be that the EAs are too few and/or government cannot afford to train or employ more.
Not only that, are the few EAs on the ground adequately taken care of in terms of salaries and allowances?
Under what condition are the EAs working?
The number and categories of farmers must be adequately considered during the policy formulation.
e) Stability Extension policies should not be rigid, but flexible simply because, agricultural extension per se is dynamic.
It changes from time to time.
For it to be sustainable, it must equally adjust frequently.
The organisational set up should be stable even if the programmes or projects are adjusted to suit the dictates of time and the stakeholders.
But the frequent change of policy concerning the supervisory body as it happened to Ministries of Agriculture in Nigeria is not healthy to good policy formulation.
For example, today, Research Institutes are under the Federal Ministry of Agriculture.
Tomorrow, they are transferred to Federal Ministry of Science and Technology.
This does not augur well for good policy.
f) Extension Policy Formulation There is no standard formula to be used in formulating agricultural extension policies.
It should be noted, however, that most existing laws and policies on extension have been formulated by planners and policy makers in the Ministry of Agriculture and Agriculture committees in the National Assembly.
Also, agricultural extension professionals from agricultural universities are called upon to provide advice and assist in drafting extension legislation before it is ratified by the national assembly.
150 However, to produce a more relevant and workable extension policy, the drafting should be more participatory.
Farmers and all stakeholders in the agricultural policy should be involved.
It should be ratified by the Ministry of Agriculture before final promulgation by the legislature.
It is then the policy can be sustainable.
g) Extension Funding This is a very sensitive issue with regards to extension policy formulation.
It is sad to note, particularly in developing countries that policies on agricultural extension has been a “tug of war.” The policy makers tend to underestimate the enormity of the extension operatives.
Consequently a very low proportion of fund is allocated to this sector.
The policy makers do not quite appreciate the fact that agricultural extension is a service oriented process.
The return from agricultural extension (like that of education plight) is not in the amount of Naira accruable to the government kitty, but its in the apparent increase in the farmers’ productivity.
Without adequate and commensurate funding of agricultural extension which is the “nerve” of improved sector of the economy cannot contribute sustainability to the national development.
4.0 CONCLUSION The concept of agricultural extension policy was discussed.
It includes a plan of action in connection with agricultural extension.
Lack of realistic policies could result from lack of planning, not involving the appropriate steps and people, i.e.
not fundamental and participatory.
Such policies are usually not workable and sustainable.
The factors to be considered during the policy formulation were highlighted as population, natural resources and environmental, the economics of extension and sustainable agricultural and rural development.
Also, the scope of agricultural extension policy should include mission and goals of extension agencies and clientele to be served.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that:  agricultural extension policy is a general plan of action in connection with agricultural extension  population factor is a very important factor as far as policy formulation is concerned  the policy should include the mission and goals for agricultural extension  extension policy can be formulated in different ways  there are certain issues that extension policy should address.
151 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the concept of agricultural extension policy.
ii.
Describe the forms of extension policy.
iii.
Discuss the issues that extension policy should address.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Idachaba F.S.(1988).
“Strategies of Achieving Self Food Sufficiency in Nigeria”.
Keynote Address, First National Congress of Science and Technology, University of Ibadan, Ibadan Nigeria.
Swanson, B.E.
(1984) Agricultural Extension.
(A Reference Manual).
Rome :FAO.
152 UNIT 5 MANAGEMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Human Resource Planning for Extension Personnel 3.2 Job Analysis (Job Description) 3.3 Major Types of Extension Personnel 3.4 Essential Attributes for Extension Personnel 3.5 Recruitment, Training and Development of Extension Personnel 3.6 Supervision 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Human resources is one of the most important aspects of any organisation.
Human resources refer to the human aspect (i.e.
staff) of the organisation.
This is a very sensitive area because they are delicate to handle, i.e.
direct, guide, control or manipulate.
This is because the other aspects of the organisation like the physical (material) resources are lifeless.
They can be easily manipulated, changed, increased or decreased or even eliminate them.
Nowadays people (or staff) are more self conscious.
Their productivity depends largely on how they are treated in terms of giving them their rights, motivation and the respect given on the job.
Human relations theory even states that good supervisors should put others (subordinates) in their own shoes.
It went further that it is by understanding their plights that supervision will be easy and the organisational goals will be achieved.
This unit treats the human resource planning, job description, major types of extension personnel and characteristics of a good extension officer, recruitment, training and development of the recruited staff, and highlights of his functions.
153 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  examine why it is necessary to plan for the staff for the necessary operational activities called job description  discuss the major types of extension personnel, and also the attributes for the extension personnel.
 explain recruitment, training and development of extension personnel  mention the supervisory roles of extension personnel.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Human Resource Planning for Extension Personnel What is planning and why do you plan?
Planning is forecast of actions or activities to be executed in the future.
Also, planning is done to avoid errors such as gaps, overlaps (repetition) and easy execution of the activity.
These explanations show the importance of human resource planning.
For example, it is highly essential to pre-determine the number of staff, the type, qualifications, and experience required for jobs before starting the recruitment process.
This is the only way to ensue appropriate assemblage of the right human resource for the organisation.
This is referred to as human resource forecasting which is predicting an organisation’s future demand for number, type and quality of various categories of employees.
3.2 Job Analysis or Job Description It is just very appropriate and normal to equip a newly recruited staff with his/her job schedules.
He or she will not be able to function satisfactorily without this tool.
Job analysis requires a systematic collection, evaluation and organisation of information about the job.
It also includes detailed specifications of duties to be performed, responsibilities and working conditions and indicates what is expected of a job holder.
It is unfortunate that some extension organisations in developing countries do not have clearly defined job description for extension personnel.
That is why they have problems in supervision, and staff appraisal and finally they could not achieve their goals fully.
154 3.3 Major Types of Extension Personnel In Nigeria, before the advent of the Agricultural Development Projects (ADPs), what can be called extension was mainly saddled with the servicing of the input delivery system.
This was the major function of the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MANR) then.
At that time, the entire MANR is divided into two broad categories: the office and field staff.
The office staff contained the administrators are the management (policy makers and executors).
They are the Permanent Secretaries (PS), Deputy PS, Chief Agricultural Officers (CAO), and Assistant CAO.
The supervisory officers at the Headquarters or Circle (Zonal) headquarters are the Principal and Senior Agricultural Officers.
They are the agricultural policy executors and supervisors of all lower cadres of staff in the entire MANR, especially on the field.
Other field staffs are Agricultural Officers I and II, Agricultural Superintendents (Chief, Assistant Chief, Principal, Senior and Agricultural Superintendents).
The last cadre of field staff by that time is the Field Overseers who do not possess School Certificate or General Certificate of Education.
This set up was the staff cadres obtained before ADP agricultural system was introduced.
The staff cadre and layout being used today in Nigerian Agricultural System differs slightly.
The management and the supervisory officers described above still exist as office staff.
But the MANR has intensified its agricultural extension system tremendously and this was solely handled by the field staff under the ADP umbrella.
The ADP handles both distribution of inputs and services and also getting improved agricultural practices to the farmers through training and demonstrations.
The intervention of the World Bank that provided loans in conjunction with the state and Federal government contributions really gave this additional programme a commendable push.
Nigerian Agricultural system had shifted emphasis on the ADPs by giving them adequate support and recognition, particular in funding and provision of human and material resources.
This ADP is an integral part of each state MANR.
Now that the World Bank Loan had ceased, it is being financed, supervised and run entirely by each state MANR.
The ADP is headed by a Project Manager (PM).
Each state is divided into zones (3-4) and each is manned by a Zonal Project Director (ZDP), followed by Assistant Directors.
All ADP officers are field officers but the above categories are for both agricultural policy formulation and execution.
155 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL The ADP organisation structure operates in such a way that the entire area under its coverage is divided into manageable portions with the highest as the zones and the lowest as the village with sizeable farm families.
The zones are divided into Blocks which are headed by Block Extension Supervisors (BES).
The blocks are divided into villages headed by Village Extension Agents.
The supervisory extension staff plan, organize, coordinate and implement extension programmes and activities.
They supervise and monitor the work of the field staff, providing guidance, motivation and evaluation of performance.
They also coordinate the programme with other relevant agencies.
ADPs through the World Bank intervention, introduce the Subject Matter Specialist System (SMS).
These SMS are graduates, some with post graduate qualifications.
They are the link between the Research Centres (Research Institutes and Agricultural Universities) and the Village Extension Agents (VEAs) with their farmers.
The SMS are specialists in specific agricultural areas who collect and teach the VEAs about special subject areas.
The VEAs will in turn disseminate these latest innovations to their farmers, first through selected farmers called Contact Farmers and later to all other farmers’ problems back to the research centers for possible solutions.
The Village Extension Agents make regular visits to villages and farms to create rapport with their clients and to understand their problems.
They undertake educational activities in the form of meetings, campaigns, demonstrations, field days, training sessions and exhibitions.
Finally, they provide advisory service to the farmers and solve their production problems.
3.4 Essential Attributes for Extension Personnel Hitherto, the key roles and areas, the extension personnel are to perform had been covered.
The essential attributes the extension personnel should have include adequate educational qualifications, skills, experience, physical characteristics, mental abilities, values, and attitudes needed for extension.
The critical attributes needed for field level and supervisory extension staff are necessary formal training in agriculture, practical skills and experience in farming and knowledge of modern farm practices.
Abilities in group dynamics, human relations and communication are also important.
Basic skills related to management and leadership are needed by extension supervisors.
Values and attitudes such as faith in rural people, commitment to agricultural development and concern for the whole community are important for all extension personnel.
156 Assessment of personal and professional attributes for selecting productive extension personnel is essential because an unsatisfactory educational level of extension staff is one of the most serious problems of extension in developing countries.
When extension personnel are unproductive, the farmers are the worse hit.
3.5 Recruitment, Training and Development of Extension Personnel Recruitment is important in selecting the right kind of extension personnel.
This is because this is the process of planning for the type of staff, combing the appropriate catchment area to choose the best available and following the subsequent processes to select the best for the extension work.
Therefore if all the essential attributes discussed are not put in place during the recruitment process, the success of the extension personnel is doubtful.
The manner in which promotions and advances are expected matters a lot in the success of extension service system.
As much as possible, insiders should be considered for promotion rather than looking outwards whenever vacancies exists or expansion occurs.
This will not only motivate of boost the morale of the staff, but it will also increase their loyalty many fold.
Regular staff appraisal through annual performance evaluation report should be used to determine the staff to be promoted, transferred to dent for training.
Attendance in workshops, seminars, attachment training should be given periodically.
This training is offered to update and maintain the specialised subject-matter officers, extension supervisors and frontline workers updated.
It also enables them to add to the knowledge and skills they already have.
Maintenance or refresher training usually deals with new information and new methods as well as review older materials.
This type of training is needed to keep employees at the peak of their possible production and well up-to-date.
3.6 Supervision This administrative process had been defined and explained in earlier unit of this book.
However, it should be stressed here that two major functions of supervision are tasks orientation and concern for employees.
Thus, direction and organisation of activities, motivation of employees and management of work groups are the important functions of extension supervisors.
Extension supervisors have to plan the work and maintain a high standard of performance.
The whole process of job analysis, 157 AEM 715 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PERSONEL identification of key performance areas and performance appraisal will help in planning and organizing extension work.
Lack of motivation among extension staff leads to poor performance.
For example, with no rewards and incentives, poor facilities, very limited or no promotional avenues, low esteem given to extension staff seriously demoralise the extension agents to the extent that they do not even work up to their normal rate, not to talk of putting extra efforts where needed.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit reasons for human resource planning for extension and their job description were discussed.
Major types of extension personnel were also covered.
The pre-ADP and current agricultural systems were presented.
Different staff cadres were listed.
The attributes to look for among extension staff were highlighted.
The importance of undertaking qualitative recruitment drive them adequate training and development to equip them for better performance were emphasised.
Finally, the benefits of effective supervision were given.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit that:  human resource planning ensures appropriate assemblage of the right human resource for the organisation  job analysis requires a systematic collection, evaluation and organisation of information about the job  there are major types of extension personnel  the extension personnel should possess certain essential attributes  recruitment is important in selecting the right kind of extension personnel  functions of supervision are task orientation and concern for employees 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Why is planning required in human resource?
ii.
List the major types of extension personnel.
iii.
Mention the essential attributes of extension personnel.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Aromolaran A.
(2000).
Op.Cit.
158
