 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: AEM 246 COURSE TITLE: Youth Organisation in AgricultureAEM246 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE Course Team Dr. (Mrs.) Grace Modupe Adebo (Course Developer/Writer) - UNIADO Dr. N.E.
Mundi (Editor/Programme Leader)-NOUN Dr. Jari Sanusi (Coordinator)-NOUN ii AEM246 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-455-2 All Rights Reserved iii AEM246 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ……………………………………..……….………….
1 Course Aim ……………………………………………….…..…….
4 Course Objectives …………………………………………………... 4 Working Through This Course ……………………….…………….. 5 Course Materials …………………………………………………….
5 Study Units ………………………………………………………….
6 Presentation Schedule …………………………………….………… 7 Textbooks and References…………………………………………… 7 Assessment File ……………………………….…………………….. 9 Assessment ……………………………………….………………….
9 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs)………………………………… 10 Examination and Grading …………………………………….…….. 10 Course Marking Scheme ……………………………….…………… 11 How to Get the Most from This Course …………………………….
11 Facilitation/Tutors and Tutorials ……………………….………….. 13 Summary …………………………………………….……………… 13 iv  Introduction AEM246 Youth Organisations in Agriculture is a two-credit course unit available to students at the second year level at the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Youth Organisations in Agriculture refers to an organised group of young people under the guidance of a leader for the purpose of capacity building in the field of agriculture.
The need for youth organisations in Nigeria stems from the fact that young people require to grow and develop capacity in a positive way.
Capacity building can take place in the context of the family, peer group, school, neighbourhood as well as the community.
Young persons may not be able to build essential skills and competences and be able to feel safe, cared for, valued, useful and spiritually sound unless the family and the community provide them with the support and opportunities they need along the way.
Many young people in rural communities do not have the advantages that promote optimal health development of the body, mind and spirit.
This kind of opportunity can be obtained from youth organisations.
All countries that have purpose and direction make adequate provision for socialisation and mobilisation of their youths through deliberate and skillfully implemented youth organisations to enable them become useful citizens of the future.
Youth organisation is an important platform that can help youths to see agriculture as a dignified profession from which people can earn a decent living and not one in which the practitioners are condemned to poverty and compelled to a difficult life.
Youth organisations are necessary to develop responsible leadership and follower ship skills.
Youth Organisations can help youths to develop a sense of competence: a sense of usefulness: a sense of belonging: and a sense of power.
Hence this course will expose you to the definition of youth, necessity for Youth organisations in agriculture as well as steps involved in the organisation of youth clubs, and the various types of youth organisations in agriculture.
It will also show the differences and similarities between Youth Organisations in cities, urban and rural settings, the roles of the Youth in farming families and settlements as well as the problems and prospects of retaining Youths in rural communities.
Issues such as Youth Organisations and clubs in school management, State, Regional, and National Organisations in Agriculture, leadership in Youth Organisations and roles of a Youth Leader, members, patrons, advisers, and volunteers as well as Rural Youth Club Projects will be discussed in this course.
AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE This course guide tells you what to expect from reading this material.
The study of Youth Organisations in Agriculture will enable you to understand definition of youth, the various characteristics of youth and the need for organising youth clubs in agriculture.
It will expose you to the various types of youth organisations in agriculture such as the young farmers club, the 4-H club, Youth Alliance of Nigeria, children and youth in Agriculture programmes.
Each of these has its aims and objectives as well as philosophy.
They all have leaders who perform different roles in order to move the organisation forward.
All youth organisations aid the development of the child in three domains: affective, cognitive and psychomotor.
A succinct difference between rural and urban youth is discussed in the course.
Rural areas are usually referred to as small, inward looking, idyllic communities held together by kinship relations and supporting basic agricultural occupations.
While urban areas on the other hand are dynamic, ever-changing and commercial centres.
The major differences between rural and urban areas are manifested in their features.
These are: size, population density, closeness to nature, occupation, social interaction, social differentiation, social stratification, social mobility, social control and standard of living.
These features also explain why youth organisations in urban areas are different from that of rural areas.
Youths in farming families and settlements are referred to as the young blood of the community, and as leaders, youths can move the community from bottom to top.
They can unite and organise the community.
The presence of youths in communities and settlements enhances the ability of households to make the fullest use of productive resources such as land.
Youths can bring a revolution in rural economy if Agro-based industries are established in rural areas.
The study differentiated the various settlement patterns found in rural areas, the compact, cluster or nucleated settlement, the scattered or dispersed settlement and the linear settlements.
Nigerian youths residing in rural communities encounter several challenges which prevent them from staying in rural communities and encourage migration to urban centres to experience life in cities.
These challenges are: poverty, malnutrition and hunger, limited or lack of access to basic education and other services, poor and or lack of social amenities.
Others are inadequate or lack of industries, inefficient marketing facilities, inadequate or absence of processing facilities, poor road network, poor/lack of health facilities-homelessness and inadequate housing; unsafe environments; social discrimination and exclusion; lack of participation in decision-making in civil and socio-cultural life, lack of access to, or loss of control over resources, including land, skills, ii AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE knowledge, capital and social networking.
Suggestions were made on how to retain youth in rural communities as well as how to ensure they return to the communities after tertiary education in cities.
Some of the Youth Organisations in schools discussed are as follows; Nigerian Red Cross Society, Drama Club, Literary and Debating Society, JETS Club, Health Club, French Club, and Young Farmers Club.
These Clubs and Societies are headed by graduate teachers who are experts in their various fields.
Through their efforts, these clubs and societies have organised programmes whereby students are able to practice what they are taught in class which is done on weekly basis and learn new things through the programmes and activities of these clubs.
The students can be taught new things like soap, candle and cream making by the Jets Club.
Others are Cassava production and processing – where the participants are taught how to process several value added products of cassava, operations of the Stock Market, cultural display, which expose students to the diverse cultural groups in Nigeria, develop the ability to speak in public by overcoming stage fright through the activities of the debating societies, and lot of other activities that have positive impact on the growth and development of the students.
There are different agricultural organisations existing in communities, states, regions and national levels these include: Community Development Association (CDAs), Cooperative societies, Occupational/professional Association, Trade and Commercial Associations, Religious Organisations,, Gender groups, Farmers Development Union, Food and Agricultural Association(FAO).
They all perform diverse roles to ensure agricultural development, increase food production in order to alleviate poverty and hunger.
Leadership is and has been described as the “process of social influence in which one person can enlist the aid and support of others in the accomplishment of a common task.
Qualities of a leader includes: honesty, confidence, focus, patience, dedication, consistency, motivation, effective communication, tolerance, enthusiasm, and discipline.
A youth leader must possess these qualities in order to lead effectively.
In order to function effectively there are certain roles to be performed by youth leaders, members, patrons, advisers and volunteers in organisations.
The entire activities of rural youth club centers on worthwhile projects.
Such projects might include two or more of the following: Farm works which might involve the cultivation, processing, storage and packaging iiiAEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE of any food crop, rearing of farm animals such as ruminants and monogastric animals as well as fishes, making of decorations, clothing and textile, home making- food preparation, food preservation, kitchen gardening etc.
Effectiveness and efficiency of a project depends on the ability to meet the needs and interest of majority of members, projects should also be seen to be interesting and achievable; projects should be cost effective and time bound as well as challenging; projects must be able to bring about improvement in specific fields of interest; and be able to utilise local materials.
Youth clubs can be sustained through; provision of incentives to boost the morale of participants, cooperation, accurate record keeping; publicising the results of projects after completion and recognition and rewarding excellent performance.
Course Aims The course seeks to provide an understanding and appreciation of youth organisations in agriculture, their roles in farming families and settlements, in school management, youth leaders and their functions, youth projects, challenges confronting rural youths and how to overcome them.
It will highlight the various agricultural organisations found in the communities, states, regions and the nation.
Course Objectives In addition to the aim above, the course sets out to achieve some objectives.
After going through this course, you should be able to: • state different definitions of youth, characteristics of youth, reasons for organising youth clubs in agriculture and the various steps involved in organising youth clubs • mention different youth organisations in agriculture, discuss the activities carried out by the young farmers club, explain the concept of 4-H club and discuss the goals of children/ youth in agricultural programmes • specify six major differences between rural and urban areas, discuss why youth organisations in rural areas are different from that of urban cities and the similarities among the organisations • describe the major settlement patterns in rural Nigeria, mention five roles of youth in farming families and settlements, explain how youths are agents of security to their communities and settlements and how youths can bring about revolution in the rural economy • discuss at least five problems encountered by rural youths, give reasons why rural youths migrate to urban cities, discuss how youth problems can be solved, and expatiate on the prospects of retaining youths in rural communities iv AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • state five clubs/organisations in Nigerian schools, explain the activities of three of the clubs, highlight the need for a student to be a member of the Literary and Debating Society, and state the benefits of being a member of a health club • mention at least four youth organisations in Nigeria, discuss the need for cooperative societies, explain fully the Farmer’s cooperative society, discuss the activities of the Farmers’ Development Union, expatiate on the need for NGOs in agricultural development, and explain the different ways in which the FAO is alleviating hunger and poverty worldwide • define leadership, state the qualities of a good leader and explain the principles of leadership • discuss the roles expected of the President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer of a youth organisation, discuss the functions of the patron and advisers, and explain the need for volunteers in youth organisation • define projects, explain reasons for embarking on various projects in agricultural clubs, state the various kinds of projects that can be carried out in agricultural clubs, mention the criteria for selecting youth club projects and discuss ways of sustaining youth club projects.
Working through This Course This course involves that you would be required to spend a lot of time to read.
The content of this material is very dense and require you spending quality time to study.
This account for the great effort put into its development in the attempt to make it very readable and comprehensible.
Nevertheless, the effort required of you is still tremendous.
I would advise that you avail yourself the opportunity of attending the tutorial sessions where you would have the opportunity of comparing knowledge with your peers.
The Course Materials The main components of the course are: 1.
The course guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References 4.
Assignments 5.
Presentation schedule In addition, the course comes with a list of recommended textbooks which though are not compulsory for you to acquire or indeed read, are necessary as complement to the course material.
vAEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE Study Units The course is divided into two modules made up of ten units as listed below: Module 1 Unit1 Definition of Youth and Necessity for Youth Organisation in Agriculture Unit 2 Types of Youth Organisation in Agriculture Unit 3 Comparative Analysis of Youth Organisations in Cities, Urban and Rural Settings Unit 4 Roles of Youth in Farming Families and Settlements Unit 5 Problems and Prospects of Retaining Youths in Rural Communities Module 2 Unit 1 Youth Organisations and Clubs in School Management Unit 2 State, Regional, and National Organisations in Agriculture Unit 3 Leadership in Youth Organisations Unit4 Roles of a Youth Leader, Members, Patrons, Advisers, Volunteers in Organisations Unit 5 Rural Youth Club Projects The first unit in module 1 introduces you to the definition of youth, characteristics of Youth, definition of Youth Organisations, and the necessity for Youth organisation in Agriculture as well as the steps involved in the organisation of youth clubs.
The second unit lists the various youth organisations in agriculture, and discusses the activities carried out by each club, their objectives and philosophy.
The third unit focuses on the major differences between rural and urban areas and why youth organisations in rural areas are different from that of urban cities.
It states the similarities among the organisations The fourth unit discussed farming families and settlements as well as the roles of youths in farming families and settlements.
It explains how youths can bring about a revolution in the rural economy.
Unit five discusses the problems of retaining Youths in rural communities; it suggests methods of retaining Youths in rural vi AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE communities and how they can be brought back to rural areas after post secondary education.
In module 2, the first unit discussed youth organisations and clubs in school management, the activities of each club and the benefits of the clubs to the student, school and the society.
The second unit deals with state, regional and national organisations in agriculture.
Specifically it explains Community Development Associations, Cooperative Societies, Farmers’ Co-Operatives, Occupational/ Professional Associations, Religious Organisations, Gender Groups, Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs), Farmers Development Union (FADU), and Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO).
It discusses their contribution to the development of the agricultural sector of the nation.
The third unit focused on leadership in youth organisations.
Specifically, it defines who is a leader as well as identifies effective leadership qualities and principles of leadership.
The fourth unit is concerned with roles of a youth leader, members, patrons, advisers, and volunteers in organisations while the fifth unit focused on projects that can be carried out by youth clubs and organisations.
Such projects include; farm works which might involve the cultivation, processing, storage and packaging of any food crop, rearing of farm animals such as ruminants and monogastric animals as well as fishes, making of decorations, clothing and textile, home making- food preparation, food preservation, kitchen gardening etc.
Each unit consist of one to two weeks work and includes an introduction, objectives, reading materials, exercises, conclusion, summary, tutor-marked assignment (TMA) references and other recommended text.
The unit directs you to work on exercises related to the required reading.
In general, this exercise shall task you on the material you have covered.
Together with TMAs, these exercises will help you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Presentation Schedule Your course materials give you timelines for the early and timely completion and submission of your TMAs and how to attend tutorials.
You should remember that you are required to submit all your assignments by the stipulated time and date.
You should guard against lagging behind in your work.
viiAEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE Textbooks and References These books are recommended for further reading: Adedoyin (2005).
“Youth and Children Programme in Extension: Agricultural Extension in Nigeria”.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria Publication.
Ajayi, A.R.
(2006).
A Guide for Young Farmers’ Clubs.
Akure: SAC Impressions.
Nigeria.
Carrino (2005).
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (2009)-Rural Youth Development Curtain, R. (2004).
Youth in Extreme Poverty: Dimensions and Policy Implications with Particular Focus on South-East Asia.
Ekong, E. (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Publisher Ltd. Englama & Bamidele (1997).“Measurement Issues in Poverty”.
Proceedings of Annual Conference of the Nigerian Economic Society.
Adebo, Grace Modupe (2004).
“Evaluation of Poverty Alleviation Strategies among Women in Ekiti and Ondo State Nigeria”.
Unpublished PhD Thesis Submitted to the Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension, Federal University of Technology, Akure.
House, R.J. (1971).
"A path-goal theory of leader effectiveness".
Administrative Science Quarterly.
Vol.16: pp.321–339.
International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF)(1967).
“Preventive Medicine and Family Planning”.
Proceedings of the 5th Conference of Europe and Near East Region of the IPPF.
Copenhagen, Denmark, July 5-8 1966.
London, England.
Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd. Kouzes, J.
& Posner, B.
(2007).
The Leadership Challenge.
CA: Jossey Bass.
viii AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE National Youth Development Policy (2001).
Nigerian Red Cross Society (2005).
“Implementation of Ouagadougou Declaration” http://EzineArticles.com/?expert=Joe_Daley Ogunliditimi, T. O.
(1984).
Rural Youth Programmes Mimeograph.
Department of Agricultural Extension and Rural Development, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Ogunsanya, J.
A.
(1973).
Guidelines for Holding YFC Meetings.
Ibadan: M.A.N.R.
Old Western State of Nigeria.
pp.
1 - 15.
Onuekwusi; et al.
(2002) “Nigerian Parents and the Development of Rural School Youth”.
Journal of Social Science Rethinking Youth (2009).
The Concept of Youth.
Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia (2008).
National Federation of Young Farmers' Clubs.
Assignment File In your assignment file, you will find all the details of the TMAs you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for this assignment will count towards the final score for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself, and later in this Course Guide in this section on assessment.
There are many assignments for this course and these assignments are basically meant to assist you to understand the course.
Assessment There are three aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are self- exercises, second are the Tutor-Marked Assignments and third is the written examination/end of course examination.
You are advised to be sincere in attending the exercise.
In tackling the assignments you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor/facilitator for assessment in accordance with deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The TMAs you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course work.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final or end of course examination that will count for 70% of your total course mark.
ixAEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) The TMA is a continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You are required to submit at least four (4) TMAs before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The TMAs would be given to you by your facilitator and returned after you have completed them.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your study units and references.
However, it is desirable to demonstrate that you have read and researched more into other references which will give you a wider view point and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your facilitator on or before the deadline given in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not granted after the due date.
Course Examination and Grading The end of course examination for will be for about 3 hours duration and has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which will reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercise and Tutor –Marked Assignment problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Utilise the time between finishing the last unit, and the examination date to revise the whole course.
You might find it useful to revise the whole course.
You might find it useful to review yourself-test, TMAs and comments on them before the examination.
The end of course examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 Four assignments, best three of the four accounts for 10% each = 30% of course Marks End of course examination 70%of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks x AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university classroom lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning: you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace.
And at a time a place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do.
The study unit tells you when to read, and which are your text materials or recommended books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format, the first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do, by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your reference or from a reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or visit the study centre nearest to you.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you when you need assistance.
Do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
Read this course guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
1.
Organise a study schedule- design and a course overview to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available at the study centre.
You need to gather all information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
2.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with xiAEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
3.
Turn to unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
4.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your references and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
5.
Ask your study centre whenever you need up to date information.
6.
Visit your study centre whenever you need up to date information 7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates) visit your study centre for your next required assignment.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objective you can start on the next unit, proceed unit by unit through the course and try to space your study so that you can be on schedule.
9.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignment.
10.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved those unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the course Guide).
Facilitation/Tutor and Tutorials There are 14 hours of tutorial provided in support of this course you will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials as well as the names and phone number of your facilitator, as soon as you are located a tutorial group.
Your tutor or facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You should mail your tutor- marked assignment to your tutor before the scheduled date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e-mail and discuss problems if you need assistance.
xii AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE The following might be circumstances in which you would find help where necessary.
Contact your facilitator if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • you have difficulty with the self-test or exercises • you have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your course facilitator and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain much benefit from course tutorials prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in active discussion.
Summary The course is to provide you with some underlying knowledge of psychology for extension personnel.
By the time you complete the course, you will be able to answer the following questions: • what are the different definitions of youth • state eight characteristics of youth • give reasons for organising youth clubs in agriculture • explain the various steps involved in organising youth clubs • mention different youth organisations in agriculture • discuss the activities carried out by the young farmers club • explain the concept of 4-H club • discuss the goals of children/ youth in agricultural programme • state six major differences between rural and urban areas • discuss why youth organisations in rural areas are different from that of urban centres • state the similarities among the organisations • describe the major settlement patterns in rural Nigeria • mention five roles of youth in farming families and settlements • explain how youths are agents of security to their communities and settlements • explain how youths can bring about revolution in the rural economy • state at least five problems encountered by rural youths • give reasons why rural youths migrate to urban cities • discuss how youth problems can be solved • expatiate on the prospects of retaining youths in rural communities xiiiAEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • mention at least four organisations in Agriculture in Nigeria • discuss the need for cooperative societies • explain fully the Farmer’s cooperative society • discuss the activities of the Farmers’ Development Union • expatiate on the need for NGOs in agricultural development • explain the different ways in which FAO is bringing about the alleviation of hunger and poverty world wide • mention at least four youth organisations in Nigeria • discuss the need for cooperative societies • explain fully the Farmer’s cooperative society • discuss the activities of the Farmers’ Development Union • expatiate on the need for NGOs in agricultural development • explain the different ways in which FAO is alleviating hunger and poverty world wide • define leadership • state the qualities of a good leader • explain the principles of leadership • discuss the role played by the President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer of a youth organisation • discuss the functions of the patron and advisers • explain the need for volunteers in youth organisation • define a youth project • explain reasons for embarking on various projects in agricultural clubs • state the various kinds of projects that can be carried out in agricultural clubs • mention the criteria for selecting youth club projects • discuss ways of sustaining youth club projects.
We wish you success in this course.
In particular, we hope you would be able to appreciate the various youth organisations in agriculture, challenges of rural youth and how the challenges can be resolved as well as the various projects youth organisations can embark upon to develop themselves, the school, rural communities and the society .
We hope you enjoy the course.
Best wishes.
xiv AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE Course Code AEM246 Course Title Youth Organisations in Agriculture Course Team Dr. (Mrs.) Grace Modupe Adebo (Course Developer/Writer) - UNIADO Dr. N.E.
Mundi (Editor/Programme Leader)-NOUN Dr. Jari Sanusi (Coordinator)-NOUN xvAEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-455-2 All Rights Reserved xvi AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………………… 1 Unit1 Definition of Youth and Necessity for Youth Organisation in Agriculture ………………………….. 1 Unit 2 Types of Youth Organisations in Agriculture……….. 7 Unit 3 Comparative Analysis of Youth Organisations in Cities, Urban and Rural Settings …………………..… 18 Unit 4 Roles of Youth in Farming Families and Settlements... 23 Unit 5 Problems and Prospects of Retaining Youths in Rural Communities ……………………………….….
29 Module 2 ………………………………………………………… 37 Unit 1 Youth Organisations and Clubs in School Management …………………………………….…… 37 Unit 2 State, Regional and National Organisations in Agriculture ……………………………………..…….. 44 Unit 3 Leadership in Youth Organisations ………………… 60 Unit4 Roles of a Youth Leader, Members, Patrons, Advisers, Volunteers in Organisations …………………..…….. 65 Unit 5 Rural Youth Club Projects ……………………..…….
70 xviiNoneAEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE MODULE 1 Unit1 Definition of Youth and Necessity for Youth Organisation in Agriculture Unit 2 Types of Youth Organisations in Agriculture Unit 3 Comparative Analysis of Youth Organisations in Cities, Urban and Rural Settings Unit 4 Roles of Youth in Farming Families and Settlements Unit 5 Problems and Prospects of Retaining Youths in Rural Communities UNIT 1 DEFINITION OF YOUTH AND NECESSITY FOR YOUTH ORGANISATION IN AGRICULTURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions of Youth 3.2 Characteristics of Youth 3.3 Definition of Youth Organisations 3.4 Necessity for Youth Organisations in Agriculture 3.5 Steps involved in the organisation of Youth Club 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Youth has been defined severally by scholars from various regions.
For instance the way Nigerians view youth is quite different from other nations.
So this unit intends to give you these various concepts of youth, their characteristics, necessity for youth organisation in agriculture as well as the steps involved in organising youth clubs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • give different definitions of youths • state eight characteristics of youths • cite reasons for organising youth clubs in agriculture • explain the various steps involved in organising youth clubs.
1AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definitions of Youth Youth has been defined severally by scholars from various regions.
For instance the way Nigerians view youth is quite different from other nations.
According to Rethinking Youth (2009), Youth is seen as a relational concept.
This refers to the social processes whereby age is socially constructed, institutionalised and controlled in historically and culturally specific ways.
In relation to adulthood, the notion of youth is perceived by comparing the characteristics of youths and adults as shown in Table 1.1 Table 1:1: Notions of Youth and Adult Youth Adult Not adult/adolescent Adult/grown up Becoming Arrived Pre-social self that will emerge Identity is fixed under the right conditions Powerless & vulnerable Powerful & strong Less responsible Responsible Dependent Independent Ignorant Knowledgeable Risky behaviours Considered behaviour Rebellious Conformist Reliant Autonomous Source: Rethinking Youth, (2009).
Globally, youth is described as the period in an individual’s life and this runs between the end of childhood and entry into the world of work (Onuekwusi & Effiong, 2002).
Youth is seen as a universal stage of development.
According to Nigeria’s National Youth Development Policy (2001), the youth comprises all young persons of ages 18 to 35, who are citizens of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Some writers focus on Youths from the point of view of behaviour, arguing that young people themselves, through antisocial behaviour and activities, are a threat to society.
According to Carrino (2005), youths are the largest generation ever to transit to adulthood.
Comprising 30 percent of the population in the developing world, young people present a set of urgent economic, social, and political challenges that are crucial to long term progress and stability.
People in this age bracket definitely constitute a sizeable 2 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE chunk of a nation’s population on which the burden of nation building falls.
In Nigeria, for example, youths are seen as “vital sources of manpower for development” (Odusanya, 1972; Olujide, 2008).
Youths are rightly seen as leaders of tomorrow.
The youth also constitute the major resource base for any country that seeks to embark on any meaningful rural development projects.
Hence, the kind of education (formal or informal) that youth are exposed to or have access to will determine the nation’s overall development.
3.2 Characteristics of Youths Youths according to Adedoyin (2003) and Torimiro (2008) are said to possess the following characteristics.
• Greater physical strength • Greater knowledge acquisition propensity • Faster rate of learning • Faster reaction time • Innovative proneness • Love for adventure and preference for boldness • Minimal risk aversion • Less fear of failure • Less conservation 3.3 Definition of Youth Organisations Youth organisation is synonymous with youth clubs, youth groups, youth associations and youth movements.
Babylon English saw youth organisations as groups of young people.
A youth organisation is a formal organisation aimed at children and adolescents for education and socialisation (Word IQ.COM 2011).Youth Organisation in agriculture therefore, can be defined as an organised group of young people under the guidance of a leader for the purpose of capacity building in the field of agriculture.
3.4 Necessity for Youth Organisations in Agriculture • The need for youth organisation in Nigeria stems from the fact that young people require to grow and develop capacity in a positive way.
Capacity building can take place in the context of the family, peer group, school, neighbourhood and the community.
It is a process that involves all of the people around the youth- the family and the community.
Young persons may 3AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE not be able to build essential skills and competences and be able to feel safe, cared for, valued, useful and spiritually sound unless the family and the community provide them with the supports and opportunities they need along the way.
• Many young people in rural communities do not have the advantages that promote optimal health development of the body, mind and spirit.
• They do not have the opportunities to experience positive stimulation for growth or nurturing support from the family, friends and community.
This kind of opportunity can be obtained from youth organisations.
• All countries that have purpose and direction make adequate provision for socialising and educating their youths through deliberate and skillfully implemented youth organisations so as to make them to become useful citizens of the future.
• Youth organisation is important to help youths to see agriculture as a dignified profession from which people can earn a decent living and not as one in which the practitioners are condemned to poverty and a difficult life.
• Youth organisations in agriculture are necessary to develop responsible leadership and follower ship skills.
• Youth Organisations are predicated on the understanding that all young people need support, guidance, and opportunities during adolescence, a time of rapid growth and change.
With this support, they can develop self-assurance in the four areas that are key to creating a happy, healthy, and successful life: - a sense of competence: being able to do something well - a sense of usefulness: having something to contribute - a sense of belonging: being part of a community - a sense of power: having control over one's future.
3.5 Steps involved in the organisation of Youth Club The five stages in the process or organising a youth club are: a. choice of locality: The choice of where a youth club should be located is very important.
In choosing location, one should consider proximity and accessibility.
The location should not be too far from where the youths are prominent and should be accessible b. contact with village: There is the need to contact the village heads/Oba, who in turn will inform the members of his community about the club and the necessity for having it in the community.
This can stimulate the interest of the community 4 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE members in the project and subsequent cooperation by community members c. contact with parents: Parents of the youth club members also need to be informed formerly about their child(ren) involvement in youth clubs for legitimisation of action.
This will assist in the child while seeking permission to attend club programmes or when in need of any material to be provided by the parents.
It can also serve as security for both club leader and the youths d. contact with the youths: Youths in any locality where a youth club is to be organised need to be contacted from the commencement of the organisation.
Contacting youths will stimulate their interest and subsequent participation in the programme e. official launch or inauguration: There is need for official launching of youth clubs for proper take off and making it known to the public.
This might entail the invitation of youth clubs around the locality and adults who will provide leadership and act as advisers.
The launch can also be used to raise funds for the organisation and as a medium to show-case the club.
4.0 CONCLUSION Youth Organisations in Agriculture are formed purposely to enhance the cognitive, affective and psycho motive development of the youth.
This can encourage them to take up farming as a profession or on part time.
Participation in youth agriculture organisations enhances the development of good leadership traits in youths.
The overall effect will lead to the development of good citizens and nation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that Youth Organisations are groups of young people under the guidance of a leader for the purpose of capacity building in the field of agriculture.
• Youth Organisation in Agriculture is formed so that young people can grow and develop capacity in a positive way.
• To promote optimal health development of the body, mind and spirit.
• For young people to experience positive stimulation for growth or nurturing support from the family, friends and community.
• To help youths to see agriculture as a dignified profession from which people can earn a decent living.
• To develop responsible leadership and follower ship skills.
• To provide support, guidance, and opportunities during adolescence so that they can develop self-assurance in the four 5AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE areas that are key to creating a happy, healthy, and successful life.
• The five stages in the process or organising clubs are: choice of locality, contact with village, contact with parents, contact with the youths, and official launch or inauguration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define youth organisations in agriculture.
2.
What are the necessary steps to take in organising youth clubs?
3.
Give five reasons for organising youth clubs in agriculture 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adedoyin, S. F. (2003).
“The Nigerian Child and the National, Plan for Decent Livelihood”.
Annual Research Network Meeting and Conference of Children –in Agriculture Programme (CIAP) Lagos Nigeria pp.
1-8.
Babylon English (2011).
http://dictionary.babylon.com/youth%20organization/ Odusanya, J.A.
(1972).
Career Exploration and Job Opportunities for Youth in Agriculture.
Young Farmers Club, Western State, Nigeria.
Olujide, M. G. (2008) “Attitude of Youth towards Rural Development Projects in Lagos State, Nigeria”.
Journal of Social Science, 17 (2) pp.
163-167.
Onuekwusi, G.C.
& Effiong, E.O.
(2002).
“Youth Empowerment in Rural Areas through Participation in Rabbit Production: The Case of Akwa Ibom State, Nigeria.” Nigerian Journal of Rural Sociology, 4: pp.95-99.
Rethinking Youth (2009).
The Concept of Youth.
Torimiro, D.O.
(2008).
Rural Youth Development and Extension, Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treatise with Model Questions and Glossary.
Lagos: ABC Agricultural Systems Ltd. pp.
279-299.
Youth Organisation definition (2011).
:www.wordiq.com/definition/Youth_organisation 6 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE UNIT 2 TYPES OF YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Youth Organisations in Agriculture 3.1.1 Young Farmers Club 3.1.2 Philosophy of YFC 3.1 3 Objectives of YFC 3.1.4 Requirements for Belonging to YFC 3.1.5 YFC’s Pledge Credo 3.1 6 YFC Emblem and Motto 3.2 The 4-H Club 3.2.1 Objectives OF 4-H Club 3.2.2 Club Emblem.
3.2.3 Roles of 4-H Leaders.
3.2.4 Membership 3.2.5 Special Characteristics of 4-H Club.
3.2.6 The 4-H club Organisational Structure 3.2.7 The 4-H Pledge 3.3 Youth Alliance of Nigeria 3.3.1 Mission and Vision 3.3.2 Activities of the Organisation 3.4 The Children-in Agriculture Programme (CIAP) 3.4.1 Activities of the CIAP Club 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are different types of youth organisations in agriculture.
All the organisations have different goals , objectives and approaches but aim at the development of youth and agricultural productivity in Nigeria.
This unit will expose you to various agricultural organisations in Nigeria, their mission, vision and activities performed by each organisation.
7AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention the different youth organisations in agriculture • discuss the activities carried out by the young farmers club • explain the concept of 4-H club • discuss the goals of children and youth in agricultural programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Youth Organisations in Agriculture a.
Young farmers club b.
4-H Club c. Children/ Youth in Agricultural Programme d. Youth Alliance of Nigeria 3.1.1 Young Farmers’ Club A young farmers' club (YFC) is an organisation in which young people (9-20 years) are encouraged to learn about farming and home-making.
The members are under the guidance of the agriculture teachers, agricultural extension personnel and local voluntary leaders.
The members of the club are allowed to elect their officers, plan their own programmes, execute these programmes and hold meetings regularly.
They also carry out worth-while projects or activities in farming, homemaking, community development and other related areas.
3.1.2 Philosophy of YFC A philosophy is a body of principles.
A young farmers' club programme is a practical one that emphasises "learning by doing".
Basically, YFC is: • educational - each project teaches skills and methods recommended by the agricultural and home-making technicians.
Rural youths learn new practices by actually using them in their home and farm projects.
The skills and improved methods they learn and use become a part of their lives • voluntary - the club is opened to any rural youth who meets the requirements for membership.
There are no compulsory dues to be paid before becoming a member 8 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • there are no compulsory requirements for membership and participation.
It is non-political, non-sectional and has no limitations as to race, creed or colour • a joint endeavour by the government and people-if and when a YFC is established, either in the schools or at the village/community level, the rural local leaders.
Parents, agriculture teachers, school authorities, agricultural extension youth workers, non-governmental organisations and other villagers should be involved • a way of developing self-reliance-members are usually exposed to craft-work, practical farming and other meaningful activities that can make them become self reliant individuals • a cooperative work - it promotes cooperation among members.
YFC entails planning and execution of group projects • exhibiting a linear relationship between the adults (parents) and the youths (children) - any member of a YFC must keep his/her parents informed.
Besides, He/she should relate all activities going on within the club; and • a democratic process - the election of the club officers is purely democratic.
The selection of projects should be based on the needs, interests and problems of the members (Ogunfiditimi, 1984).
3.1.3 Objectives of YFC An objective is an expression of the ends toward which all efforts are directed.
It is a direction of movement or a statement of some pre- determined action or product to be achieved through educational processes.
Basically YFC is established to: • help ,boys and girls to develop ideals for better farming • homemaking and rural community development • give informal training in agriculture • provide social and recreational activities • make boys and girls better citizens • encourage and practice thrift • encourage team work • encourage boys and girls to use their leisure time prudently • promote patriotism • reduce juvenile delinquency • help give the necessary dignity to agriculture as an occupation • develop good and competent agricultural leadership • provide an opportunity for self-expression and • help raise the standard of living of rural people.
9AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.1.4 Requirements for Belonging to YFC A would be member of YFC should: • obtain the permission of his/her parents • be ready to comply with the set-up rules and regulations • practice what is being learnt on his/her own project at home • keep records of' what he/she is doing in relation to the project • exhibit whatever he/she produces in connection with the project • demonstrate the new ideas imparted in him/her during the club year • be ready to help others if and when necessary and • take part in all meetings and activities to the benefit of the community.
3.1.5 YFC’s Pledge Credo A typical YFC's pledge credo can take any of the following forms, (Ogunsanya, 1973; Oguniiditimi, 1984) • “I pledge • My Head to clearer thinking • My Heart to greater loyalty, • My hands to larger service, and • My health to better living for my club, community and country” • “A farmer’s life is the life for me, • I owe I love it dearly, • Enough for self and some to give, • To such poor souls as need them” 3.1.6 YFC Emblem and Motto Emblem and motto form an important aspect of YFC development.
A typical YFC must have an emblem in which the motto is indicated.
A typical YFC emblem with the motto is illustrated below: Fig.1.1: Young Farmers Club Emblem 10 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.2 The 4-H Club The 4-H according to Adedoyin (2005) is America’s version of youth extension programme.
It is a voluntary, educational programme designed to meet the needs and interests of boys and girls.
4-H members, parents and leaders learn and work together in club activities, project groups, special interest groups and endless special interest events.
3.2.1 Objectives of 4-H Club The objectives of 4-H club are to: • develop leadership skills in members • gain knowledge and skills in various projects or activities • enable members to become self-reliant • use scientific methods to create and solve problems, and • explore careers.
3.2.2 Club Emblem The emblem is a four-leaf clove with an H in each leaf.
The letters in the emblem stand for Head, Heart, Hands and Health which are the foundation of all 4-H programmes.
The colours are green (representing life) white (representing purity) slogan is “learning by doing” and the motto is “To make the best better”.
3.2.3 Roles of 4-H Leaders Leaders are to help members develop their head, heart, hands and health.
• HEAD- to think decision making, understanding the “why” and gaining new and valuable knowledge.
• HEART- Being concerned with the welfare of others, accepting the responsibilities of citizenship, determining values and attitudes by which to live and learn how to work with others.
• HANDS- Learn new skills, perfecting skills already known, and developing pride in work and respect for it.
• HEALTH- Practice healthful living, protects the well-being of others, and makes constructive use of leisure time.
11AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.2.4 Membership 4-H club is open to children and youth of all races, location, socio- economic and educational backgrounds.
3.2.5 Special Characteristics of 4-H Club • It is a real life experience-through which children and youth learn how to do jobs and how to make decisions.
• It can be a family affair-participants can reach and teach their family members and friends.
• It is adaptable- it can be “tailored” to fit any individual, any home or any community.
• It is decision making-learning to stand on one’s own feet and learning to work with others in a group.
Participants are encouraged to explore and decide which path they will follow.
• It provides for ownership, buying and selling are included.
Each project belongs to members.
• It is based on science and fact.
• It is a part of the community –they learn to take community responsibility.
• It is learning by doing- it is an action programme.
Participants watch others, study, experiment but they ‘do and practice’ themselves.
The slogan of the club is ‘Learning by doing’.
3.2.6 The 4-H Club Organisational Structure a.
Local 4-H Club.
This is the basic unit of the 4-H club.
It could be organised by project areas, within a community or neighbourhood or within a school.
The group is responsible for its management and it is the point of membership enrolment and active participation.
b.
Country Extension Service: 4-H Club is the primary Extension programme in youth education.
Country extension educators are the professionals responsible for 4-H club programmes and serve as resource people for local 4-H programmes.
c. Purdue University: The resources of the entire university are available to the extension youth programme.
It also provides research information to support the 4-H club activities.
d. Cooperative Extension Service (of the U.S department of Agriculture): The families, 4-H and Nutrition division of the Cooperative State Research, Education and Extension Service (CSREES) is responsible for the national 4-H programme.
Its staff provides resource assistance to state, country and local 4-H 12 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE programmes.
It also collects and interprets research data in youth extension work.
3.2.7 The 4-H Pledge According to the Purdue University cooperative Extension Service (2003) as quoted by Adedoyin (2005), the 4-H club has a pledge which has stood the test of time, is educationally sound and states the true purpose of the 4-H programme.
The pledge, its meanings and the key thoughts are presented as follows: • I Pledge My Head to clear thinking • Strives for intelligent behavior • Develop lifelong skills for living • Offers experience in the decision making process • Teaches ‘how’ to think rather than “what” to think • My heart to Greater Loyalty • Instills trust and respect • Strengthens personal standard by which to live • Helps to understand others who may seem ‘different’ • Develop lasting friendships • My Hands to larger service • Relate to both physical and mental health • Teaches wise use of leisure times • With decision of career choice • Develops an understanding about the need for a clean and healthy environment for my club, my community, my country and my world • Provides learning experience that is worldwide • Teaches that you are a part and that you belong • Shows that relationships exist between community and the world.
• Develops citizenship by acting responsively.
This pledge is said at the opening of 4-H club meetings.
Members do not only say the pledge but discuss it so as to be able to say it with meaning understanding and purpose.
3.3 Youth Helps Alliance of Nigeria Youth Helps Alliance of Nigeria involves youth of all ages; this organisation hosts seminars, workshops and exhibitions focusing on health, development, education, agriculture, science and technology, and small-scale projects.
Their aim is to help create an agricultural base for Nigerian youth, and to involve members in community work.
13AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.3.1 Mission and Vision The mission statement of the organisation include; to enhance agricultural production and productivity through dissemination of innovation to the rural dwellers and to control environmental hazards which will help to enhance the standard of living of the rural people.
Food security depends on Agricultural activity and the future of agriculture depends on the wise use of water and land resources, therefore the environment should be protected from hazards for high productivity.
3.3.2 Activities of the Organisation The club is geared towards extension education i.e.
dissemination of information to the rural farmers to enhance food production and productivity without degrading the environment.
They are also engaged in capacity building for the rural youth, training rural youths on agricultural activities and other low input resource.
The organisation is interested in improving the living standard of the rural youth through training and empowerment and participation in development through research, problem solving and decision making to enable the African rural youths face the challenges of the millennium.
Youths are given the opportunity to develop their social and economic life as regards to wide city migration and interaction with people of different culture.
New techniques are also learnt during skill acquisition and empowerment programmes.
A Rural unemployed youth attached to an existing environment of young rural farmers club stands the chance of been self-employed through agricultural activities and agricultural by- products.
3.4 The Children- in – Agriculture Programme (CIAP) The children – in – agriculture programme (CIAP) is a nationally coordinated research and development network aimed at integrating agriculture training into the socialisation process from childhood and sustaining children’s interest in agriculture as they grow through their teen years.
It also ensures training in the areas of civic and citizenship education, transparency and accountability, democratic ideals, gender equality, children right and advocacy, entrepreneurship, market- oriented production, value addition and export, resource management, environmental development, savings and credit support, record keeping, social participation and moral instruction.
14 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE The programme originated through the rural farm family resources research and development efforts of Professor Samson Fola Adedoyin and Dr. Dixon Olu Torimiro in 1995 at the Department of Agricultural Extension and Rural Sociology, Ogun State University (now Olabisi Onabanjo University) Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State, Nigeria.
The researchers identified the missing link in the process of ensuring continuity and sustenance of farming as a worthy profession and conceptualised and initiated same as the children – in – agriculture programme (CIAP).
The programme is now operated by the National Research and Development Network on Children- in – Agriculture Programme (CIAP Network).
The network organises annual national conferences rotated among states of the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory, and operates through coordinated offices at State, Local Government and Community levels.
It also forms CIAP clubs in schools (primary, secondary) and Community levels At the school/community level, the local leaders and the implementation committee and the CIAP club executive council operate CIAP in collaboration with school authority, community leadership, village extension agents, representatives of parents and CIAP club members.
This is the level at which the actual implementation of the programme through club activities is carried out.
The local leaders are volunteer officers who are genuinely interested in working with youths in the community.
In the case of schools, the most senior agricultural science teacher is normally invited to play this role.
If he refuses, the next person to him or other suitable person could be used.
3.4.1 Activities of the CIAP Club After the identification of the local leaders and the formation of the club, the club embarks on the following activities: • mobilisation of more members • orientation programme for members • electing their leaders by themselves • capacity building and community services • technical training in agriculture, rural development, home economics, handicrafts etc • identification and execution of personal and group projects as well as processing/ marketing of produce or products • recreation and sports • leadership development training • voluntary services activities • young farmers’ festival and agricultural show 15AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • recognition and award • entrepreneurship skill developments practices • career exploration • communication and IT training • current affairs • democracy and popular participation • gender sensitivity • excursion, tour and visits • citizenship education • literacy/ revision classes.
The club song emblem and pledge are being prepared to reflect the philosophical foundation of the programme.
4.0 CONCLUSION Youth organisations in Agriculture are formed purposely to enhance the cognitive, affective and psycho motive development of the youth.
This can encourage them to take up farming as a profession or on part time.
Participation in youth agriculture organisations enhances the development of good leadership traits in youths.
The overall effect will lead to the development of good citizens and nation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that types of youth organisations in Agriculture discussed in this book are Young farmers Club, 4-H Club, Children, Youth in Agricultural Programme and Youth Alliance of Nigeria.
All these organisations have their objectives, philosophy, activities and functions.
Young farmers' club (YFC) is an organisation in which young people are encouraged to learn about better farming and home-making.YFC is established to help ,boys and girls to develop ideals for better firming, homemaking and rural community development, give informal training in agriculture; provide social and recreational activities; make boys and girls better citizens; encourage and practice thrift; encourage team work; encourage boys and girls to use their leisure prudently; promote patriotism; reduce juvenile delinquency; give the necessary dignity to agriculture as an occupation; develop good and competent agricultural leadership; provide an opportunity for self-expression and help raise the standard of living of rural people.
The objectives of 4-H club are to develop leadership skills in members, gain knowledge and skills in various projects or activities, enable 16 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE members to become self-reliant, use scientific methods to create and solve problems, and explore careers.
4-H club helps members develop their head heart, hands and health.
The Children – in – Agriculture Program (CIAP) is a nationally co- coordinated research and development network aimed at integrating agriculture training into the socialisation process from childhood and sustaining children’s interest in agriculture as they grow through their youthful age into adulthood.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the formation of young farmers club, their philosophy and activities.
2.
How is young farmers club different from 4-H club?
3.
Write short notes on Children and Youths in agriculture.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adedoyin, (2005).
“Youth and Children Programme in Agricultural Extension in Nigeria”.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria Publication.
Ajayi, A. R. (2006).
A Guide for Young Farmers’ Clubs.
Akure, Nigeria: SAC Impressions.
Ogunliditimi, T. O.
(1984).
Rural Youth Programmes Mimeograph.
Department of Agricultural Extension and Rural Development, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Ogunsanya, J.
A.
(1973).
Guidelines for holding YFC Meetings.
M.A.N.R.
Old Western State of Nigeria, Ibadan, Oyo State, p. 1 - 15.
Rethinking Youth (2009).
The Concept of Youth.
“Roles of Youth Leader Toolkit 15 Youth leader role PDF (2009) Minnesota 4-H Development.
Roles of Youth Leader in 4-H Club.” University of Minnesota Extension Services.
Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia (2008).
“National Federation of Young Farmers' Clubs.” 17AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE UNIT 3 COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN CITIES, URBAN AND RURAL SETTINGS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Differences between Cities, Urban and Rural Settings 3.2 Comparative Analysis of Youth Organisations in Urban and Rural Settings 3.3 Similarities among Youth Organisations in Urban and Rural Settings 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As rural and urban areas are different in many facets from each other, so also are the youth organisations found in the two places.
This unit will expose you to the major differences that exist between rural and urban areas and the youth organisations in rural and urban areas.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state seven features of urban areas which makes it different from rural areas • give a typological difference between youth organisations in rural and urban areas • discuss similarities between youth organisations in urban and rural settings.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Differences between Cities, Urban and Rural Settings Rural areas are usually referred to as small, inward looking, idyllic communities held together by kinship relations and supporting basic agricultural occupations, while urban areas on the other hand are dynamic, ever-changing, and commercial centres (Ekong, 2003).
The 18 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE major differences between rural settings and urban centres and cities are given below: Table 1.2: Differences between Rural Settings, Urban Centres and Cities Features Rural settings Urban and Cities 1.
Size Small particularly in Inhabit large space areas inhabited area 2.
Population Low population density High population density density 3.
Closeness to People in rural areas are Are protected from the nature exposed to the physical physical and elements of the biological elements of environment the environment 4.
Occupation Farming is the major People in urban occupation of rural centres mainly dwellers engaged in commercial, manufacturing and administrative activities 5.
Social Social interaction in Social interaction in interaction rural areas is mainly urban areas entails a characterised by primary lot of secondary group contacts contacts- through radio, television, magazines newspapers 6.
Social Low in differentiation Urban area is highly differentiation and tends towards differentiated homogeneity 7.
Social There are fewer social There is a wide gap stratification classes in the rural areas between the poorest and richest in urban areas 8.
Social Mobility Social mobility in rural Social mobility in (movement from areas is very slow urban areas is very one stratum to rapid the other) 9.
Social control Behaviour of individuals Behaviour of is guided by informal individuals in cities is institution and the guided by formal application of norms and institutions such as values police, traffic warden, lawmen etc.
10.
Standard of Standard of living in Urban dwellers enjoy living rural areas can be said to high standard of living 19AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE (This includes the be low ownership and use of items such as radio, television, refrigerator, cooker, eating of balanced regular meals) 3.2 Comparative Analysis of Youth Organisations in Cities, Urban and Rural Settings Youth Organisations in cities, urban and rural settings can be analysed critically by comparing the characteristics of these three places.
The characteristic features of the environment usually influence the youth organisations found there.
These are seen in the following features: • number of organisations: Rural communities are usually smaller in size in terms of the area inhabited by people than urban areas and cities; hence the numbers of youth organisations in rural areas are usually smaller when compared to those of cities and urban areas • social interaction: Youth organisations in rural areas contact themselves mainly through face to face affective contact but youth organisations in urban areas and cities can contact themselves using both the primary and secondary contact- such as on radio, television, internet ie through face book etc.
• social differentiation: This refers to the tendency of social interaction to generate social differences among men.
Youth Organisations in rural areas are usually homogeneous, comprising of people from the same village with the same occupation usually farming, however, youth organisations in cities and urban areas are usually heterogeneous comprising of people from different towns with different occupations • social stratification: This refers to the manner in which the society ranks its members into different strata or distinct hierarchy on the basis of wealth (class), birth (caste) and social status.
There are fewer social classes in rural than urban areas.
The difference between the extremes of the social strata is small in the rural areas than in urban areas.
Youth organisations in urban areas and cities usually follow the pattern of their parent’s class • experience: Youth Organisations in rural areas are based on local experiences and their relatively poor cultural base, but youth organisations in urban areas and cities are based on complex and 20 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE heterogeneous ethnic background, new technological innovations, latest fashion, literature etc.
• most of the Youth Associations in rural areas are informal traditional groups whereas most associations in urban areas are formal and nontraditional because the people are from diverse cultures • most of the youth associations in rural areas can be classified as expressive associations because they are formed to satisfy the individual interest of members • officials of rural youth associations can be elected through nominations or show of hands, but officials of urban youth organisations in urban centres and cities can be elected through nominations and the ballot.
.Members can even cast their votes through the internet without being there physically • rural associations usually sustain the tradition and culture of the predominant ethnic groups in rural areas where they are located • level and standard of standard of living: level or standard of living is generally used to describe the quantities of goods and services actually consumed by an individual and his family.
This includes the ownership and use of items such as radio, television, refrigerator, cooker, and eating of balanced regular meal etc.
3.3 Similarities between Youth Organisations in Urban and Rural Settings Associations in both rural and urban settings usually give both moral and financial support to members when the occasion demands.
Both provide social services to members.
All fulfill the needs of members for relaxation and social interaction.
Also, it is an avenue through which members derive auxiliary benefits such as jobs marriage, admission, partners etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION Youth organisations in cities, urban and rural settings differ in relation to the characteristics of the environment in which they are located.
However, they can be all referred to as agents of development.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been able to learn that youth in cities, urban and rural settings differ in terms of: number of Organisations, social interaction.
social differentiation, social stratification, experience, purpose of organisation, method of selecting leaders, commitments to culture and tradition, and level and standard of standard of living.
21AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE However they are similar in that all the organisations give moral and financial support to members when occasion demands, provide social services to members; fulfill the needs of members for relaxation and social interaction.
It is also an avenue through which members derive auxiliary benefits such as jobs marriage, admission, partners etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differentiate between urban and rural settings.
2.
Give six major differences between youth organisations in cities, Urban and rural settings.
3.
Discuss how these organisations are similar.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong, E. E. (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Nigeria.
Jumak Publisher Ltd. Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd. 22 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE UNIT 4 ROLES OF YOUTH IN FARMING FAMILIES AND SETTLEMENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Farming Families and Settlements 3.2 Patterns of Settlements 3.2.1 The Cluster or Nucleated Settlement 3.2.2 Dispersed Farmstead Pattern of Settlement 3.2.3 The Line Settlement Pattern 3.3 Role of Youths in Farming Families and Settlements 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are different patterns of settlement among farming families in rural areas of Nigeria.
The type of settlement pattern poses some challenges to youths in the area.
The needs and challenges of rural young people today are greater than they have ever been in the past.
Hence this chapter will expose you to various roles youth can perform in farming families and settlements.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the major settlement patterns in rural Nigeria • mention five roles of youth in farming families and settlements.
• explain how youths are agents of security to their communities and settlements • discuss how youths can bring about revolution in the rural economy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Farming Families and Settlements Farming families can be defined or referred to as agrarian families whose lives depend largely on farming.
Farming family usually 23AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE comprises of the farmer, the wife, children and dependent relatives.
It can also refer to families of farmers usually found in a particular settlement.
The manner by which rural population distributes itself within the geographical space it occupies varies from one place to another.
In some villages people settle together in a particular area, share and enjoy intimate relationships, while in others people are scattered but enjoy being close to their occupation- living within the farm vicinity.
Others also settle along river paths/ roads.
The type of settlement of a people is governed by the natural physical condition such as topography, soil type, and availability of water, vegetation and climate.
These conditions determine how much land will be available to the population for habitation and farming, the need for safety and security of life and property, the desire for social stimulation and the desire for economic advantage in occupying a large agricultural land area.
3.2 Patterns of Settlements There are three major patterns of settlement.
These are: • the compact, cluster or nucleated settlement • the scattered or dispersed settlement • the linear settlement.
3.2.1 The Cluster or Nucleated Settlement This consists of many dwellings of the farmers established in a location usually referred to as a village while their farms are established some distance away from the village.
In some cases, a small house is built on the farm to serve as a resting place for the farmers in between the shift of farm work while some might stay in the small houses during the week in order to concentrate on farm work and return to the village during weekends or on special occasions.
This has led to dual residence among the farmers that practise it.
Nucleated/Cluster Settlement is common among the Yoruba in South Western Nigeria and the Hausa and Nupe towns and villages in the North.
3.2.2 Dispersed Farmstead Pattern of Settlement The dispersed pattern of settlement is that in which the residential building is located on the land where the farmer’s farms are established.
The homes of the residents, in dispersed farmstead, are scattered on the field and distant from one another.
This is found among the Ibo, Ibibio, Tiv and other smaller ethnic groups in Nigeria.
24 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.2.3 The Line Settlement Pattern The farmers locate their homes along a road or rivers unlike the dispersed farmstead where farms are located behind their homes.
Some houses are also located in line on the farm along smaller roads.
This results in a fairly compact settlement.
Where the settlement is in a valley, a road is constructed around the valley and houses are located behind the houses.
3.3 Role of Youths in Farming Families and Settlements Youths are some of the greatest assets that any nation can have.
Not only are they legitimately regarded as the future leaders, they are, potentially and actually the greatest investment for a country’s development (Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999).
They serve as a good measure of the extent to which a country can reproduce as well as sustain itself.
The extent of their vitality, responsible conduct and roles in any community is positively correlated with the development of their country (Zonal Youth Summits, 2000).
The rural youth is an important factor to be reckoned with in development programmes or efforts.
This category of human population has been recognised as a potent force in agricultural and rural development programmes which are yet to be tapped to the advantage of rural communities in Nigeria (Malik et al, 2005).
• Youths are referred to as the life blood of the community.
• As leaders, youth can move the community from bottom to top.
• They can unite and create good organisations in the community.
These organisations usually perform several roles which enhance the development of the community.
For instance, in so many communities in Ekiti State, Nigeria, youths on different occasions have embarked on developmental projects such as the building of town hall, recreation centre, repair of roads, especially feeder roads, construction of local bridges linking farms, repair of school buildings, construction of market stalls etc.
Youths can make good plans for development of the community.
• Youthful life is full of energy, dreams and enthusiasm.
Creative thoughts always keep coming up in youths.
They can be molded in any direction their leaders want.
They can be instrumental in changing the whole rural scenario should their full potential be unleashed and effective participation be realised.
• The community is also mixture of bad people; it is the basic duty of youth to monitor antisocial behaviour in the community and to restrict its harmful influence in the community.
• Youths usually form informal groups called vigilantes that prevent criminal gangs from infiltrating the community.
25AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • They usually help police to arrest such gangs in bigger villages • Through communal efforts youths usually carry out maintenance works on community roads, roads leading to the village stream palace, church and mosque environments.
• Since the major occupation of rural communities is farming, young adults provide the energy needed to work on the farm.
There are typical jobs referred to as men’s work such as digging and mound making.
These jobs are well performed by young agile men while weeding and planting are usually carried out by women on the farm.
• They may have to work as labourers on other people’s farms in other to earn income.
• The presence of youths in communities and settlements enhances rural household’s ability to make the fullest use of productive resources such as land.
• Youths can bring a revolution in rural economy if Agro-based industries are established in rural areas.
These industries might range from cottage industries to the ones manufacturing finishing products of high value and low volume, such as perfumery, vegetable seed production, dairy product processing.
• Youths can make life in rural areas pleasant.
This is achieved through the various activities they embark on and sponsor.
Such activities include sports competition, dancing competition, traditional festivals, church activities etc.
• Youth leaders can play an important role in the provision of sex education.
This role will vary according to the type of club or organisation and according to the age of the clientele.
Youth under 14years of age might benefit most from group discussions while older boys and girls might profit from individual counseling.
• Agricultural university’s course curriculum has practical applications of the agricultural education.
Practical Crop Production, extension programmes, field laboratories, etc.
are the many rural development-oriented programmes that are imparted youths.
Youths exposed to these programmes and inculcating deeper values of life, naturally, would readily be the part and parcel of the rural development processes.
Their participation would also add substantial value to rural development.
• The rural youth work of FAO over the years has made significant contributions to making the lives of young people from rural areas more productive and meaningful by strengthening the organisations which serve them.
It is true that young people need education and training to prepare them to become the farmers and community leaders of the future, but even more importantly, they must receive maximum support and access to resources to enable them to become active partners in food security today.
26 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 4.0 CONCLUSION The development of any community depends largely on how vibrant and effective their youths are; hence deliberate efforts should be made to ensure proper development of our youths.
This will boost their role performance in future and enhance the overall development of our communities.
5.0 SUMMARY In this study, you have been able to learn that: • there are three major settlement patterns in rural areas • youths play vital roles in ensuring the security of farming families and settlements • youths are some of the greatest assets that any nation can have • they are the young blood of the community.
• youthful life is full of energy, dreams and enthusiasm that can be molded in any direction their leaders want.
• youths usually form vigilantes that prevent criminal gangs from infiltrating the community • youths can make life in rural areas pleasant • young adults provide the energy needed to work on the farm • youths can bring about a revolution in rural economy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss five ways in which the lives of rural communities depend largely on the youths.
2.
How can youths bring about revolution in the rural economy?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong, E.E.
(1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Publisher Ltd. Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (2009).
“Rural Youth Development” Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd. Malik, M.; et al.
(2005).
“Nigerian Parents and the Development of Rural School Youth”.
Journal of Social Science 10(3), pp.191- 197.
27AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF)(1967).
“Preventive Medicine and Family Planning”.
Proceedings of the 5th Conference of Europe and Near East Region of the IPPF, Copenhagen, Denmark, July 5-8 1966.
London, England.
28 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE UNIT 5 PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF RETAINING YOUTHS IN RURAL COMMUNITIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of Retaining Youths in Rural Communities 3.2 Suggestions for Retaining Youths in Rural Communities 3.3 Suggestions for Retaining and Bringing Back Youths to Rural Areas after Post Secondary Education 3.4 Prospects of Retaining Youths in Rural Communities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Youths are found to possess certain characteristics required for sustainable development.
Despite this, Nigeria witnesses a lot of migration of young people to the cities for white collar job.
This makes the bulk of work in Agricultural production which is the major work engaged in by residents in rural areas lay on old senile men who engaged in subsistence farming and is characterised with the use of crude implements and local seeds thus resulting in low productivity, low income and a vicious cycle of poverty.
This unit will expose you to reasons why Nigeria as a country witnesses the exodus of young people to urban cities.
It will also proffer solutions to the problems as well as unravel the prospects of retaining youths in Rural Communities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention at least five problems encountered by rural youths • give reasons why rural youths migrate to urban cities • discuss how youth problems can be solved • expatiate on the prospects of retaining youths in rural communities.
29AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problems of Retaining Youths in Rural Communities Nigerian youths residing in rural communities encounter several challenges which prevent them from staying in rural communities and encourage their migration to urban centres.
Some of the problems are enumerated below: • Poverty: Poverty according to Encyclopedia Americana Vol.
22 is defined as insufficiency of means relative to human needs.
According to Englama and Bamidele (1997), poverty is seen as a state whereby an individual is not able to cater for his/her basic needs of food, clothing and shelter; unable to meet social and economic obligations; lack of gainful employment, skills, assets and self esteem and has limited access to socio-economic infrastructure.
According to the United Nations (2005 ) over one billion people in the world today live in unacceptable conditions of poverty, mostly in developing countries, particularly in rural areas of low-income countries in Asia and the Pacific, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean and the least developed countries.
Below is an estimate of youths living in poverty in the year 2005.
Table 1.3: Estimates of the Numbers of Youth; Aged 15-24, Living in Poverty in 2005 (in millions) Region <$1/day < $2/day Undernourished South Asia 84.1 206.1 57.8 Sub-Saharan 60.7 102.1 39.9 Africa East Asia and 46.5 150.5 38.6 the Pacific Latin America 11.1 27.2 10.8 & the Caribbean Middle East and 2.0 12.1 7.1 North Africa Europe and 4.1 18.2 5.8 Central Asia World* 208.6 515.1 160.1 Source: R. Curtain, Youth in Extreme Poverty: Dimensions and Policy Implications with Particular Focus on South-East Asia (Melbourne, 2004) 30 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • Malnutrition and hunger: Hunger and malnutrition remain the most serious and intractable threats to humanity, often preventing youth and children from taking part in society.
Hunger is the result of many factors: mismanagement of food production and distribution; poor accessibility; misdistribution of financial resources; unwise exploitation of natural resources; unsustainable patterns of consumption; environmental pollution; natural and human-made disasters; conflicts between traditional and contemporary production systems; irrational population growth; and armed conflicts • Limited or lack of access to education and other basic services; Majority of the youths in rural areas have limited access to education.
Most of the schools in rural areas are ill staffed.
Most of the schools lack educational facilities such as standard laboratories, libraries, studios and internet facilities.
This leads to poor performance in secondary school certificate examinations.
Also, higher institutions are usually located in urban centers.
This encourages young school leavers to crave for urban centers.
• Poor / lack of social amenities: Social amenities such as electricity, pipe borne water, internet facilities, film/ cinema houses, clubs etc are either absent or if present not functional in rural areas where a lot of Nigerian youth reside.
Attempts to gain access to these facilities stimulate youths’ drift to urban areas.
• Poor/ lack of industries: Most industries whereby youths can be gainfully employed in Nigeria are located in urban centres.
Since farming is the major occupation in rural centres, and farming in rural areas in Nigeria is still at the subsistence level, most of the youths see it as a poor man’s job hence prefer to go to urban areas to seek white collar jobs than to remain in rural areas farming.
• Poor marketing facilities: Rural areas in Nigeria lack access to good marketing facilities.
There are no refrigerators to store farm products.
Most of the farm produce are perishable and since there is no storage facilities, most of the good produce are being sold to middle men at give away prices.
There are no standard units of measurement in rural areas.
This also leads to farmers receiving low income from goods sold.
This compounds rural poverty.
• Poor/lack of processing facilities: There are no processing facilities in rural areas in Nigeria.
This leads to wastage of most agricultural products.
Lack of processing facilities creates fear in farmers and makes them to sell their products at any opportunity available, even at a loss.
This also prevents farmers from maximising profit from farm proceeds.
• Poor/ lack of good roads: Most of the roads leading to rural areas where the bulk of foods produced in Nigeria is obtained lack good roads.
Worst still there are no access roads from farms 31AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE to nearby markets or villages.
Hence youths and their parents often trek long distances from farms to nearby markets or villages with farm produce loaded on their heads, making the job tedious and unpleasant for youths.
In fact most of them become tired after the day’s job.
This makes them to want to vacate villages at any slightest opportunity available.
• Poor/lack of health facilities: There are poor / lack of hospitals, maternities where the people living in rural areas can take adequate care of themselves when they are ill.
This results in increased morbidity and mortality from illness and premature death in case of emergencies.
Other factors that militate against retaining youth in rural communities include: • homelessness and inadequate housing • unsafe environments • social discrimination and exclusion • lack of participation in decision-making in civil and socio- cultural life • lack of access to or loss of control over resources, including land, skills, knowledge, capital and social connections.
3.2 Suggestions for Retaining Youths in Rural Communities • Make farming more rewarding and life in agricultural areas more attractive.
Efforts should be made by governmental and Non Governmental Organisations to make farming more rewarding and life in agriculture attractive.
This can be done by having special focus in developing the agricultural sector itself.
This can be done through the provision of good /feeder roads to the rural areas, provision of electricity and pipe borne water, provision of health centres and equipping them with drugs and modern facilities; granting loans to farmers, provision of improved seeds, agrochemicals and fertilisers etc.
• Governments should enhance educational and cultural services and other incentives in rural areas to make them more attractive to young people.
Schools should be well equipped while teachers should be motivated to stay in rural areas by paying them special allowances.
• Experimental farming programmes directed towards young people should be initiated and extension services expanded to maintain improvements in agricultural production and marketing.
32 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • Local and national Governments, in cooperation with youth organisations, should organise cultural events that enhance exchanges between urban and rural youth.
• Youth organisations should be encouraged and assisted in organising conventions and meetings in rural areas, with special efforts to enlist the cooperation of rural populations, including rural youth.
• Skill-training for income-generation by young people: Governments, in cooperation with youth organisations, should develop training programmes for youth with improved methods of agricultural production and marketing.
Training should be based on rural economic needs and the need to train young people in rural areas in techniques of food production and the achievement of food security.
Attention should be given in such programmes to young women, youth retention in rural areas, youth returning to rural areas from the cities, young people with disabilities, refugee and migrant youth, displaced persons and street children, indigenous youth, youth returning from military service and youth living in areas of resolved conflicts.
• Land grants for young people: Governments should provide grants of land to youth and youth organisations, supported by financial and technical assistance and training.
• Governments should be consistent with their rural development schemes and with the assistance of international organisations, as appropriate, are encouraged to work with volunteer youth organisations on projects which enhance and maintain the rural and urban environments.
• Cooperation between urban and rural youth in food production and distribution.
3.3 Suggestions for Retaining and Bringing Back Youths to Rural Areas after Post Secondary Education It is important to note that not all higher institutions can be found in rural areas.
Youths normally desire to leave rural communities for such institutions.
In order to ensure they return to rural communities the following suggestions are made by Bruce (2007).
• Involve youth in the identification of issues, challenges, and solutions before they leave (at the middle and high school level) by appointments to community and regional committees, boards or councils.
• Provide meaningful ways for youth to participate in the planning for the future of their communities before they leave.
33AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • Identify opportunities for employment and business creation, and sharing those with youth.
• Connect youth with existing programmes that can help them start their own businesses.
Many youth are unaware of the assistance that is already available.
• Involve the business community in the creation of opportunities for information sharing, apprenticeship, and mentorship.
• Demonstrate to youth that they are valued and that the community cares about them and their future.
• Involve municipal government leaders so that they may hear youth concerns and issues while at the same time being able to provide information about the community (such as housing and other issues).
• Making use of Information Communications Technology.
3.4 Prospects of Retaining Youths in Rural Communities a.
Agricultural and industrial revolution: Youths are economically active groups hence can provide the labour force needed for agricultural and industrial revolution in rural communities.
For instance In Cambodia over 600,000 children below 18 years of age are economically active.
A high proportion is in bonded labour.
In Sri Lanka approximately 35,000 children aged 10-14 are economically active.
170,000 young Sri Lankan women work as domestic staff in the Middle East, Korea and elsewhere and many are shamefully exploited.
In China the ILO estimated that in the year 2000 there were 9,224,000 economically active boys and girls.
Rural teenagers are recruited in industries such as coal mining and urban factories.
If the youths are provided with the right incentive, they are agents that can transform the rural communities both agriculturally and industrially.
b.
Rural Food security: Youths are risk takers.
Research all over the world shows that youths possess the ability to take risk particularly with new technology when compared with adults.
If youths are encouraged to remain in rural communities, the level of adoption of improved farm technologies would increase and this in turn will influence the quantity and quality of food produced.
The cumulative effect can translate to enhancing rural food security.
c. Leadership role: Youths are leaders of tomorrow.
If these youths are retained in the rural communities, they will be groomed as future leaders.
d. Perpetration of cultural traits and values: Rural youths have the ability to perpetrate the culture of rural communities from one generation to the other.
But if they migrate to urban areas, the 34 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE communities may witness the extinction of certain values and norms that are essential to their existence.
e. Rural sustainability: In social sciences discourse on rural communities, sustainability is linked to the concepts of social capital, capacity building, and networking.
Social capital is a concept closely related to social cohesion and has the potential to add vitality in rural communities f. Capacity building: This can be defined as strategies that seek to empower, motivate and capacitate regional communities through the development of leadership, skills, resources, partnerships and information to access their own goals.
It is commonly believed that these measures then can potentially empower local communities to overcome adverse socio-economic pressures.
In planned organisational change, well-established social networks provide a strengthening of community ties and provide a shared understanding.
In a crisis environment faced with uncertainties, communities tend to rally around their own local interests and local decisions, which could impede strategic change to succeed.
Strong social networks can act as cultural conduits and that change will be more readily accepted with greater interconnectedness and an abundance of strong ties.
Youth are agents of rural sustainability if provided the enabling environment.
4.0 CONCLUSION Youths migrate to urban areas in order to make up for things that are lacking in rural areas.
This leaves the bulk of work in agriculture to being carried out by old men, thus leading to low productivity and income.
These also affect agricultural Gross Domestic Product and subsequent food insecurity as witnessed in Nigeria.
However these problems can be solved by making the rural environment habitable and livable through the provision of basic life amenities.
5.0 SUMMARY Factors militating against retaining Youths in Rural Communities in Nigeria includes; poverty, malnutrition and hunger, poor/ lack of educational facilities, poor/lack of good roads, poor marketing facilities, poor processing facilities, poor/lack of electricity, poor health facilities, homelessness and inadequate housing; unsafe environments; social discrimination and exclusion; lack of participation in decision-making in civil and socio-cultural life; lack of access to or loss of control over resources, including land, skills, knowledge, capital and social connections.
These problems can be solved through directing special 35AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE attention to rural communities and making life in agriculture an enviable one.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss five major reasons why Nigerian youth drift to urban areas.
2.
Explain the role of governmental and Non Governmental organisations in solving these problems.
3.
Discuss the place of youth organisations in preventing rural- urban drift.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebo, G. M. (2004).
“Evaluation of Poverty Alleviation Strategies among Women in Ekiti and Ondo State Nigeria”.
Unpublished PhD Thesis Submitted to the Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension, Federal University of University of Technology, Akure.
Bruce, D. (2007).
“The Challenges of Immigration as a Rural Repopulation Strategy in Maritime Canada.
Our Diverse Cities”.
Special Feature on Rural Communities.Vol.3.Summer pp.90-96.
http://canada.metropolis.net/publications/index_e.htm Curtain, R. (2004).
Youth in Extreme Poverty: Dimensions and Policy Implications with Particular Focus on South-East Asia.
Englama & Bamidele (1997).
“Measurement Issues in Poverty”.
Proceedings of Annual Conference of the Nigerian Economic Society.
36 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE MODULE 2 Unit 1 Youth Organisations and Clubs in School Management Unit 2 State, Regional and National Organisations in Agriculture Unit 3 Leadership in Youth Organisations Unit4 Roles of a Youth Leader, Members, Patrons, Advisers, Volunteers in Organisations Unit 5 Rural Youth Club Projects UNIT 1 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS AND CLUBS IN SCHOOL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Clubs and Associations 3.2 Nigerian Red Cross Society (NRCS) 3.3 Drama club 3.4 Literary and Debating Society 3.5 JETS Club 3.6 Health Club 3.7 French Club 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education entails the complete development of the child- cognitive, psycho motive and affective domains.
As an adage says ‘all work without play make jack a dull boy’ hence the establishment of several youth organisations and clubs in schools.
This unit will expose you to such clubs and organisations and their activities or functions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention five clubs/organisations in Nigerian schools • explain the activities of three of the clubs • highlight the need for a student to be a member of the Literary and Debating Society • state the benefits of being a member of a health club.
37AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Clubs and Associations Several Clubs and Associations are established in schools to create an informal outlet away from the class environment where students are given the opportunity to express and develop their hidden talents.
These Clubs and Societies are headed by graduate teachers who are experts in their various fields.
Through their efforts, these clubs and societies have organised programmes whereby students practice what they are taught in class which is done on weekly basis and learn new things through the programme and activities of these clubs.
The students have been taught new things like soap, candle and cream making by the Jets Club, Cassava production and processing – where the participants are taught how to process several value added products of cassava, operations of the Stock Market, Cultural display, which expose students to the diverse cultural groups in Nigeria, develop the ability to speak in public by overcoming stage fright through the activities of the debating society, and lot of other activities that have positive impact on the growth and development of the students.
Some of these clubs include: • Nigerian Red Cross Society • Drama Club • Literary and Debating Society • JETS Club • Health Club • French Club • Young Farmers Club.
3.2 Nigerian Red Cross Society (NRCS) The Red Cross Movement was based on alleviating the suffering of wounded soldiers on the battle field, the focus and scope has since changed over the years.
It now formed an integral part of Community Based Health Programme (CBHP).
There are about 450 schools involved in its implementation.
It has a volunteer base of approximately 9,000 School Unit members.
The School Unit is created in order to strengthen the Red Cross community structures for good programme delivery and community involvement.
The Unit intends to equip School Teachers, Students and Pupils with the required skills on prevention of illness, Basic First Aid, HIV/AIDS Preventive measures as well as seeking appropriate care for children.
38 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE The School Unit is one of the crucial components of the Society’s Health Programme.
Only a small proportion of sick children in the community usually have access to health facilities and this translates to higher morbidity and mortality rate among this population.
Therefore, simple knowledge of preventive measures by school-teachers and pupils can improve the management of children in the school.
The yearly participation of Road Safety Awareness Campaign by the Nigerian Red Cross Society in collaboration with the Federal Road Safety Commission has gone a long way in reducing the rate of road traffic accidents, especially in schools that border major roads.
The Society has produced training manual for School Units and highway codes.
The involvement of our School Unit members in giving First Aid at various school competitions increases the visibility and profile of Nigerian Red Cross Society.
3.3 Drama Club Drama Club is an educational organisation consisting of students who are interested in theatre or theatre productions.
Starting a drama club at school requires getting a teacher to sponsor the club, advice from an actress, artist, or singer but it can also be easily started through Face book, where any student in the network can join.
Drama clubs can perform in their schools, villages or participate in schools drama competition programme.
The club raises money to buy costumes through fees charged during their plays.
Drama club expose the hidden potentials of students and increases their ability to speak in the public.
Some talented students take up their career through their participation in drama club activities.
A lot of students benefit from drama clubs.
3.4 Literary and Debating Society The Literary and Debating Society (often referred to as the “Lit & Deb”) is the oldest and most prestigious society in school.
The chief activities of the Society were the holding of debates, discussions and lectures.
Core to the principals of Lit & Deb is the principal of freedom of speech.
Everything from politics and human rights to literature and medical ethics are fair game for discussion inside the walls of the Literary and Debating Society.
Each week, members of the Society engage in spirited debate on matters ranging from current events to philosophy and law to humorous topics.
Members frequently present original works of Literature and Poetry or 39AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE give readings of the works of other authors.
The Society holds a number of competitive Debate, Oratorical, and Literature events, and engages other organisations in friendly contests of debate or athletic skill.
A Literary and Debating Society is always an asset to Schools.
Debates are usually interesting as all students are often anxious to participate.
Members of the Staff are usually consulted and used as judges.
Interesting and thought provoking topics such as - “Be it resolved that Parents be blamed for Juvenile Delinquency”, “There should be co- education in all Schools”, and “Science has contributed most to the Progress of Mankind” are debated.
3.5 JETS Club The Junior Engineering Technical Society, (J.E.T.S) is a science based club.
The club is aimed at juniors and seniors in Secondary Schools.
For any student to be a member of the club, he/she must be science based or aim at becoming one.
Subjects like calculus, chemistry, and physics are essential to a good performance.
J.E.T.S.
offers experience in engineering, in sharing knowledge in a group as one would do in the workforce, especially if one plans on entering the engineering field.
JETS Club has been bringing science to life for over one million Secondary school children, teachers, and parents.
The Club fuels the wonder and joy of learning, through school assemblies, workshops, television, video, and print.
The Club has also designed programmes for museums, agencies, and educational organisations.
TEX-JETS is an organisation with the purpose of supporting the math/science team.
TEX-JETS researches math and science concepts to help prepare the math/science team for competition.
Members design and create projects, such as robots, using what they have learned in class, in research, and from what the supervising teacher(s) have advised them.
The projects are entered into science competitions.
3.6 Health Club A health club (commonly referred to as a gym) is a place which houses exercise equipment for the purpose of physical exercise.
Quality of life starts with living well.
Health Club helps students to discover the benefits of living an active, healthy lifestyle.
Most health clubs have a main workout area, which primarily consists of free weights like dumbbells and barbells and exercise machines.
This area often includes mirrors, so that exercisers can check and maintain correct posture during their workout.
Some health clubs offer sports 40 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE facilities such as a swimming pool, squash court or boxing area.
In some cases, additional fees are charged for the use of these facilities.
Most health clubs employ personal trainers, to which members have access to for training/fitness/nutrition/health advice and knowledge.
Personal Trainers can help write a customised fitness routine, sometimes including a nutrition plan, to help members achieve their goals.
They can also monitor and train with members.
Health club in schools engaged in the construction of environmental sanitation structures (latrines, refuse pits, dish racks).
Strong hygiene education awareness was included to ensure replication of the sanitation component.
They usually focus on the overall well being, comprising emotional, social and mental health of the child.
It is an alternative to the Girl Guides or Boy Scouts, enabling an organisational point for conducting activities related to various dimensions of health and wellness.
Constitution of a Health Club • Principal as Convener.
• Counselor / Psychologist / P. T. Teacher / Nodal Teacher as Secretary.
• Student representative (one boy and one girl from each level).
• Identified teachers from each level.
• Parent for each level (preferably a doctor).
Responsibilities of the Health Club • As an organiser of all health relevant activities (at least 8-10 activities in the year at each level).
• As a Resource Centre for the overall well being of students.
Objectives of the Health Club • To create Health Cards for each student.
• To create a health newspaper at least twice a year/poster competition related to health issues.
• To conduct surveys on health related concerns.
• To organise ‘health walks’ as part of social campaigns.
• To organise health fairs and immunisation projects.
• To tap the local resources in the community to arrange health talks.
• To render service in any area affected by a disaster or a calamity.
• To create health help line within the school to respond to distress, cope with emotional and social behaviour and to clarify misconceptions regarding sexual and reproductive health.
41AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • To teach the students techniques of yoga and meditation from an early age.
• To inculcate in the students healthy and positive ways of living.
• To teach health songs on various health topics.
• Celebration of important days (World Health Day – April 7).
• Creating awareness regarding ‘World No Tobacco Day’ (May 31), ‘World AIDS Day’ School Health Clubs have had some success and are indeed behaviour change agents.
They have been regular in relaying of health messages both at school and at home.
3.7 French Club French club is usually organised in schools by the French teacher purposely to promote the speaking and learning of French language.
Both teachers and students are allowed to join the club.
Officials are chosen among the students while the teachers act as coordinators.
The club activities vary depending on the leader.
Activities carried out by French club include drama, debates, excursion, and competitions.
In most schools French club organise trips to French village or to any Francophone country.
4.0 CONCLUSION One of the ways of knowing a good school is by the presence of viable and functioning clubs and organisations.
Hence school principals and head teachers should try as much as possible to ensure and encourage the establishment and operation of several clubs and societies in their schools.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt that: • there are several clubs and organisations in schools • such clubs include Nigerian Red Cross Society, Drama Club, Health Club, Literary and Debating Society, Press Club, Science (JETS) Club, French Club, and Young Farmers Club • school clubs help in the total development of the child • enables the child to develop good leadership qualities • enhances the ability of the students to speak in public • develop skills and potentials in the students • can give direction in deciding or choosing a life career.
42 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give five reasons why clubs are essential in school management.
2.
Describe the health club and how you can benefit from it if you are a member 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nigerian Red Cross Society (2005).
“Implementation of Ouagadougou Declaration.” World Health Club.htm.
“Join the Movement”.
Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia (2009).
“Literary and Debating Society.” (NUI, Galway) http.//www.get-ex.co The Science Club Information Page http://sciencespot.net/Pages/sciclub.html 43AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE UNIT 2 STATE, REGIONAL AND NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 4.0 Main Content 3.1 Criteria for Classifying Organisations 3.2 Community Development Association 3.3 Cooperative Societies 3.4 Farmers’ Co-operatives 3.5 Occupational/ Professional Associations 3.6 Trade and Commercial Associations 3.7 Religious Organisations 3.8 Gender Groups 3.9 Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs) 3.9.1 Farmers Development Union (FADU) 3.9.2 National Farmers Association of Nigeria (NAFAN) 3.9.3 Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are several Organisations present at the State, Region and National levels that work towards the development of Agriculture and food production in Nigeria.
This unit will expose you to some of these organisations, functions and their activities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention at least four organisations in Nigeria • discuss the need for cooperative societies • explain fully the Farmer’s cooperative society • discuss the activities of the Farmers’ Development Union • expatiate on the need for NGOs in agricultural development • specify the different ways in which FAO is alleviating Hunger and Poverty Worldwide.
44 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Criteria for Classifying Organisations According to Akinloye et al.
(2005), there are twelve criteria for classifying organisations.
These are: size, duration, rhythm, proximity of members, basis of formation, access, degree of organisation, functions, orientation, relation with the inclusive society, relation with other groups, types of social control, types of authority and degree of unity.. Based on these criteria, there are twelve types of Community- Based Organisations in Nigeria.
These are: Community Development Association (CDAs), Cooperative Societies, Town/Village Development Union, Occupational/Professional Association, Age Grade Group/ Association, Youth Associations, Trade and Commercial Associations, Religious Organisations, Trade/Commercial Associations, Gender Groups, Indigene Club/ Associations, Tribal/Ethnic Group /Associations and other local groups.
3.2 Community Development Associations (CDAs) CDAs were formed on the premise that the Federal Government alone cannot provide all the community needs and the need for decentralisation.
This empowers the people in the community, including the farmers to form different organisations.
The organisations through counterpart funding are able to identify, plan, implement community agricultural and rural development projects in partnership with the Government.
Most of the CDAs are well organised.
They have officials occupying various offices such as chairman secretary, treasurer, public relation and social welfare officer.
Memberships of CDAs are open to interested persons.
CDAS are engaged in Community Development programmes such as construction of roads, culverts, schools, provision of electricity, water, farm inputs and agrochemicals at subsidised rates to farmers and procurement of agricultural loans.
3.3 Cooperative Societies Cooperative Societies are found in every village, town, state, region and national level.
They have a mother body that each cooperative must register with.
At the initial stage there was a Cooperative Bank in Nigeria, but due to the problems within the banking sector, the bank merged with other banks.
Presently, cooperative societies in Nigeria still operate under the auspices of Skye Bank Nig.
PLC.
Cooperative societies according to Juhász (2001) are traditional organisations of mainly the poorer segments of society which have the 45AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE potential to play an important role in developing a strong “social capital” in rural areas.
This is a pre-requisite for food security and sustainable development.
Cooperatives may be consumer-owned, producer-owned, or worker-owned.
A Consumers’ cooperative, according to INC (2008), is one in which individuals combine their purchasing power, usually for the purchase and wholesale or retail distribution of agricultural or other products.
Cost savings are achieved by buying directly from the producer or farmer.
A form of commonly known consumers' cooperative is a food or grocery cooperative.
Membership is open to anyone, with goods sold at market price to members and non-members alike, with any surplus over expenses going back to members.
Importance of Cooperative Societies • Co-operative societies according to Gertler (2001) are practical vehicles for co-operation and collective action, both of which are crucial to sustainable development; build and reinforce community.
• They are therefore media for measuring and sustaining development.
• When they work effectively, co-operatives reproduce and expand social capital, which then contributes to the success of other projects.
• Co-operatives play an integrating and stabilising role, foster alliances and coalitions, and can help to reduce social inequality.
• Co-operatives are not tightly constrained by the discipline of capital markets—at least in the short run.
• Co-operative managers do not need to demonstrate growth and profits (surplus) every quarter, nor do they risk their jobs if they fail to generate competitive rates of return on shareholder investments.
• Co-operatives can raise capital via retained earnings and various forms of member equity contributions and loans.
• Co-operatives do not need to make a profit in the conventional sense.
They can persevere in the long term without more than break-even performance; co-op capital is “patient” capital.
Co- operatives can thus make longer term investments that promise important returns in the future, even if that future is more than one business cycle away.
Members derive other kinds of benefits besides those enjoyed by owners of a firm.
They are likely to be positively affected by investments in environmental sustainability, for example, because they live and work in the region directly affected by the co-operative.
Co-operatives help to stabilise regional economies and provide a favourable climate for further investment.
46 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • Cooperative societies tend to outlive many private firms (Direction des Coopératives1999), and their presence in rural areas helps to stabilise economies that are typically the most vulnerable.
This allows others to plan and invest with greater confidence, and to reap the benefits of long-term projects designed to enhance productivity or to protect the resource base.
• Co-operatives reduce inequality and promote equitable sharing of the costs and benefits of sustainable development.
• Co-operatives promote economic democracy and the empowerment of marginalised groups—a hallmark of sustainable development and a pre-condition for shared responsibility.
Co- operatives promote greater economic democracy through shared ownership and shared control.
More people gain direct roles in the allocation and management of resources, and their skills and creativity are more fully engaged (Sen, 1999).
• Co-operatives serve as facilitating partners in alliances involving local and national, and public- and private-sector organisations.
• Cooperatives are often key partners, trusted and respected by Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), State agencies, and private-sector firms.
As brokering partners, they frequently provide leadership resources and may serve as facilitators for projects involving complex alliances (Ortíz Mora, 1994; Ketilson, et al., 1998).Sustainable development is knowledge-and management-intensive.
• Co-operatives have organisational capacity for communication, training and education.
Educating members, employees, and the public is a co-operative principle, and many co-operatives have been successful in upgrading the technical, managerial, and organisational skills of their membership and staff.
Short courses, advanced education, peer instruction, and learning by experimentation all become more feasible in a co-operative context.
• Co-operatives are also conduit channels by which Government or Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) can effectively deliver training, technical support, and adapted technologies.
• Given the prospect of long-term relationships, co-operatives can valorise investments in members, employees, and customer education.
• As locally controlled organisations, co-operatives are in an advantageous position when it comes to effective communication (Ortíz Mora, 1994).
There is less reason to conceal product or business information, and members can be confident that they are not being misled.
• Co-operatives are part of a world movement that has strong links to other contemporary social movements focused on the environment.
47AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • Some co-operatives have pioneered in providing sustainable livelihoods to marginalised peoples.
• Co-operatives have provided needed links between socially conscious consumers and innovative producers who wish to implement more sustainable forms of production and consumption.
• Co-operatives in agriculture have a number of obvious advantages among which are economies of scale, reduced transaction costs, increased business safety and new services.
According to Earnshaw (2000), "[food] co-operatives must pay out at least 20 per cent of the surplus in cash, but may reinvest 80 percent in the business for the good of members."
The benefits to members of this reinvestment may include reduced prices, a larger store, or extra services.
Some members may desire a discount when purchasing their goods.
Types of Co-operatives There are four major types of Cooperatives.
These are: • production co-operatives, including agricultural production co- operatives • consumer co-operatives • mixed production-consumer co-operatives • co-operatives “for the satisfaction of housing, services and other social needs.
3.4 Farmers’ Co-operatives A farmers’ co-operative is a private company that belongs to the farmer producers, the members, and aims at providing a range of services and operations for its members, with a view to improving the members’ profits from their own farming activities.
As a basis for co-operatives, there is a willingness of a group of producers for some common commercial objectives and activities.
A Farmers’ Co-operative is set-up by a group of members as a private business under the local enterprise or company laws and regulations of that country.
A co-operative should follow certain basic rules, in order to be a strong agricultural business in the market: • members have to undertake and fulfill certain commitments of activity with their Co-operative.
48 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • members have to purchase shares in proportion to their activity with the Co-operative • co-operatives are managed by elected boards composed of producer members.
They appoint, if necessary, an executive manager and a team of salaried staff.
The executive manager and staff operate strictly under the producers’ control, through the policy and strategy set by the elected board • at the end of the year, the financial surplus is distributed among the members in proportion to their activity they have had during the year, in the form of product rebates or discounts on purchased inputs or bonuses on sold commodities.
The board of elected members decides on the level of bonus and share distribution on annual basis.
3.5 Occupational/ Professional Associations Occupational associations are formed by the coming together of people of the same occupation with the aim of promoting and protecting their occupational interest.
The associations seek to improve technical skill of members, assist members in times of need, procure loans as a group, ensure quality delivery and protect customers from fraud and excessive charges.
Examples of such association in agriculture are, The Cocoa Farmers Association, Cassava Farmers Union, and Association of Cashew Farmers.
3.6 Trade and Commercial Associations Trade and commercial associations are established mainly to assist members in all aspects of life and in particular in areas of price regulation, addition of value to goods and services, standardisation of goods and capital investment.
They also help members to secure loan from financial institutions.
Trade and commercial associations can be of benefit to the community in which they are located by giving scholarship to the indigenes.
Examples of such associations are; Cocoa Marketers Association, Plank sellers and food vendors.
3.7 Religious Organisations Certain religious organisations are engaged in agricultural projects with the aim of alleviating poverty and hunger as well as providing employment to the unemployed members of their congregation.
At times they intervene in some rural development programmes.
They engaged in the production of food crops such as cassava, rice, and establishment of plantations e.g.
oil palm plantation.
Some of the religious organisations in Nigeria include; Christian Rural Urban Development Association of 49AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE Nigeria, Oyo- Osogbo Catholic Diocesan Agricultural Development Project and Rural Development Programme of Ibadan Archdiocese.
3.8 Gender Groups It is widely known that there is discrimination and marginalisation of women in all aspects of the economy.
Due to the sensitisation of the society on the need for gender equality, the womenfolk in many communities often form groups.
Through these groups, there have been several improvements in the well being of members in the following areas: • securing of land for farming • obtaining loan as a group for increased farm productivity • information on improved farm technologies • training of members on improved farm production, storage and marketing strategies, and • training on how to improve their socioeconomic status as well as benefit from the dividend of democracy.
Examples of such gender groups are: Rice producers /processors, Gari processing association etc.
3.9 Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) NGOs are agencies set up by private citizens/ foundations, churches, volunteer workers, etc to tackle specific problems and particularly the alleviation of poverty and administration of relief to the needy and deprived, war victims and refuges (Ekong, 2000).
An NGO may be state, region or National based.
At times an NGO may have branches all over the country e.g.
Country Women Association of Nigeria which is presently found in more than 12 States in Nigeria.
NGOs in Nigeria are concerned with agricultural production, poverty eradication, capacity building and empowerment.
Activities of NGOS include: Formation of groups of Small Scale Farmers, Evaluation and upgrading farmers conditions, meeting with farmers on regular basis which may be monthly, bi-monthly, or quarterly, visitation to farmers field, linkage of farmers with other institutions, monitoring of activities through staff meetings, farmers forum and meetings.
Achievements of NGOs in Nigeria • NGOs in Agriculture have helped in reaching the poor especially in inaccessible areas of rural Nigeria and providing their needs in 50 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE the areas of infrastructure and services such as schools, electricity, sanitation and adequate good quality drinking water.
• NGOs use advocacy and political influence to hold local officials accountable for activities which are damaging to the poor.
• They help communities’ mobilise and form societies to express their concerns.
• They provide an enabling environment in which officials can consult people about development plans and listen to alternatives presented by the people.
• NGOs have recorded a huge success in the areas which governments have failed.
For instance the maintenance of public utilities.
NGOs adopt the participatory approach thus making the people to be part of the programme from the initiation stage to planning, implementation, execution and maintenance.
This makes most of their projects sustainable rather than abandoned.
• NGOs play a major role in transferring of innovations to rural communities.
• Their capability to work with local groups has made them to be more successful than government projects.
• Examples of NGOS in the agricultural sector are; Nigeria International Rural Development Organisation (NIRADO), Nigeria Participatory Rural Development Network (NIPRANET), Country Women Association of Nigeria (COWAN), Farmers Development Union, Christian Rural Urban Development Association of Nigeria (CRUDAN), Oyo- Osogbo Catholic Diocesan Agricultural Development Project (OODAP) and Rural Development Programme of Ibadan Archdiocese.
3.9.1 Farmers Development Union (FADU) Farmers Development Union (FADU), an NGO, is a rural development Organisation, formed in 1989, owned, directed, governed and financed by about 500,000 rural Nigerians, who are its members.
Other support donors to FADU programme are Ford Foundation, EZE and EEC.
FADU is a regional Agricultural Organisation as the members are concentrated mainly in the South Western part of Nigeria.
The main thrust of FADU ' s development programme is to reach the low-resourced poor and vulnerable groups with basic economic and social services for improved rural income, nutrition, employment and living condition.
Its activities have been focused on group development, aimed at rural peasants, for community participation and enhancement of their managerial capacities to operate small-scale farming and non- farming enterprises.
This approach is to promote community participation as a means of overcoming constraints on individual micro- 51AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE producers.
FADU has made tremendous resource concentration on poverty elimination, creation of jobs, and advancement of women.
The Guiding Principles in FADU’s Programme and Activities • Community group’ responsibility.
• Social and economic sustainability of project.
• Group cost recovery and financial capacity building.
• Project cost recovery and operational efficiency.
• Human resource development.
• Poverty alleviation.
• Rural productive activities.
Guided by these principles, FADU has been giving financial services, technical support, training and marketing support services to rural producers operating in the Nigerian informal economic sector.
The long- term goal of the organisation’s programme is to assist this class of informal producers, into the mainstream of the Nigerian production economy.
To achieve this long term goal, FADU has joined the E Fair Trade Network to achieve collective buying and selling for its members and to facilitate wholesale credit facilities for FADU members’ activities.
FADU Achievements • Mobilised, trained and technically and financially assisted about 50,000 productive rural network of groups (called societies), mostly women (87%), in villages and semi-urban across 28 states of the Nigerian federation.
• Built a very strong self-managed and self-financed grassroots institutional formations (referred to in its own terms as Groups, Societies, Districts and Zones) which have become a basis for FADU ' s savings and credit scheme, agricultural projects, rural health, environment and literacy awareness that are facilitated by the Organisation.
• Disseminated (through its credit scheme, training and technical assistance) low cost, locally fabricated and adapted medium scale technologies for micro-producers in the remote villages across the country.
Among the technologies is manually pedaled Treadle Pump for Small Fadama Farmers, improved palm oil, cassava and groundnut oil processing equipment.
• Created over 500,000 new jobs, since 1989 in remote villages, considered otherwise as marginal and disadvantaged areas.
• Consistently demonstrated commitment to fostering partnerships to fight hunger and poverty in Nigeria.
Current evidence of this is 52 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE the on-going development Co-operation the World Bank, IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development), UNDP, State Agricultural Development Programmes (ADPs).
• The Union also builds a network of 159 replicate-CBOs, which receive FADU's training and technical assistance, to upgrade their programme management skills.
• FADU has a permanent core of development professionals.
These Staff collectively combine extensive experience designing and managing community targeted development programmes in Nigeria with background in agriculture, business, finance, community development, rural sociology and food technology.
FADU can draw on the talents of 346 programme employees, consultants and volunteers across Nigeria.
FADU can access expertise in other areas such as affordable processing technology design management; agro-forestry; small and farmer-managed irrigation schemes; group-managed enterprise development; agricultural finance; supply, production, processing and marketing; savings and credit programme design and management; human resource development and training for grassroots targeted programmes; institutional development schemes for community based organisations etc.
• Through its programme, FADU has strengthened participation and facilitated the involvement of the intended beneficiaries in project design, implementation, project cost recovery and management.
Its grassroots involvement approach has also enabled beneficiaries to have greater control of the project resources, thereby maximising the proportion of resources reaching the poor.
FADU has given increased emphasis to promoting ownership projects by the beneficiaries.
• In the three states, Oyo, Ogun and Osun, where the Union has the highest concentration of members, about 58%, FADU has been able to cover the operational cost of its programme.
Nevertheless, the Organisation still face big challenges in the areas of meeting the credit needs of its members including replicates, build members in other 25 states, where it has presence, to the status of three project states, and reducing the unsustainable farming practices among members.
3.9.2 National Farmers Association of Nigeria (NAFAN) National Council of Farmers was formed in 1999 after the advent of President Olusegun Obasanjo.
The association was formed as a result of the observation by the president that farmers formed about three quarter of the Nigerian’s population, yet they are disillusioned.
He therefore call for a need for the proper organisation of the farmers to have a common voice while making any demand from the Government or any of the 53AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE National and International body such as FAO and World Bank.
This led to the organisation of the National Farmers Congress which organised its first Summit in 1999.
At the end of the Summit, seven leaders were elected to represent the following areas of agriculture: tree crop, food crop, fiber, fishery, animal/ poultry and marketing.
The committee was named National Agricultural Coordinating Council headed by Alhaji A.K Wodi.
Functions of National Agricultural Coordinating Council • To coordinate all existing and would be farmers group into one single umbrella.
• Ensure farmers are organised on commodity basis.
• Ensure farmers are organised from ward to the local government, to State and National levels.
• Draft acceptable constitution for the association with an acceptable apex name • Ensure that farmers association is non- political.
• Ensure that among the farmers there is a formation of production, processing and marketing.
• Ensure that the ward, Local, State and National leaders are democratically elected.
• After working for two years all the mandates were accomplished.
Presently the officers are elected with Femi Coker as the National President supported by three Vice Presidents, Secretary and other officials known as the National Working Committee.
In addition, there are six zonal vice presidents to represent each of the six geopolitical zones in the country.
3.9.3 Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO is a specialised agency of the United Nations that leads international efforts to defeat hunger.
Serving both developed and developing countries, FAO acts as a neutral forum where all nations meet as equals to negotiate agreements and debate policy.
FAO is also a source of knowledge and information, and helps developing countries and countries in transition modernise and improve agriculture, forestry and fisheries practices, ensuring good nutrition and food security for all.
Its Latin motto, fiat panis, translates into English as "let there be bread".
As of 8 August 2008, FAO has 191 members’ states along with the European Community and the Faroe Islands, as associate members.
54 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE Structure FAO was established on 16 October 1945 in Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
In 1951 its headquarters were moved from Washington, D.C. United States, to Rome, Italy.
The agency is directed by the Conference of Member Nations, which meets every two years to review the work carried out by the organisation and to approve a Programme of Work and Budget for the next two year period.
The Conference elects a council of 49 member states (serve three-year rotating terms) that acts as an interim governing body, and the Director-General, that heads the agency.
FAO is subdivided into eight departments: Administration and Finance, Agriculture, Economic and Social, Fisheries, Forestry, General Affairs and Information, Sustainable Development and Technical Cooperation.
FAO's Regular Programme budget is funded by its members, through contributions set at the FAO Conference.
Programmes by FAO include: • Special Programme for Food Security, Integrated Pest Management, TeleFood, Alliance against Hunger, and Goodwill Ambassadors.
• Special Programme for Food Security • The Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) is FAO's flagship initiative for reaching the goal of halving the number of hungry in the world by 2015 (presently 852 million people), as part of its commitment to the Millennium Development Goals.
Through projects in over 100 countries worldwide, the SPFS promotes effective, tangible solutions to the elimination of hunger, undernourishment and poverty.
Currently 102 countries are engaged in the SPFS and of these approximately 30 are operating or developing comprehensive National Food Security Programmes.
To maximise the impact of its work, the SPFS strongly promotes national ownership and local empowerment in the countries in which it operates.
Integrated Pest Management During the 1990s, FAO took a leading role in the promotion of integrated pest management for rice production in Asia.
Hundreds of thousands of farmers were trained using an approach known as the Farmer Field School (FFS).
Like many of the programmes managed by FAO, the funds for Farmer Field Schools came from bilateral Trust Funds, with Australia, Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland acting as the leading donors.
FAO's efforts in this area have drawn praise from NGOs that have otherwise criticised much of the work of the organisation.
55AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE TeleFood Its central goal is raising awareness about the problem of hunger and it mobilises energy to find a solution.
In 1997, FAO launched TeleFood, a campaign of concerts, sporting events and other activities to harness the power of media, celebrities and concerned citizens to help fight hunger.
Since its start, the campaign has generated close to US$28 million in donations.
Money raised through TeleFood pays for small, sustainable projects that help small-scale farmers produce more food for their families and communities.
The projects provide tangible resources, such as fishing equipment, seeds and agricultural implements.
International Alliance against Hunger In June 2002, during the World Food Summit, world leaders reviewed progress made towards meeting the 1996 Summit goal of halving the number of the world's hungry by 2015; their final declaration called for the creation of an International Alliance against Hunger (IAAH) to join forces in efforts to eradicate hunger.
Launched on World Food Day, 16 October 2003, the IAAH works to generate political will and concrete actions through partnerships between intergovernmental and non- governmental organisations and national alliances.
The IAAH is a voluntary association of international organisations, national alliances against hunger, civil society organisations, social and religious organisations and the private sector.
The global activities of the IAAH focus on four major themes: advocacy, accountability, resource mobilisation and coordination.
The International Alliance is made up of the Rome-based UN food organisations – FAO, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the World Food Programme (WFP) – and representatives of other intergovernmental and non- governmental organisations.
Individuals cannot directly join the IAAH, though they can work with national alliances against hunger.
In less than two years, 36 countries have established national alliances, some of them already very active in Brazil, Burkina Faso, France, India and the United States.
Goodwill Ambassadors The FAO Goodwill Ambassadors Programme was initiated in 1999.
The main purpose of the programme is to attract public and media attention to the unacceptable situation that some 800 million people continue to suffer from chronic hunger and malnutrition in a time of unprecedented plenty.
These people lead a life of misery and are denied the most basic of human rights: the right to food.
Governments alone cannot end hunger and undernourishment.
Mobilisation of the public and private sectors, the involvement of civil society and the pooling of collective 56 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE and individual resources are all needed if people are to break out of the vicious circle of chronic hunger and undernourishment.
Each of FAO’s Goodwill Ambassadors – celebrities from the arts, entertainment, sport and academia such as Nobel Prize winner Rita Levi Montalcini, actress Gong Li, the late singer Miriam Makeba, and soccer player Roberto Baggio, to name a few – have made a personal and professional commitment to FAO’s vision: a food-secure world for present and future generations.
Using their talents and influence, the Goodwill Ambassadors draw the old and the young, the rich and the poor into the campaign against world hunger.
They aim to make Food for All a reality in the 21st century and beyond.
4.0 CONCLUSION Agricultural Organisations enhances the production of individual farmers and groups.
It provides a forum for discussing and solving problems related to farming and food production.
It acts as avenue for capacity building in agriculture.
It has helped to bridge the gap between the Government roles in farming and the individual farmers, thus providing avenues for obtaining loans, agricultural inputs, and sales of farm products as well as alleviating poverty and hunger.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • there are several Agricultural organisations in Nigeria and Cooperative societies which are media for measuring and sustaining development.
Co-operatives reproduce and expand social capital, which then contributes to the success of other projects.
Co-operatives play an integrating and stabilising role, foster alliances and coalitions, and can help to reduce social inequality.
Cooperative societies tend to outlive many private firms.
Co-operatives reduce inequality and promote equitable sharing of the costs and benefits of sustainable development.
They promote economic democracy and the empowerment of marginalised groups Co-operatives serve as facilitating partners in alliances involving local and national, and public- and private- sector organisations.
They are often key partners, trusted and respected by Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), State agencies, and private-sector firms.
Co-operatives have organisational capacity for communication, training and education • there are four major types of cooperatives.
These are: Production co-operatives, Consumer co-operatives, Mixed production- 57AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE consumer co-operatives, Co-operatives for housing, services and other social needs • NGOs in Nigeria are concerned with agricultural production, poverty eradication, capacity building as well as empowerment.
NGOs in Agriculture have helped in reaching the poor especially in inaccessible areas of rural Nigeria and providing their needs in the areas of infrastructure such as schools, electricity, sanitation as well as adequate good quality drinking water • NGOs use advocacy and political influence to hold local officials accountable for activities which are damaging to the poor help communities’ mobilise and form societies to express their concerns provide an enabling environment in which officials can consult people about development plans and listen to alternatives presented by the people recorded a huge success in the areas which the governments have failed adopt the participatory approach thus making the people to be part of the programme from the initiation stage to planning, implementation, execution and maintenance play a major role in the transfer of innovations to rural communities capable of working with local groups rather than government officials.
• FADU has helped to mobilise, trained, technically and financially assisted about 50,000 productive rural societies.
Built a very strong network of self-managed and self-financed grassroots institutions.
.Disseminated low cost locally fabricated and adapted medium scale technologies for micro-producers in remote villages across the country.
Created over 500,000 new jobs, since 1989 in remote villages, considered otherwise as marginal and disadvantaged areas.
Consistently demonstrated commitment to fostering partnerships to fight hunger and poverty in Nigeria.
Built a network of 159 replicate-CBOs, which receive FADU's training and technical assistance, to upgrade their programme management skills programmes carried out by FAO to alleviate hunger and poverty include: Special Programme for Food Security, Integrated Pest Management, TeleFood , Alliance Against Hunger, and Goodwill Ambassadors.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention four types of Agricultural Organisations in Nigeria.
2.
Discuss the activities of Farmers Development Union.
3.
What are the activities carried out by FAO to remove poverty and hunger from our society?
58 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adeboye, J.B. (2002).
“The National Farmers Association of Nigeria.
What it means”.
The National Farmers Association of Nigeria.
PDF.
Ekong, E.E.
(1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Publisher Ltd.
Farmers Development Union (2009).
Farmers Development Union capital.htm Gertler, M. (1998).
Rural and Co-operatives Sustainable Development Centre For the Study of Co-operatives University of Saskatchewan.
Canadian Cataloguing In: Publication Data Gertler, Michael E. (Michael Eden).
Gertler, M. (2001).
Rural Co-operatives and Sustainable Development Study of Co-operatives University of Saskatchewan.
Canadian Cataloguing I N Publication Data Gertler, Michael E. (Michael Eden).
Inc.com (2008).
Cooperatives - Encyclopedia Mansueto Ventures LLC..Inc.com, 7 World Trade Center, New York, NY.
Juhász, J.
(2001).
“The Role of Co-operatives in Sustainable Agricultural and Rural Development – FAO Policies, Strategies and Programmes Promotion of Rural Development through Agricultural Co-operatives Joint Workshop” Organised by ICAO – ICA Europe in collaboration with COGECA and MOSZ Budapest, pp.
17-22.
59AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE UNIT 3 LEADERSHIP IN YOUTH ORGANISATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Leadership?
3.2 Effective Leadership Qualities 3.3 Principles of Leadership 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is a common perception that leaders are born, not made.
This may be true to some extent because some people display some intrinsic traits right from birth, which put them in the position where they are looked up as leaders.
This unit will expose you to the meaning of leadership, qualities of a good leader and the principles of Leadership.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define Leadership • state the qualities of a good leader • explain the principles of leadership.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Leadership?
Leadership is and has been described as the “process of social influence in which one person can enlist the aid and support of others in the accomplishment of a common task”.
According to Alan Keith of Genentech as quoted by (Wikipedia, 2009)”Leadership is ultimately about creating a way for people to contribute to making something extraordinary happen.” Leadership is a process by which a person influences others to accomplish an objective and directs the organisation in a way that makes it more cohesive and coherent.
Leaders carry out this process by applying their leadership attributes, such as beliefs, values, ethics, character, knowledge, and skills.
Although your position as a manager, supervisor, lead, etc.
gives you the authority to 60 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE accomplish certain tasks and objectives in the organisation, this power does not make you a leader, it simply makes you the boss.
Leadership differs in that it makes the followers want to achieve high goals, rather than simply bossing people around.
Kenneth Boulding (2009).
3.2 Effective Leadership Qualities Honesty The sign of a good leader is the honesty towards his/her work and employees.
A youth leader should be very honest to self as well as to the members of the association.
A youth leader should not lose his integrity, whatever be the circumstances, because a leader will not be considered reliable and worth following, if he/she looses integrity.
Confidence Confidence should exude in every word said and in everything done by a youth leader.
He should have the confidence to manage people and show them the right path, whenever they seek guidance.
People who see panic or uncertainty in the eyes of their leader will not consider him/her worth depending upon, in the time of crisis.
A good leader should always keep a cool head in times of crises and finds solutions to any difficult situation.
Patience If you want to be known as a good youth leader, it is very important to be patient.
Be cool, calm and collected.
Do not panic or loose your temper when the situation is nerve-wracking.
A good leader considers crisis, emotions and tricky situations a part of his journey and never loses his composure.
Focus A good youth leader should always remains steadfast to the goal, without wasting time in checking for hindrances that might creep in.
If you find any obstacles in this process, consider it as your moral responsibility to solve them and find better ways to make progress towards the target.
Dedication People will respond more openly to a youth leader who is dedicated towards his/her work and constantly works for the betterment of the employees as well as the organisation.
He/she should be zealous about 61AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE the organisation’s work and prove oneself as a source of inspiration for the people around you.
Consistency Consistency is an important leadership quality.
Displaying inconsistency will confound others.
A youth leader should remember that he is part of the team.
Therefore, should be stable before expecting consistency from others.
Motivate Others A good youth should always encourage his/her members and congratulate them for all their achievements, whether small or big.
This will create a healthy environment in the workplace, which will in turn motivate members to give their best every time they are assigned a task.
Effective Communication A good youth leader should be able to reach the people around him/her effectively.
Good communication skills are, in fact, key to good leadership.
Tolerance A youth leader should be tolerant of alternative opinion or views and should always remain tranquil, composed and persistent to his/her goals.
Enthusiasm A good leader is always enthusiastic about the cause of the people.
He/she must have the capability to see what is good or bad for the people in the long run.
He/she approaches a problem in a holistic manner and never believes they are different from the people they serve.
Discipline A leader believes in discipline.
He/she follows an orderly manner and routine but still is tolerant.
He/she takes decision keeping emotions and personal matters aside.
Skillful He/she looks each and every aspects of the situation before arriving to any decision and never loses his/her temper in difficult situations.
He/she should think positively in each and every situation.
A great leader is proactive and committed to excellence.
He always maintains high standards and acts as a role model for his/her followers.
62 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE His/her personal and public life both are remarkable and stain free.
A good leader is the one who can give people voice and direction.
3.3 Principles of Leadership • Know yourself and seek self-improvement - In order to know yourself, you have to understand your be, know, and do, attributes.
Seeking self-improvement means continually strengthening your attributes.
This can be accomplished through self-study, formal classes, reflection, and interaction with others.
• Be technically proficient - As a leader, you must know your job and have a solid familiarity with your employees' tasks.
• Seek responsibility and take responsibility for your actions - Search for ways to guide your organisation to new heights.
And when things go wrong, they always do sooner or later -- do not blame others.
Analyse the situation, takes corrective action, and move on to the next challenge.
• Make sound and timely decisions - Use good problem solving, decision making, and planning tools.
• Set the example - Be a good role model for your members.
They must not only hear what they are expected to do, but also see.
We must become the change we want to see - Mahatma Gandhi.
• Know your people and look out for their well-being - Know human nature and the importance of sincerely caring for your organisation’s members.
• Keep your members informed - Know how to communicate with not only them, but also patron, advisers and other key people.
• Develop a sense of responsibility in your members - Help to develop good character traits that will help them develop professional responsibilities.
• Ensure that tasks are understood, supervised, and accomplished - Communication is the key to this responsibility.
• Train as a team - You should see your members as one and also work as a team.
• Use the full capabilities of your organisation - By developing a team spirit, you will be able to employ your organisation to its fullest capabilities.
4.0 CONCLUSION Since Youths are considered as leaders of tomorrow, efforts should be made to develop the qualities of a good leader in them through youth organisations.
This will have a cumulative effect on our future leaders and the development of a great nation.
63AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • leadership is a process of social influence in which one person can enlist the aid and support of others in the accomplishment of a common task • the qualities of a good leader are: Honesty, confidence ,patience, focus, dedication, consistency, motivating others, effective communication, tolerance, enthusiasm, discipline, skillful, and proactive • principles of leadership are: Know yourself and seek self- improvement; technically proficient; Seek responsibility and take responsibility for your actions; Make sound and timely decisions; Set the example, Know members and look out for their well- being; Keep members informed.
Develop a sense of responsibility in youth members; supervise, and accomplish training as a team; Use the full capabilities of the organisations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define leadership.
2.
State five qualities of a good leader.
3.
Justify the saying that leaders are made.
4.
What are the principles of leadership?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong E. E. (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Publisher Ltd. “Qualities of Good Leader”.
http://EzineArticles.com/?expert=Joe_Daley Kouzes, J.
& Posner, B.
(2007).
The Leadership Challenge.
CA: Jossey Bass.
House, R. J.
(1971).
"A Path-Goal Theory of Leader Effectiveness".
Administrative Science Quarterly.
Vol.16: pp.
321–339.
Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia “Leadership.4.
htm” 64 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE UNIT 4 ROLES OF A YOUTH LEADER, MEMBERS, PATRONS, ADVISERS, VOLUNTEERS IN ORGANISATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 3.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Roles of Youth Leaders 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION All organisations are directed by a group of people called leaders.
These leaders have different roles to play to ensure the smooth running of the organisation.
This unit will expose you to the various roles played by youth leaders.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the roles performed by a youth president, secretary and treasurer • explain the need for volunteers in youth organisations • discuss the functions of patrons and advisers.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Roles of Youth Leaders Youth leaders are to: • guide the operation of the Organisations • serve as contact person with Patrons and Volunteer leaders • keep members informed of the relevant programme and opportunities in and around their vicinity.
65AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE Roles of Youth Officers President The duties of the President include: • checking on arrangements for meetings • presiding at meetings • learning and use of correct parliamentary procedure • appointing committees with the help of club leaders; unless otherwise instructed • working closely with the club leaders, agriculture teacher, extension personnel and club members in planning the club programme for the year • casting of the deciding vote in case of a tie • approving payments of accounts • bearing responsibility for orderly conduct of meetings, and • keeping in mind that the organisation belongs to the members, he only guides.
Vice-President The duties of the Vice-President include: • assuming the President's duties in his absence • serving as a chairman of' all the programme committees • keeping club members informed of the programme for the different meetings so that preparations can be made in advance, and • working closely with the president.
Secretary The major duties of the Secretary include: • keeping an accurate record of club membership and attendance of members at meetings • keeping accurate minutes of all club in meetings ready for inspection at any time • calling the roll at the request of the president • keeping correspondence up-to-date • calling the meetings to order when both the president and vice- president are absent.
• assisting the president in handling the details of club business, and 66 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • learning how to write minutes of the meetings.
• Minutes of the meeting should include name of club, date and place of meeting.
kind of meeting (regular or special), number of members present and names of special guests, reply to roll call and statement that minutes of the previous meeting were or were not read and approved; records of committee reports and time/ place of next meeting.
Treasurer The treasurer: • handles and keeps accurate records of all money owned by club, club bills and receipts • pays bills after president has approved payment • gives a financial report of the club when requested the president, and • co-operate with the other officers and members.
Patrons and Advisers The Patrons and advisers are respectable adults, knowledgeable in the area or the type of youth organisation, who can give necessary guidance to the organisation when and where needed.
Patrons are usually selected from among villagers/community people and agreed to by members.
At times Patrons give financial assistance to the association.
They meet with the organisation regularly to monitor progress on organisational activities and plan for future projects.
At times patrons act as contact persons in helping to source for funds.
They can help in given publicity to organisational projects Volunteer Work Volunteer work is a major component of unpaid labour, which has become a focus of increased attention by policymakers throughout the world as a major form of economic activity and economic benefits, particularly in developing countries.
The volunteers have the opportunity to impact the existing community initiatives through strengthening their pillars of sustainability.
These pillars include manpower, networking and fundraising.
• Manpower: Volunteers can accelerate the productivity of Community Based Organisations by contributing manual labour work required for farming operation of farm machines and construction.
67AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE • Networking: the volunteers can work in linking grassroots organisations to International Organisations working in similar programmes.
• Fundraising: Volunteers can engage in proposal writing and other forms of fundraising initiatives for Community Based Organisations to inspire growth and facilitate the expansion of their impact on the community.
Volunteer work can offer services not easily provided by paid workers, such as mentoring and role models; Volunteer work enhances social solidarity, social capital, political legitimacy and quality of life in a society.
Volunteer work can serve as a means of social inclusion and integration; and Volunteer work provides a sense of personal satisfaction, fulfillment, well-being and belonging to persons who volunteer.
A recent survey of national statistical offices and institutes conducted by the U.K. Office of National Statistics on behalf of the United Nations Statistical Commission revealed that “the non-observed economy and informal employment” was one of the “three top priority areas for labour statistics” identified by member countries as needing attention (UK Office of National Statistics, 2008).Volunteer work is a component of unpaid labour that may be easier to capture since it can be differentiated from household activity and much of it takes place through institutions that are considered to be well within the production boundary of the economy Because volunteer work not only produces tangible outputs but also gives individuals a sense of self-satisfaction and a feeling of contributing to the progress of society, its measurement is consistent with the International Labour Organisation’s emphasis on “decent work”, as a means of promoting human agency, dignity, and a feeling of self-respect.
4.0 CONCLUSION The success of any organisation depends on how effective the leaders/ officials are, hence efforts should be put in place by youth to elect people with desirable qualities to lead their organisations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • the key officials in youth organisations are president, vice president, secretary, and treasurer • president duties include: supervising arrangements for meetings; Presiding at meetings; Learning and use of correct parliamentary 68 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE procedure; Appointing committees with the help of club leaders; unless otherwise instructed; Working closely with the club leaders, agriculture teacher, extension personnel and club members in planning the club programme for the year; casting of the deciding vote in case of a tie; and approving payments of accounts.
• the treasurer handles and keeps accurate records of all money owned by club, club bills and receipts: Pays bills after president has approved payment: Gives a financial report of the club when requested by the president and co-operate with the other officers and members • patrons and advisers are adults that provide guidance for the association and can perform other functions such as helping the association to raise fund • volunteer workers can provide manpower, networking and fundraising.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss five ways in which the lives of rural communities depend Mention four roles of the president of a youth organisation.
2.
Give four reasons for selecting a patron in youth organisations.
3.
What are the roles played by a volunteer worker in youth organisations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, A. R. (2006).
A Guide for Young Farmers’ Clubs.
Akure, Nigeria: SAC Impressions.
Ekong,E.
E. (1988).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Ibadan: Jumak Publisher Ltd. International Volunteer Work Camp in Africa.
Intership.com.- 69AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE UNIT 5 RURAL YOUTH CLUB PROJECTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 3.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Rural Youth Club Projects 3.2 Purpose for Embarking on Projects in Youth Clubs/ Associations 3.3 Criteria for Selecting Youth Club Projects 3.4 Types of Projects being Embarked on by Youth Clubs 3.5 Ways of Sustaining Youth Club Projects 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The entire activities of rural youth club centers on worthwhile projects.
This unit will expose you to different projects usually embarked on by youth clubs/ associations in agriculture, the purpose of embarking on such projects, criteria to be considered for selecting projects as well as ways of sustaining project works in agricultural clubs and associations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define a project • explain reasons for embarking on various projects in agricultural clubs • list the various kinds of projects that can be carried out in agricultural clubs • mention the criteria for selecting youth club projects • discuss ways of sustaining youth club projects.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Rural Youth Club Projects A project is a form of home or farm activity which a member or groups within the club/association chooses to do following the recommendation of the local leader.
The entire activities of a rural youth club center on 70 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE worthwhile projects.
The projects can be organised around almost any farm or home or school tasks and activities.
3.2 Purpose for Embarking On Project in Youth Clubs/ Associations a.
Project work helps members to learn new and better methods of farming/ home making.
b.
It teaches youths to be dependable and responsible.
c. It provides members of the association to improve their skills, knowledge and attitude.
d. It gives youths the pride and satisfaction of ownership.
e. It provides a feeling of achievement, satisfaction or accomplishment.
f. It gives the youth a sense of belonging to the community and society at large.
3.3 Criteria for Selecting Youth Club Projects For any project to be effective and efficient, certain criteria must be considered.
These include: • the project must meet the needs and interest of majority of members • it must be interesting and achievable • it must be cost effective and time bound • the Project must be challenging to members • it must aim at bringing about improvement in specific fields of interest • materials to be used for the project work should be available locally.
3.4 Types of Projects Being Embarked on By Youth Clubs a.
Farm works which might involve the cultivation, processing, storage and packaging of any food crop.
b. Rearing of farm animals such as ruminants and monogastric animals and fishes.
c. Making of decorations.
d. Clothing and textile.
e. Home making- food preparation, food preservation, kitchen gardening etc.
71AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 3.5 Ways of Sustaining Youth Club Projects In order to sustain youth club projects, there is need for: • members to be committed and ready to share responsibilities • provision of incentives to boost the morale of participants • provision of incentives to boost the morale of participants • among all the parties concerned.
These are; the professional youth leader, local leaders and members.
• accurate record keeping • publicising the results of projects after completion • recognition and rewarding excellent performance.
4.0 CONCLUSION Youth club projects enable the youths to be able to utilise all their senses effectively and develop the affective, cognitive and psycho motive knowledge.
This makes them to develop into a useful member of the society.
However for the projects to be sustainable there is need for members to be committed interested and to co-operate with each other.
Also, there is need for motivation for good performance.
5.0 SUMMARY • A project is a form of home or farm activity which a member or groups within the club/ association choose to do the following on the recommendation of the local leader.
• Youth club projects makes members to learn new and better methods of farming/ home making, improve their skills, knowledge and attitude.
Develop feeling of achievement, satisfaction or accomplishment and a sense of belonging to the community and society at large.
• Effectiveness and efficiency of a project depends on ability to meet the needs and interest of majority of members, projects being interesting and achievable ; project being cost effective and time bound and challenging; project being able to bring about improvement in specific fields of interest; and ability to utilise local materials.
• Types of projects that can be embarked upon by youth clubs includes: rearing of animals, crop production, processing and preservation, home making, clothing and textile etc.
• Youth clubs can be sustained through; provision of incentives to boost the morale of participants, cooperation, accurate record keeping; publicising the results of projects after completion and recognition and rewarding excellent performance.
72 AEM246 YOUTH ORGANISATIONS IN AGRICULTURE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by a project?
2.
Mention four criteria for selecting a youth club project 3.
Describe six major projects that can be carried out by youths in your community.
4.
Explain four ways through which a youth club project can be sustained.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adedoyin, (2005).
Youth and Children Programme in Extension and Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria Publication.
Jibowo, G. (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta; Gbemi Sodipo Press Ltd. 73
