BASIC ARA 181 ARABIC Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE ARA181 COURSE GUIDE ARA 181 BASIC ARABIC Course Developer Dr. Barihi Adetunji School of Arts & Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos Course Writer Dr. Barihi Adetunji School of Arts & Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos Course Editor Dr. A.F.
Ahmed School of Arts & Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Programme Leader Dr. A.F.
Ahmed School of Arts & Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE ARA181 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-185-5 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE ARA181 CONTENTS PAGES Introduction ………………………………………………….
1 Course Aims ………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives …………………………………………… 1 Working through this Course ……………………………….. 2 Course Materials …………………………………………….. 2 Study Units ………………………………………………...... 2 – 3 Textbooks and References…………………………………… 3 Assessment File……………………………………………… 3 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) ………………………... 3 – 4 Final Examination and Grading …………………………….. 4 Course Marking Scheme …………………………………….
4 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule ………………….... 5 How to Get the Most from this Course ……………………... 5 – 7 Tutors and Tutorials ………………………………………… 7 Summary …………………………………………………..... 8 ivCOURSE GUIDE ARA181 Introduction Welcome to ARA 181 Basic Arabic This course is a two-credit unit course for first year students.
It consists of fourteen units which include, the importance of Arabic language, Arabic vocabulary development, grammar, common works and selected activities, and Short Arabic Passages.
This Course Guide provides information on what the course is about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through this material.
It also tells you about assessment, and periodic tutorial classes that are available for the course.
Course Aims The aim of this course can be summarized as follows: i) To introduce you to basic understanding of Arabic language.
ii) To familiarize you with how to construct sentences with all the signs applied in vocalization.
iii) To prepare you for expressing yourself in spoken Arabic language.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, ARA 181 has overall objectives.
(In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are at the beginning of each unit.
I advise that you read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check your progress.)
Here are the wider objectives for the course as a whole.
By meeting the objectives, you count yourself as having met the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: a) explain the importance of Arabic as an international language.
b) express yourself well enough in spoken Arabic language.
c) identify and explain some wise sayings and simple Arabic poems.
d) read with assimilation, simple and short passages.
e) acquire enough vocabularies that are peculiar to directions, measurement, colours and natural things.
f) identify and explain some basic grammar and Arabic language registers that are related to some fields of human activities.
j) Discuss the code of ethics for Nigerian journalists k) Discuss some ethical problems in Nigerian journalism 1COURSE GUIDE ARA181 Working through this Course To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
You will also need to undertake practical exercises for which you need a pen, a note book, and other materials that will be listed in this Guide.
The exercises are to aid you in understanding the concepts being presented.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: i) Course Guide.
ii) Study Units.
iii) Text Books.
iv) Presentation Schedule.
In addition, you must obtain text materials.
They are provided by the NOUN.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems obtaining the text materials.
Study Units There are fourteen study units in this course broken into three modules.
They are listed below: Module 1 The Importance of Arabic Language, the Arabic Alphabets and its Forms Unit 1 The Importance of Arabic Language Unit 2 Arabic Short Vowels, Sukūn, Nunation (Tanwīn), Long Vowels, Diphthongs, Double Consonants, the Moon and Sun letters.
Module 2 Arabic Vocabulary Development Unit 1 Household items and word relating to Day to Day Activities Unit 2 Numbers, Dates, the Days, the Months, the Weatherand Season Divisions.
Unit 3 Human Body, Five senses, Illness and Occupation.
Unit 4 Some Arabic Customs, and Gender Numbers.
Unit 5 The Nature, Trees, Insects, Reptiles, Inanimate Objects and Adjectives.
Unit 6 Food, Vegetables and Fruits, Drinks, bank and Post Office.
2COURSE GUIDE ARA181 Module 3 Grammar, Common works and selected Activities Unit 1 Prepositions, Adverbs and Further Lessons on Pronouns Unit 2 Common Words used in Hospital, Government Service, Commerce etc.
Unit 3 Relative and Interrogative pronouns, and Introduction to sentence construction.
Unit 4 Directions, Measurements, School subjects and punctuation Marks.
Module 4 Short Arabic Passages Unit 1 Five Selected Passages Unit 2 Conversation and some simple Arabic poems.
Each Unit contains a number of self-tests.
In general term, these self-test questions on the materials you have just covered is meant to help you evaluate your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the materials.
Alongside with your Tutor-Marked Assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Textbooks and References Each unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Assessment File An assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the tutor marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will account for 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs) You will have to submit a specified number of the TMA.
Every unit in this course has a Tutor-Marked Assignment.
You will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the TMA will be used for your 30% grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send 3COURSE GUIDE ARA181 it together with a Tutor-Marked Assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submissions.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a test of three hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Find time to read the unit all over before your examination.
The final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of self assessment exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignment you have previously encountered.
And all aspects of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments (Best Three Assignments out of Four marked) = 30% Final Examination = 70% Total 100% Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
4COURSE GUIDE ARA181 Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Unit Title of Work Weeks Activity Course The Importance of Arabic Language, Guide the Arabic Alphabets and its Forms Module 1 Unit 1 The Importance of Arabic Language Week 1 Assignment 1 2 Arabic Short Vowels, Sukūn, Nunation Week 1 Assignment 2 (Tanwīn), Long Vowels, Diphthongs, Double Consonants, the Moon and Sun Letters Module 2 Arabic Vocabulary Development 1 Household Items and Word Relating to Week 3 Assignment 1 Day to Day activities 2 Numbers, Dates, the Days, the Months, Week 4 Assignment 2 the Weather and Season Divisions 3 Human Body, Five Senses, Illness and Week 4 Assignment 3 Occupation.
4 Some Arabic Customs and Gender Week 4 Assignment 4 Numbers.
5 The Nature, Trees, Insects, Reptiles, Week 5 Assignment 5 Inanimate Objects and Adjectives 6 Food, Vegetables and Fruits, Drinks, Bank and Post Office Grammar, Common Works and Module 3 Selected Activities 1 Prepositions, Adverbs and Further Week 6 Assignment 1 Lessons on Pronouns 2 Preparing Broadcast Copy Common Week 7 Assignment 2 Words Used in Hospital, Government Service, Commerce etc.
3 Relative and Interrogative Pronouns, and Week 8 Assignment 3 Introduction to Sentence Construction 4 Directions, Measurements, School Week 9 Assignment 4 Subjects and Punctuation Marks Module 4 Short Arabic Passages 1 Five Selected Passages Week 10 Assignment 1 2 Conversation and Some Simple Arabic Week 10 Assignment 2 poems Total 14 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and 5COURSE GUIDE ARA181 at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the Assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit I, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your Study Centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
6COURSE GUIDE ARA181 8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
if you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the Tutor- Marked Assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter.
He will provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor-marked assignments to the Study Centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • you have difficulty with the exercises • you have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
7COURSE GUIDE ARA181 Summary The course guide gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches you the alphabets and basic word in Arabic language, and how these can be applied.
It also acquaints you with how to use the language to express yourself in the day-to-day activities.
We wish you success the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
8
