ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING BED 112BED112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSISNG Course Code BED112 Course Title Advanced Word Processing Course Team Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Course Writer/ Developer) National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Okoro, Chinedu (Course Writer) UNIBEN Prof. L. E. Ekpenyong (Course Editor) UNIBEN Inegbedion, Juliet (Course Co-ordinator) National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos iiBED112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSISNG NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-892-2 All Rights Reserved iiiBED112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSISNG CONTENTS PAGES Module 1 Business Documents……………………….
1 Unit 1 Letters...………………………...................... 1 – 16 Unit 2 Memorandum……………………………..... 17 – 22 Unit 3 Tabulations ………………………….……... 23 – 32 Unit 4 Mail Merge/e-mail ……………….………… 33 – 47 Unit 5 Speeches and Reports…………………….… 48 – 53 Module 2 Display ……….………………...………….. 54 Unit 1 Display ……………………………………... 54 – 84 Unit 2 Document Enhancement …............................. 85 – 99 Unit 3 Multiple Columns on a Page ……………….. 100 - 105 Module 3 Legal/Literary Work and Skill Mastering……………………………….….
106 Unit 1 Legal Document ……………………..…….. 106 – 110 Unit 2 Literary Document …….…………..…….… 111 – 114 Unit 3 Skill Mastering ………………………..…… 115 – 123 ivBED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING MODULE 1 BUSINESS DOCUMENTS This module would take you through the major documents that are used in the business world.
Documents are very vital in the day-to-day business activities.
It is only through accurate documentation that any business can survive.
Can you recollect the type of document you have personally had contact with in the business world?
Does your recollection go with the documents listed in the units below?
Which ever way, compare with the units below as they are going to be the units that would be treated in this module: Unit 1 Letters Unit 2 Memorandum Unit 3 Tabulations Unit 4 Mail Merging/e-mail Unit 5 Speeches and Reports UNIT 1 LETTERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One major way written communications are expressed within and outside business is through the use of letters.
This was more pronounced before the advent mobile phones, whereby the only major ways people could communicate with their loved ones at a distance is through letter writing, which has to be sent through the Post Office.
Is this strange to you?
But today many people hardly write any other type of letter except business letter because of its importance in business.
Nothing has been able to replace it.
The only improvement which has come in the electronic form came to speed up the delivery system.
What is written and what is displayed is still very vital.
1BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identity the various types of business document; and • type a simple business document.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are different types of letters such as: • Business letters • Circular letters • Form letters • Personal letters • Personal/business letters Business Letters Some terms that are commonly used in business letters will be looked into.
Such terms as attention line, enclosure, confidential line, urgent, postscripts, care of, through, catchwords, continuation, printed letter headed, photo-copy and blind photo copy.
Parts of a Business letter: 1.
Reference 2.
Special mark used in letters, such as private, confidential, personal, urgent, registered, by hand etc.
3.
Date 4.
For the attention of 5.
Name and address of the addressee 6.
Salutation 7.
Subject heading 8.
Body of the letter 9.
Displayed matter 10.
Complimentary close 11.
Name of signatory 12.
Enclosures 13.
Postscripts 14.
Photocopies/Circulation copies 15.
Blind photocopies/blind circulation copies 16.
Continuation sheets 17.
Signing letters 2BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Reference: There are two forms of reference – our reference and your reference.
These are usually abbreviated as ‘Our Ref’ and ‘Your Ref’.
Reference is used when a written contact has already existed between the writer and the addressee.
The writer uses Our Ref while the addressee would be referred as Your Ref.
Where Our Ref and Your Ref are already printed on the paper, the typist should make use of the ruler as a guide to type in the references to align with the prints.
If the references are not already printed and you are to type on plain paper, leave one inch to the top margin and type the reference.
But if it is to be typed on a printed heading, turn up two single spaces and type the references.
You can type either of them first, though some schools of thought may say type one first before the other.
Type the reference at left margin and give one clear space between Our Ref and Your Ref.
Special Marks: These are typed at the left margin with one or two clear spaces after the last line of reference.
Date: Type at left margin if it is blocked style or type on the same line as the reference to block at the right margin if indented style is used with one or two clear spaces after the reference or special mark.
For The Attention of: Most business letters are addressed to the firm, but where the writer of the letter wishes to reach a particular individual or person, the words, ‘FOR THE ATTENTION OF…’ are typed on the left hand margin.
Give one or two clear spaces between the last line of typing and ‘For the Attention of…’ When the words ‘FOR THE ATTENTION OF ‘are used the salutation becomes plural e.g.
Dear sirs.
The wording is also typed on the envelope one or two clear spaces above the name and address.
Name And Address Of Addressee Type in single line spacing at the left margin with one or two clear spaces after ‘For the attention of’, reference or special mark.
Salutation: Type at the left margin with one or two clear spaces after the last line of address.
Where the salutation is to be written in ink, leave enough space.
Subject Heading: For blocked style, it is typed at the left margin and centered if it is indented.
Type in capital letters or type in capital letters 3BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING and bold without underscore.
But underscore when initial capitals are used.
Body of the Letter: Leave one or two clear spaces after the heading.
Use blocked paragraph if you are using blocked style, and indented paragraph if you are using indented style.
Use single line spacing.
Displayed Matter: When you are using blocked style line of all displayed matters, start at the left hand margin with one clear space before and after the matter.
If the display is in column, leave appropriate space between columns.
If it is indented style, center the display matter on the typing line.
If it is an inset with quotation, use single line spacing and you may reduce the font size or italicize for emphasis, once it is inset, it must be typed as an inset even when you are using blocked style.
But where a specific instruction is given, follow the instruction.
Complimentary Close: Typed at the left margin if blocked style is use and from the mid point of typing line if indented style is used.
When the salutation reads Sir(s), Madam, the end would be ‘Yours faithfully’ which may be followed by a company’s name but when the salutation is Dear Mr.…, Dear Miss…, etc, the end would read ‘Yours sincerely’.
Name of Signatory: In business letters, male persons do not append the word ‘Mr.’ before and after their names.
But for women/ladies they have to append ‘Miss’, ‘Mrs.’, or ‘Ms’ before their names or after in brackets.
Enclosures: Most business letter usually go with one enclosure or the other i.e.
enclosing extra document such as ‘quotation list’ in the envelope containing the letter.
In this case the enclosure would have been referred in the content of the letter.
After the last line of typing, leave one clear space and type Enc if it is one enclosure and Encs if it is more than one.
Some companies prefer to use the abbreviation ‘Att’ when the word ‘attach’ is used in the body of the letter.
When the attachment is in the singular form, type the number of attachment e.g.
Att 4.
Enclosure is typed at the left margin be it blocked or indented style.
Postscripts: Postscripts are typed at the foot of the letter.
Postscripts are used either because the writer forgot some important point(s) he wanted to make or for the purpose of emphasis.
Postscripts are typed one or two clear spaces after the last line of typing and they are typed in single line spacing.
Use paragraph heading.
Type the abbreviation PS, 4BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING leave two character spaces and type the content.
If you are using closed or full punctuation, put a full stop after the S. Photocopies/Circulation Copies: Business letters are usually duplicated for reference purposes and at the same time one or more persons may need to have the same information communicated to the addressee.
In this regard, copies need to be sent to the persons in question.
After all typing, at the foot of the letter, type ‘PC’ or ‘cc’ and type the name of the persons one after the other e.g.
PC: Chairman Registrar Bursar File At the end of typing, print a copy and make photocopies for the number.
Photocopy is recommended because it is cheaper than reprinting from the computer.
But where the additional copies are printed directly from the computer, use ‘CP’ instead of ‘PC’.
‘CP’ means ‘computer print’.
Type at the left margin.
Underlined or tick the side of the name for whom copy is intended.
E.g.
cc: Chairman cc: Chairman Registrar Registrar Bursar Bursar File File cc: Chairman cc: Chairman Registrar Registrar Bursar Bursar File File Blind Photocopies/Blind Circulation Copies: At times the writer may not want the addressee to know that the content of the letter has been sent to some other persons.
In this case the PC or CP will not appear on the original copy.
After typing the letter, copy and paste on another page and then type PC OR CP on the copied page.
This now implies that two original copies will be printed from the machine.
The copy without the copied names is sent to the addressee and the second copy containing 5BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING the copied names is photocopied but the original of this copy is kept as the file copy and the photocopies are sent out.
If the above is typed as blind photocopies it would appear thus: bpc: Chairman Registrar Bursar File Continuation Sheets: Sometimes a letter may run into a second sheet, when this happens you follow the following step of typing.
1.
Use plain sheet of the same size, quality and colour as the previous page.
2.
Type the name of addressee, page number and date starting from the fourth line from the top.
In blocked style all details are typed on the left margin in the following order – page number, date, name of addressee but in indented, the addressee’s name is typed at the left margin, the page number is centred on the typing line and the date ends at the right margin, give two clear spaces and continue the body of the letter.
3.
Do not take only the complimentary close and the name of the writer to the continuation sheet at least take two lines or a paragraph to the continuation sheet.
4.
Do not type the words ‘CONTINUED’ or ‘PTO’ at the foot of the letter.
This is seldom used in letters.
5.
You may use catchword i.e.
the first word in the continuation page typed at the foot of the preceding page.
6.
You must not use page number as catchword.
Signing Letter: Some times an employee may be required to write and sign a letter on behalf of his employer.
When this happens, the name of the company is typed immediately after the complimentary close e.g.
6BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Yours faithfully CARRET & CO LTD Aigbedion A A Style of Typing Letter There are two major types of styles - blocked and indented.
Another importOanutr a Rspeef c t i s PpCun/BctWua/t1io2n – open and closed.
See the following examp l e2s/3: SLS Your Ref SA/455/KL 2/3 SLS 4th June 2006 2/3 SLS For The Attention of… 2/3 SLS The Managing Director 22/24 Adekoya Close Opebi Junction Ikeja – Lagos 2 SLS Dear sir 2 SLS SUBJECT HEADING 2 SLS Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 2 SLS Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 2 SLS Yours faithfully CARET & CO LTD 5 SLS Aigbodion A A Sales Manager 2 SLS Enc 2 SLS pc Mr Otokhine File 2 SLS PS xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 7BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Our Ref PC/BW/12 2/3 SLS Your Ref SA/455/KL 4th June, 2006 2/3 SLS For The Attention of… 2/3 SLS The Managing Director, 22/24 Adekoya Close, Opebi Junction, Ikeja – Lagos.
2 SLS Dear sir, 2 SLS SUBJECT HEADING 2 SLS Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 2 SLS xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x Bxxloxcxkxexdx xsxtyxlxex wxith open punctuation 2 SLS Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 2 SLS xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 2 SLS Yours faithfully, CARET & CO LTD 5 SLS Aigbodion, A.
A.
Sales Manager 2 SLS Enc.
2 SLS Pc: Mr. Otokhine File 2 SLS PS: xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 8 xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxBED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 2 4th June 2006 Indented style with closed punctuation NTohtee tMhea npaugnicntgu aDtiiorenc tionr the two examples above.
This also affects the body of the letter in standard abbreviations like J.A.M.B.
for closed punctuation and J A M B or JAMB for open punctuation.
Apart from the abbreviations, grammatical punctuation like comma, full stop, question mXarxkx xetxcx axrxex nxoxtx axfxfexcxtxexdx bxexixnxgx ixt xoxpxexnx oxrx cxlxoxsxedx xpxuxnxcxtuxaxtxioxnx.x xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Yours faithfully CARET & CO LTD Aigbodion A A Sales Manager Enc pc Mr Otokhine File PS xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 9BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Continuation sheet in blocked style The Managing Director 2 4th June, 2006 Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxx Yours faithfully, CARET & CO LTD Aigbodion, A.
A.
Sales Manager Enc.
Pc: Mr. Otokhine File 10 PS: xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxBED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Continuation sheet with indented style Note the position of the date in indented style, it aligns with right hand margin.
Circular Letters These are letters of the same contents but sent to different persons.
Type the format and save in the computer.
Provide space for the addressee's address.
On request fill the space for addressee's address to meet with individual need, print and send.
But where the letter is to be sent at the same time to several persons, it would be better to use mail merging.
Also one copy cSoPuRldIN bGeF pOrRinTteHd S aCnHd OpOhoLt oOcFo pEiDesU CmAaTdeIO tNo meet with the number required; this is usAeDd EwGhBeOn LthAe A lVetEteNr UisE exactly the same content (no name discrimination) andI KisE tJoA b –e LseAnGt OtoS several customers.
Mail merge would be discussed in a later unit, but view the following example of a circular letter.
........................ 2 SLS ……………… Dear ……..
Invitation to Teachers Parents Association (PTA) First and foremost, we want to appreciate your great contribution towards our just concluded Inter House Sport competition, through which the school was able to make a further impact in the society.
As you know there is a tradition in the school for teachers and parents to meet at the end of every term to discuss the welfare of our children.
On this note, we therefore request your presence on behalf of your child/ward …………………….
to attend the forth coming meeting schedule to hold on ……….. in the usual venue.
Thank you for your cooperation.
Yours sincerely, 11 Usunobun I. O.
Head of SchoolBED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING The dotted spaces are to be filled with matching information which will vary from person to person.
Like earlier mentioned this type of circular letter would be better achieved if mail merge is used because is going to several persons of about 100 and above.
Form Letters These are letters designed in form of a form.
Though it is a letter, there are spaces left out to be filled for individual persons e.g.
admission letters, contain the same wordings except for the course of study, level, and name.
Spaces are left out to be filled at the point of need.
A copy could be typed, printed and photocopied and fill the spaces with pen at the time of distribution or the form letter is typed and saved in the computer and the necessary information are filled in the computer at the time of requirement before printing out.
The method to be used, depends on the house style available.
Personal Letters Personal letters contain the following parts: 1.
Writer’s address 2/3 SLSS 2/3 SLSS 2.
Date 3.
Addressee’s address 2/3 SLSS 2 SLSS 2 SLSS 12 2 SLSS 5 SLSSBED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 4.
Salutation 5.
Subject heading 6.
Body of the letter 7.
Complimentary close 8.
Writer’s name It is not all personal letters that have subject headings such as letters to friends or relatives.
Personal letters that have subject headings are those with business tune like a letter of permission to visit a particular firm or company.
Writers of personal letters write for themselves, they are not writing on behalf of firm.
Most of these types of letters do not have printed heading.
Therefore the writer is expected to type his/her own address.
If it is blocked style, type the writer’s address at the left margin, leave one clear space and type date, leave another one clear space and type the addressee’s address, leave one clear space and type salutation after this every other thing remain same as discussed in business letter.
See examples below: Note: personal letters end with “yours sincerely” in most times.
But if it is a personal business letter it could end with yours faithfully, e.g.
a letter of complaint from a student to the school authority.
The difference between personal business letter and personal letter is that personal business letter is used when writing to an unknown firm or person while personal letter is used when writing to somebody known to you unofficially.
13BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Another important aspect of letter writing is when you are sending a letter through somebody e.g.
a student whose name is omitted in the matriculation list of Lagos State University, Anthony Village Campus though legitimately admitted writes a letter of complaint to the registrar through the head of department.
Such a letter will take the following format.
Let’s assume that the student is in Economics department and his name is Osemene Okoruwa.
The aspect I want to draw your attention to is the address of both the writer and the addressee.
The letter is taking the upward form of communication, therefore is passing through the head of department to the registrar.
In this type of letter the address of both addressees would be required.
These are typed distinctly for clarification.
Some schools of thought feel that ‘Through’ should be typed first before the ‘To’ others say no, it has to be ‘To’ before ‘Through’.
There is no hard and fast rule to holds to this, therefore a house style could be adopted or follow a desired style.
Every other thing follows the style of typing a business letter.
14BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 4.0 CONCLUSION Always remember the difference types of letters that are used in the business world and you should be able to know what type of letter and style that is needed at a time.
It is also important to note that the most commonly used style internationally is blocked style, therefore try to adhere to it.
5.0 SUMMARY There are different types of letters – business, circular, form, personal and personal/business.
Each of these letters has its peculiarities in format or layout which need to be learnt and practiced.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Type the following letter.
Use A5 portrait size of paper and type in block style.
Dear Thank you for your letter of 10 May 2007 about the above account.
In view of the fact that you have made an application to extend your credit, I should like you to make arrangements to have meeting a have with us sometime during the trns course of the next month.
We look forward to seeing you at the earliest opportunity.
I am sure you are aware of the fact that our interest rates could be going up in the near future.
I should like to point out that it would be advisable to take into consideration stet the length of time you will require to repay the amount you wish to borrow.
Yours sincerely, Pls.
address the letter to Mr Odubiyi Akande of Central Control Tower, Agiliti, Mile 12 Lagos using today’s date.
15BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
16BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING UNIT 2 MEMORANDUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Memorandum is the most commonly used format of written communication within an organisation.
Most times it is referred to as memo.
Just as there are peculiarities in presenting letters so also there are peculiarities in the presentation of memos.
Some people have the view that memos are only sent from the superior downwards; there is no hard and fact rule that suggests this.
Memo can be used by either parties, it is just a means of conveying information from one person to the other.
One thing that should be noted in writing, be it letters or memos, is that the words should be friendly.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 17BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING • identify memos; • differentiate between memos and letters; and • type different types of memos.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The abbreviation ‘memo’ is commonly used for the word “memorandum”.
The word ‘memoranda’ is the plural form of memorandum.
Where the abbreviation memo is not used; the full singular form memorandum is used.
It is used in sending messages within an organization either within branches or from head office to branch office.
The layout of the headings varies.
There are two major styles of typing - blocked or indented.
Blocked Indented Some organizations have the headings printed on desired paper.
Where this is available, set the left margin to align with the beginning of the print and fill the necessary information required.
To have proper alignment, make use of the ruler on the screen.
You could also take physical measurement of the paper you are going to print on after typing to ensure accurate alignment.
Where there is no printed headed paper, use the usual papers for typing letters - A4 portrait or A5 portrait or landscape.
Leave one inch at top margin, one inch at left margin, ½ an inch to the right and bottom margins.
On the other hand you could make all the margins equal at one inch each.
Be consistent with the space given after each heading.
You also need to be consistent with the style of punctuation - either open or closed punctuation.
The style is the same with that of letters.
See below: 18BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING DATE: Indented style with closed punctuation Indented style with open punctuation It is not compulsory that From, To, Ref and Date be typed in capital letters; they could be typed in initial capitals but not lower case all through.
Sometimes you may have to type a long memo which may run into another sheet.
This will be the continuation of the first page.
See below on how continuation sheet should be laid out.
3 clear spaces Things to Note Memos do not have salutation and complimentary close.
The sender’s identity is already disclose at the heading – ‘From’, but for the purpose of fraudulent act it is advised that you type the name of the person four or five clear spaces after the last line of typing if it is his/her designation that is typed at the ‘From’ row; leave the space for signature e.g.
19BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING From: Dean (School of Education) This shows that the memo is coming from the Dean in the School of Education but has not shown who the Dean is, therefore the name of the Dean need to be shown at the bottom because any body could claim the Deanship and come up with a memo that could disorganize the organization.
This is why staff only considers a memo to be authentic only and only when the name and signature of the writer appears on it and not just the designation alone.
The end of the memo after the four or five spaces will appear thus: Professor K. O. Akande This then shows that the writer is Professor K. O. Akande and he is the Dean, School of Education.
This will make the recipient value the memo.
This may not have been necessary were it not for the fact that some writers could impersonate actual senders.
But where the name has already formed part of the heading, leave four or five spaces and type signature to create space for the writer to sign.
It is not compulsory that the word ‘signature’ must be typed all the time, but the writer need to sign.
E.g.
From: Professor K. O. Akande The close of the memo will now appear thus: Or Signature Catchword You may equally use catchword if need be, but do not use the next page 20BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING number as catchword e.g.
if the first word in the next page is ‘message’, you type the word ‘message’ at the foot of the page at the right corner.
This will enable the reader to know what the first word in the next page is as he/she is turning over the paper.
See the following example: Spacing Spacing is another vital aspect of typing memos and letters.
In typing of letters, use single line spacing and one and a half at the most where a short letter is involved but not more than that.
Use single line spacing to type long memos, one and half or double line at the most.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Type the following MEMORANDUM From: Sales Manager To: All Staff Subject: Auction Sale Date: 18th May, 2007 This is to notify all members of staff of management is decision to sell the unused vehicles in the organization to interested members.
Interested members should see the Sales Manager tomorrow – 19th May, 2007 for details.
21 Mr. Ajagu P. C.BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 4.0 CONCLUSION How did you fair in your practice?
I hope you were able to tackle all the problems.
You would have observed some differences between letters and memos.
Memos do not have: • Salutation e.g.
Dear Sir • Complimentary Close e.g.
Yours faithfully • Addressees address rather the To and From is used It is also important to note that there is no hard and fast rule that ‘To’ must come first before ‘From; any one can be typed first it, all depends on choice.
5.0 SUMMARY Memos are mostly used to convey written information within an organisation.
The two basic ways of presenting memos are blocked and indented styles.
There is a need for consistency in the punctuation method; it is either closed or open.
So also there are different formats of presentation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Type the following memo using today’s date and type using open punctuation.
OFFICE FUMIGATION The office premises would be fumigated this weekend – Saturday 19th May 2007 and Sunday 20th May 2007.
You are advised to keep away edible items from the office until the fumigation is over.
Should you find the habitable not office on Monday – 21st May, 2007; report to the Maintenance Office immediately to avoid the corrosive smell.
22BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Please Note: The memo is coming from Mrs. Carol Ujagbe – Head of Maintenance Dept.
Is going to all staff in the organization.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Bershire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
UNIT 3 TABULATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 23BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 1.0 INTRODUCTION So far we have been talking on how straight texts are typed.
There are times we put our texts or figures in columns and rows; it is this form of arrangement that is classified as tabulation.
Texts and figures are typed in tabular form for easy understanding; it is a way of summarizing information.
This unit will introduce you to different types of tabulations that are commonly used in business.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • identify the different forms of tabulation; • type simple tabular texts; and • type simple texts and figures in a tabular form.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Types of Tabular Work The following are the different ways texts and figures could be presented in a tabular form: • Column of words • Column of words with horizontal headings (blocked and centred) • Tabulation with ruling • Tabulation with vertical and oblique headings • Tabulation with multiple line heading • Tabulation with sub-divided headings Column of Words Set the tab.
You can set the tab by clicking on the ruler directly to mark the various points each column will start: 24BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING In the following ruler, you would observe an ‘L’ shape mark on the ruler that is an indication of where each tab would begin.
But before this is done, determine the number of spaces to leave in- between columns.
Use the longest line in each column to determine the number of character spaces required.
Let assume we have the following to type: Ade Omosun Omowumi Akhbue Samson Akpan Omoyebagbe Dada Iyabo To determine the space to leave between the first, second and third column, I have to locate the longest word in the first column, this is ‘Omoyebagbe', ‘Omosun and Samson' in the second column and ‘Omowumi' in the third column.
Then choose the space to leave between these columns say 5.
Take the cursor to the ruler and click the points you want the tab stops.
Type the words and use tab key to move from the end of one word to the beginning of the other.
Now try typing the example above.
Follow the illustration given.
Column of Words with Horizontal headings (blocked and centered or Indented Style) 25BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING In the blocked style, the heading starts at the same point with the text while in the indented style, the heading is centered on the longest word.
The blocked style is most preferred.
Note: At the end of typing, centralize your typed document vertically and horizontally on paper.
To achieve this click on ‘page set up’, from the dialog box click on vertical or horizontal.
In some computers from the dialog box, click on ‘layout’ and select as desired.
Where it is not available, adjust manually, by using the enter key and the space bar to move text and objects.
Type the examples above with Column of Words and Horizontal headings Tabulation with ruling Use the table on the menu bar.
Tables are collections of information organized in rows and columns.
Tables might contain numbers, text, or combinations of both.
Each row and column intersection is called a cell.
A cell is the value at a table’s row and column intersection.
To create a new table, perform these steps: 26BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 1.
Select Table, Inset, and Table.
Word displays Table dialog box.
2.
Specify the number of columns and rows your table will need, you can change these values later if your table needs change.
3.
Enter a column width, or leave the column width field set to Auto if you want Word to guess the table’s width.
You can change a table’s column width at any time (even after you enter date).
4.
When creating your first table, press Enter, once you get used to creating tables, you can click the AutoFormat button to select from a list of pre-defined table formats.
5.
Click OK (or press Enter) to close the dialog box.
Word creates your table and outlines the table’s cells in a grid format.
Follow the following stages: Stage one - click Table Stage two – click insert table Stage three – Select the number of rows and columns as desired before you click ok. 27BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Use your mouse to adjust the size of a row or column’s width by clicking and dragging one of the table’s four edges in or out.
You can also expand or shrink individual columns and rows by dragging their edges.
When you click on the line you wish to adjust, you will find this line before you drag.
To move around the table, do any of the following: Press this to move the table’s cursor here 28BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Tab The next cell Shift + tab The previous cell Alt + Page up The column’s top cell Alt + page down The column’s bottom cell Alt + Home The current row’s first cell Alt + End The current row’s last cell Tabulation with vertical and oblique headings 1.
Create the table 2.
Type the heading NAME COUNTRY 3.
Highlight the heading 4.
Click format, click text direction and it will appear thus: A click on text direction will produce the following box: 29BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Click on any of the desired text direction and click ok.
These are headings in the vertical form.
To center within the box, highlight the text and click on the short cut ‘center’ in the menu bar.
It is difficult to type diagonal heading with word.
This is more achieved with Excel package.
Can I have an example of a diagonal heading?
Yes.
Here is an example: Tabulation with multiple line heading Sometimes headings run into two or more lines.
Such headings should 30BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING be typed in single line spacing.
E.g.
NIGERIAN UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENTS Blocked style NIGERIAN UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENTS Indented style Tabulation with sub divided headings 1.
Click table 2.
Click insert table 3.
Adjust the table 4.
Place the cursor on the cell to be divided and click Split cells 5.
From the dialog box, select the number of rows and columns and click ok E.g.
Cells can equally be merged.
Highlight the cells to be merged, click on Table, click merge cells.
31BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Type the following: INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION STATISTICS Category 1993 1994 1995 Passengers Carried (‘000) …… 127.0 106.3 35.0 Passengers/km (million) …… 405.0 447.0 140.0 Cargo Tonnes/km (‘000) …… 7,894.0 5,477.2 5,628.0 Freight Tonnes ……………….
1,262.0 790.7 834.0 4.0 CONCLUSION Remember the rules guiding the typing of tabular work; there are different ways of presenting headings – horizontal, vertical and diagonal.
Also text or figures could be typed in tabular form, by using the ruler to set the tabs and the tab key to move the cursor to the typing lines.
5.0 SUMMARY Texts and figures that may look clumsy in normal typing may be presented in a tabular form for clarity purposes.
Therefore, tabular work could be presented in any of the following ways: • Column of words • Column of words with horizontal headings (blocked and centred) • Tabulation with ruling • Tabulation with vertical and oblique headings • Tabulation with multiple line heading • Tabulation with sub-divided headings 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Type the following on separate A5 paper: 249.4 257.0 266.2 277.7 276.8 285.4 294.9 307.3 146.0 149.8 158.0 166.3 164.1 171.0 176.0 180.4 67.1 74.0 89.4 99.5 128.0 130.2 1314 1&.7 32BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING b.
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT ACTIVITY SECTION 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1.
Agriculture (Crop Production)……….
30.13 14.45 34.12 36.09 44.65 2.
Livestock …………………………….
5.12 4.34 66.52 56.89 55.70 3.
Fishing ……………………………….
45.34 56.23 66.51 55.78 23.01 4.
Crude Petroleum …………………….. 0.27 4.07 1.88 12.07 23.08 5.
Mining and Quarrying ……………….
34.45 56.34 45.23 10.34 25.80 6.
Manufacturing ……………………….
23.88 34.66 77.34 66.68 88.23 7.
Foresting …………………………….
22.23 24.34 44.34 33.23 22.11 8.
Utilities ……………………………... 0.67 0.55 0.89 0.34 0.99 9.
Building and Construction ………….
24.77 45.29 56.45 66.45 76.23 10.
Transport …………………………... 55.23 67.33 45.66 56.23 44.01 Total (GDP) …………………………… Sum the totals.
c. Repeat (b) above and put every row and column in a ruled format 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
33BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING UNIT 4 MAIL MERGING/E-MAIL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Mail merging is a new technology that has been found very useful when sending document of same content with little variations may be names, addressed to a large group of people.
Instead of having to type each document in the number of places, a single instruction could be used to produce the documents at a time.
e-mail is an electronic mail; this is also a new technology that has made the sending of mail very fast without having to pass through the post office.
This unit will put you through how to achieve this.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • mail merge simple documents; and • send e-mail.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Mail Merging Mail merging is the process of sending document of same content to different group of persons.
There are tools and procedures to be followed in achieving this.
First and foremost, we are going to study the tools before it is applied in the merging process.
Mail Merging Tools 34BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Where would you get the tools?
Use the following process to get it: Click on Tools in the menu bar.
From the dropped down menu, click on Letters and Mailings, and click on Mail Merge Wizard.
A click on Mail Merge Wizard will show the following on the right hand side of the window: The first part expects you to select the document type you wish to work on.
You have letters, e-mail messages, envelopes, labels and Directory.
There is a small circle at the beginning of each of these; a click on any of the circles indicates the one selected.
In the example above, you will notice that there is a dot in the preceding circle to Letters that indicate that the document you wish to work on is a letter.
35BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Underneath shows further instructions on the highlighted document type; further down shows the steps to take, where you have ‘click next to continue’ Now click the message on the right hand side of the screen will show this: Read the new instructions.
Under ‘Select starting document’ there are options, click on the desired option.
There are three of those options – A click on the first one which is ‘use the current document’, means you have a document already on the screen.
A click on start from a template 36BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING means you want to choose from the existing templates to work with and the last ‘start from existing document’ means you want to use a file that is already saved.
A click on any of the three will give you a further directive on what to do.
A click on step 3 will show the following information: If ‘use an existing list’ is selected, it means you would have typed and saved the list you want to use.
In this case, click on ‘Browse’ and select the saved document file.
If ‘Select from Outlook contacts’ is selected; it will give you an opportunity to make appropriate selection.
The last part is ‘Type a new list’.
When this is clicked; it will give a directory given you an opportunity to type the desired list.
Continue in this way until you get to step 6 which is the last step.
To have a good depth of understanding on what we are discussing let’s use the following illustration.
Suppose you have the following letter to send to a group of applicants: 37BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Dear We write to congratulate you as one of the successful candidates that have been short listed for the position of ….. .
The date of interview is scheduled as follows: Date: Venue: Time: Please endeavour to keep to time.
Yours Sincerely, Manager In this letter, it is hoped that you wish to send the letter to each applicant by name e.g.
Dear Mrs Okonofua, Dear Mr Danjuma; and within the content there is going to be some variations like the position of ….
It means the dotted part should be filled with different positions.
Also the Date, Venue and Time of interview may not be the same for every body.
But for the fact that it will be a waste of time to be typing the letters one after the other there will be a way to fast tract it.
This is where mail merging becomes very useful.
To achieve this, follow the following: Type the fields i.e.
the areas where you wish to effect changes e.g.
Dear …, position of ….
What do you want to use to replace the dotted lines?
See the example below on the field created for the above letter.
38BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Dear Position Date Venue Time Mr Udoh Marketing 12th April, Conference 9.00 a.m.
Manager 2007 Room 1, Marketing Department Mrs Adeboye Marketing 12th April, Conference 10.00 a.m.
Manager 2007 Room 2, Marketing Department Ms Okoruwa Marketing 12th April, Conference 11.00 a.m.
Manager 2007 Room 3, Marketing Department Mr Danjuma Computer 13th April, Conference 9.00 a.m. Analyst 2007 Room 1, Computer Department Mr Fulani Computer 13th April, Conference 10.00 a.m. Analyst 2007 Room 2, Computer Department Mr Computer 13th April, Conference 11.00 a.m. Adegboyega Analyst 2007 Room 3, Computer Department Mr Osezele Protocol 15th April, Room 6, 9.00 a.m.
Officer 2007 Protocol Unit The headings created are to reflect the desired information required at different times.
The headings are – Dear, Position, Date, Venue and Time.
Save after typing.
Now follow the steps as indicated in the mail merge wizard.
Steps 1 and 2 have been explained above.
Step 3 Click on ‘existing list’ and click Browse or Select a different list (Shows lists of recipients).
Select the file name for the saved field.
From our example above, a click on the saved field would present thus: 39BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING a click on Select All will make the ticks in the box at the left hand side to appear, while a click on Clear All will clear all the ticks.
The ticks show that they are activated for use.
Click OK if you are satisfied with the produced list and if not click on Edit and make the necessary corrections before clicking on ok.
Step 4 Step 4 will show thus: This requests you to type the document, remember you have selected the 40BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING type of document you wish to type e.g.
letters.
So type your letter.
After which take the cursor to each point you want variety and click on more items and select as desired.
A click on ‘more items’ will show the headings created for the fields, see the example below: After insertion, it will appear thus: Where you have the inverted commas indicate the positions where the 41BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING information under those headings would be inserted.
Step 5 A click on step 5 will automatically insert the information in the desired places as shown below.
The letter in the above box is the letter going to the first recipient, Mr Udoh.
To get the letters going to the other recipients, click on the right directional arrow after recipient 1 as shown in the above box.
See the extract 42BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 43BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Go through the list of recipients’ information and the letters presented above for each recipient, you will discover that information has been slotted in the appropriate places.
In step 5, you can edit the list of recipients or delete the unwanted.
You can also find recipient.
All these information are provided on the right hand side on the screen while working except if you close with the close button.
Step 6 44BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Click on ‘Edit individual letters…’ if you want all the letters to run on without haven to click one by one, and click on ‘Print’ if you want all the letters printed.
There are short cuts tools in the menu bar once you lunch on mail merge wizard.
See below: Electronic mail (e-mail) This section would only give a briefing on how an electronic mail, which is usually referred to as e-mail is used.
An e-mail can not be used without the availability of the internet.
First the internet has to be lunched, select the e- mail tool.
Open your account if you do not have 45BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING one.
It is not compulsory that you do it alone; you may be assisted.
But if you already have an e-mail box, open your box and follow the instructions either to check your mail or compose your mail.
There are pertinent things that need to be noted, such as: • The format of typing.
It is necessary to present our e-mail in the appropriate format.
It should be noted that these mail are sometimes printed out, and even when they are not printed the format in which a document is presented does enhance the understanding of such document.
• The attached document must at all times be presented in the final format the document should appear.
• Where a continuity of a communication is required for reference purpose, do not delete the information received when making a reply.
Let the communication run on.
• Always remember to log off from your mail box when you are through with checking your mail.
Do some practice as you connect to the internet.
4.0 CONCLUSION Before you mail merge, get what you want to write and the different information that is going to the different recipients, and remember to follow the mail merge wizard steps.
In working on an e-mail, always present in the appropriate format so as to be appealing to the reader.
46BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 5.0 SUMMARY Mail merge is the process of sending document of same content to different group of persons.
To achieve a successful mail merge, first type the field in a tabular form and save in a desired destination; then click on the mail merge wizard and follow the steps therein.
There are six steps in the mail merge wizard; each step is followed with instruction, which need to be followed in order to achieve the desired goal.
Electronic mail (e-mail), which has been used to solve the problems encountered with the use of NIPOST.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Please send admission letters to the following people, using the format below: S/N Name/Address Department Course 1.
Iyabode Adeboye Vocational & Technical Edu.
B.Sc.Ed.
Bus.
Edu.
No 13 Ikorodu Rd Ojota 2.
Iyakubu Ajorin Social Science B.Sc.
Econs No 7 Aigbokhan St. Opoji Rd.
Ekpoma.
3.
David Mathew Sciences B.Sc.
Compt.
Sc.
No 67 Ijaye-Ogba 4.
Maria Okokobiko Arts B.A.
English Lang.
P.O.Box 1456 Kaduna 5.
Ilobekeme Omoyebaria Sciences B.Sc.
Mathematics P.M.B.
267 Abuja 6.
Edith Igue Vocational & Technical Edu B.Sc.Ed.
Buiding Tec P.O.Box 568 Ikeja 7.
Iyobosa Osanyende Sciences B.Sc.
Zoology P.O.Box 55 Ilorin 8.
Utiemute Kebena Arts B.A.
History P. O.
Box 77 Damaturu 9.
Kelvin Okoro Social Sciences B.Sc.
Marketing P.O.
Box 675 Aba 10.
Durojaye Amure Vocational & Technical Edu.
B.Sc.Ed.
Home Econs P.O.
Box 33 47BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Mushin – Lagos Address Dear ….
We write to congratulate you on your success at the interview you attended in our institution on Monday 14th May, 2007.
As a follow up of the interview you have been offered admission in the department of …… to study …… Should you accept the offer, kindly forward a letter of acceptance addressed to the Registrar two weeks from the date of receipt.
Yours faithfully, Akudo, P.S.
(Mrs) Registrar 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
48BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING UNIT 5 SPEECHES AND REPORTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Apart from the various topics we have discussed in the previous units, there are still other vital topics that need to be discussed which include Speeches and Reports.
We make speeches and give reports on a daily basis.
This is done either through oral or written medium.
This unit will lay emphasis on the written pattern by introducing you to how speeches and reports should be presented in printed form.
Pick copies of typed speeches and reports.
Go through them and make your observations in the presentation.
Discuss your observations with your facilitator or colleagues.
Note your points and critique after reading through the Main Content of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the difference between speeches and report; and • type speeches and reports.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Speeches There are rules guiding the typing of speeches, for typed speeches to be made easy to read and understood.
This section is not intended to teach us how to write a speech but it is designed to teach us how to present our speeches in a typed format to the audience.
49BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Paper Size Use A4 Portrait size of paper.
Line Spacing Use double line spacing; you may however, use a minimum one and half line spacing and not single line spacing.
But where you wish to type in single line spacing, either you choose a font type that is bigger than the normal font types like Times New Romans or Arial or use the normal font type and increase the font size from the normal font size of 12 to 14.
The purpose of this is to ensure that reading would be made easy for the readers.
Everyone has different sighting level, therefore the speech should be prepared in such a way that the readers would not have to strain their eyes so much before they can read, especially the person making the speech.
Margin You may set equal margins at one inch or top and left margins one inch, right and bottom margins half an inch.
Bold or italicize or underscore words that need emphasis.
Emphasis and Font Size If the speech is to be read, find out if the reader may want to have some pauses, gesticulations, etc.
Should there be any, leave wider side margins for reminders.
If it is to be printed on transparencies, use font size 14 or more and type in such a way that each transparency carries a whole idea.
Same may be applicable when preparing slides; the size of the audience should be considered as well; that would be part of the consideration on the font size to use.
When a large number of audience is to be reached, use higher font size for perfect sighting wherever the audience is seated.
Continuation Sheet 50BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Should there be a continuation sheet, you may use catchword but not the next page number as catchword.
Let the numbering of the pages start from the second page.
Apart from the page numbering at the footer, you may also let the name of the person making the speech be there or the title of the speech to appear at the foot of all the pages except the first page because it already carries the title.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 From what you have learnt so far on speeches, critique the speeches you read at the introduction of this unit and discuss with your colleagues and facilitator.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Type the following with appropriate display: It gives me great pleasure to send my goodwill message to the Governing Council, Senate, Staff and Students of the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) on the occasion of the Grand Opening and formal commissioning of its headquarters in Lagos by Mr. President, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo.
Nigeria, with a population of about 140 million cannot but place emphasis on a lot of social and economic services that promote good governance, equity, equality, social justice, alleviate poverty and eliminate illiteracy.
It is in this regard that the administration of Obasanjo, since it inception in 1999, has put premium on reforms within the public sector as a sure road to fulfilling its commitment to improve the lot of all Nigerians no matter who they are, where they are and what they do.
As desirable and brilliant as they are, none of the reforms in all other sectors will blossom without a solid reform in the education sector as a basis for driving the total development of the nation.
It is in this regard that, on assumption of office as the Federal Minister of Education in 2006, my team and I vigorously embarked on a wide range of reforms in the education sector.
These reforms not only cut across the various levels of education (basic, secondary and tertiary) they also target several other specific niches which will underscore government's commitment to enhancing access to educational opportunities in Nigeria of today and of several decades to come.
A distinguishing feature of these reforms is the private public partnership initiative which invites a comprehensive community-wide involvement in the stakes that have such profound effect in the lives of all Nigerians.
At the tertiary level, we have restructured the regulatory mechanisms and agencies to further pursue quality, created some city universities and merged colleges of education and polytechnics with Federal Government universities within their neighbourhood.
Government is now on the path of creating some special universities to further meet the demands of Nigeria for higher education in a country where we can only boast of less than 2 percent participatory rate in higher education.
The foresight of the Federal Government in setting up NOUN in 2003 is a strong message to the whole world that Nigeria has put its trust on mass higher education order to find answer to the realization of the Millennium Development Goals, Education For All and the eradication of illiteracy.
With the humble strides already made by NOUN, which are situated within the current climate of educational reforms, I have no doubt that skeptics and critics of the ongoing reforms will have reason to accept that the future of the entity called Nigeria is greater and far more important than short sighted individual and sectional interests.
Nigeria deserves and Nigerians are right in demanding for an emancipatory path towards liberation from the shackles of ignorance.
I am therefore very proud that NOUN, as a major player in this regards has come of age and should begin to blossom.
I wish to 51BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING congratulate Nigeria for this revolutionary step in its fulfillment of its pact with Nigerians on the use of non-conventional innovative way of taking education to the people no mater their circumstances.
Long live the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
( Culled from the Honourable Minister of Education (Mrs. Obiageli Ezekwesile) message sent to National Open University of Nigeria on its Special convocation Ceremony held on the 13th March, ) 2007 Report In typing a report note the following: Paper Size Use A4 portrait paper size except when there is a need to make diagrammatic illustrations; landscape could be use.
Line Spacing/Paragraph Heading Use single line spacing and at the most one and half line spacing and preferably blocked style of paragraph and shoulder headings.
Major headings should be typed in capital headings and either bold or underscore and not the two at the same time.
The sub headings could be typed in initial capitals, bold or underscore.
But whereby there is a house style format, such house style may be adopted.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Type a copy of the following report with appropriate line spacing Foreign Exchange Monitoring The CBN carried out the routine examination of foreign exchange operations of 42 commercial and merchant banks and 15 special investigations of foreign exchange related transactions on banks.
Also, spot checks were carried out on banks to determine how CBN AFEM intervention sales were utilized by them.
The result revealed that there was an astronomical increase in the demand for Business Travel Allowance (BTA)/Personal Travel Allowance (PTA) following the removal of ceilings by the Federal Government.
Consequently, those banks that demanded for and allocated unreasonable amounts of foreign exchange in respect of BTA/PTA to their customers 52BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING were asked to refund the excess to the CBN.
Also, 3 banks were banned from participating in the AFEM for various infractions on the regulations, ranging from collection of unauthorised charges from customers to failure to repatriate to the CBN, interest earned on FEM accounts accruing to the Bank.
Fourteen banks paid a total of Mi.4 million as penalties for various infractions of foreign exchange regulations.
4.0 CONCLUSION In the typing of speeches and reports, use appropriate line spacing and format considering the audience in question.
Use A4 portrait size of paper and set out the paragraphs and headings orderly to make the reading and understanding easy.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit is not designed to teach you how to write speeches and reports rather it is designed to teach you on how speeches and reports should be presented in a typed format.
Though, some of the things to be learnt could enhance writing of speeches and reports.
The pertinent things to consider in presentation of speeches and reports includes: the type of paper size to be used, line spacing, heading and paragraph formatting.
The purpose of all these is to make reading and understanding easy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Type the following with appropriate corrections and style of display: I am very pleased to send this goodwill message to the Governing Council, Senate, Staff and Students of the National Open University of Nigeria on this historic occasion of the formal Grand Opening and Commissioning of the University by the President and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of Nigeria, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, GCFR.
of priorities to be attended to, the visionary commitment of Mr. President in establishing NOUN as the answer to the tremendous demand for mass higher education in Nigeria.
My first official visit as Minister was to NOUN headquarters to appraise the state of development and it left me in no doubt that government was in the right direction towards providing alternative mode of instruction to all in order to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
It is exciting and fulfilling to note that NOUN has so quickly emerged from its difficult pioneering years to set itself on the sure road towards national and global success.
This is no doubt a tremendous achievement for a government determined to use education as a sound foundation for development and emancipation of its people especially those who have in previous years been disadvantaged and marginalised with regard to access to higher education.
I commend the Vice Chancellor for the quiet but sure and effective manner he has brought his professional expertise on open and distance learning to bear on the founding of the University.
I wish to use this forum to heartily congratulate Mr President for this bold initiative and to join millions of Nigerians in wishing NOUN a steady growth and successful planting of open and distance learning in the West African sub-region.
When I assumed responsibility as Minister of Education in 2005, I quickly realised among the deluge 53BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING ( Culled from the message of Former Honourable Minister of Education, May 2005 - September 2006 in National Open University of Nigeria on its Special convocation Ceremony held on the 13th March, 2007) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
54BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING MODULE 2 The uniqueness of every typed or printed document is the display manner.
The way and manner a document is displayed determines how well such document would appeal to the readers.
Display is not carried out in the same way in all documents; the type of document to be typed determines the kind of display that should be used.
The Units under this module are: Unit 1 Display Unit 2 Document Enhancement Unit 3 Multiple Columns on a Page/Multiple Pages UNIT 1 DISPLAY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 55BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 1.0 INTRODUCTION As earlier mentioned in the introduction, there are different types of display.
The kind of document to be typed determines the type of display that should be used in that document.
In this unit, the following documents would be discussed: • Draft • Centering – Horizontal and Vertical • Inset matters • Elision (omission of a letter), Ellipsis (omission of words) • Form Layout • Menu • Itineraries • Logo • Numbering/Bullets • Boarders • Notice of meeting • Allocating space • Leader dots/The tabs dialog box options (Tap stop position, left, center, right, decimal, leader – none).
• Folded Leaflet • Invoices • Special characters (symbols) • Curriculum vitae • Fractions (sloping and vulgar) • Tear-off portion • Enumeration (Arabic, Decimal and Roman • Chart (Flow, organization) • Balance sheet • Bibliography/References 2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • apply appropriate display in the typing of simple documents of various kinds.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Draft 56BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING There are two types of draft.
A draft may be typed to see the exact way the document would look at the end of typing or for amendment.
If a draft is typed for the purpose of the former, use the exact line spacing and display.
But where a draft is typed for amendment, use double or two and half or treble line spacing in typing.
The purpose is for the writer to have sufficient space for corrections.
Always type the word ‘DRAFT' on top of every draft you are typing.
A draft of any document could be typed.
Being a draft does not mean it should not follow the document format; the format of the document is maintained but provision is made for corrections.
Centering – Horizontal and Vertical Documents are more appreciable when they are well displayed on the paper.
There are two basic ways our documents are centered on paper; it is either horizontal or vertical e.g.
To achieve this in Microsoft word, there is no automatic centering tool that can be used rather use the physical eyes in gauging the centering, this could be further ascertained by using the print preview.
It is easier to achieve this in other packages like Microsoft Excel.
Let’s see the difference of what occurs in the following procedure between Microsoft words and excel: 1.
Click on file 57BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 2.
From the drop down menu, click on page set up 58BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 59BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 3.
You will find horizontal and vertical centering under margins in some software and like earlier said it is not available in Microsoft word.
Compare the excel and word below: Microsoft Word 60BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Microsoft Excel You will observe that there is provision for automatic centering in Microsoft Excel which is not available in Microsoft Word.
4.
The document will automatically center horizontally and vertically when the box is selected.
But whereby you want only one of them, click as desired.
Inset matters Inset matters are typed in single line spacing at the center of the document.
You may reduce the font size from the size used in typing the other parts of the document, and at the same time italicize the inset if it is a text.
Any quotation that goes beyond three lines should be typed as an inset.
If the body of the document is typed in single line spacing, give one clear space before and after the inset and if it typed in one and half line spacing give 2 clear spaces by simply pressing the Enter key twice and if it is typed in double line spacing, give three clear spaces, all you need to do is to press the Enter key twice.
The styles of typing (blocked or indented) do not have any effect on the typing of inset matter.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Type the following text.
To develop behavioural objectives a learning task must be broken down into smaller components through analysis into specific measurable tasks.
The learning success may be measured by tests developed to measure each objective.
The advent of behavioural objectives can be traced back to the Elder Sophists of ancient Greece, Cicero, Herbart and Spencer, but Franklin Bobbitt developed the modern concept of behavioural objectives in the early 1900s (Saettler 1990 in Mergel 1998).
The behavioural objectives are stated to elicit a desired behaviour from 61BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING the topic in question.
Well stated behavioural objectives give further guide to the producer.
The producer at each stage in the production process would always ask the questions ‘Would the learner achieve the desired behaviour through this process?
What method would make the learners attain the desired behaviour?
The producer considers the set objectives each time a new idea is to be incorporated into the process of production.
Further to this, Bloom emphasise the need.
Bloom’s Taxomomy of Learning – in 1956 Bloom and his colleagues began the development of a taxonomy in the cognitive, attitudinal (affective) and psychomotor domains.
By the late 1960’s most teachers were writing and using behavioural objectives.
There were, of course, people who questioned the breaking down of subject material into small parts, believing that it would lead away from an understanding of the “whole” (Saettler 1990 in Mergel 1998).
A well stated behavioural objective would serve as a guide through out the process of designing an instruction.
Elision (omission of a letter), Ellipsis (omission of words) Elision means omission of a letter(s) in a word e.g.
won't for would not, can't for cannot.
In typewriting, such abbreviations of words are not allowed in formal documents.
They must be typed in full.
Ellipsis means omission of word(s).
The omission may be at the beginning, middle or ending.
It is usually represented by three dots (…) to show that something is missing.
It is typed as four dots (….)
if the ellipsis ends a sentence, the fourth dot is the normal full stop typed at the end of a sentence.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Type the following words in full: i. Haven’t ii.
can’t iii.
wouldn’t iv.
aren’t Form Layout In designing a form, the following should be noted: 62BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING • Know the purpose of the form.
• Have accurate knowledge of the content.
• Choose a particular layout that is explicit.
When these facts are known then mind: • The line spacing.
Use one and half or double line spacing to create space for writing.
The space created must not be too wide or too narrow for writing.
Use the ‘line' in the ‘Draw Tool' to rule the lines be it dots or straight lines.
With this you can easily fill the spaces with the use of computer without much difficulty.
• Present information in an unambiguous manner.
• You may use ruled lines or dotted lines.
• Where information is to be typed in with the use of the machine, the designed form may be saved in the machine to be retrieved and worked on when need be.
All that need to be done is to take the cursor to the space provided.
And when the form is already in the hard copy, use the manual ruler to measure the hard copy form and then use the computer ruler to gauge the line of typing so that when it printed on the form after typing, it will fall into the appropriate space provided for the information.
• The space between the typed text and the beginning of the space created should be at least 2 clear spaces and at most 4 clear spaces e.g.
the space between ‘NAME' and the beginning of the line in the example below.
E.G.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Type the following: Insurance Renewal Form a.
Name: ……………………………………….
Address: …………………………………….. ……………………………………..
Car Model: …………………………………..
Number: …………………………………….. Policy Number: ……………………………... 63 Fully Comprehensive: YES NO Third Party: YES NOBED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING b.
Get a hard copy form, and use the personal computer to fill in the required information.
Menu Sometimes we may need to have display of menu.
In doing this take note of the following: 1.
Type in either blocked or indented style.
2.
Type in single line spacing.
3.
Choose a desired font and font size.
4.
Give equal spacing between courses.
5.
Use appreciable emphasis 64BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING You can make your typing look more attractive by inserting pictures from Clip Art and filling the background and fonts with colours.
We will talk more on this later.
Itineraries There are two types of itineraries – appointment itineraries and travel itineraries.
An itinerary is prepared to serve as a guide to an employer or a boss.
An appointment itineraries contain a day's schedule.
While travel itineraries contains travel appointment.
These are typed in columns.
The heading may be typed as shoulder or side heading.
Give two clear spaces between the heading and the column.
The headings may be typed in capitals and bold.
Logo This is a symbol or trademark of an organization.
You can insert pictures from Clip Art or use drawing tools to create it.
E.g.
The best software to create logo is desktop publishing tools.
Numbering/Bullets Numbers and Bullets are used for emphasis or itemization.
The style of display determines the position of the numbering or bullets.
When you are using a blocked style, let the numbering be blocked as well and when you are using an indented style, indent the numbering.
E.g.
65BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING There are two types of numbering, page numbering and numbering within the body of a document.
What we have above is the numbering within the body of a document.
Take note of the following when numbering within a document: 1.
The space given between the text and itemization.
When the body of the text is typed in single line spacing, give one clear space before and after itemization.
If the line spacing is set in one and half or double line spacing, press the space bar twice before and after the itemization.
2.
Be consistent with the space given.
3.
When there is a sub outline number, choose an appropriate outline.
To insert Numbering/bullets do the following: 1.
Click on Format.
66BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 2.
From the drop down menu, click on Bullet and Numbering.
1.
From the dialog box click the desired option – Bullet, Numbered, Outline numbered and List Styles.
67BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Dialog box of bulleted Dialog box of outline numbered 68BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Dialog box of outline numbered Dialog box of List Styles 4.
Click the desired square and click O.K.
69BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING If it is page numbering, it is not advisable to start numbering from the first page if it is an official document.
Let the numbering start from the second page.
But the second page has to read page two e.g.
To insert a page number, do the following: 1.
Click Insert.
2.
From the drop down menu, click Page Numbers.
70BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 3.
From the dialog box, follow the instruction and choose as desired.
What do I do when I want to clear my page numbers?
Use the header and footer.
Click on header and footer and select the number and press the delete key.
Num ber to be delet ed Boarders Sometimes we need to make our documents look attractive therefore create a boarder around our typed document.
To create boarders, do the following: • Click on Format.
71BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING • From the drop down menu, click on Borders and Shading • From the dialog box click on boarders or page borders or shading.
• If you want the border to be on a page, click page border so that you can use the Art design to enhance your document.
Follow the instructions in the dialog box and apply to your document 72BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Notice of meeting In formal meetings, notices are sent to those to attend the meeting.
The notice should contain the agenda, date, time and venue of the meeting.
You may type notice of meeting in blocked or indented style with open or closed punctuation.
In formal notice of meeting, the chairman’s agenda is sometimes typed differently from others so as to create space for side comment(s).
See the following examples: Give appropriate spacing between paragraphs.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Type the following: Taxonomic Analysis of Learning Behaviours • Bloom’s Taxonomy of Learning – in 1956 Bloom and his colleagues began the development of a taxonomy in the cognitive, attitudinal (affective) and psychomotor domains.
Many people are familiar with Bloom’s Cognitive taxonomy: - knowledge - comprehension - application - analysis - synthesis - evaluation • Gagne’s Taxonomy of Learning – Robert Gagne developed his taxonomy of learning in 1972.
Gagne’s taxonomy comprised of five categories: - verbal information - intellectual skill 73BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING - cognitive strategy - attitude - motor skill • Gagne’s and Brigg’s Model - Action - Object - Situation - Tools and Constraints - Capability to be Learned Allocating space There are times we need to leave space within the document either for photographs, thumb print or for some other purposes.
To have appropriate allocation of space, first determine the purpose for leaving that space, then determine the amount of space that need to be left.
With the use of the ruler on the screen take the desired measurement.
Click on the square or text box in the drawing tool to draw the required space.
When you use the text box, you can easily type within the box, but when you use the square box it will not accept text.
To type text within it, take the cursor to the box and click the right button on the mouse, from the displayed menu click on ‘add text' and type as desired.
Let’s view the following examples: Text Box A click on this can not immediately give you an access to add text except you right click to add text.
74BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING See example: click on the rectangle and draw in the desired space and put your mouse in the box and right click, there will be a dropped down menu, in the dropped down menu select ‘Add Text’, once that is down, a cursor will immediately appear in the rectangular box.
See the second box below.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Type the following: Personal Data Form Name: ……………………………………………..
Address: …………………………………………...
Attach your recent …………………………………………... passport Next of Kin: ……………………………………….
State the relationship Address of next of kin: ……………………………………..................... ………………………………………………….
75BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Leader dots/The tabs dialog box options (Tap stop position, left, center, right, decimal, leader – none) Leader dots are basically used to guide the eyes from one item to the other.
To type leader dots with the aid of already formatted dots, Click on Format, click on paragraph, click on tab option, from the dialog box select as desired.
But when you want to type it manually do the following: • One dot with three spaces in-between e.g.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
• Two dots with three spaces in-between e.g... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • Three dots with two spaces in-between e.g.
… … … … … … … • Continuous dot, type without space e.g.
……………………….. • This is the simplest and it is recommended for use except for special instruction.
• Where by an item goes more than a line, let the leader dots go with the last line.
• Where you are using 1 to 3 above, you must ensure alignment of the dots.
• Leave at least two character spaces before the leader dots.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Type a copy of the following: Module 1 Page Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia Unit 1 Definition of Terms ………………………… 1 – 7 Unit 2 Importance of Multimedia Systems ….…… 8 – 11 Unit 3 Teachers’ Expectations in the Use of Multimedia …………………………………… 12 – 14 Unit 4 Students’ Expectations in the use of Multimedia …………………………………… 15 – 17 Unit 5 Multimedia Technology in the Classroom 18 – 20 Module 2 Multimedia Production Unit 1 Introduction to Multimedia Production…… 21 – 40 Unit 2 Tools Required in Multimedia Production 41 – 50 Unit 3 Production Procedure ………..…………….. 51 – 60 Unit 4 Multimedia Delivery ………………………... 61 – 64 76BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Unit 5 Problems & Solutions in Multimedia....….. 65 – 69 Folded Leaflet The nature of the document to be typed on a folded leaflet determines the kind of display that may be used.
To have an accurate typing on the right side of a folded leaflet, test run your print if you are not very used to the side of paper that is printed when fed into the printer.
The purpose of this is to enable you mark out the page numbers especially on the reverse side.
Determine the size of paper required and into how many folds.
It is most appropriate to use ‘Columns’ under ‘ Format’.
You will see more of this later.
One important thing to note is that though the prints will go into one paper, the typing may not be done on one page on the screen.
Let’s consider the following: Let assume that the above is an A4 paper folded into two equal parts, making four pages.
After folding, the back page will be numbers 4 and 1 while the front page will be numbers 2 and 3.
It will appear thus: When typing on the screens do the following: 1.
From page set up, select A4 Landscape.
2.
From Format, click on ‘Columns’ and select 2 from the dialog box.
3.
Ensure you type the information on the right page using the 77BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING physical guide that you have on paper.
4.
When you are through with the first two pages, take the cursor to the next page on the screen and type the next two pages.
5.
At the time of printing, do not send the two pages for print at once.
If you do that the pages will print on separate sheets.
Remember you want the four pages to be on one sheet.
Therefore send the pages for print one after the other.
Send the first page, at the end of print, turn the reverse side of the paper and re-insert into the printer, while doing this be conscious of the matching pages, then send the second page for print.
The same is applicable if you are to fold A4 landscape paper into three folds as it appear thus: We will discuss more on multiple columns on a page in a subsequent unit.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 Type a four page leaflet using the following information: Front Page A profile National Open University of Nigeria Inside Page One Justification for Open and Distance Education in Nigeria In Nigeria, the adoption and deployment of open and distance education delivery systems is just on several grounds.
These include: Provision of Education For All and Promotion of Lifelong Learning 78BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Filling the gap created by the closure of Outreach/Satellite Campuses Cost effectiveness Improved economic of scale Bullet these Flexibility of delivery system points Maximum utilisation of academic personnel On the job teacher training Poverty eradication Vocational and life long education Provision of non-formal education Reaching the 'unreached'.
Inside Page Two B.Sc.
Ed 1.
Integrated Science 2.
Biology Let B.A.Ed 3.
Physics be at the 4.
Chemistry 5.
Mathematics side of B.Sc.
6.
Agricultural Science Ed 7.
Information Technology for Teachers 8.
Vocational Technical Education 9. Business Studies B.A.
Ed 1.
Early Childhood Education 2.
Primary Education 3 .French 4 .English Invoices Type in single line spacing and apply the rule of typing tabulation which we have discussed in one of the previous units.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 8 Get a copy of an invoice from a supplier and type, using the format learnt.
Special Characters (Symbols) There are some characters or symbols that you may not find on the keyboard.
For such characters or symbols click on ‘Insert' on the menu bar and from the drop down menu, click on ‘Symbol', from the dialog box, choose as desired.
If the symbol desired is not on the displayed box, scroll the button on the ‘font' box within the displayed dialog box.
Put the cursor in the point you want the symbol.
After clicking on the symbol click insert and then close to come out of the environment.
79BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Curriculum vitae Mixed display is allowed in typing curriculum vitae.
You may use both indented and blocked styles.
Shoulder or side heading can be use.
But which ever style that is used; the information must be displayed in such a way that there would not be any conflict of information by the reader.
Appropriate spacing is equally required.
The words – ‘Curriculum Vitae’ must be typed at the top in capital and bold letters.
Word Arts can also be use.
(We will talk more about Word Arts later).
Fractions (Sloping and Vulgar) Most fractions may be found under ‘symbol’ but fractions like slopping and vulgar may not be there, therefore, they could be typed manually.
See below: 80BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING In addition to this, Equation Editor can also be used in typing higher scientific symbols.
To get equation editor click on Tools - from the dropped down menu, click on customize; a dropped down menu will appear.
From the dropped down menu click on Insert, then Equation Editor.
Left click on the Equation Editor without releasing your hand and move it to Standard Tool Bar in the menu bar.
Click on it and work with the tools.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 9 Type the following: 81BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING i.
6 9 + 8 10 8 12 - 13 65 22 ii.
4 7 3 x 6 5 9 Tear-off portion Sometimes, documents are designed in such a way that some parts may be detached for an onward transmission.
There should be demarcation between the text and the detached part.
Use broken or straight lines to show the line of demarcation.
Click on the line in the Drawing tool at the bottom of the screen.
If it does not appear on the screen click on View in the menu bar and click on Toolbars; then appears a dropped down menu, from the dropped down menu click on Drawing and it will automatically appear on the screen.
View the selection of the Drawing tool below: Select this and rule a straight line, should you want to make it a broken line, click on the rule line and select desired option from the ‘dash style' from the drawing tool.
E.g.
You will observe two small circles at the edges that show that the line is highlighted.
If it is not highlighted, you can not effect the broken lines, so click on it and make sure it is highlighted and then click on the following tool and make adequate selection: 82BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Enumeration (Arabic, Decimal and Roman) Note the following: • Alignment of numbers is automatic.
• You may put the numbering in brackets or end them with a full stop.
• You may use letters in place of numbers.
• Distinguished subdivisions of enumerated items by applying say: 4.1 4.2 4.3 Should there be further subdivision of the above, follow this: 4.1.1.
4.1.2.
4.1.3.
• You may or may not leave space between enumerated items.
But leave space before and after enumeration.
• You may use any of these punctuations before enumeration – colon (:), which is commonly used, full stop (.
), a colon and dash (:-), 83BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING which is seldom used today, it is regarded as old fashioned.
In all, the sense of writing determines the punctuation to use.
• Be consistent with the style of spacing, display and punctuation.
• You may use the already formatted enumeration.
To achieve this, click on ‘Format', click on ‘Bullets and Numbering', from the dialog box click on ‘numbered' or ‘outline numbered', click on the desired option and click O.K.
You may refresh your memory with the discussion on Pagination above.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 10 Type a copy of the following: Sale!
Sale!!
Sale!!!
The following houses are available for sale at Magodo Phase II, Ikeja-Lagos.
• Fully detached 4 bedroom duplex • Semi detached 4 bedroom duplex • Fully detached 3 bedroom bungalow • Semi detached 3 bedroom bungalow • Fully detached 2 bedroom bungalow • Semi detached 2 bedroom bungalow • 2 bedroom terrace Interested members should fill the space provided below.
Detach and mail to the concerned address.
Name: …………………………………………………………………………………….
Address: …………………………………………………………………………………..
Type of Property: ………………………………………………………………………… Tel.
No.
…………………………………………………………………………………….
Chart (Flow, organization) 84BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Charts differ from organization to organization.
Whichever way it goes, the same tools are required for typing.
Use the text box, the square shape, the oval shape, Auto Shapes, Draw, lines with variations and colours all from the Drawing tool.
If the Drawing tool is not already displayed on the screen, click on ‘View', from the drop down menu click on ‘Toolbars' and click on ‘Drawing', it will automatically appear on the screen then pick as desired.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 11 Type the following: is which Audio typing typing from dictation has previously been recorded Term to be Class to which the Points which defined term belongs differentiate the term from other terms in Balance sheet the same class Most financial statements are typed in rows and columns and the content are usually very many, because of the volume of the content.
Note • A4 landscape is often used.
• Use tab to align the column.
• Use single line spacing.
• Centre the text vertically and horizontally on paper.
• The volume of work determines the margins to be left.
• More voluminous content should be typed with Excel package.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 12 Get a copy of a balance sheet from any accounting proceedings and type, using the format taught.
Bibliography/References These are lists of books, journals, magazines or newspaper articles included at the end of thesis, project or reports.
Type the reference in alphabetical order, with the name of the author first, the year of publication in bracket, the title of the text, the place of publication and the publisher.
85BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING The first or second line of reference may be indented.
Use single line spacing and give one clear space in-between reference.
In Nigeria, this is the most commonly used format and it is called APA (American Psychological Association).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 13 Type a copy of the following on A5 paper: Usha V. R, Director (2003).
Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (CEMCA).New Delhi.
C:\Documents and Settings\User\Desktop\Technology - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.htm.
Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th ed.
Maidenhead – Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. 4.0 CONCLUSION From all the discussions, you will observe that each document has its peculiarity in display.
But in all, certain things are vital such as the line spacing, paragraphing, font type, font size, sizes of paper and centering.
Try to recall all that we have learnt in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY Display is a way of making our document attractive and presentable to our readers.
Any document that is lacking a good display may mislead the readers understanding and may equally discourage the readers from reading.
It is therefore important that we display our documents in a very attractive and self explained manner.
There are different tools that are provided in the computer to assist in achieving these skills such as the use of Drawing Tools, Standard and Formatting tools.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Type a copy of the following references with appropriate display.
86BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 1.
Connolly, Peter (ed.)
1999.
Approaches to the Study of Religion Cassell, London and New York.
2.
Goring, Rosemary (ed.)
1992.
Dictionary of Beliefs and Religions Wordsworth Reference, Ware, Herefordshire.
3.
Hopfe, Lewis M. 1994.
Religions of the World (6th Edition), Macmillan College Publishing Company, New York/Maxwell Macmillan Canada, Toronto.
4.
Matthews, Warren.
1998.
World Religions.
West Publishing Company, New York, Los Angeles & San Francisco.
5.
Nigosian, S.A. 1994.
World Faiths.
(2nd Edition), St. Martin’s Press, New York.
6.
Onibere, Oseovo.
1981.
Rudimentary Study of Religion.
Olasode Press, Ile-Ife, Nigeria.
7.
Waardenburg, Jacques.
1999.
Classical Approaches to the Study of Religion: Aims, Methods and Theories of Research.
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin & New York 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
87BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING UNIT 2 DOCUMENT ENHANCEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION So far we have discussed the normal way of presenting different types of document.
Apart from these different forms, the documents could be improved upon either by making it more attractive or use some enhancing tools to make it more explicit.
This unit will discuss the 88BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING various ways these could be achieved.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • present documents in different forms; and • use different enhancing tools appropriately.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Drawing Tools Drawing tools are tools provided in Microsoft word to make your document look great or to make it more explicit.
How can I achieve this?
See the following: Ensure that Drawing Tools appear on the screen.
What do I do if it does not appear?
Click on view: after clicking on it the following dropped down menu will appear: 89BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING You will notice, there are two types of dropped down menu.
In the first one, you will see the toolbars.
A click on it shows the second dropped down menu; if you look through the dropped down menu, some items are highlighted while others are not.
The highlighted items are the only ones that will appear on the screen.
Drawing is among those not highlighted, so make Drawing appear on the screen, click on Drawing to highlight it and it will immediately appear usually at the bottom of the screen.
See the example below: What can I achieve with the Drawing Tools?
Now let’s see what we can achieve with each icon: a click on any of these tools will produce a tool box with the inscription, create your drawing here: 90BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING click inside the box and drag the mouse and the shape will be attained e.g.
click on the attained shape without releasing your hand move it to the desired position.
You can also draw directly in the desired position you wish the diagram to be without first drawing it in the box.
You will observe that there are small dots around the circle shape in the tool box while the square does not have.
This means the circle is highlighted and the square is not, you can only have more effect on the highlighted one.
The shape has to be highlighted any time you need to carry out more effect on it.
To add text in a shape like rectangular or oval, right click, and select add text from the dropped down menu e.g.
91BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING a click on Add Text will now make the shape appear thus: with this you can type in any text of your choice.
To delete any shape, click on it and press the delete key.
Practice this in your computer, follow the explanations.
How did you find the practice?
Fair.
That is a very good beginning.
Practice more of it and you will acquire the mastering you need.
This is a text box.
Click and type within the box e.g.
a click on the scroll button and will produce: 92BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING This sign shows there are still more items.
Click on it to show all the items The full will appear thus: Let’s have some practice from the dropped menu above, let’s pick the first tool – Group.
Use this tool when you want to make several shapes as one e.g.
let’s draw rectangular and oval shapes with connecting arrows: 93BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Should you need to move it to another environment, you need to click on it and move.
But in this case because they are not grouped, if you click on it they will not all be highlighted at a time, it means you will only be able to move them one by one and that becomes more cumbersome because it calls for another arrangement.
Now let’s click on it you will observe that it is only one shape that is highlighted.
Now let’s group and see what will happen.
To group, click on this shape - (Pick Tool) among the Drawing Tools and use it to draw a rectangle around all the shapes.
Once this is down, you will achieve: with this all the shapes are highlighted at once.
Now click on the scroll button on Draw and click on group 94BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Compare the Group in this dropped down menu and the one in the one above, you will observe that the Group in this last dropped down menu is highlighted whereas the other is not.
This is because you have use the pick tool to select all items.
Note, after selecting with the pick tool, you may not be able to get back to your normal text typing, so you have to re-click on the pick tool and continue the normal text.
Another interesting part is the AutoShape Tools a click on it will show the following dropped down menu 95BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING to the right of every item in the dropped down menu, there are arrows.
A click on any of the items, a dropped down menu will appear, click the desired shape and click on the part of the document where you want the shape to appear, click and drag the mouse to print in the shape e.g.
You can always enhance your shapes by adding text; to add text right click and click on Add Text from the dropped down menu, you can fill in colours or change the colour of the text to any other desired colour by clicking on any of these tools: But always highlight the shape or text before clicking on the said tools e.g.
96BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING To highlight a shape, just click on it and you will observe the dots around it, and then click on the fill tool and it will appear thus: select any colour so desired and the shape will appear thus: click any part of the document apart from the shape to remove the dots.
When this is done, the shape will appear thus: 97BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING If it is a text, highlight the text thus: select the font colour and click on desired colour from the dropped down menu, the text will then appear thus: If you do not highlight before clicking on any of the tools it will appear blank: 98BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING The straight line shape can be enhanced.
Draw a straight line and highlight click on any of the following tools: to achieve desired lines and arrows and select as desired e.g.
lets select the broken lines, a click on it will appear thus: click on the desired line and you will achieve this: 99BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING The text box can be enhanced with any of the following tools: How?
Click on the text box and draw the box click on the said tools and select a desired shape or 100BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING the text box will then appear thus: Note: The appearance is dependent on the selected style or pattern.
You can also make the line of the text box bigger by selecting from the line options .
As usual highlight the text box and click on the line option to select desired line e.g.
101BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Depending on the selected line, the box may appear thus: Did you follow the explanations?
Now try to practice each of them and compare with what you have just learnt.
Do this until you are comfortable with your practice.
The other tools left are: This is shortcut to insert wordArt.
A click on it will show the following box: 102BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING MANAGING DOCUMENTS AND CUSTOMIZING WORD The highlights on this session include: • What document properties are • Where to locate and change a document's properties • How to request the spell and grammar checker • Why you need to proof documents manually despite Word proofing tools.
• How to customize Word to behave the way you want.
Document Properties A property is information related to a particular document.
To get property dialog box, select File/properties.
On the properties dialog box, you find: • General – Contains the document's file information, including the date and time you created, last modified, and last accessed the document.
103BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING • Summary – Tracks a document title, author (your name by default), keywords, and comment notes.
• Statistics – Tracks the document's numeric statistics, such as character, word and page counts, and total amount of editing time consumed for the document.
• Contents – Describe the parts of your document, such as the header, body and footer.
• Custom – Keeps track of information you want in the order you specify.
Some properties are available elsewhere in Word.
For example, you can find a document's statistics, such as word and paragraph counts, by selecting Tools/Word count.
4.0 CONCLUSION As you type, look for ways to make your presentation more appreciable and to the understanding of the reader(s).
Avoid ambiguity in display and the type of artistic forms selected for the text.
Enhancement of document could be done while the work is going on or when the job has been completed.
Any method is acceptable it all depends on the one you finds more suitable.
5.0 SUMMARY Enhancement of documents is the process through which Microsoft tools like Draw, AutoShape, WordArt etc are used to make our documents more presentable.
It is also important for us to know that the enhancement should not be too much, for too much of it may make it lose its beauty, therefore you should mind how these tools are used when you want to make your documents presentable and understandable.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Draw the following shapes: OFFICE ENVIRONMENT 104BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
105BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING UNIT 3 MULTIPLE COLUMNS ON A PAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Another important aspect of display is the use of Multiple Columns in our documents.
This form is required especially in the typing of magazines, dailies and literary work.
This unit is designed to take you through creation and utilization of multiple columns.
Study the presentation carefully and do the exercises.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • identify multiple column documents; • create multiple column documents; and • integrate multiple column documents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT When you want to create newspaper-style columns, such as those that appear in newsletters and brochures, configure Word to format your text with multiple columns.
You can assign multiple columns to all or to only a selected part of your document.
Generally, you may type your document's text before breaking the document into multiple columns or set the columns before typing.
Follow the following steps, if you want to set multiple columns.
1 .
Select the text you want to convert to multiple columns 106BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 2.
Select Format/Columns to display the columns dialog box • Click the preset column.
Format and enter the number of columns you want to produce.
107BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Study the dialog box, and follow the instruction to select appropriate style that you desire and click OK. Now let’s apply it.
Remember we have already highlighted a text ready to be made into columns, from the preset in the dialog box above, select ‘two’ and the text will appear thus: 108BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING This can also be presented in three columns, and it will appear thus: Apart from the sample in the presets in the dialog box, you could select any number of columns desired by choosing the desired number from the ‘number of columns’ box within the dialog box.
Therefore you can select one, two, three, four, five, six, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION Remember to achieve the desired pattern.
There are two things that could be done; either you type the text before formatting it to the desired columns or set to desired columns before typing.
The last style is better of when you are to type all the text in the pages but if it is just a part of the whole text that is required to be put into columns, highlight just that part before formatting into columns.
In that instance, it will only affect the selected part.
5.0 SUMMARY Putting text into columns is a kind of display, which is mostly used in newspapers, magazines and literary works.
Columns can be created within a text or for the whole text.
To create columns click on format; from the dropped down menu, click on column and from the dialog box, 109BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING select as desired, following the instructions in the dialog box.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Type the following text in three columns: Column one The society is dynamic in nature and therefore it is subject to change.
The advancement in technology especially in the use of personal computers in almost every area of life calls for the need in keyboarding and word processing skills.
Computers have been found useful in almost all fields – Engineering, Architecture, Surveying, Medicine, Artistic Work, Education etc.
Gone are those days whereby keyboarding was only associated with typists or secretaries.
It is not enough to finger the keyboard or to mere know how to use the mouse to bring out data from the computer.
Column two The programmers that programmed the packages that are commonly used today, followed typewriting techniques which cover (1) word processing (text), this includes letters, speeches, memoranda, etc; (2) Display (3) Tabulation.
They tried as much as possible to programme the skills in typewriting so as to make typewriting more enjoyable and meaningful.
The fact remains that the use of personal computer has not come to send typewriting into extinction; rather it has come to enhance it.
It should be noted that although the programmers followed typewriting styles, one still needs to learn the skills so as to be able to appreciate the new machine more.
Column three This material is prepared to give you an ‘on hand’ practical experience in keyboarding and word processing, which is the term that has taken over ‘typewriting’ because of the change in the use of machine and the expanse in the function of the machine.
To day, it is important that everyone becomes proficient in keyboarding and word processing irrespective of the field of specialization, more importantly in the business world.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: 110BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
111BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING MODULE 3 LEGAL/LITERARY WORK AND SKILL MASTERING This is the last module in this course.
It will take you through how legal work and literary work are typed.
In addition a lot of exercises will be provided for your practice to help you gain the desired proficiency that is required in Word Processing.
The exercises will take you through all that you have learnt in Word Processing.
In this module emphasis will be on how these documents are to be presented.
All that is required to achieve such presentations have been learnt therefore less emphasis will be given to that.
To achieve this, this unit is subdivided into the following units: Unit 1 Legal Document Unit 2 Literary Document Unit 3 Skill Mastering UNIT 1 LEGAL DOCUMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every document has its own peculiarity in display mode.
This is the reason why this document is selected.
This unit will teach you how legal documents are typed.
This may lead to questions such as: does it mean legal documents are not presented in the same way as other texts we have learnt?
What make the display pattern different?
Try to answer 112BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING these questions at the end of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify legal documents; and • type legal documents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT • Agreement • Will • In typing any of the above, do the following: • Type in double line spacing • Type the attestation in single line spacing • Left margin one and half inch, right margin half an inch • Short lines must be filled with broken lines 4.0 CONCLUSION Go through the presentations and ensure you answer all the exercises.
At the end of each exercise check your progress by comparing your answers with the presentation.
Note the mistakes and try your hands on them once more.
5.0 SUMMARY Legal documents are not just like any other documents.
There are peculiarities in writing and typing them, this is why time is spent on it to teach you how such documents are typed.
The areas that are mostly given attention are the line spacing, attestation, the margins and short lines.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT HIGH COURT OF LAGOS STATE (CIVIL PROCEDURE) RULES FORM 1 General Form of Writ of Summons (0.
3, r. 3) 20................... (Here put the letter and number (see note (a) following this form).
In the High Court of Lagos State In the.....................................................................................................................................
Judicial Division 113BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Between: A.B............................................................................................................................................................
Claimant and CD...................................................................................................................................................
Defendant To C.D.
of ................................. in the ................... of................................................................. You are hereby commanded that within forty-two days after the service of this writ on you.
inclusive of the day of such service you do cause an appearance to be entered for you in an action at the suit A.B.
and take notice that in default of your so doing the claimant may proceed therein, and judgment may be given in your absence.
DATED this ..................dav of ................... 20 ................
Memorandum to be subscribed on the writ.
N.B: This writ is to be served within three calendar months from the date thereof, or.
if renewed, within three calendar months from the date of the last renewal, including the dav of such date, and not afterwards.
Forms of Writs of Summons, etc - continued The defendant may enter appearance personally or by Legal Practitioner either by handing in the appropriate forms, duly completed, at the Registry of the High Court ot the Judicial Division in which the action is brought or by sending them to the Registry by registered post.
Endorsements to be made on the writ before issue thereof- The claimant's claim is for.
etc.
(b)...........................................................................................................................
This writ was issued by (1 H.. of ............ whose address for service (c) is .................................................
Agent for........................................................................... of................................................................... Legal Practitioner for the said claimant who resides at (d) ......................................................................................................... (mention the city, town or district and also the name of the street and number of the house of the claimant's residence, if any) Endorsement to be made on copy of writ of forthwith after service.
This writ was served by me at.................................................................................. on the defendant (here insert mode of service) on the ............................. Day of …….............. 20.............................. Indorsed the ................................. day of............................................ 20..................................................... (Signed) 114BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING (Address) Note: (a) Heading and Title — it the action is for administration the writ must be headed "Ir.
the matter of the list ate of .....................deceased.
"If it is a debenture holder's action the writ must be headed in the matter of the company, and in a probate action.”In the Estate of A.B., deceased.
"A writ of summons claiming administration of a trust or settlement may be instituted "In the matter of the (Trust or settlement)' (IV) Endorsement of Claim - If the claimant sues, or defendant is sued, in a representative capacity, the endorsement must state in what capacity the claimant sued or the defendant is sued.
Sec 0.4.r.2.
li the claim is for a debt or liquidated demand only, the Endorsement, even though not special, must strictly comply with the provisions of 0.
4. r. 4, including a claim for four days' costs.
(c) Address for Service - see 0.
4. r. 6.
The address must be within the jurisdiction.
(d) Address of Claimant - In the case of a company in liquidation the claimant's address should run "...........................................................claimants, who are a company in liquidation.
The liquidator is (name of liquidator), of (address of liquidator)" In the case of a foreign corporation within the meaning of part 10 of the Companies and Allied Matters Act the claimants' address should run thus; "................................................................................... claimants, who are a foreign corporation within the meaning of the Companies and Allied Matters Act.
The registered name and address of the person to be served are (here add registered name and address)".
(e) Endorsement of Service - See 0.
7. r. 13.
(f) Probate Actions - In these actions the endorsement of claim must show the nature of the claimant's interest, under which he claims (0.
4. r. 3); and the alleged interest of the defendant.
Before the writ is issued the following certificate must be indorsed on it: The Registry.
High Court of Lagos State In the .....................................................Judicial Division A sufficient affidavit in verification of the endorsement on this writ to authorize the sealing thereof has been produced to me this....................... Day of………….......... 20............ (Signature of Registrar) 115BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
116BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 117BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING UNIT 2 LITERARY DOCUMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As mentioned in unit 1 above, different documents requires different formats.
Again literary documents are not usually typed like other documents, they have their peculiarities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to type literary documents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT LITERARY WORK: • Reports • Stories • Poetry • Plays • Theses and scripts To type any of these do the following: • Use A4 paper.
• The first page is not usually numbered.
• For chapter heading, use capitals.
118BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING • The first page of a chapter may be in the form of dropped heading.
• The chapter heading is typed two single spaces below the chapter number.
• You may set equal margins at one inch.
Should you want to leave a binding margin, set left margin at one and half inch and one inch on the top, right and bottom margins.
The line spacing varies, it depends on the type of matter to be typed.
4.0 CONCLUSION Note that there are variations in the type of display and styles used in the typing of different literary work.
But one basic thing that may be noted is that literary works are usually typed in single line spacing.
5.0 SUMMARY Literary works cover reports, stories, poetry, play theses and scripts.
One most important thing is the ability to identify the type of literary work you are to type, that would help inform the type of style and display that would be needed.
The use of elision is allowed in literary works e.g I’ve, He’s etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Type the following as it is: He all my grief has taken, and all my sorrows borne; In temptation He’s my strong and mighty tower; I’ve all for him forsaken, I’ve all my idols torn, From my hear-and now He keeps me by His power Though all the world forsake me, and Satan tempt me score, Through Jesus I shall safely reach The goal.
He’s the “Lily of the Valley, “the “Bright and Morning Star”; He’s the fairest of ten thousand to my soul!
119BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
120BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING UNIT 3 SKILL MASTERING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is designed to refresh all we have learnt in Introduction to keyboarding and word processing and Advanced Word processing.
You should practice all the tasks and ensure a good mastery.
Where there is a doubt of what to do, go back to where such task was taught in the text and refresh your memory and then go back to the task and answer the question.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • type any form of texts with appropriate display; and • type numbers with appropriate display.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Task 1 Type the following with appropriate display.
264 words at 33 w.p.m.
for 8 minutes We understand that you will be leaving this country shortly to take a job overseas, and we thought that your friends and family might like an up- to-date photograph of you before you leave.
We can supply large prints, and we should be pleased to arrange a sitting at short notice when convenient to you.
May we also mention that we offer a service for business men which is both efficient and complete in every way.
We will be pleased to show 121BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING you numerous pictures which show clearly the eye-catching style presented by our photographers.
We enclose a list of firms that employ us and for whim we have produced many advertisements for industrial magazines.
Transfer Travel, our branch in High Street, can help you in a number of ways to solve your travel and transport queries.
In these days when time seems to be the most important commodity of all, you can depend on Transfer Travel to deal with all your arrangements.
Just telephone Sean Gallapher and he will use both his own and his staff’s time in dealing with the hundred and one irritating little things that crop up, but which are so easily overcome by the expert who has made the whole subject his own intimate profession.
Should you wish to do business with a country with which you are not in touch, our agents will be pleased to help you with advice and contacts.
(SI 1.27) Task 2 Type the following text in 5 minutes.
Proofreading is a skill and like any skill it must be practiced.
If you are to become efficient at spotting errors of all kinds, it is necessary to undergo training in the art of proofreading.
To be effective a proof reader needs to be able to spell and punctuate correctly, and to know the basic rules of grammar, as well as acceptable typewriting display and layout.
It is not a question of just reading through a completed piece of typescript in case a typing error may have been overlooked; it is often necessary to ask the help of a colleague to through the copy to make certain that figures are correct, that nothing has been omitted, or that unreadable handwriting has been deciphered correctly.
It may be that you are an audio-typist and that you have to listen to a recording on a transcribing machine.
You will need to take great care when proofreading, and, in order to check certain details, it may be necessary for you to play part of the recording again.
If the transcription is from shorthand notes, it is a good plan to check the transcript very closely with the notes to make certain that nothing has been omitted.
Keep one finger following the shorthand notes with a finger of the other hand following each word on the typed copy.
Take particular care with words that sound alike but are spelt differently – homophones, eg, check and cheque; aloud and allowed.
If you have any doubt as to which spelling is required, check the meaning of the word in 122BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING a dictionary.
If you are proofreading from VDU, it may be helpful to use the cursor to guide the eye across the screen, and to vary the density of the brightness on the screen.
Make sure that you have used the correct stationery; type accurately any labels or envelopes required, and attach any enclosure before the documents are placed for signature.
Task 3 Type the table below in an A4 paper.
FROM SUPPLIERS 1 ENCLOSING PRODUCT a catalogues, price lists, INFORMATION samples 2 DELIVERY INFORMATION advice notes, dispatch notes, consignment notes 3 REQUESTING PAYMENT bills, invoices, statements 4 ACKNOWLEDGING receipts PAYMENT FROM CUSTOMERS 5 REQUESTING PRODUCT requesting catalogues, price INFORMATION quotations 6 ORDERING order forms, purchase orders 7 ENCLOSING PAYMENT cheques, money orders 8 QUERIES/COMPLAINTS concerning quality, orders, delivery dates FROM POTENTIAL EMPLOYEES 9 REQUESTING job applications EMPLOYMENT FROM GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS 10 REQUESTING FINANCIAL tax forms, demands INFORMATION/PAYMENTS 123BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Task 4 Type the following: General Form of Originating Summons (O.
3, r. 8) In the High Court of Lagos State I in the ........................................................................Judicial Division (If the question to be determined arises in the administration of an estate or a trust entitle it: In the matter of the estate or trust.)
Between: In the ........................................................................................................................Judicial Division Between A.B....................................................................................................
Claimant and C.D.
and E.F.......................................................................................Defendants Let................................................of............................................................in ................................................................................within forty-two days after service of this summons on him, inclusive of the day of such service, cause an appearance to be entered for him to this summons which is issued upon the application of ............... .....of...................................who claims to be (state the nature of the claim), for the determination of the following questions: (State the questions).
DATED the................................Day of............................................. 20…………………….........
This summons was taken out by.......................................................................... Legal Practitioners for the above-named................................................................................................................ 124BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Task 5 Type the following: Originating Summons under (O.
3, r. 8(1)) No..............................................of 20........................................................
In the High Court of Lagos State In the ..........................................................................Judicial Division In the matter of A.B.
a Legal Practitioner (Re Taxation of costs, etc.)
(or as may be).
Let A.B.
of ..............................attend the Court, (or Chief registrar's Office) HIGH COURT LAGOS, on the ..............................day of ...................... 20..................................... At 9 O'clock in the forenoon (on the hearing of an application on the part of ..............................................).
(State relief sought).
(If for leave to endorse award under the Arbitration Law, ap.
Add, "And that the respondent do pay the costs of this application to be taxed."
DATED the.................day of.................20.......................
This summons was taken out by......................................................
Note: It will not be necessary for you to enter an appearance in the HIGH COURT REGISTRY, but if you do not attend either in person or by your Legal Practitioner, at the time and place above mentioned (or at the time mentioned in the endorsement thereon), such order will be made and proceedings taken as the Judge may think just and expedient.
125BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Task 6 Type the following: Form of ex parte Originating Summons (O.
3, r. 8(1)) In the High Court of Lagos State In the................................................................................
Judicial Division Suit No.........................................................................................
In the matter of A.B.
an infant (or, as may be).
Let all parties concerned attend, before the Judge or (Chief Registrar's Office).
High Court, Lagos State, at the time specified in the margin hereof, on the hearing of an application on the part of the above named A.B.. an infant, by C.D.
his next friend, that etc.
This summons was taken out by .............................................................of .............................................
Agents for.......................................of .........................................................Legal Practitioner for the applicant.
126BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Task 7 Type the following: Letter Forwarding Request for Substituted Service (0.
8, r. 3(d)) The Chief Judge of Lagos State presents his compliments to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and encloses herewith a writ of summons in the case of ........................... versus ......................in which the claimant has obtained an order of the……………………………...........Judicial Division of the High Court of Lagos State (which is also enclosed) giving leave to make a request that the said writ may be served by substituted service on the defendant............................................... at..................... in the (name of country).
The Chief Judge requests that the said writ and order may be forwarded to the proper authority in (name of country) with the request that the same may be transmitted by post addressed to the defendant at (the last known place of abode or the place of business) of the said defendant, or there delivered in such manner as may be consistent with the usage or practice of the courts of (name of country) for service of legal process where personal service cannot be effected; and with the further request that the same may be officially certified to the ...............................
Judicial Division of the High Court of Lagos State, or declared upon oath, or otherwise, in such manner as is consistent with the practice of the courts of the (name of country) in proving service of legal process.
Task 8 Type a copy of your curricular vitae.
Task 9 Write an application letter for the post of Administrative manager to Kevin & Co Industrial Chemicals, No 77 Olakuko, Ajangbadi.
Task 10 Type the following: Committee procedures and documents Meetings are such an essential component in the business world that all and secretaries should be familiar with the documents used and the proceed* opted.
Before the meeting the secretary must ensure that a Notice is sent to all tl titled to attend, giving the day, date, time, and place of the meeting.
The mum length of time which must elapse after the notice is sent out and before meeting is held is stated in the organisation's rules or constitution.
For an nual general meeting it is usually twenty-one clear days and seven to fourteen; clear days for an ordinary meeting.
127BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING An Agenda is a list of items of business to be discussed at a meeting.
It is iled by the secretary in conjunction with the chairman, and is usually ith the notice of the meeting so that those people attending the meeting have time to think about the matters to be discussed.
Occasionally, it may not be lable until the meeting, hence the importance of the notice.
After the meeting, the secretary types a draft of the minutes for the chairman's approval before subsequent duplication and distribution to the members.
Minutes, which are an accurate, concise and clear record of the business transacted at a meeting and the decisions arrived at, are approved at the next meeting and signed by the chairman as constituting a true record of the proceedings.
They are written in the third person and in the past tense.
Their safe keeping is of paramount importance since they provide a permanent record which is available for reference purposes.
(Adapted from an article by Ken Fisher, Typing in Block', Memo/ 2000, August 1980. in Daviies S & West R. 1982) It is the secretary's responsibility to ensure that suitable accommodation is a\ liable for the meeting, and to have to hand all the papers and documents which be required for it.
During the meeting the chairman will take the items in the order in which they appear on the agenda.
He is responsible for the conduct of meeting and his decisions must be accepted by all the members present.
He sometimes has the casting vote, ie a vote used to make a decision when the votes 'for' and 'against1 a motion are equally divided.
4.0 CONCLUSION Do all the exercises and discuss your answers in group.
Explain to your group how you achieved the display given to you to work, and state the rules guiding such display.
During your discussion, listen to one another.
Do not argue just because you want to argue, rather listen and have your argument(s) based on stated facts.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit is a revision of all other units.
A good practice of it would enhance a good mastery of all that you have been taught.
When there is doubt on what is to be done, consult the text and revise the instructions concerning that particular task and go back to the task you are working on.
128BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Present the following in appropriate format.
1.
Way to Learning Practice as many times as possible Do not be discouraged when you are faced with difficulties.
The difficulties are part of learning.
2.
129BED 112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Archie, Drummond and Anne, Cole-Mogford (1989).
Applied Typing.
5th Ed.
Maidenhead Berkshire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Okhia: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. Davies, S. & West R. (1982).
Pitman Business English 2: Secretarial.
Great Britain: Pitman Publishing Pty Ltd. Melbourne.
130
