Principles of Business Education BED 113 iCourse Code BED113 Course Title Principles of Business Education Course Team Inegbedion, Juliet O.
Course Developer/ Coordinator) National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Dr. (Mrs.) Njoku, Celestina Ugochi (Course Writer) Federal Polytechnic, Nekede -Owerri Associate Prof. L. E. Ekpenyong (Course Editor) UNIBEN, Benin-City Inegbedion, Juliet (Course Co-ordinator) National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiNational Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-904-X All Rights Reserved iiiCONTENTS PAGES Module 1 Historical Foundations of Business Education Programme …………………..… 1 Unit 1 Origin and Concepts of Business Education…...1 – 9 Unit 2 Development of Business Education Programme in Nigeria ………………………...10 – 17 Unit 3 Business Education Programme in other Countries ………………………….……..........18 – 26 Module 2 Objectives and Contents of Business Education Programme ……….……………...27 Unit 1 Objectives and Contents of Business Education Programme ………………………...27 – 34 Unit 2 Content of the Business Education Programme …...................................................35 – 42 Unit 3 Importance of Business Education ……………43 – 50 Module 3 Issues in Business Education Programme ….
51 Unit 1 The Content of the Curriculum …………….…51 – 56 Unit 2 Facilities for Teaching …….…………..………57 – 64 Unit 3 Methods of Teaching Business Education Subjects …………………………………..……65 – 72 Unit 4 Qualification and Quality of Teachers………... 73 – 80 Module 4 Principles of Teaching and Learning…….... 81 Unit 1 Principle of Teaching and Learning………….. 81 – 88 Unit 2 Learning Style of Individuals………………… 89 – 92 ivBED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION MODULE 1 HISTORICAL FOUNDATIONS OF BUSINESS EDUCATION PROGRAMME INTRODUCTION The historical foundation of business education differ from one country to another and sometimes from one author to another, just as the gospel of St. Matthew, Mark, Like and John.
However, the differences were not significant.
This is because almost all the writers or narrators traced the historical foundation to the apprenticeship system but with varying dates in the different countries.
In all, this would be discussed in great details later.
This module would introduce you to the Historical foundation of business education and will be discussed under the following units.
Unit 1 Origin and concepts of business education Unit 2 Development of business education programme in Nigeria Unit 3 Business Education programme in other countries UNIT 1 THE ORIGIN AND CONCEPTS OF BUSINESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Origin of Business Education 3.2 Concepts of Business Education 3.3 Facets of Business Education Programme 3.4 Meaning of General Education, Basic Business and Vocational Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Business education has its own terminology just like other professions such as Medicine, Law, Banking and Finance and so on.
The said appreciation of the course (Business Education) can only take place when you are made aware of the terms and the historical foundation of business education as your course or programme of study.
In this unit you would be introduced to the definition of business education 1BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION concepts, its development in Nigeria as well as in other countries.
This is very important because it would arm you with all you need to know about the take off of the business education programme in the teaching/ learning situation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you will be able to: • discuss the origin of business education and its historical foundation; • explain the concept of business education, as it was in the past and the present; and • differentiate between general education and vocational education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT As I said before every discipline has its own terminology, you will therefore come across some of them.
Also it is necessary for you to know the historical foundation of the course you are studying to make for more coherent ideas in the teaching/learning.
The major ones are discussed below.
3.1 Origin of Business Education The earliest form of business education according to Osuala, Popham (1975) and Njoku (1990) as well as most authors was the apprenticeship training.
At that time an individual had to learn a trade under another person who had the skill for the trade, or who was experienced in a particular area.
These were craft, bookkeeping, farming, and sales, etc.
The period of training varied from one trade to another.
Sometimes the length of time was based on how fast the apprentice could learn the skill.
For instance, sole traders were able to take apprentices to assist in the sale of wears through the learning of how it was done.
Today, this type of skill is carried and acquired through apprenticeship training.
As time passed the apprentice became free and was either a salesman or bookkeeper.
In some cases the apprentice paid for the period of training but where it was not possible, the family of the apprentice was required to mortgage land or any valuable property.
At the end of the training it was an option put forward to the apprentice whether to remain with his master and be paid a token sum, which may be complimented with material items.
The second option was that of the freed – apprentice to establish his own business and have his own business and have his own apprentice.
If the first option was chosen, the master was obliged to feed him and provide him with routine help.
In all 2BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION he was still responsible to the master and must operate within the rules stated by his master.
I tell you one thing that made the training very striking and worth emulating but which we lack in our society today, was that the apprentice must be worthy in character and learning.
You all will agree with me that today, the issue of character and learning has been jettisoned, especially that of character.
There were certain skills which some families endowed with, but which they did not want to share with outsiders.
All these took place in a non- formal setting.
As time went on, businesses started growing, Popham (1975) stated that more people were needed in businesses and the idea of restricting the training to certain places was not achieving much and itinerant tutors started travelling around the country (USA) giving instruction in book keeping and penmanship.
People started appreciating the need for business skills and grammar schools started including book keeping, penmanship and commercial arithmetic in their curricula as a result of demands for commercial training.
This gave business education a place in the formal setting.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
From what you have studied above, how would you define business education then?
ii.
Who were the itinerant tutors?
iii.
How were their qualifications of the teachers determined?
3.2 Concepts of Business Education I would like us to look at the definitions of business education in the past and in the present.
This is because technology has helped to change definitions of certain things.
It therefore, implies that business education, as a course of study has to move with time.
Popham (1975) said when a group of people where asked what business education is?
The reply was as follows: • A business executive replied, “Business Education is education to produce goods and services”.
• A radical retorted: It is the avenue to enormous profit.
• One teacher responded: Economic concepts necessary for living in a business economy.
• Another teacher answered: Learning skills to enter a business or distributive job.
3BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION • A person on the street said “ Shorthand and typing, that’s it SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Assess the definitions given by the people above then consider whether they are in any way useful.
Popham: later said these answers bring to mind the parable of the blind men and the elephant.
(Remember the six blind men of Hindustan who went to see the elephant.
I know you are familiar with the story?
).
Depending on which part of the elephant each of them touched they respectively defined the elephant as a wall, a spear, snake or a rope.
Their ideas about the elephant were limited by their own perceptions and experience.
I am sure that this is what we see and hear on the views people hold about business education.
After Looking at the different views of business educators, Popham came to a conclusion that: Business education is a course that prepares students for entry into and advancement in jobs within business and it is equally important because it prepares students to handle their own business affairs and to function intelligently as consumers and citizens in a business economy.
Nolan, Hayden, Malsbary (1967) defined business education as those business programmes and courses taught ordinarily at the secondary school level.
Osuala E.C.
(1989) defines Business education as an essential part of the preparation of youth for live and living.
In 2004, Osuala, gave another definition as: Business education is a programme of instruction which consists of two parts (1) Office education, a vocational programme of office careers through initial, refresher and upgrading education and (2) General business education a programme to provide students with information and competences which are needed by all in managing personal business affairs and in using the services of the business.
Still on the definition of business education, Njoku (1997) defines business education as that facet of educational training that helps the individual to acquire relevant skills needed for living.
However in 2006 Njoku gave another definition as an educational programme that equips an individual with functional and suitable skills, 4BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION knowledge, attitude and value that would enable him/her operate in the environment he/she finds himself/herself.
You can see that as the years go by, the definitions of business education continue to change.
This means that business education is not static.
Therefore any worthwhile programme has to move with time.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
Having given you the different definitions from different authors, I would like you to write out your own definition that you would use as a working tool.
Clue: In writing out your own working definition note the substance in each definition and work with them.
ii.
Engage your friends in a brainstorming session and evaluate your answers along with theirs.
Today business education is not looked at as preparing you for the acquisition of skills only as teachers or secretaries but also prepares you as administrator, manager, responsible citizen, leaders or entrepreneurs.
3.3 Facets of Business Education 5BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION THE FACETS Business Education Vocational Education Education about Education for Business Business Economic Job Competency Competency For all Students For Business Majors Career Exploration Career Preparation Social Adjustment Work Adjustment Subjects such as Basic Business Subjects such as beginning Accounting Typewriting, Advanced Typewriting General Business Data Processing Business Law Distributive Education Consumer Econs Office Procedures Economics Secretarial Introduction to Procedures Business Shorthand.
Marketing Understanding the free enterprise system P: 28.
Source: Blockus Wanda.
Basic Business Education in the future 3.4 Meaning of General Education, Basic Business Education and Vocational Education 6BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION General Education As you can learn from the diagram is for everyone irrespective of your trade or profession.
It enables you to develop basic skills in reading, writing and computation/arithmetic as well as social skills that could enable you improve on your interpersonal relationship.
This is what is needed by all of us to function as citizens of our dear country.
Everyone needs general education irrespective of the person’s age, sex, ability or background.
You need it in order to be part of the society where you belong.
For instance, you are a consumer of certain products like soft drinks, biscuits, bread, milk and other beverages.
In the next few years you would see yourself as no longer just a consumer but someone who would make input on how the products are produced, packaged or distributed.
This is because you are now able to read and write.
Basic Business Basic business education includes education needed by you as an individual as well as the education that provides the individual the foundation that would enable him advance in his course of study and with a view to entering the world of business in his chosen career.
Some one has just said to you I have been having acute headache and the doctor gave me some drugs.
If you ask him the name of the drugs, he would say I don’t know or they are just as big as panadol but the colours are white and pink.
You can now see the ignorance.
Suppose there was a reaction, how can the doctor who wants to handle this case go about it?
With basic business knowledge you will understand your responsibilities as a citizen of this nation.
You will now play your own part (if there is any criminal act capable of throwing the country into confusion) either out-rightly or by reporting the case to the police.
The EFCC is fighting corruption, you can only join them to ensure we get a corrupt–free nation when you know your responsibility.
• Basic business knowledge helps you to understand and appreciate how business and people around you operate.
You are able to see each person as different from the other and appreciate the person in the right sense.
I know that some of you hate shorthand teachers.
But when you remember that they are not wicked, but have to teach the subject as part of the training, and then you would now understand 7BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION and appreciate them.
• With the know of basic business you are in a position to know your right and defend it.
VOCATIONAL EDUCATION This is ideal for you as a student with a career objective.
You need it to enter in or advance in a job (Popham et al 1971) and for work adjustment.
You are able to prepare yourself for acceptable business decorum, appearance and speech, how jobs are interrelated and how responsibility relate to job success.
According to Popham et al (1971) and Njoku, (1990) this type of training starts with the elementary business courses through vocational or business like classroom setting and unto work.
Detailed discussions on general and vocational business education will be provided under objectives of basic and vocational business education.
4.0 CONCLUSION The study of the historical foundation of any course and the concepts would help you to understand the course in its totality and appreciate its contribution to whatever segment of the economy.
The concepts include Business education, general education, basic business education and vocational education.
The meaning of each is necessary to help you understand what each has to do with the overall objectives of business education and when the teacher should use it during the teaching and learning process.
5.0 SUMMARY Business education has its origin from the apprenticeship system.
The qualifications of the people who taught and learnt the course then were different from what we have today.
Learning this would help you to know the qualifications of the people you are teaching and what goals they are out to achieve.
The difference between the different facets of education would help you not to create confusion between them.
Explaining the concepts of business education and the overview of apprenticeship in relation to business education would help you to know whatever is required in teaching/learning of this course.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 8BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 1 Differentiate between general education and vocational education.
2.
Which of the two is ideal for you at this level and why?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Osuala, E.C., (1989).
Principles & Practical of Business Education.
Obosi, Nigeria.
Pacific Correspondence College and Press Ltd. Osuala, E.C., (2004).
Principles and Methods of Business and Computer Education.
Enugu, Enugu State: Cheston Agency Ltd. Njoku, C.U.
(1997).
An Appraisal of Business Education Programme in Selected Tertiary Institutions in Nigeria Unpublished.
Ph.D Thesis.
University of Nigeria Nsukka.
Njoku, C.U.
(2006).
Business Education and Value Orientation for National Economic Empowerment and Development.
Paper presented at the Owo.
2006 Annual Conference of the Association of Business Education of Nigeria (ABEN) on the theme: Popham, E.L., Schrag, A.F., and Blocklvs (1971).
A Teaching Learning System for Business Education.
New York: Megraus.
UNIT 2 BUSINESS EDUCATION PROGRAMME IN 9BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Emergence of Private schools 3.2 The Turn Around 3.3 The Asby Commission Report 3.4 The Atkinson Report 3.5 Outcome of the Atkinson Report 3.6 Business at the Tertiary Level 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Business education programme in Nigeria had a very slow beginning and dated back to the late 1940s.
Its introduction was due to the dire need for accounting, clerical and stenographic personnel in different industries and offices, (Njoku 1997).
Some private institutions that were running the programme called the schools Commercial schools/Commercial institutes.
As time went on the names changed, as changes occurred in the system of education just as the educational and objectives became clearer to the people.
One major reason for the change was the many committee reports which threw light on the direction education in Nigeria should follow.
All these would be discussed later.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • explain the development of business education programme in Nigeria; and • describe the revolutionary trend that occurred in business education programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Business education programme in Nigeria as well as in other developing and developed countries has had a slow beginning and was faced with serious neglect until the last few decades.
This affected its growth and 10BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION development compared to other disciplines.
In the light of this, it is pertinent that you become fully introduced to all these to enable you form the basis for the teaching and learning process of this course.
This unit has therefore, been broken down into subheadings for easy understanding and comparison.
3.1 Emergence of Private Schools The history of Business Education in Nigeria varies from one reporter to another, just as the gospel of St Mathew, Mark, Luke and John.
However, many of the reporters agreed that business education was traced backed to the late 1940’s.
The schools were run by private individuals and institutions.
The British government neglected technical and commercial education in favour of the public grammar schools the curriculum of which was entirely of the academic type.
Business education institutions were previously known as Commercial Institutes.
Students were prepared for examinations which led to the award of the Royal Society of Arts, London Chamber of Commerce, City and Guilds and Pitmans (Osuala, 1987).
Concerning the intake of these private schools graduates of primary schools in the different parts of the country who could not gain admission into the secondary school were offered admission.
These were regarded as drop outs.
You can now see where the public negative attitude toward business education started.
However, these criticisms notwithstanding, have commercial schools provided services to individuals and organizations that needed their products.
Reports showed that the first private school was established by Joseph Etukokwu at Onitsha in 1836.
The schools were established in order to provide the people with adequate education and to motivate them to acquire education especially in the area of business.
They provided the business community with the needed clerical secretarial and accounting personnel.
3.2 The Turn Around The early 1940’s saw the concern for and the recognition given to business education by the establishment of Central Commercial Academy in 1942 at Enugu, Anambra State with an enrolment of 238.
This was followed by St. Paul’s Commercial College, Aba 1942 and St. John Bosco College, Ubiaja, Bendel State with 54 boys and no girls.
The subjects offered were business education subjects as well as English Language and Mathematics as well as other courses that could be adapted quickly to the needs of the employment market.
The schools, therefore, met the needs of those in the employers in the private sector 11BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION better than in the public grammar schools.
In 1958, the government of the then Western Nigeria resolved to upgrade their programmes in business education and asked for the assistance of the US Agency for International Development.
As a result of this, Ohio State University incorporated a business education programme from 1958 to 1967 at the Polytechnic Ibadan.
The certificate awarded at the end of the course was Teachers’ Certificate Grade One (Commercial).
3.3 The Ashby Commission Report of 1960 Following the Ashby Commission Report in 1960 which expressed dissatisfaction over the non-inclusion of technical education and commercial subjects in the regular school curricula and lack of respect for manual skills and technical achievement, the Federal Government of Nigeria set out to correct the imbalance.
In addition, the Dike Committee report of 1962 underscored the urgency for the production of typists, secretaries and other clerical workers.
It also noted the gradual growth of trade and commerce in the country and called for the training of the right type of personnel through business education programmes as the only way to cope with the rapid economic development in Nigeria.
The Committee Report saw the inclusion of these subjects – business economics, office practice, commerce, basic typewriting, as having educational value, which assured the learners a place in the general education.
We all can now appreciate why we stress that every one should have a basic knowledge of business education subjects, no matter their status or profession.
About half a dozen of large institutes were recommended at Enugu, Ibadan, Kaduna, Yaba, Benin, Port-Harcourt and Kano instead of the proliferation of small private institutes all over the country.
The institutes recommended by the Ashby Commission were to offer three types of courses to cater for the interests of the various categories of students in Commercial and Technical fields.
1.
The first was the full time day courses designed for both students in Technical and Commercial schools.
2.
The second was the part-time or evening programme for students already in employment and who live within reasonable distance from the institutes.
3.
The third was the sandwich programme designed for those in employment who live outside the vicinity of the institutes.
These students were to alternate six months of work with six months of 12BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION study in the institutes in agreement with their employers; (Jegede, 1989).
You can agree with me that some of the programmes designed today borrowed their leaves from 1 – 3 above.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Examine the above 1 – 3 critically and see which of them falls in line with your programme of study.
3.4 The Atkinson Report of 1960 In this segment, I would like you to follow up this as a story that is told as our teachers used to tell us in those days in primary schools.
This is the only way you will appreciate it and be able to explain it to others.
You all will agree with me that the setting up of committees by the government to look into educational problems did not start today.
This is because the needs of individuals and the society cannot be divorced from the prevailing circumstances.
The government needed people in sensitive areas and they were trained with due adherence to the report of the committees.
This is because they were carefully chosen and self- interest was not their main focus rather it was the welfare of the country and its citizenry was paramount to them.
This should be a guiding factor to all of us.
With the implementation of the Ashby commission report there was still shortage of teachers.
In order to further encourage business teacher education, the Atkinson Committee was asked to prepare and submit a report to the National Working Party on Technical, Commercial and Vocational Education.
One of the recommendations of the committee states that: “Business teacher training must be developed in Nigeria.” This recommendation encouraged the training of business education teachers in Nigeria.
This was because in the past, Nigeria depended on foreign institutions for the training of business teachers.
Some of them were sent to Garnet College in London for one year course.
Others went to Pitman’s college for teacher training courses.
Later, these two oversea colleges shut the door for oversea students who had to look for alternatives.
Subsequent to this, two institutions were encouraged to start business teacher education programmes.
They were Olunloyo College, Ibadan and the University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
At the initial stages of the existence of the University of Nigeria, Nsukka the business teacher education programme had no faculty members of its own and no 13BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION laboratory equipment.
The programme was drawn and organized by faculty members of the erstwhile Department of Secretarial Studies, who had been graduates of the commercial teacher education programme of the Garnett College and Pitman’s both in London.
The Olunloyo College offered a one-year programme leading to the award of NCE in Business Studies.
Admission was offered to those who possessed two years diploma certificate in Business Studies.
It is a very long one, isn’t it?
I believe too that it is quite interesting.
Okay, let’s move on.
By the end of 1966, there were only 23 teachers holding Nigeria Certificate of Education (NCE) in Business Education trained by the Olunloyo College.
The department of Vocational Teacher Education of the University of Nigeria offered degree programme in Business Education.
By 1966, this department graduated only two students.
In 1968 a total of 23 graduates were expected (Jegede, 1987).
By 1965, there was only 1 person holding postgraduate degree in business education, twelve with degrees in business administration, 56 with NCE or equivalent in business studies, 92 with diploma in business studies and a total of 217 untrained business teachers in Nigeria (Atkinson, 1960).
As a result of this acute shortage of business teachers in the secondary schools, the Atkinson Committee recommended as follows: 1.
That in the emergency period until fully trained business teachers are available, short courses for business teachers will be provided.
2.
That two-year business education courses be organized.
Each be attached to existing teacher training programme where Students selected for training must hold minimum of the West African School Certificate.
3.
That a three-year business education course leading to the award of the NCE be mounted in the Advanced Teacher Training College in addition to Olunloyo College of Education.
4.
That the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, should start degree courses in business education with an output of thirty students per year to meet the needs of Nigeria.
5.
Postgraduate courses in Business Education to be taken overseas preferably in the United States where the needed training was provided.
These teachers should learn how to teach typewriting, shorthand, book keeping, office practice, office management and business correspondence.
6.
That staff for teacher training (postgraduate) should be recruited overseas.
14BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 3.5 Outcome of the Atkinson’s Report The above recommendations by the Atkinson Committee were fully implemented and helped to some extent to alleviate the problems of the society.
As a result of this, there was a boost in the Nigerian economy in the early 1970s as a result of the oil boom.
This boost in the economy led to the growing need for business knowledge since many Nigerians were then participating actively in business and, therefore, needed to acquire enough business knowledge to be able to manage them effectively.
There were changes in employment requirements due to technological advancement.
People’s attitude towards business education also started changing.
A sharp turn was made in the school system with the introduction of the 1981 educational policy where business education was given recognition as one of the national curriculum programme.
Business education is accordingly being offered as part of the secondary school curriculum since the early 1980s.
The following business subjects, namely, accounting commerce, office practice, economics, shorthand and typewriting are being offered along with other general subjects.
At the present time the training arrangements for business education teachers in Nigeria is done in Colleges of Education, Polytechnics/Colleges of Technology and Universities.
The training provided by these institutions leads to the Nigeria Certificate in Education (NCE) and a Bachelor’s degree which is sometimes called B.B.Ed or B.Sc (Business Education).
3.6 Business Education at the Tertiary Level At the NCE level the curriculum for teacher preparation by National Commission for Colleges of Education prepares business teachers for the teaching of pre-vocation subjects at the junior secondary school level.
Though, this curriculum did not provide for data processing and computer literacy.
However, these subjects have since been included in the NCE business education curriculum.
Banks and most businesses are making heavy use of computers because of the period of technological advancement in the world.
Business educators have accordingly have up-dated their skills to remain saleable in the ICT market.
This can only be done through the inclusion of such courses in the curriculum that would make business education ever current – the use of word processing/ computer is one of them.
It is, therefore, the responsibilities of education institutions to adequately equip these teachers with the necessary skills to meet the new challenges posed by technology.
15BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION At the Bachelor’s degree level, students spend two, three or four years depending on their entry qualifications in any of the universities running business education course.
The curriculum covers areas like: 1. Business education 2.
Education 3. Business Administration 4.
Teaching Practice 5.
Industrial Work Experience (SIWES) The above areas are expected to equip the students with both theoretical and practical orientation for the business world.
However, experience has shown and from empirical observations that business education teacher programme in Nigerian Universities has no common curriculum.
Each institution designs its own curriculum to suit it.
This in fact, would create even more diversity in the programmes; and thereby discourage standardization, on certification (Njoku, 1992).
Today many institutions offer business education programme at the tertiary level and this is because of the technological trend and the demands for the acquisition of practical skill for self-reliance.
The step taken by the National Open University to include the business education programme in its curricula then goes to underscore its importance.
More on business education teacher programme will be discussed under the Module on the issues.
4.0 CONCLUSION Knowing something about the emergence of business education in Nigeria and the different committees that gave a boost to it will help you to have an in-depth knowledge of what has been taking place so far in the discipline.
It would help you to know what you require in the teaching and learning business education under the present technological and information age.
5.0 SUMMARY Through the recommendation of the different committees, business education has undergone positive changes that have given it an appreciable recognition in the society.
The recommendations of the different committees can help you to make further recommendations that could make government to provide more funds to boost and take business education to an enviable height 16BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Going by the Federal Government’s vision on education for all, put up a write-up so that the employed and unemployed can acquire necessary skills through business education programmes.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Njoku, C.U.
(1997).
An Appraisal of Business Education Programme in Selected Tertiary Institutions in Nigeria Unpublished.
Ph.D Thesis.
University of Nigeria Nsukka.
Osuala, E.C., (1989).
Principles & Practical of Business Education.
Obosi, Nigeria.
Pacific Correspondence College and Press Ltd. Popham, E.L., Schrag, A.F., and Blocklvs (1971).
A Teaching Learning System for Business Education.
New York: Megraus.
UNIT 3 BUSINESS EDUCATION IN OTHER COUNTRIES 17BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Content of the Programme 3.2 Admissions into the Programme 3.3 Qualifications 3.5 Present Status of Business Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is not wrong for us to say that Business Education is a problem candidate.
Even in developed countries business education had had a slow beginning as a result of government poor attitude towards it.
This means that the problem is not peculiar to Nigeria.
The requirements of business education programmes in other countries and the type of preparation given to them need to be discussed in order for us to know whether or not the programme here is in line with what other countries have.
It would be in terms of admission, mode of preparation/training, course contents, etc.
In this unit you would be taught the way other countries business education programmes operate.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • explain how business education programmes function in other countries; and • establish an ideal course of action for business education programme in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The admission, preparation, and other criteria for the preparation of a business education teacher differ from one country to another.
It is therefore, important that you are acquainted with the way they operate, as they would help you in the teaching and learning process.
These are discussed below.
3.1 The Take-off of the Programme 18BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION The preparation of business education graduates in other countries is quite different from that of Nigeria.
The training of business education teachers in developing and developed countries started in private schools and industries.
In America a number of State schools were established in Massachusetts, New York and Connecticut in which teacher education programme in business were offered .This was during the last part of the nineteenth Century.
The institutions came to be known as State Teacher’s Colleges.
3.2 Content of the Programme The business education programme at that time was made up of the following components: 1. Business education 2.
Education 3. Business Administration 4.
Teaching Practice 5.
Work Experience According to authors from some of the developing and developed countries, the content was so because the business education student was not trained to be a teacher only, but also a businessman.
In order to have a comprehensive programme, India had to restructure her business education programme.
USA was not left out, because Liebermen (1960) stressed the need for a tremendous change and this did not affect not only what was taught and how it was taught but also such aspects of education as teacher organisations, professional ethics, teacher education, the theory and practice of teacher compensation, among others.
a.
Course Content among States Among the different institutions offering business education courses differences were observed in course offerings.
This was also the case with Nigerian institutions offering business education subjects prior to adoption of the 1981 National Policy on education In other countries such as the USA and India each state /institution has it’s own procedure for organising business education and the variations among them could easily be seen especially in the number of credit hours allocated to subject matters.
No wonder some graduates of business teacher education tend to be more competent in theoretical than the practical aspect.
b.
Contrary Views on Course Contents 19BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION In a study of American teachers, Koerner found out that it was best for each institution to develop whatever programme in teacher education that it considered adequate and that the institution would certify that the candidate was qualified to teach so long as he participated in a state approved practice teaching arrangement.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Do you think it is right for institutions to develop their own programmes?
Explain clearly.
3.3 Admission into the Programme According to Koerner (1963) a student’s choice of a speciality should be based on the degree and depth of interest in the discipline and the demonstrated ability that he exhibits in the field.
It is also necessary to determine whether one actually wishes to devote one’s career to teaching in the subject field.
But in admitting candidates into a business education teacher programme, Aremu (1987) suggested that it should be based on examination and interview.
The examination according to him would test candidate’s aptitude and potential skills.
The interview would find out certain forms of handicaps –poor vision, defective hearing, deformed fingers, etc.
His view was not clear as to whether the students should be admitted into the programme or not.
Osuala (1989) said that business education programme provides for the handicaps in the society too.
Although, the prospective teacher may have all these positive qualities, (Aina (1990) but may not remain in the job.
This according to NERC report of 1980 and Shamsuddin,(1980) has caused many teachers to become uncommitted and want to leave the profession at the slightest opportunity.
a.
Colleges of Education In Nigeria, there are general requirements for admissions into Colleges of Education with respect to business education.
The course requirements for Colleges of Education include: General: Senior Secondary Certificate West African School Certificate General Certificate of Education O/L, Credit in any three of Economics, Government, Accounts Commerce, Shorthand, Geography, History, Business Methods and Typewriting, plus at least a pass in English Language and Mathematics/ 20BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Statistics.
Some institutions such as Alvan Ikoku College of Education however, require any two of Office practice/Secretarial Duties, Commercial Arithmetic/Mathematics, Book-keeping and one of those above.
These Colleges produce qualified but non-graduate teachers.
The products play a very important role in the teaching of business studies at the Junior Secondary School level.
A College of Education also serves as a preparatory ground for advancement into a University for a degree course in business teacher education.
b.
For Universities (JAMB Brochure) The requirements for universities offering business education subjects, for Direct Entry include the NCE with merit level passes in 2 relevant subjects and 3 credits including English language and at least a pass in Mathematics; OR ‘A’ level passes in relevant subjects OR Diploma with credit passes from NBTE accredited institutions.
UME Requirements Five TC II or GCE O/L credits including English Language, Mathematics, Economics and other subjects in the Social Sciences and Arts.
The students are expected to sit for an examination, which takes the following into account: UME Subjects Mathematics, Economics plus one of Literature in English Language, History, Government, Geography, Agriculture, Biology, Chemistry and Physics.
However, some institutions have special considerations for some lapses.
For instance, Anambra State University of Technology (ASUTECH): may accept a pass in Maths at O/L or in TC II in addition to 5 credits/merits in relevant subjects.
ABU, UNN and ASUTECH accept holders of NCE in Business Education with at least a credit pass or 21BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION NTTC or HND for a two year programme.
It is important to note that requirement for business teacher education programme differ from institution to institution.
This is not peculiar to Nigeria.
c. Other Countries For instance, in East Germany to enter a Business Teacher Education Programme, David, (1975) said that the student must have secured the leaving certificate of the ten-year school or reached an equivalent standard in vocational school or have as a working man done a correspondence course to reach the same level.
The student then has to spend four years in the institution.
The institution engages part of the time on widening and deepening the student’s education and part of it on one subject specialisation.
There is a notable flexibility of admission of mature students in New Zealand.
Even if the person does not hold the University entrance qualification if he is aged over 21 (Dakin, 1973), and if the professional board for vocational education or similar authority believes that he can enter into the proposed course with reasonable prospect for success.
The situation is also different in Australia.
Between states there are diversities in course offerings, although there is a fair measure of agreement on some of the more important matters concerning each of them.
The case of America is similar to Nigeria.
The student is expected to spend four years for the award of a bachelor’s degree in Business Education.
In addition each state or institution has it’s own special entry qualifications and develops plans for executing its business teacher education programme.
Other conditions for admission into American institutions are not found in the Nigerian case.
For instance, the student must have certain personal qualifications, which may not be formally stated by the college, state or school, but which will nevertheless determine, to a large extent, whether he is able to secure a position, and whether later on he will be able to advance to a better position.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State your support for or against this statement.
The student must have personal qualifications which must not be formally stated by the institution, state or nation before he/she is admitted into the business education programme.
22BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION d. Qualification - Business and Personal According to the American system, the business education teacher is given training during his academic preparation and certification.
His educational preparation focuses on general education as well as on professional areas.
In certification, the student must meet the stated requirements to teach.
The purpose of certification is to protect business education from unqualified teachers, to protect the value of certified teacher’s formal preparation by eliminating competition with unqualified applicants.
This was the reverse during the colonial era and consequently standard became low.
Nolan, (1967) believed that there was no other profession which had more opportunity to influence the youth and the future of any country than the teaching profession.
This is to say, that the success of any business education programme is largely determined, among other things, by the qualifications and background of the teachers .The job of the business education teacher is to teach.
It follows, therefore, that the business education teacher must have a degree of mastery in the subject matter he teaches.
He must be well educated and trained for his unique role as a teacher or office worker in order to transmit the relevant, practical skills and keep up in the challenging work environment.
3.4 Theoritical Versus Practical Orientation of the Business Education Teacher a.
Business education subjects are made up of skilled and non- skilled subjects and as such should involve practical and theoretical orientation in order to realise the goal of the programme.
The theoretical training is received in the classroom while the practical training is offered through field training.
In Nigeria most institutions that offer business teacher education programme neglect the practical aspect and sometimes substitute it with theory.
This was the situation in Italy in 1984 where a graduate could become an academic secondary school teacher without receiving any practical training.
This led to a deficiency in the training received by the teachers at that time, resulting in making irrelevant what the students learnt, as they could not be readily employed, since they were unemployable.
This was not the case with China and India.
There was a balance between theory and practice.
The Indian government, in order to achieve a balance between theory and practice selected people working in factories to teach the students, while teachers went back to factories to 23BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION improve their own skills.
This is so because business education is a programme that prepares the individual for two occupations, one in industries and the other in schools.
The idea of recruiting individuals from industries or from the road-side mechanics into vocational institutions was upheld some years ago in Nigeria but was never implemented, (National Policy on Education, 1981) .Most people in Nigeria are not yet convinced that those who posses the necessary skill but have no formal education could communicate effectively with the students in the formal setting.
Hitherto, the Nigerian government was expected to provide a solution to this problem by striking a balance between theory and practice in the area of vocational/technical education.
Such a move has however come in the form of SIWES.
b.
Introduction of Work Experience The government of India introduced work experience as an integral part of general education.
The introduction of work experience in the general education according to Vidyalankar was to compliment the theory learnt in school.
Another reason given for the introduction of work experience into general education was as a result of inadequate facilities in educational institutions.
The curriculum for business teacher education programme provides for the use of modern machines and practical work to enable the teachers to become not only capable of telling but also capable incapable of doing.
He, therefore, calls for a balance between theory and practice to make the teacher competent.
It was on account of this imbalance that late N. O. Anyaduba said that for the Junior and Senior Secondary tiers of the system, the Polytechnics seemed to be the most fertile ground for training technical staff to teach introductory technology, business studies and allied vocational courses.
According to him, the students would be exposed to high quality equipment and materials.
It is generally argued that although these groups of people were properly trained for the practical work they had no pedagogical training.
However, some Polytechnics had to designed programme in business teacher education and award Nigerian Certificate in Education (NCE) in Business Education to their products that were prepared to teach at the Junior Secondary School level.
That responsibility had to be rescinded after the establishment of the NCCE in 1991. c. Certification 24BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Since the majority of the students who enter the business programme do so with vocational intent, the effectiveness of a business education programme can be determined by comparing the results achieved with the requirements of business.
Nolan believed that this should be known as vocational business education programme.
For instance in the USA past certification had been granted on the basis of educational credits and perhaps teaching or work experience.
This is no longer so.
Emphasis is now changing to teacher competencies and provided the students meet the requirements of the college before graduation.
Based on observations and personal experience, these have not been achieved.
The idea of theory and practical can only balance when there is a Competency-Based teacher education programme.
Ekpeyong sometime ago lamented and asked the question: who certifies the uncertified business education teachers?
With this question can we now stress on competency-based business teacher education programme?
If so, who takes the lead?
4.0 CONCLUSION Every programme has a beginning and knowing how the programme started would help you to understand how it operates.
In other words, it gives you an in-depth knowledge of all the requirements of the programme as you get involved in teaching and learning and then establish a course of action for change in the programme as time goes on.
5.0 SUMMARY Business Education programme in other countries have had some rough beginning in private schools as was the case in Nigeria.
Their contents were like those of Nigeria but varied in some areas especially in terms of the calibre of people admitted into the programme.
Strong emphasis was placed on qualifications indicating that both business and academic qualifications needed to be integrated into the programme content.
Hence the facts that were to be taught to the students were meant to help convey messages that were considered as very important.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What pattern(s) of training did you see in other countries regarding the business education programme that you would like this country to adopt?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 25BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Njoku, C.U.
(1997).
An Appraisal of Business Education Programme in Selected Tertiary Institutions in Nigeria Unpublished.
Ph.D Thesis.
University of Nigeria Nsukka.
Osuala, E.C., (1989).
Principles & Practical of Business Education.
Obosi, Nigeria.
Pacific Correspondence College and Press Ltd. MODULE 2 OBJECTIVES AND CONTENTS OF BUSINESS EDUCATION PROGRAMME 26BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION INTRODUCTION The objectives of a business education programme have been varying with technological developments.
Also its objectives have different from level to level.
For instance, the objectives of business education at the junior secondary school level differ to some extent from those of the senior secondary school level.
Similarly the objectives at the tertiary level also differ from those of the polytechnics, colleges of education and universities.
Another point is that the name given to business education programme differs from one institution to another, a development which may affect the objectives, as well as contents of the programme.
All these issues will be discussed in detail later.
In this module, therefore, you will be introduced to the objectives of business education at all levels and the changes that may have occurred as a result of technological growth.
This would be discussed under the following units.
Unit 1 Objective of Business Education Unit 2 Content of the Business Education Programme Unit 3 Importance of Business Education UNIT 1 THE CONTENT OF THE CURRICULUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Objectives of Business Education in Private Vocational Schools 3.1.1 Objectives in Vocational Schools 3.2 Objectives of Business Education at the Junior Secondary School Level 3.3 Objectives of Business Education at the Senior Secondary School Level 3.4 Objectives of Business Education at the Tertiary Level 3.5 The UNESCO and ILO objectives for TVE of which Business Education is a Part 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 27BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION No course would achieve its purpose without a proper focus.
The objective of any course of study or unit gives the direction for action.
It is very important that you set the objectives with the right domain or taxonomy of education.
The objectives of business education have been set out under vocational education of which business education is a part.
The UNESCO and ILO recommendations spelt the objectives under the Technical and Vocational Education UNESCO, (2002).
All these will be helpful to you as we progress in the teaching and learning process.
In this unit, you will be introduced to the objectives of Business education at the different levels.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • explain the objectives of business education at the different levels of education; • discuss convincingly the usefulness to the different segments in the system; and • appreciate the importance of business education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The objectives of business education are numerous because they differ from one level to another.
As a result of this, you need to know the objectives of the various levels and the rationale for them in teaching and learning.
3.1 Objectives of Business Education a.
The general aim and objectives of business education curriculum as stated by Osuala (1989) are as follows: b.
To make available to all students opportunities to explore and learn the world of business and the possible interest and potential careers it has to offer.
1.
To develop in all students the ability to choose discriminately and to use wisely the goods and services that business is to offer.
2.
To assist in developing, on the part of the students, interest in of the various occupations to be found in the world of business.
3.
To develop in all students the practical way of understanding, 28BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION appreciating the actual functioning of our economic system.
4.
To enable students to acquire basic skills in business occupations as beginners who expect to follow business as a career.
5.
To prepare students to enter and succeed in business occupations as beginners who expect to follow business as a career.
6.
To prepare students to perform business activities common to many professional, industrial, agricultural services and home-making careers; and 7.
To prepare students for more effective study in the fields of business and education beyond the secondary school education level.
Ubulom, (2003), extracted the objectives of business education from the curricula of Rivers State College of Education and the Rivers State University of Science and Technology as follows: 1.
Produce well-qualified and competent graduates in business education who will be able to teach business subjects in the secondary schools.
2.
Produce business graduates who will be able to inculcate the vocational aspects of business education into Society in the secondary schools.
3.
Produce graduate business teachers who will start the so much desired revolution of vocational development right from the Nigerian primary and secondary schools.
4.
Produce teachers who will engage in professional studies of business education.
5.
Produce strong advocates and promoters of viable industrial and business enterprises.
6.
Enable graduates of the programmes have an intelligent understanding of the interesting complex of the business world.
However, the National Policy on Education makes the following provisions for technical and vocational education.
3.1.1 Objectives in Vocational Schools 1.
To provide technical knowledge and vocational skills necessary for 29BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION industrial and commercial development: 2.
To produce people who can apply scientific knowledge to the improvement and solution of environmental problems for the use and convenience of man: 3.
To give an introduction to professional studies in engineering and other technologies.
I have given as many objectives as possible from the different authors to enable you widened your knowledge on the objectives of business education.
3.2 Objectives of Business Education at the Junior Secondary School Level According to Popham (1975) the purpose of business education at this level is economic education.
It is called education about business.
Its purpose could be achieved through the social business subjects.
This means that the objectives at this level are: 1.
To prepare students to function intelligently in a business society.
To achieve this the student will be exposed to social business subject and which is divided into (1) Social economic that will help him lay the foundation to understand the structure of business and how it operates and (2) Consumer economics, which will provide him with the skills, and understandings that will enable him carry out his own business affairs with ease.
2.
To lay the foundation for more advanced business subjects (Nolan et al).
The student at this level lays the foundation that would enable him/her have the right focus of the course and this would help his/her move to the next level with ease.
For instance, the foundation laid in commerce; office practice or bookkeeping would help the student to take up economics, introduction to business or accounting with ease.
3.
To enable youth to have an intelligent understanding of the complexity of technology (NPE 1998).
Technology is never static.
The student at this level will be exposed to the complexity of nature of technology and how they function.
4.
To provide the students with explanatory skills.
The skills to be acquired at this level would enable them to determine whether or not they have interest in the course as to continue at the senior secondary level.
The students at this level will now have the pre- 30BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION requisite qualification to be or not to be on the course.
They are: 1.
To enable students acquire basic business skills for use in their personal affairs.
2.
To provide the students with exploratory skills.
3.
To lay the foundation for more advanced business subjects (Nolan et al).
4.
To enable youths to have an intelligent understanding of the increasing complexity of technology (NPE 1998).
3.3 Objectives of Business Education at Senior Secondary Level Business education as part of TVE as a portion for an occupational field should provide the foundation for productive and satisfying careers.
1.
To provide the individual with broad knowledge and generic skills applicable to a number of occupations within a given field so that the individual is not limited in his/her choice of occupation and is able to transfer from one field to another during his/ her working life.
2.
To give training and impact the necessary skills to individuals to enable them become self-reliant.
3.
To help students prepare for, choose, enter into and progress satisfactorily in occupations of their choice.
(Osuala 2004).
4.
To provide the background in terms of knowledge, skills and attitudes for continuing education at any point in the individual’s working life 5.
To enable students acquire functional skills in their chosen field.
6.
To make available to students occupational information so as to enable them understand and appreciate how they function.
7.
To provide students with the appropriate training that would help them fit in the world of work or any where else they might find themselves.
8.
To enable students become responsible citizens and become 31BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION intelligent consumer’s of goods and services.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE i.
As you study the objectives, make a mental picture of what each objective is out to achieve.
ii.
You can work as a team.
3.4 Objectives of Business Education at the Tertiary Level Njoku (2006) gave the objectives of Business Education as follows; 1.
To empower you with desirable skills, knowledge and value to perform specific functions so as to become self reliant.
2.
To help you appreciate the world around you and contribute maximally to the social and economic development of the nation.
3.
To empower you in such a way that you will develop your intellectual capability that would help you to make informed decisions in all sphere of life.
4.
To help you become a judicious spender and develop proper values for the achievement of healthy living and growth of the nation 5.
To understand the political framework of a nation so that you can contribute to national economic and development of your country.
3.5 The UNESCO and ILO Objectives of Technical and Vocational Education We have seen and studied the objectives above, now it is important we study as well the objectives of Technical and Vocational Education as stated in the UNESCO AND ILO Document that is out to revitalise TVE in which business education is a part.
The first and second parts have been completed and have been proved successful in almost all the Polytechnics in Nigeria.
It is also important to let you know that in 2001 UNESCO went into agreement with the Federal government in order to revitalise TVE.
It was on this account that the following objectives emerged, and the document stated as follows; 1.
Preparation for occupational fields and for effective participation in 32BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION the world of work.
2.
As aspect of life long learning and a preparation for responsible citizenship.
3.
An instrument for promoting environmentally sustainable development.
4.
A method of facilitating poverty alleviation.
4.0 CONCLUSION A good knowledge of the objectives of business education at the different levels of education will help the teacher to understand the process towards the achievement of set goals.
In this regard, you as a teacher would have the right focus by having a clear understanding of the teaching and learning environment.
5.0 SUMMARY Objectives of business education differ at the different levels.
Hence, a thorough understanding of the objectives at each level is very important for teaching and learning.
The teacher has to know the objectives at each level for him /her to discuss convincingly during the teaching and learning process.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Having gone through 3.4 I would like you to write out in your own words how you could explain this to a person who may want to study business education but did not clearly understand the objectives of the programme.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS UNESCO and ILO Recommendations Technical and Vocational Education and Training for the 21st Century.
(2001).
Njoku, C.U.
(2006).
Business Education and Value Orientation for National Economic Empowerment and Development.
Paper presented at the Owo, 2006 Annual Conference of the Association of Business Ltd of Nigeria.
(ABEN).
UNIT 2 CONTENT OF THE BUSINESS EDUCATION PROGRAMME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 33BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 3.1 Content of Business Education in Private Vocational School 3.2 Content of Business Education at the JSS Level 3.3 Content of Business Education at the SSS Level 3.4 Content of Business Education at the Tertiary Level 3.5 Traditional Courses 3.6 Proposed Contents 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The content of any programme of study is derived from the objectives.
This is to say that the objectives would determine what is to be taught and how it should be taught.
While the needs of the society would influence the objective the curriculum is out to achieve.
The content must meet the needs of the learner, society and business of development to take place at the different levels.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • describe the content of business education programme; • defend the rationale for the items in the content; and • select what should be in the content of a business education programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Since the objectives of business education programme vary from one level to the other, it means that the contents vary too.
Hence, it becomes imperative for you to be exposed to the different contents and why they are considered relevant.
These would be discussed below.
3.1 Content of Business Education in Private Vocational School They include the following subjects: Vocational Subjects General Subjects * Typewriting * Economics * Shorthand * Commerce 34BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION * Office Practice * Bible Knowledge * English Language * Government * Bookkeeping/Accounts * Secretarial Studies * Maths and Business maths 3.2 Content of Business Education at the Junior Secondary School Level At this level, the objectives of the programme as said earlier would be considered based on the needs of the learner, society and business.
Similarly, the contents would have a close relationship with the objectives.
As I told you in Module 1, Unit 3, business education has two facets and they have general education and vocational education aspects.
The Junior Secondary School level is focused on General Education.
At the JSS level Business studies is presented as relatively integrated subject which intended to be taught as unit of Business Studies, not as single subjects.
The following include the components of business studies: • Typewriting • Shorthand • Commerce • Book keeping • Office Practice 3.3 Content of Business Education at the SSS Level • Book-keeping • Commerce • Shorthand • Typewriting • Economics 3.4 Content of Business Education at the Tertiary Level The content at the Tertiary level is grouped into the following headings: 1. Business education courses vocational 2.
Education courses 3.
General business courses 4.
Teaching Practices 5.
Industrial work experience 35BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 1. Business Education Courses/Vocational - They are keyboarding (Computing) Accounting Business Maths, Shorthand 2.
General Education Courses – English Humanities, Mathematics, Psychology, Sociology 3.
General Business Courses – Economics, commerce, business law, office practice, personnel management entrepreneurship education, book keeping, consumer education (marketing), human relations, professional work ethics, 4.
Professional Education Courses – Curriculum development, methodology, research techniques, principles of business education.
Having studied all these subjects, it is important for us to know the courses studied in institutions offering business education subjects in Nigeria and identify their lapses in order to propose remedies.
a.
Courses for Nigerian Colleges of Education 1.
Advanced Finance 14.
Methodology 2.
Accounting 15.
Office Practice 3.
Auditing & Taxation 16.
Principles of Acct.
4.
Basic Maths 17.
Principles of Mkt.
5.
Bus.
Fin & Econ.
Institution 18.
Principles of Mgt.
6. Business Law 19.Public Sector economics 7.
Bus.
Statistics 20.Econs.
8.
Commerce 21.Research 9.
Computer Application 22.Project 10.
Cost Accounting 23.Shorthand Theory 11.
Financial accounting 24.Typewriting (Keyboarding) 12. International Econs.
25.Secretarial English 13.
Intro to Economics 26.SIWES All the 8 Federal Colleges of Education (Okene, Pankshin, Ondo, Kano, Katsina, Abeokuta, Kontogora and Obudu) studied offered all the courses stated above.
Only one of the colleges offered Secretarial English.
b.
Standard Courses for Federal Government Owned Universities offering Business Education Courses S/N Courses No.
S/N Courses No.
Offering Offering 1.
Industrial Work 6 12.
Evaluation of Voc.
6 36BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Exp Ed.
2 Methodology in 6 13.
Foundations of Voc.
2 Bus.
Ed.
Ed.
3 Project 6 14 Research Design in 3 Voc.
/Bus.
Ed.
4.
Bus.
5 15.
Admin of Voc.
Ed.
1 Communication 5 Consumer 1 16.
Prins.
Of Bus.
Ed.
4 Econs.
6.
Office Tech.
2 17.
Production Typing 3 7.
Prins.
Of Small 3 18.
Seminar in Bus.
Ed.
4 Bus.
Mgt.
8.
Admin.
Office 5 19.
Shorthand 4 Mgt.
9.
Bus.
Law & 5 20.
Transcription 4 Govt.
Reg.
10.
Bus.
1 21.
Typewriting 4 Organisation 11 Comp.
History 2 22.
Vocational 2 of Bus.
& Mkt Guidance Ed.
c. Professional Education Courses S/N Courses No.
S/N Courses No.
Offering Offering 1.
Curr.
Implemen- 6 4.
Intro.
to Educ.
1 tation and Instruction 2.
Curr.
Theory & 5 5.
Measurement and 6 Planning Evaluation 3.
Teaching 6 6.
Educational Psychology 6 Practice d. Marketing/Accounting/Office Studies Components S/N Courses No.
S/N Courses No.
Offering Offering 1.
Element of 6 7.
Nigerian Marketing 1 Accounting System 2.
Element of 3 8.
Fundamentals of 1 Marketing Govt.
Acct.
System 3.
Intro.
To Fin.
5 Acct.
37BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 4.
Shorthand 4 Transcription 5.
Advanced 4 Typewriting 6.
Audio 4 Typewriting f. Social Sciences and Statistics Courses S/N Courses No.
S/N Courses No.
Offering Offering 1.
Humanities 1 5.
Prins.
of Economics 3 2.
Use of 4 6.
Introduction to 4 English Computer 3.
Computer 3 7.
Natural Sciences 2 Application 4.
Micro Econs 3 8.
Statistics for Soc.
4 Theory Sciences From all the tables, you can see that the courses were not uniform in and this may be the reason for the refusal of institutions to accept graduates of other institutions in the same programme for a higher degree programme.
More on this will be discussed under issues in business education.
3.5 Traditional Subjects in Business Education In our society some group of people are known for certain traditions.
You have your own tradition that whenever a particular thing is mentioned others would know that this is the tradition of the Yorubas, Ibos or the Ikweres.
Business education has its own traditional subjects that whenever such subjects are mentioned people would know that they belong to the family of business education.
The major traditional subjects of business education are: Shorthand and typewriting.
These are highly skilled subject.
Office practice is rarely mentioned as a traditional subject.
a. Shorthand Since the introduction of shorthand as part of the business education programme, its study has been taken seriously until recently.
The teaching of shorthand was taken seriously because of its great need by verbalism reporters and those requested to be present during proceedings.
It was reported that no one could talk of typewriting without any mention of shorthand.
Hence, this gave the 2 subjects a 38BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION prominent place in the business education programme.
I know you must have heard people or relations say that business education programme is all about typewriting and shorthand.
Well, do not blame them because the two subjects are just like sisters.
I hope you would not say that shorthand is no longer in use and so talking about it is not necessary.
It is important you get to know much more about the course of your study even if they are not currently used.
In shorthand therefore, the following skills are developed: 1.
Manual Skill You are required to develop the correct outline and apply dexterity.
Hence, you develop the ability to differentiate between light and heavy strokes and be consistent with the length of strokes from the initial stage of the study.
This would be carried thorough-out the training and into the teaching of the subject.
2.
Mental Skill Here you learn how not to write mechanically.
You grab the sense of the passage and would consistently display a thorough mastering of the sense of the passage.
b. Typewriting Typewriting as one of the major traditional subjects was offered by almost all business schools because of its own importance then.
Offices during the colonial days were engaged in typing business letters and several documents that kept the offices moving then.
The colonial masters used typewriters as their major office tool; hence they believed that students after leaving school would need the typing skill for personal use and for office use.
At that time it was believed that no matter your area of study there was need for you to acquire typewriting skill.
You need to type your document, communicate whenever you like and be employed with the skill you have acquired.
A third traditional subject was clerical office practice or what is today called office practice or secretarial practice.
The reason for this traditional subject was due to the importance attached to the production of good documents.
There was need for proper organization of office documents in relation to filing, retrieval, 39BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION pay rolling, purchases and sales, operation of office machines and billing, among others.
4.0 CONCLUSION The content of the business education programme are “make-ups” of the objectives at the different levels.
Knowing all this would help you as a teacher to direct the teaching of the course towards the desired objectives stated for learning at the different levels of education.
5.0 SUMMARY Several course contents have been mapped out for the different levels.
Some of the contents were not appropriate while others were not appropriate.
It is of great importance to you as a teacher to select appropriate contents for a programme that would help you achieve your objectives bearing in mind the passage of time and what is relevant or suitable to you as a learner.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Having studied the courses listed, I would like you to identify those courses you know that are not appropriate/relevant to the learner bearing in mind the objectives of the programme.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Njoku, C.U.
(1997).
An Appraisal of Business Education Programme in Selected Tertiary Institutions in Nigeria Unpublished.
Ph.D Thesis.
University of Nigeria Nsukka.
Olofintila, A.O.
(2006).
Business Education a Gateway to National Development and Survival.
Book of Readings, 1 (6).
122 – 131.
Ubulom, W.J.
(2003).
An Evaluation of Undergraduate Business Education Programmes of Tertiary Institutions in River State.
UNIT 3 IMPORTANCE OF BUSINESS EDUCATION TO THE INDIVIDUAL/LEARNER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance to Student-Trainees 3.2 Importance to the Nation 3.3 Importance to Entrepreneurs 40BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 3.4 Importance to Other Categories of People 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The importance of business education cut across many aspects of our lives and the economy of every nation.
Unfortunately, some people still believe that business education is not as important as other courses, hence should not be given a prominent place in any system because of it perceived poor image.
It’s importance cannot be neglected by any government that wants to develop and sustain development especially as it affects its businesses and the citizens.
Details of all these would be discussed under different units and sub headings.
2.0 OBJECTIVES IMPORTANCE OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Having understood the objectives of business education, it is now necessary for you to know the importance of business education to the individual.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance to Student-Trainees 1.
It is important because you would acquire skills that would enable you engage in any meaningful employment.
You are employed or you become employer of labour.
2.
With the understanding of business education you can make informed decisions as a consumer of goods and services.
41BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Avoid spontaneous buying and know which products or services meet your immediate needs.
You should be in a position to ask questions about the how of a product.
1.
It is important to you because you are in a position to spend judiously and live a life devoid of excessive acquisition of wealth, which has led us into social vices such as corruption, sexual abuse as well as inefficiency and waste of the nation’s resources.
Today, you can see that the country we live in is full of individuals deep rooted in excessive acquisition of wealth which the government is trying to curb.
I feel that business education will solve this problem as mentioned above.
2.
With business education you will be able to appreciate the world around you, develop a high sense of commitment as you are doing with your studies today.
Similarly, you develop respect for maintenance culture which is lacking in most of us today.
How many of us believe in respect for dignity of labour and maintenance value?
I tell you if up to 40% of the work force believes in it, then Nigeria would be a changed place.
As you will now become patriotic and help safeguard the nation’s wealth, you can start the change.
3.
It is important for you to understand the socio, political and economic frame work of the country.
With this you should be able to contribute your own quota to the economic development of this country.
Your knowledge and competence on business education can place you in a position which you can contribute best effort to economic development programmes such as NEED and other poverty alleviation programmes as put forward by the Federal government.
4. Business education is very important because it gives you the new life especially as regards to your value system.
It will give you a new focus on environmental management, amicable conflict resolution, and to shy away from prostitution, violence, cultism, rape, drugs, etc.
5. Business education is important because it inculcates in you the sense of discipline and patience through the study of courses such as human relations, professional ethics, entrepreneurship etc.
You are well placed to work with people and accommodate others.
6.
It offers you the opportunity to operate successfully your own business and be able to determine the flow of business at each time, thereby reducing the risk of business failure.
42BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 3.2 Importance to the Nation 1. Business Education is important to the nation because more people would have skills that can make them ready employers of labour.
Dependence on the nation would be minimised as people become job creators.
2.
As people develop proper values towards work they tend to contribute more economically to the nation.
For instance, the nation is divorced from violence, sexual immorality, pride, corruption and examination malpractice among others.
3.
As individual citizens become judicious spenders, the country gains by way of investing excess resources on meaningful projects that would lead to economic development.
Today, we are talking about poor infrastructural facilities in our educational and health systems, this can be avoided if we spend wisely.
4.
If one understands one’s right as a citizen of this country and enforce them the country would have less, to worry about but would rather devote more time and resources on development.
5.
If we as citizens of this country develop sound moral value then the country will be free from insecurity and peace will reign supreme.
More people will invest in the country and there will be increased in growth and development.
6. Business education has made it possible for those who want to be retrained in order to up grade their skills and have access to education.
In this way, people who finish secondary grammar school with no saleable opportunity skills will have to acquire skills that make them become functional, through retraining programmes.
From the points raised here it is important to embrace business education because it prepares you for the world of work.
First you are free to take up teaching.
Second, to become a business man 3.3 Importance to Entrepreneurs 1.
As an entrepreneur you will have a better understanding of how government policies function and affect you as a business man.
For example, with the reform agenda and the gender mainstreaming you will apply the different strategies needed and make profits with ease.
43BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 2.
You would not only know how to organise and operate your business successfully but manage staff, and resources, with meagre resources and still maximise your profit.
3. Business education is important to those with entrepreneurial spirit because it would enable them to engage in various businesses with success.
4.
Most financial records today are in one trouble or another.
This is because some businessmen lack the skill and knowledge to maintain a complete and accurate financial record.
With a thorough knowledge of business education you would be able to keep adequate records of all your financial transactions, thus preventing your business from collapse.
5.
The keeping of accurate financial records and your ability to retrieve them will serve as a guide to financial planning and welfare of yourself, and your family.
6. Business education is important to everyone because the knowledge acquired will enable people keep proper record of yourself, business and family.
In addition you will be able to separate business accounts without the other suffering, similarly regular analysis of transactions i.e.
debits and credits.
7.
It can enable us to avoid financial losses through waste in the purchase of office items: as we bear the criteria for selection of equipment in mind and involve staff who should take part in the exercise.
8.
Not all documents that we would like our secretary to type.
There are highly confidential documents we would like to keep only to ourselves and the recipients.
Again, we may want to save some documents in the computer, which we would not want any one else to open.
An understanding of the various ways of handling such matters can be said to be the advantage we derive from business education.
9.
Other importance of business education to you as an entrepreneur include: a.
Your understanding of your customers, staffs and retaining them.
b.
Handling and dealing with difficult staff/customers.
c. Safe guarding of your documents d. Developing professionals • As a prospective entrepreneur state 2 importance of business 44BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION education to you and your family.
10.
As an entrepreneur, business education is important to you in advertising.
You should be able to know where to advertise.
Strategies to use should include appeal methods that arouse the interest of customers, monitoring of your competitors and other media most appropriate to the consumers.
* Examine The Table Below And Appreciate The Ways The Different Business Education Subjects Can Play An Important Role In Your Life.
ROLE OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Subjects Objectives 1.
Book keeping - accurate keeping of financial resources - understanding ways of recording business transactions - improving arithmetical skill/develop basic skills in arithmetic 2.
Office Practice - understanding the different filling system - able to retrieve information easily - able to set different office machines design forms etc 3. Business Communication - write mail able letters 45BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION - able to deal with customers by using the appropriate word - speak fluently - able to write /develop convincing letters 4. Business Mathematics - able to work out trade and cash discounts - able to convert numbers - able to multiply, subtract, add etc with ease 5.
Secretarial Duties - able to develop human relation skills - use initiative tact - handle minor routine duties - know the importance of been honest, punctual etc.
6.
Marketing - acquire effective sales habit - able to analyse situations 7.
Word Processing Accurate processing and management of information 3.4 The Importance to others a.
The Physically Challenged To say that one is physically challenged does not mean that the person can do nothing physically or mentally.
Business education courses would be of paramount importance to you in this case because you can use your head or mental faculty to be meaningful to yourself and society .You can set up your own business or be employed with the skill you have acquired.
b.
Pregnant Women on Maternity Leave/Men or Women on Annual Leave/Vacation The beauty of business education, as a life-long process is that it provides opportunity for workers, men and women alike, to earn additional income through training or acquiring employable skills in computer, sewing baking, etc.
Let me tell you my story in 1992 when I was on vacation, I used the time to learn how to use the computer at IITA Ibadan.
In 1994 when I was on my maternity leave I used the period to learn to sew and bake queen’s cake and chinchim.
In 1998, I used the long vacation to update my knowledge in computer Microsoft, excel, power point, etc.
c. The Less Privileged 46BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION The private vocational schools or business centres offer business education courses at an affordable cost.
You are free to take single subjects such as production of documents, etc on part time basis.
With the skills acquired you would be in a position to fend for yourself and meet up other expenses.
4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of any course once it is known to the individual acts as a stimulant to the learner.
Knowing the importance of business education would help a teacher to inspire the students to conscientiously work towards the achievement of their goals.
In effect, the students become act co-participants in the learning and teaching process.
5.0 SUMMARY Business education is important to everyone – individuals, nations, entrepreneurs, etc.
Its importance to each group is highly needed for them to properly understand how the economy operates.
In this regard, explaining the importance of business education to the learner would help them to appreciate studying the course and apply it when the need arises.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT In your own words, explain 2 importance of business education to a friend who is unemployed and has always seen business education as typewriting and shorthand only.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ntukidem, E. (2003).
Need for Career Guidance for Business Education Students.
4.
(1) 134 – 139.
Njoku, C.U.
and Nwosu, A..N. (2002).
Role of Business Education in Sustaining Small Scale Businesses for National Development.
Business Education Journal.
III.
(5) 95 – 105.
Osuala, E.C., (2004).
Principles and Methods of Business and Computer Education.
Enugu, Enugu State: Cheston Agency Ltd. 47BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION MODULE 3 ISSUES IN BUSINESS EDUCATION PROGRAMME INTRODUCTION The major issues in business education programme have been attributed to the ineffective implementation of the programme.
The issues cut across the different aspects of the programme especially those that have to do with achievement of goals.
The content for example is a major issue upon which if not handled can crumble a programme.
One other issue is concern teaching the teaching methods together with instructional facilities available.
All these would be discussed in later units.
In this module you would be introduced to the major issues in Business education under the following units.
Unit 1 The Content of the curriculum 48BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Unit 2 Facilities for Teaching Unit 3 Methods of Teaching Business Education Subjects Unit 4 Qualification and Quality of Teachers UNIT 1 THE CONTENT OF THE CURRICULUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Terms 3.2 Inadequacy of Contents 3.3 Non Relevance of Course Content 3.4 Poor Implementation of the Curriculum 3.5 Analysis of Issues 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The curriculum content of business education programme consists of different courses with different objectives.
These courses are included in the curriculum with the intention that all the contents would be adequate enough to bring about the desired behaviour .As the learner is expected to acquire skills –knowledge, affective and psychomotor.
In this unit you would be introduced to issues arising from the content of business education curriculum.
2.0 OBJECTIVES • explain the major issues in business education curriculum; and • determine those that would be involved in selecting curriculum content.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are doubts about the content of the curriculum.
Several courses make up the content.
One of the issues raised has to do with the inadequacy of the contents.
It is important for you to understand whatever issues exist in a programme so that you can remedy the gaps created by them.
49BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 3.1 Definition of Terms a.
Inadequacy of Curriculum Content This means that the content is not adequate to meet the requirement or fully sufficient for what it has been stated to achieve.
b. Irrelevancies of Curriculum Content It indicates that most of the contents of the curriculum do not show relevance in terms of the objectives stated for the programme.
c. Poor Implementation of Curriculum This means that teaching and learning are not in agreement with what is prescribed by the curriculum.
It is either that implementation is partial or not followed at all.
3.2 Inadequacies in the Curriculum Content of Business Education The content of business education curriculum has been reported as inadequate at all levels.
An example of such could be seen in a study by Njoku, 1997 on tertiary institutions, Njoku (1990) on Junior Secondary Schools and Nwosu, 1999 on private secondary school.
1.
Most of the courses do not cover the scope of knowledge and skills required for the effective preparation of business education teachers today.
2.
Highly needed courses are not available in the curriculum.
Typewriting, Administrative office management and Transcription are not included in the curricula of some institutions.
Such inadequacies in the curriculum could lead to the production of half-baked graduates.
That is, they would not acquire the necessary skills for effective performance.
Such teacher cannot compete with business education graduates elsewhere.
A probable reason for the above inadequacies may be that business education experts and relevant stakeholders are not often invited to participate during the development of the curriculum.
Today, some ministries handpick people to develop the curriculum for teachers at certain levels.
This could generate lots of problems, not only for the institutions, but also for their products.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 50BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION In developing the contents of business education curriculum, who are those you would involve and why?
3.3 Non Relevance of the Course Content A business education programme should include courses that would prepare the student for saleable skills, help them have an understanding of the economic system and how a business operates.
It was also to be geared towards helping you to acquire knowledge, and attitude/value that would enable you function in the world you live.
To this end, subjects that would meet the objectives set or goals must be in the content of the curriculum.
A good curriculum should also be geared towards helping the students to acquire knowledge, attitudes and values that would enable them function efficiently in the world of work.
To this end, subjects that would meet the objectives or set goals must be included in the curriculum.
Again the content of traditional business education curriculum is geared towards the choice of the person at the head.
The courses stated in unit 2 of module 2 would give you a clearer picture of the issue discussed.
In this regard therefore: Should the curriculum include all the knowledge and skills needed for the programme or should it include all those needed to be acquired while on the job?
This question should be used for class or group discussion.
3.4 Poor Implementation of the Curriculum Today the training of business educators tends to tend to deviate from what is contained in the curriculum: a.
Industrial training is no longer carried out the way it was originally done.
Should the ITF allow students to look for places to do their industrial attachment or should the college provide them with establishments for SIWES?
This is a critical question for discussion.
b.
Should the institutions visit the students to find out whether they are properly placed or should the students report back to the school on how they were placed?
Treat this question as that in (b) above.
c. Time allocation.
Another aspect that shows inadequacies is the time allocated to the subjects on the school timetable.
In some schools Njoku (1997), and Nwosu,(1999) observed that inadequate number of hours allotted to business education subjects at all levels was considered a major issue that needed proper attention.
51BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 3.5 Selection of Subjects At the different levels of education the selection of subjects to be offered was to a large extent influenced by the person at the head, the time (space) available on the time table, and the competence of the teachers available, in some cases.
For instance, in most vocational schools office practice, shorthand, typewriting, commerce and bookkeeping were offered, but a few others offered secretarial studies as a major course.
Although the state ministries of education approved the courses for them the schools were still selective in what they teach.
At the JSS level, business education subjects are put under Group B as Vocational electives.
This becomes a source of concern to all of us.
Nwosu (2005) reported that not all the schools studied offered most of business education subjects.
This can show that the programme at this level is not uniformly taught by schools.
3.6 Analysis of the Issues On the issues below you are required to take a stand.
The teacher’s discussion is not supposed to influence your stand.
Hence, below is a list of critical issues in business education that you have to brainstorm with.
(Njoku, 1997) All these emanated from the curriculum of a business education programme.
S/N Issues Make Your Remarks 1.
Should poor implementation of the content of the curriculum be attributed to teachers lack of competence or to non-availability of teaching facilities?
2.
Should lack of uniformity in the content of the curriculum for institutions offering business education subjects be discouraged or should it be encouraged?
3.
Should students be supervised by their school during industrial attachment programme or should the school allow the firm to do so and report back to it?
4.
Should the selection of teaching materials be based on the content of the curriculum or 52BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION should the school acquire all the facilities prescribed in the curriculum only?
4.0 CONCLUSION Knowing what issues are in the content of the curriculum would help the teacher to have an in-depth knowledge of what is required and understand what is needed for teaching and learning to take place.
5.0 SUMMARY Issues in the content of a curriculum are diversified in nature.
This is because they have to touch all aspects of teaching and learning.
It is pertinent for you to understand what they are and be able to apply them as the need arises.
Issues are best handled if you are allowed to brainstorm and generate ideas that would lead to further issues.
In this case you have to make use of different methods of teaching and learning styles in order to get the best from your learning efforts.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT In developing the contents of business education curriculum, who are those you would involve and why?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Njoku, C.U.
(1990).
Evaluation of the Junior Secondary School in Imo State Model Schools.
Unpublished.
Thesis.
M.ED (Bus.Ed).
University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Njoku, C.U.
(1997).
An Appraisal of Business Education Programmes in Selected Tertiary Institutions.
Unpublished.
PhD Thesis.
University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Nwosu, A.N.
(1999).
The Status of business Education Programme of Private Secondary Schools in Imo State .
M.Sc.
Unpublished Thesis University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Osuala, E.C.
(1989).
Principles and Practice of Business Education.
Anambra: Pacific Publishers.
53BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION UNIT 2 FACILITIES IN BUSINESS EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Facilities in Business Education is as important as the Business Education Teacher 3.1.1 Facts about Teaching Facilities in Business Education 3.2Facilities for Teaching Business Education Subjects 3.3Criterion for Selection 3.4Who Selects the Facilities 3.5The Core Issues 4 Conclusion 5 Summary 6 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 54BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Facilities for teaching and learning in any programme are usually given a prominent position in the field of instructional technology.
Just as Nolan said, it is not possible to achieve the objectives of a well-designed programme without adequate facilities.
This means that facilities must be adequate and functional 2.0 OBJECTIVES • know the facilities for the teaching of business education subjects; and • explain the criteria for the selection of facilities in business education programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Facilities in Business Education is as important as the Business Education Teacher 3.1.1 Facts about Teaching Facilities in Business Education The facilities you will need for your business education courses would depend on: 1. a.
The content of each course.
b.
The objective of the programme for each course.
c. In some cases the method of teaching.
d. The level and number of students.
2.
Adequacy This means that facilities needed for instruction must be capable of taking care of all those who need them For instance, in a class of 30,36computers must be made available.
So that the teacher would have 1 for demonstration and the rest would be left as stand-by.
3.
Relevant How relevant are the facilities to the course content and objectives as well as societal needs?
To understand this the facilities will be listed against the courses.
55BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Teaching Facilities and Relevant Courses where they are needed Facilities Office Sh/Adv.
Typ Office Acct Off Tech.
Trans.
Prac.
Sec Mgt Duties 1.
Typewriter (Manual) * * 2.
Electric/Electronic Typewriter * * 3.
Dictating Machine * * 4.
Calculating Machine * 5.
Duplicating Machine * * * * 6.
Photocopying Machine * * * 7.
Shredding Machine * * 8.
Demonstration Stand * * * 9.
Stappling Machine 56BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION * * * * 10.
Scanning Machine * * * * 11.
Projectors * * 12.
Cassette Tape Recorder * * * * 13.
File Cabinet * * * 14.
Perforator * * * * 15.
Word Perfect * * * * 16.
Staple Remover * * * 17.
Computer * * * * * * 18.
Stop Watch * * 3.2 Criteria for the Selection/Purchase of Equipment for Business Education The selection of equipment should be based on the following criteria.
1.
Cost of Equipment Money is hard to come by and organisations are trying to make judicious use of the little resources they have.
The cost of the equipment will to a large extent determine whether or not such equipment should be selected or not.
That is to say that if the benefit to be derived from the use of equipment is not worth the cost, it should be discontinued.
2.
Objective of Programme The objective of the programme must be taken into serious consideration.
Some people make purchase without due consideration to the objective of the programme, thereby wasting scarce resources.
For example, the objective of a course such as office practice/management may state that students should be trained in the use of shredding and photocopying machines.
In this case, there is need to purchase the equipment because the word ‘use’ connotes that students have to be taught using the equipment before they can use them.
This means that the equipment must meet the requirements of the curriculum.
3.
Life Span You need to ask the question: what is the life span of the equipment?
Of course no one would like to waste money on equipment that would not pay back.
You can do this by finding out from other institutions or business that uses such equipment to find out how the equipment has really served them.
57BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 4.
Supply of Power We all know how erratic our power supply has been and the cost of fuel or diesel to run generators.
If the equipment needs power to function and you have epileptic power supply, it is not advisable to go for purchase generated equipment when the manual one can provide you with the same services.
5.
Length of Use If the equipment were to be used for a short time, purchasing the equipment would not be advisable.
It is better for you to go leasing or hiring and save the money for something else.
Well, do I say that those who have the money may not care?
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
No matter the cost of equipment, once the objective of the programme incorporates the need for that equipment, it must be purchased.
ii.
Take a stand on this statement.
6.
Cost of Maintenance Equipment for teaching needs adequate and regular maintenance to meet the demands of the students.
If the cost of maintenance is high, it is clear that the equipment will not be given adequate maintenance.
In the long run, it will be dumped and the money wasted.
7.
Availability of Skilled Manpower Closely related to the maintenance of equipment is the availability of manpower.
If skilled manpower is not readily available, then you may have to go outside to look for people to carry out the repairs, and that would be at an exorbitant cost 8.
Modernity/Replica of what is used in Business The equipment for a business education programme must be modern and a replica of what is used in the business world.
This is because at the end of your training you will be expected to work in an organisation or be self-employed.
9.
Model 58BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION What is the model?
I know most of you check the model or make of a car before buying.
So also it is for such items as office equipment.
The model would help you to determine whether or not to continue with the purchase.
10.
Space Do you have the right space and the right room temperature and the proper layout for the equipment?
Office equipment especially the computer requires a particular room temperature and as such that condition has to be complied with for it to last longer.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Of all the criteria given, which 2 do you consider most important to others?
ii.
State convincingly your reason(s) 3.3 Who Selects the Equipment The selection of equipment for the teaching of business education courses should be a collective responsibility of the teachers of business education.
This is because business education teachers are usually trained in the teaching of all the business education subjects.
Furthermore, the school administrator should be involved since they are the policy makers.
The Head of department of 4.
Servicing the equipment: Use the right (skilled) technicians and materials/spare Parts 5.
Timing: Carrying out the servicing at the right time 6.
Pressure: Ensure that too much pressure is not placed on it i.e.
number of students/workers using the equipment has to be minimized 7.
Constant check: Check from time to time if there are possible faults in the equipment Core Issues a.
Facilities It has often been observed by teachers of business education that facilities for the teaching of business education subjects are not 59BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION adequate, functional and in most cases relevant.
The need for up to date and adequate facilities for the teaching and learning process cannot be over-emphasized.
The teacher can only accomplish his/her objectives for the programme by using the right and adequate facilities (Njoku 1992).
Unfortunately, studies (Oyedele, 1992, and Nwosu 1997) have shown that facilities in business are grossly inadequate, fairly functional and not quite a replica of what are used in the business world.
For instance, students need to acquire skills in computer and other office equipment, but they can hardly do so in the absence of requite equipment.
An institution can constitute a committee made up of the business education teachers teaching the relevant courses (especially the skill courses) to handle the selection.
This committee would have to find out all that needs to be known about the equipment before arriving at the purchase.
3.4 Care of Equipment The amount of care given equipment can determine how well the equipment would serve its purpose.
Care of equipment could be in any or all of the following: 1.
Handling: movement from one place to another.
2.
Cleaning: with the right material and oil.
3.
Covering: has to be covered as a protection from dust and dirt.
b.
Selection of Equipment Business education teachers do not in most cases found at the centre of selection of equipment.
The people at the top who are non-specialists do the selection.
In most cases the wrong equipment is selected in terms of make, age, durability, etc.
The teachers using the equipment would be faced with lots of challenges either to make do with what they have or not to teach the subjects.
In the end the student becomes the losers.
c. Criteria for Selection In most cases what is done here is ‘penny-wise pound-foolish’.
Those assigned with the purchase of equipment would not take into consideration the criteria for the purchase of the equipment.
Rather self- interest becomes paramount in their minds.
Where this happens, the 60BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION quantity and quality of equipment bought result to inadequacy of the required facilities.
d. Care of equipment The handling of the equipment by students and office staff should be given careful attention.
- students should at the end of lectures cover the equipment or put it in the right place.
- would unplug the equipment from power source.
4.0 CONCLUSION A thorough knowledge of the facilities used and the criteria for selection as well as who selects the equipments for teaching of business education courses will help students appreciate the importance of all to teaching and learning.
The issues in business education based on inadequacy, irrelevance, non- functionality of equipment and the care of equipment will help you to fashion out ways of achieving the objectives for each course.
5.0 SUMMARY Facilities in business education have become major issues because of their inadequacies and non-functionality.
In addition is the issue of those who the equipment and the selection criteria have not helped achieved the objectives of the curriculum.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT If you were to be made a member of the selection team on business education facilities, how would you go about it?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Oyedele F. (1992).
Facilities for Business Education for Self-Reliance.
Business Education Journal, 2 (4).
136 –142.
Njoku, C.U.
(1992).
Issues and Problems in Business Teacher Programme and Implications for Business Education Programme in Nigeria in: E.U.
Anyakoha and E.C.
Osuala (Eds).
Vocational/Technical Education and Self Reliance.
160-167.
61BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Nwosu, A.N.
(1997).
The Status of Business Education Programme of Private Secondary Schools in Imo State.
M.Sc.
Thesis.
Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka.
UNIT 3 METHODS OF TEACHING BUSINESS EDUCATION SUBJECTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction 3.2 Strategies for teaching Business Education Subjects 3.3 Teaching Tools 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION According to research findings no learning strategy, and in turn, no one teaching method is effective or acceptable to all learners.
However, some learning may take place despite the method employed but students learn better when the teacher adopts a variety of methods and engages them in various learning activities.
62BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES In essence, Technical and Vocational Education subjects are practical oriented and for students to understand them clearly, different methods could be used.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 INTRODUCTION 1.
Demonstration For any skill subject, demonstration is essential by a skilled teacher.
The development of skill requires practice, but a student cannot secure the best result from his practice unless he knows how it is practiced.
That is, he must know how he is to perform it.
This he can effectively achieve by observing a competent teacher demonstrate the skill.
For example, a good teacher of skill subject will show the students how to build the techniques for skill subjects.
In demonstrating a skill, the teacher has to perform it in stages, but slowly, first and the entire class must see what he does.
He can do this by dividing the class into smaller groups or demonstrate to individual students.
Use the Following Steps for Demonstration 1.
Explanation and demonstration by the teacher 2.
Imitation by learner 3.
Evaluation by you and students 4.
Imitation by the students 5.
Re-evaluation by both The Demonstration Method may be used when a. teaching psychomotor skills b. when the teacher want to appeal to the 5 senses of the students c. when he wants the students to emulate a particular course of action.
d. when there is need for the students to know the process of an action.
Tips Before using the Demonstration Method • Ensure that you have all the required materials.
• Know how many minutes the demonstration would last.
63BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION • Have a thorough knowledge of the subject matter.
• You should not be too fast at each point in time.
• Ask questions to ensure that the students are following.
• Erase any bias that may interfere with the learning process.
• Focus on specific topics to avoid building too much into the students.
• The students may want to divert your attention, tactfully call them to order.
In using this method Ahukannah Rate stressed that the teacher should exhibit the following qualities: • Confidence and poise • Mutual respect • Tolerance in controversial situations • Humour • Self-abasement when demanded by the situation • objectivity 2.
Use of Brochures Little pamphlets written by companies or institutions explaining to people their activities and what they can do.
These pamphlets could be got from libraries, firms or locally.
The teacher can request students to go to these companies and collect their brochures.
This will make the student feel more committed to learning.
The teacher should go through the pamphlets with the students and then post same on the bulletin board for other students’ information.
3.
Use Audio-Visual, Visual and Audio Aids Audio-visuals These include teachers demonstration, role-play, field trip, motion picture and television.
Audio: Record player, radio, cassette recorder, etc.
Visual: Textbooks, chalkboard, class bulletin board, mounted pictures, graphic materials, etc.
If all these are used or applied, students will become more interested and there will be higher interest in learning at the tertiary level.
64BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 4.
Discussion Presenting real life cases and problems will enable the students to see the relevance of learning to everyday activities.
A lot of knowledge should be obtained not only from textbooks but also from happenings around the environment.
Develop creativity in them by asking them to give examples of such happenings.
This would make them to start acquiring materials for use in the long run.
Use Practical Examples in Teaching 5.
Individual Instruction Teachers should design instructions according to the needs of individual students.
For example, manuals should be left to the students to work at their own pace.
This is because people differ in intelligence at the rate that they assimilate or comprehend.
You should work from one student to another.
During examinations, questions set should cover the different domains of knowledge to take care of individual differences.
6.
Questionnaire Students can be taught how to develop Opinionaire and questions for interviews.
Ask students to go to firms, to ask questions of things you want them to know or what they want to know.
The questions have to be drafted before they leave, and whatever they collect from the firm, is termed first hand information.
Give them opportunity to present what they have brought while you guide them.
7.
Role Playing It is a method of human interaction that involves realistic behaviour in any imaginary situation.
Students can be asked to role-play, such things that come up in real life or what they have learnt in class.
You have to distribute each person’s function to ensure sound role-play.
This will remain in their minds for a long time.
8.
Field Trips to Business Offices The teacher has to plan very well before going on a field trip with the students.
In short, objectives must be clearly defined.
The firm must be contacted and must be there to show to the students what they have 65BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION come for and help to direct them At the end of the presentation the teacher should find out from the students if they have any question for the firm.
This is to prevent students from asking further questions when they come back to the class.
9.
Television and Radio These could be used to vary teaching methods in order to stimulate students’ interest.
As this is being done, the students should be asked to take down notes.
The teacher should try his possible best to control the atmosphere.
At the end of the lecture, find out how far they have followed the lesson by means of questions and demonstration.
10.
Guest Speakers People from different works of life could be invited to speak to the students on different topics.
They should be consulted in advance and should be told the background of the students, the objectives you have in mind i.e.
what you want him to speak on, so that he can plan ahead.
As he speaks, ask them to note important points and questions to be discussed.
11.
Group Study/Project Work The teacher should organise the situation in a manner that will make the students work cooperatively with one another.
By encouraging joint effort the students will see the need to cooperate with one another and work to accept group decision.
In addition, this may help the dull students to work harder.
Give them different projects to carry out and let them develop the human relation skills by learning how to accommodate one another.
12.
Question Method Questions can be divided into 3 verses: 1.
Facts questions that are based on information-presented in a text book, reports, journals or periodicals Answering fact questions demands that students study the material and remember the facts presented.
66BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 2.
Thought, or discussion questions that require the students to reason or brainstorm.
It is not the type that will recall answers.
Rather it often starts with why, Explain or How do you account for..?
3.
Application questions that require the students to apply the original situations, rules, principles presented in the textbook.
They may use a combination of the 2 classes of questions or 3 as the case may be.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the things that you would let the Guest speaker know about as you invite him/her to speak to your students?
3.2 Strategies for Teaching Strategies touch the different senses; it stimulates and spurs the students into action and the teacher into achieving the desired goal.
This is because the different methods of teaching have been combined to achieve the learning goal.
The strategies include: 1.
Individual Instruction 2.
Small group instruction 3.
Large group instruction 4.
Selective group instruction (Njoku) Explaining the different group will help you know what each group is capable of achieving: 1.
Individual group instruction This is divided into 2 groups: a.
Individual Paced Learning This makes it possible for the learner to work at his/her own pace towards the stated goal.
b.
Individual Prescribed Learning It allows the learner to work at his/her own pace, but it has to be with the help of teacher who chooses a specific goal for the learner to reach.
The step to be taken at each stage has to be graduated before moving to the next step.
67BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Generally no two people are the same, people learn at different rates, perceive value of learning differently and have different approaches to learning and may not be expected to reach the same goal at the same time.
One great advantage of this type of strategy is that it makes the learner to become less dependent, encourages critical thinking and helps them to develop a positive thinking about themselves.
2.
Small Group Instruction This group can be carved out from a large group.
The small group gives the learner a better opportunity for interaction with other members.
a.
He is no longer lost in a large group and can now have a sense of belonging.
b.
Finally, he is enabled to be grouped with those that share similar interests and learning problems.
If people without similar interest and learning problems are put together, they may have friction and the teacher may experience a little problem, which may later die down.
This type of grouping motivates the students and gives them a better chance for communication, which helps to develop them.
Everyone contributes to the group and the group appreciates the contribution of each in ember.
Explain convincingly the group you would adopt to handle your class in teaching the functions of a secretary in a modern office.
3 Large Group Instructions This enables the teacher to avoid duplication of effort.
As the teacher you have to assemble and teach the students for the achievement of the set goal.
No consideration is given to any individual as each and every student is seen as driving at the same time and pace.
In a large group instruction, up to2/3 of the students are not carried along.
Similarly, learning activities tend to be restricted since it may be impossible to attend to every one.
4.
Selective Group Instruction This is where the teacher may decide to select some students who need 68BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION help and render such help to them.
This is usually done during break periods, at agreed location.
He may be influenced to carry out this type of strategy because of his relationship with the few, on request or voluntarily.
This strategy generates envy and may lead to the students hating the course and teacher.
3.3 Teaching Tools a. Chalkboard The chalkboard is the main teaching tool.
The teacher demonstrates whatever she feels worth writing on it for the students.
In fact, this is very important in some subjects where most of the diagrams/symbols would be presented on the chalkboard.
The teacher must make sure that each student sees the chalkboard from his seat.
b. Textbooks Where every student has his or her textbook, it will be easy for the teacher to operate.
This is very true in Technical/Vocational Education (TVE) subjects.
Examine the level of the material and match it with the age, and level of understanding of the students.
4.0 CONCLUSION Knowing the methods of teaching business education and the strategies for teaching them would help the teacher to understand the importance of using the methods and strategies in the process of teaching and learning.
In this regard, the application of the different methods and strategies as well the making of effective use of the teaching tools in learning would help to drive home the point and effect behaviour change.
5.0 SUMMARY There are various teaching methods and strategies such as demonstration, field trip, discussions, individual paced instruction and small group instruction among others.
It is worthwhile to know in great details what each of them meant and what they are used for and when.
The benefits were explained to let the teacher know the appropriate method or strategy to be used at any given time.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 69BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 1.
Explain the two methods that you consider appropriate in the teaching of computer practical to the students.
2.
What are the benefits of a small group instruction?
Explain 2 of them.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ahukannah, L.I.
(2002).
Teaching Methodology in Vocational/Technical Education.
Paper presented at a workshop organised for lecturers of Polytechnics in the South-East zone at the Federal Polytechnic, Nekede, Owerri, 2nd – 6th, September.
Njoku, C.U.
(2002).
Teaching Methods in Technical and Vocational Education: A focus on the new curriculum.
Paper presented at the Workshop organised on the Implementation of the new curriculum for mechanical trade teachers of technical colleges in the South-East Zone at the Staff Development Centre, Federal Polytechnic, Nekede, Owerri.
3rd – 7th June.
UNIT 4 QUALIFICATION AND QUALITY OF TEACHERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of a Business Education Teacher 3.2 Quality of Business Education Teacher/Qualification 3.3 Qualities required of Business Education Teachers 3.4 Current Issues and Debate 3.5 Present Status 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Business Education Teacher a.
A Business education teacher is a person who holds a degree in 70BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION business education from a recognised University or an NCE (National Certificate of Education).
Holders of NCE from the recognised colleges of education in business education are competent to teach the five components of the JSS business studies programme.
He is a person who is constantly aware of the state of art in Business Education and has a thorough knowledge of the requirements of a business education programme.
(Osuala, 1987).
Table 1 Qualifications of Teachers Teaching Business Studies Subjects in the Secondary Schools Studied by Njoku(1990).
Qualifications Subject (s) Taught Nig.
Cert .of Ed.
All Bus.
(Bus.
Educ) Subs N.T.T.C.
(OR T.T.C) (BUS.
All Bus.
EDU) Subs Bach.
Of Ed.
Typewriting & Shorthand (Bus.Ed) Bach.of Ed.
All Bus.
Subjects (Acc/Comm) Master of Ed.
Comm & Accounts (Sup.& Inspec.)
Nign.Cert.of Ed.
Comm.Off Prac.&Typewriting (Sec Duties Higher Nat.
Dip.
(Bus Admin &Mgt) All 5 Bus.
Ed Subjects Bach.
Of Ed.
Comm & Bus.
Studies (Prin.&Methods) Higher Nat.
Dip.
Acc.& Commerce Chartered Institute of All Bus.
Subjects Secretaries 71BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Source: Njoku, 1992.Business Education Journal Vol.11 N.2.
62-69 Having studied the above, you can see who has what qualification and teacher what.
Area of Specialisation of Lecturers Teaching Business Education Subjects in the Institutions Studied by Njoku, 1997 Area of Specialisation Number of Lecturers Business Education 21 Marketing/Distribution Education 5 Office Management/Education 1 General Management 14 Business Management/Business Admin.
13 Economics 4 Economics /Banking 6 Secretarial Studies/Secretarial Admin.
18 Computer/Sec.
Studies 1 Secretarial Education/General Business 4 Office Technology/Management 1 Political Science 1 Commerce/Management 1 Secretarial Organisation 1 Administration/Supervision 5 Management and Methods 2 Accounting 3 Source: Njoku, C.U.
(1998) An Appraisal of the business education programme in some selected tertiary institutions in Nigeria.
a.
A business education teacher is a person who has undergone a 4 year Programme in a reputable university or 3 years programme through NCE and has been certified as competent for the award of a 72BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Bachelor’s degree /NCE in business education after meeting the requirements of the institution and the department (Njoku, 1997).
Additionally any person who has obtained a degree or a professional certification in areas such as accountancy, marketing and office technology and management, and also obtains a post-graduate certificate in educational foundations and pedagogy clearly qualifies as a business education teacher.
The definitions by Osuala and Njoku may look lengthy but there are certain key words that must be present before the definition is acceptable.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify the key words and use them to make out a good definition of a business education teacher.
3.2 Quality of Teachers/Qualifications Having studied the definition, it is hoped that you would be in a good position to know the quality of teachers needed in any business education programme, namely, academic and professional qualifications of teachers.
Examine properly the table below and see whether it fits the definition of a business education programme.
Again going by the definition what do you say about the qualification of business education teachers?
Let me go by question like these.
Some guiding questions may be raised as follows: a.
Should the teaching of business education be left to business education teachers or should those in related areas be allowed to teach all the subjects?
b.
The quality of people admitted into the programme has become a source of worry .It is a fact that some of the people admitted into the programme do not have interest in it.
This will automatically lead to cabbage in cabbage out.
Admission of unqualified students into the programme can result to lowering of the quality of the programme.
Olaitan rightly pointed that a teacher can demonstrate the act of teaching only when he is taught by the right people with the necessary background.
Hence we should not leave the job of teaching skills in the hands of incompetent technical teachers.
It is not far from saying that the effectiveness of any business education programme is determined largely by the qualification or lack of qualification of the business education teacher.
73BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Shall we then agree with a writer who said that the quality of a nation’s teacher determines the extent of its development?
You can see that a good number of those who teach business education subjects are not in the areas.
Discipline can only be instilled in a programme when the right types of people are employed to teach the students.
The students would have confidence in the teacher when the teaching and learning are taking place.
It has been observed that when students know that they are being taught by unqualified teachers-they doubt the quality of the programme.
This means that a situation where teachers are employed indiscriminately makes the programme worthless.
Placing restriction on a programme shows discipline and dignity for the programme.
Let me tell you the plain truth.
The medical profession is a good example of a profession that unless you meet the requirements of the profession you are not fit to teach the medical students or practice the profession in a college of medicine.
3.3 Qualities required by the Business Education Teacher The business education teacher has to have 3 qualifications.
1. Business qualities and personal qualities for him/her to do the job as a trained business education teacher.
Business Qualities 1.
You must possess entrepreneurship qualities since you are prepared as a teacher and as a businessman.
2.
Be innovative 3.
Be focused 4.
Have foresight 5.
Have ability to solve problems 6.
Have good human relations.
7.
Must be technically competent 8.
Must be dynamic 9.
Must be a risk taker 10.A good time manager Professional Qualities A business education teacher should: 1. belong to a professional Association 74BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 2. be adequately trained to handle his/her courses.
3. engage in research 4. attend conferences and seminars 5. must be certified as possessing the qualification of business education from a recognisable institution.
6. ability to withstand the test of time –retraining and venturing into new areas in business education-entrepreneurship education, computer education, etc.
c. Personal Attributes of a Business Education Teacher 1.
Willing to accept change 2.
Ability and interest to learn 3.
Accommodating of others 4.
Cheerful 5.
Studious 6.
Not self-centred 7.
Considerate etc.
Njoku, (2001) 8.
Have a good command of the English language 9.
Interest in people.
10.
Cooperation and loyalty 11.
Character (Nolan, et.
al.
1976) Nolan considers character as the most important attribute of a teacher.
Lack of great teaching skill may be excused, others could be ignored i.e (h-j above) but to have a person of doubtful character as a teacher would be difficult to accommodate.
3.4 Current Issues and debates 1.
A lot of discussions are currently going on as to why people in related areas of business education should not be allowed to teach core business education subjects.
The following arguments were put forward by some business educators; a. that business education is highly specialised ,hence should be taught by experts who possess the required skills.
b. that no matter the residual skills acquired by non-experts in core business education they are not qualified to teach, since they are not professionally qualified in the business teacher education.
2.
The following were put forward by those in related areas: a. that those in related areas studied courses like personnel management, office management, typewriting and others, hence, 75BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION are competent to teach the subjects b. that having studied business education at the NCE and HND levels before branching off is enough to qualify one to teach business education.
c. that having studied economics or educational management at the Bachelor’s degree level and then Business education at the master’s level is adequate to be admitted into the profession.
The teacher should take a stand immediately on issues and debates of this nature in order not to block critical thinking in students.
It is a way of accommodating all the learning styles-theorists, pragmatists, activists and reflectors as well as the different teaching methods.
3.5 Present Status of Business Education • In Nigeria most tertiary institutions are still working on their old curricula, while others have only included one or two new courses .For instance, some universities have included computer application/ key boarding and probably information technology.
• Some of them have reduced the number of credit hours given to shorthand and typewriting.
• The curriculum for secretarial administration (office technology and management) programme has been reviewed in line with the present development in ICT but not implemented appropriately at the polytechnic level.
• Most of the facilities are still obsolete while modern ones are still not adequate in number or in quality.
Most of the schools do not have any instructional equipment.
• Teachers, to a very large extent are regularly retrained.
In India and the United States of America, business education curricula have been restructured to meet the present trend in technological advances.
Teachers are on training programmes and each teacher is computer literate .A new name has to be given to business education programme in order to reflect the challenges of the present technological age.
4.0 CONCLUSION 76BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION The conclusion to be drawn from this unit is the need for the students to know the definition of business education, the quality of teaching and qualifications of teachers needed for teaching and learning would help the teacher to appreciate what all is out to achieve and what is required in the course.
It is therefore, necessary for you as a teacher to understand all the qualifications needed in teaching and learning of the business education subjects.
5.0 SUMMARY The definitions of a business education teacher and the qualifications and others need to be made known to you in this course.
These have direct relationship with whatever you are going to teach.
Knowing them in great detail is important so that you would appreciate what you are and what is expected of you by the learners and the society.
Again that teaching is a specialised job and cannot be handled by just anyone, should be understood by you.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Having studied the arguments for and against the present status of business education you are required to establish your stand on either for or against the issue.
State your facts convincingly.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Osuala, E.C.
(1989).
Principles and Practice of Business Education.
Anambra: Pacific Publishers.
Njoku, C.U.(1987).
Discipline in Teaching in Vocational Schools.
Issues in the Teaching of Business Education Subjects.
Njoku, C.U.
(1997).
An Appraisal of Business Education Programmes in Selected Tertiary Institutions.
Unpublished PhD Thesis.
University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Aina, O.
(1982).
The Emerging Business Teacher.
An Address Presented at the Launching Ceremony of the Niger State Business Education Student’.
77BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION MODULE 4 PRINCIPLES OF TEACHING AND LEARNING INTRODUCTION The response of the learner in any teaching/learning situation is of utmost importance.
Learning principles are guide to you as a teacher.
Learning the strategies involve selecting the right mix of methods/strategies in order to achieve the desired goals.
Teaching strategy according to Popham is the implementation of organisational pattern, learning activities and resources to assist students in achieving their goal as effectively as possible.
To achieving these goals, you should know that the learning styles of individuals are different and must be taken into consideration.
All these would be extensively discussed later.
In this module, you would be introduced to the Principles of learning and teaching including the impact of learning styles.
This would be discussed under the following units.
Unit 1 Principles of Teaching and Learning Unit 2 Teaching Methods and Strategies Unit 3 Learning Styles UNIT 1 PRINCIPLES OF TEACHING AND LEARNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 78BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Thorndike’s Law of Learning 3.2 Principles of Learning 3.3 Principles Related to Skill Learning 3.4 Practical Tips for Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Within the past decades, teaching has assumed different dimensions.
This is because the attention has shifted from the teacher to the learner.
Learning of course must take place for a change in behaviour to occur.
You as a teacher is then both a change agent, a director and facilitator of knowledge and must ensure that the goals are met by applying the appropriate learning methods in the teaching of any subject.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • select the principles for the teaching and learning of skills; and • apply the principles in the teaching and learning processes.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are several learning principles some of which are related to the teaching of concept-based subjects and others to skills.
Knowing all these principles is of great relevance to you as they will enable you to understand why you are using them as well as when they are needed in teaching and learning process.
3.1 THREE OF THORNDIKE’S LAW OF LEARNING 1.
Readiness When a child is ready to learn, to learn is satisfying and not to learn is annoying.
But when a child in class is not ready to learn and you force him to learn, learning is annoying, and as such the child will have no room for assimilation.
Until an individual is prepared to learn no matter what we do he will not learn.
The learner must have a strong background, i.e.
we must prepare 79BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION them for the learning situation if we really want to achieve our objectives that are by motivating the students, classroom organisation, attending to students’ differences, ensuring effective social learning atmosphere and teaching strategy.
2.
Exercise or Practice It emphasises that practice brings perfection or mastering of a skill.
It is important for the teacher to practice the right mastery of a skill.
That is be sure that he/she teaches the correct thing to the students.
Students should be allowed to practice as much as possible to enable them become conversant with the subjects especially in skill subjects.
Also, he should review what the students have learnt through drilling from what they have previously learnt.
3.
Law of Effect Any mental state or act which in any given situation produces satisfaction becomes associated with that situation so that when the situation re-occurs, that act is more likely than before to reoccur also.
Learning materials used must be relevant and must be such that they would aid understanding and confidence reposed in it.
School activities must be organised from simple to complex, reinforcement must not be left out.
3.2 Principles of Learning 1.
The Learner must Perceive what to be learnt as Relevant If what the teacher is doing with the students are relevant both in terms of materials to be used and lesson presented, then the students would look on learning as meaningful and interesting.
For a new Curriculum, the students must perceive the content as relevant for them and easy to follow.
2.
Learning Results from the Learner’s Interaction with His or Her Total Environment The class and the home environments must be in harmony before a child can learn what is taught to him.
In this case, the teacher has to be a good observer and interact meaningfully with students so as to understand what is going on.
3.
Learning is Facilitated when the Learner Associates New 80BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Behaviour You are able to complete the next step because of what you knew before.
4.
Learning Proceeds more Effectively when the Learner is an Active Participant in the Learning Process Students who interact with mates and peers as well as with the teachers in a learning environment generally develop healthier attitudes towards the learning process, than those who passively listen to the talk.
This means that the teacher has to create a healthy relationship between himself/herself and individual student.
5.
Learning is more Effective when the Learner knows the Immediate Goal to be Achieved The students should know not only the specific performance expected, but also precisely how attainment of the goals will be evaluated - using pre-tests.
Teachers have to eliminate irrelevant materials and concentrate completely on the essentials.
Students are likely to be more secure as security in its real sense generates confidence and a positive attitude towards learning.
6.
Learning Proceeds Faster when the Lecturer is Aware of the Progress being made Towards the Stated Goal Knowledge of results improves performance and stimulates more positive attitudes towards learning.
7.
Learning Proceeds more Effectively when the Learner Participates in a Continuous Expanding Pattern of Behaviour The term ‘spiral learning’ is sometimes used to illustrate this principle.
Task is first performed in its simplest form.
Once that phase is perfected, the task is practised in a more complex form.
That is, from simple to complex.
Note: Unless a student perfects sub-competencies he/she is not likely to be successful in achieving the performance goal.
3.3 Principles Related to Skill Building 1.
In order to respond effectively to the learning situation, the 81BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION learner must have the requisite previous experience in his or her repertoire This principle may be explained in terms of multiple behaviour a student needs in order to succeed in beginning a TVE programme.
The student should be able to know the names of tools in Mechanical Trade, handle them the way they should be handled accurately.
Teachers in this case should try to study their students and know which area of learning they find difficult.
Some students, for instance cannot understand why a particular tool is used instead of the other to perform some task to achieve result, until they have acquired the appropriate behaviours to do so.
Since students are prone to frustration and failure, unless the teacher finds out the area in which they need help and provide the remedial work from the first day of instruction.
If not properly guided the student would continue to believe that they are doing the right thing.
The curriculum should always be a guide to any learning situation.
2.
At initial learning stage, individual tasks must be learned to a high level before they are combined to form effortless performance Learning at a high level simply means being able to perform consistently the behaviour desired.
A student who can perform all the sub-competencies should be able to achieve the stated goal.
He should be able to pick up the right tool, handle it the right way and achieve the expected result.
In motor skill learning, the results are better when the learner understands the relationships among the sub-skills that are needed for goal achievement.
The teacher needs to in a way show a link between one stage of the teaching/learning process and another.
3.
Learning should be broken down to its various successive components You have to break down the learning of skills in a way that the learning of one constituent leads to the other without interruption.
Each component should be learnt as a single unit of motor behaviour in a sequence that will go to build up the entire motor behaviour.
4.
During the learning of each component, the learner must be given verbal instruction The learner should not be left without guidance.
Verbal instruction is necessary at each stage of the operation until he becomes perfect.
The teacher should explain to the students why they are to hold a tool in a 82BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION particular way.
Instruct him on the next to do and why.
5.
Spaced practice instead of massed practice should be adopted Practice distributed over a period of time is more likely to encourage the students than one that is not distributed.
6.
The importance of anything done should be explained and understood by the learner In skill learning, the teacher has to explain to the learner the reason(s) for anything done.
This would help the learner to be an interesting and active partner in the learning process.
The teacher has to make sure that the learner is clear with his explanation.
Intermittently, the teacher should throw in jokes and use it to motivate the students.
7.
In motor learning, early stages are characterised by excessive movement, which disappears as the skill is perfected, ultimately, effortless performance results The student at the early stage uses all his strength to hold any instrument and strike any part of the work to be done, but when he has done this for a long time and is gradually becoming perfect either by watching an expert or practicing them, the movement is modified and eventually effortless performance results.
This is why demonstration by the teacher is followed by a practice by the students.
Simply listening to the teacher describes motor skills will not enable a student to acquire the skills.
It should be put into practice.
8.
Teachers and students must keep in mind that errors are the result of lack of and development of technique using the right approach So the teacher should not shout on them.
Rather, they should be given correction and asked to emulate the teacher’s example.
9.
Drills must be varied before diminishing return sets in.
Use different methods to help them avoid monotony This gives the students the opportunity to try out other ways of drilling on their own.
10.
Each period or segment of period should have a definite objective in which the student and teacher should be aware of 83BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Put the objective into focus and move steadily towards it.
If you do that the students would appreciate it.
11.
In subject matter presentation, the teacher should as much as possible appeal to the requisite senses of the learner As students make use of their hands, teach them how to make use of their ears, eyes and even mouth.
12.
The teacher should be able to demonstrate the pattern the students are trying to learn The idea of teachers requiring students to do things without adequate demonstration hampers learning.
Undue restriction may also mar their efforts.
This means that, the teacher has to be competent in the teaching area to avoid lack of confidence on the part of the learners.
3.4 Practical Tips for Teachers 1.
Limit your teaching to the ability level of the students.
2.
Design your lesson/lecture to meet specific objectives.
3.
Train your students to take note during instruction; emphasize the strong points for them to note 4.
Use attention-getting devices such as listening, discussion, questioning, to mention a few, during the lesson.
5.
Know your material and organise them properly.
6.
Occasionally direct the instruction to students as individuals, and as a group.
7.
Avoid reading your lesson note or lecture always.
8.
Avoid extending the lecture beyond the attention span of the students.
9.
Avoid assuming that students have understood all you have said.
4.0 CONCLUSION The achievement of programme goals is based on knowing the principles of learning in general and those related to the course being studied.
It is of utmost importance for you as a teacher of business education, to know and apply them in the process of teaching, so as to achieve a desired result.
5.0 SUMMARY Principles of teaching and learning are very important in impacting 84BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION knowledge, skills and attitude (value).
There are principles that are related to the teaching of skills (psychomotor skills), which you as a teacher must apply if skill building is to have impact on the learner.
Hence, your understanding of them is of great benefit to you and to the students in terms of achieving the set goals.
Similarly knowing the practical tips as a teacher will serve as a check and balance for teaching and learning effectiveness.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why is it important for you to: 1.
Explain to the students the importance of anything done during skill building?
2.
Why should you use attention-getting devices in your teaching during the learning process?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Njoku, C.U.
(2002).
Teaching Methods in Technical and Vocational Education: A focus on the new curriculum.
Paper presented at the Workshop organised on the Implementation of the new curriculum for mechanical trade teachers of technical colleges in the South-East Zone at the Staff Development Centre, Federal Polytechnic, Nekede, Owerri.
3rd – 7th June.
Popham, E.L., Schrag, A.F., and Blocklvs (1971).
A Teaching Learning System for Business Education.
New York: Megraus.
85BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION UNIT 2 LEARNING STYLE OF INDIVIDUALS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Activist 3.2 The Pragmatist 3.3 The Reflector 3.4 The Theorist 3.5 Convergers and divergers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Individuals differ in character and in their approach to learning and acceptance to behavioural change.
Learning styles according to psychologists suggest the way an individual reacts to any learning situation.
Specifically learning a style and or strategy refers to individual’s preferred way of learning or solving problems.
It is important to discuss the different learning styles so that the teacher would be able to achieve the desired goal by accommodating the different individual learners.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • explain the different learning styles; • know the appropriate training delivery; and • work on the detail practical content that will give you correct 86BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION focus for accommodating individual difference.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The learning styles are of 4 major types, which you will come across in the study of this unit.
There are others which most people do not consider as learning styles but which are very important in teaching and learning.
As you study them you will get to know the reasons why learning styles are considered as important in teaching and learning .The styles will be discussed below.
3.1 Activists The activists learns best from new experiences/problems, survives in teamwork that is highly competitive.
They enjoy being leaders and believe in tackling problems by brainstorming.
This group strive better in the following methods of teaching: i.
Discussing method.
ii.
Problem Solving method.
iii.
Team or group method.
3.2 Reflectors They like to keep quiet in a group discussion, work from the past or from experience and from there move forward.
They do not panic and usually, they take in a lot of information from others.
They do not just swallow what they are told.
They are ready to argue with the teacher and if not satisfied they frown or sigh, implying disappointment.
In other words, they revisit issues over and over again before taking decisions.
They plan and organise whatever they are doing.
3.3 Theorists Believe strongly that a good reason must be given before they accept a thing.
They must see things in their logical sequence.
3.4 Pragmatists They do not believe in rambling, develop ideas and believe in getting things done without waste of time.
They keep on moving with time.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 87BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Explain more about the 3 learning styles you have studied above.
You can brainstorm with your study group.
3.5 Other Learning Styles Include the: Convergers and Divergers Convergers Divergers 1.Scores mostly high in an 1.Scores more highly on an open- intelligence Test than on an ended test than on an intelligence open-ended test test 2.
Usually authoritarians 2.
Liberal 3.
Masculine 3.
Feminine 4.
Unemotional 4.
Emotional 5.
Sober 5.
Humorous 6.
More sympathetic to the men 6.
More sympathetic to the women at at the expense of the women the expense of the men 7.Prefer formal approach to 7.Prefer informal approach to teaching teaching The teacher has to note that that his inability to alter his approaches in teaching to suit the needs of every type of children will result in making a considerable proportion of the students to become disinterested in the values which schools propagate (Mukterjee 1978).
4.0 CONCLUSION There has to be a great change in the way we approach teaching and learning, so that education could meet the needs of every student and not the students to meet the needs of education.
In doing this we have to take into cognisance the unique nature of every child and integrate it into the process of teaching and learning.
5.0 SUMMARY Different learning styles have been explained and the importance of each to the teacher and the students cannot be neglected if teaching and learning must take place and become meaningful to the students.
The characteristic nature of each learning style has been enumerated, as they 88BED 113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION would help you have a broad knowledge of what each child needs for learning to take place.
Furthermore, having carried out the tasks given you would now appreciate why learning styles should be an important aspect of teaching and learning.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT On the right hand side, write out against each item what the you should do.
Differentiate between: a. activists and reflectors; b. reflectors and pragmatists.
Which of these styles resemble the way you learn or act?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Mukherjee, A.
(1978).
Educational Psychology.
India: K.P.
BASU Publishing Company.
Njoku, C.U.
(2002).
Teaching Methods in Technical and Vocational Education: A focus on the new curriculum.
Paper presented at the Workshop organised on the Implementation of the new curriculum for mechanical trade teachers of technical colleges in the South-East Zone at the Staff Development Centre, Federal Polytechnic, Nekede, Owerri.
3rd – 7th June.
UNESCO – Nigerian Project on Revitalization of Technical and Vocational Education in Nigeria.
Handout.
89
