ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING BED 112 Course GuideBED 112 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE BED112 ADVANCED WORD PROCESSING Course Team Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Course Writer/ Developer) National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Okoro, Chinedu (Course Writer) UNIBEN Prof. L. E. Ekpenyong (Course Editor) UNIBEN Inegbedion, Juliet (Course Co-ordinator) National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiBED 112 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-892-2 All Rights Reserved iiiBED 112 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGES Introduction.
…………………………………………… 1 Course Aims.…………………………………………….
1 Course objectives……………………………………….. 1 Working through this Course…………………………… 1 Course Materials………………………………………… 1 – 2 Study Units ……………………………………………… 2 Textbooks and References.……………………………….
2 Assignment File………………………………………….. 3 Presentation Schedule …………………………………… 3 Assessment……………………………………………….
3 Tutor-Marked Assignment……………………………… 3 Final Examination and Grading………………………….. 3 How to Get the Most from this Course………………….
3 – 5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials ………………………… 5 Summary………………………………………………….. 6 ivBED 112 COURSE GUIDE Introduction BED112 – Advanced Word Processing.
This course is a 2 unit course designed to train the learners on mastering of Word processing and document display.
The course involves a lot of activities, which must be practiced if proficiency is to be gained.
What You will Learn in this Course You will be taught Business Documents, Display, Legal and Literary work.
Course Aims There are thirteen study units in the course and each unit has its objectives.
You should read the objectives of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
In addition to the objectives of each unit, the overall aims of this course include: i.
To produce teachers who can teach Word processing at secondary school and industrial levels.
ii.
To have well skilled teachers who can apply the knowledge of computer in teaching and learning.
Course Objectives The objectives of this course are: • to inculcate appropriate word processing skills; • to educate learners on how to create business document; and • educate learners on how to implement keyboarding and word processing skills on solving business records.
Working through this Course You have to work through all the study units in the course.
There are three modules and thirteen study units in all.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1BED 112 COURSE GUIDE 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
CDs 5.
A Tutor 6.
Assignments File 6.
Presentation Schedule Study Units The breakdown of the three modules and thirteen study units are as follows: Module 1 Business Documents Unit 1 Letters Unit 2 Memorandum Unit 3 Tabulations Unit 4 Mail Merging/e-mail Unit 5 Speeches and Reports Module 2 Display Unit 1 Display Unit 2 Document Enhancement Unit 3 Multiple Columns on a Page/Multiple pages Module 3 Legal/Literary Work Unit 1 Legal Document Unit 2 Literary Document Unit 3 Skill Mastering Textbooks and References Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try to get as some of the textbooks and materials listed.
The textbooks and materials are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself 2BED 112 COURSE GUIDE and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and a final examination which you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignment Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit them for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select four; which will be marked and the best three will be selected which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignments may be presented to you in a separate file.
Just know that for every unit there are some tutor-marked assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination which will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination which shall last for two hours, you will be requested to answer three questions out of at least five questions.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks 3BED 112 COURSE GUIDE Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
In addition do the following: 1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organise a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your 4BED 112 COURSE GUIDE schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continously available there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and the address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as 5BED 112 COURSE GUIDE these will help in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
Summary This course would train you on the basic you required to become competent in word processing.
Wish you the best of luck as you read through this course.
6
