Principles of Business Education BED 113 Course GuideBED 113 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE BED113 PRINCIPLES OF BUSINESS EDUCATION Course Team Inegbedion, Juliet O.
Course Developer/ Coordinator) National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Dr. (Mrs.) Njoku, Celestina Ugochi (Course Writer) Federal Polytechnic, Nekede -Owerri Associate Prof. L. E. Ekpenyong (Course Editor) UNIBEN, Benin-City Inegbedion, Juliet (Course Co-ordinator) National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos iiBED 113 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-904-X All Rights Reserved iiiBED 113 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGES Introduction ………………………………………………….1 What You Learn in this Course …………………………….. 1 Course Aims ………………………………………………….1 Course objectives …………………………………………….1 – 2 Working through this Course ………………………………..2 Course Materials …………………………………………….2 Study Units ………………………………………………… 2 – 3 Textbooks and References ………………………………….
3 Assignment File …………………………………………….
3 Presentation Schedule ……………………………………… 3 Assessment ………………………………………………….
3 Tutor-Marked Assignment ………………………………….
3 Final Examination and Grading …………………………….
3 – 4 Course Marking Scheme ……………………………………..4 How to Get the Most from this Course ……………………...4 – 6 Facilitators/Tutors an Tutorials ………………………………6 Summary ………………………………………………….. 6 ivBED 113 COURSE GUIDE Introduction BED 113: Principles of Business Education This is a 2-course unit designed to train the learners to understand and appreciate historical foundation of business education, the courses offered and their objectives as well as their importance to the nation and the international scene.
The course is divided into 4 modules of 12 units each.
What You will Learn in this Course You will be taught the foundation of business education, in Nigeria as well as international business education.
The subjects offered at present and their varying objectives/ contents.
The importance of Business Education to the economy will also be learnt.
Course Aims There are 12 units in the course.
Each unit has its own objectives.
You must read carefully the objectives of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
In addition to the objectives of each unit, the overall aims of this course includes: 1.
To acquaint you with the foundation of Business Education.
2.
To assess the issues in basic business education.
3.
To familiarize you with the business education programme in Nigeria.
4.
To explain to you the objectives and content of business subjects.
5.
To effectively communicate in practical terms the importance of business education in the economy.
6.
To acquaint you with the nature of business education programme in the International scene.
Course Objectives The objectives of this course are: • to acquaint learners with the historical foundations of business education; • educate learners on how to deal with the issues in business education in the teaching and learning process; • educate learners on the operational method of the business education programme in Nigeria; • develop in the learner, how the objectives and content of the course would help in true live situations; 1BED 113 COURSE GUIDE • to enable learners appreciate the importance of business education to the economy; and • educate learners on how business education programmes function in the international scene.
Working through this Course You have to work consistently through all the study units in this course.
There are 4 modules and 12 study units in all.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
CDs 5.
A Tutor 6.
Assignments File 7.
Presentation schedule Study Units The breakdown of the 4 modules and – units are as follows: Module 1 Historical Foundation of Business Education Programme Unit 1 Origin and concepts of business education Unit 2 Business education programme in Nigeria Unit 3 Business Education in other countries Module 2 Objectives and content of Business Education Programme Unit 1 The Objectives of Business Education Unit 2 Content of Business Education programme Unit 3 Importance of business education Module 3 Issues in Business Education Programme Unit 1 The Content of the Curriculum Unit 2 Facilities for Teaching Unit 3 Methods of Teaching Business Education Subjects Unit 4 Quality of Teachers 2BED 113 COURSE GUIDE Module 4 Principles of Teaching and Learning Unit 1 Principles of Teaching and Learning Unit 2 Learning Styles of Individuals Textbooks and References Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try to get as many as possible of those textbooks and materials that are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in this course guide in the section on assignments.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on tutor-marked assignment (TMAs) and a final examination, which you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignment Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit them for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select four that will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignments may be presented to you in a separate file.
Just know that for every unit there are some tutor-marked assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
3BED 113 COURSE GUIDE Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination that will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination that shall last for two hours, you will be requested to answer three questions out of at least five questions.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down Assessment Marks Assignments Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks.
Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecture.
In the same way, a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or textbooks.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives lets you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any difficulty, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to 4BED 113 COURSE GUIDE help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
In addition do the following: 1.
Read this course guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organise a study schedule.
Design a ‘course overview’ to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available from the study center.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that, they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available.
8.
Long before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review 5BED 113 COURSE GUIDE the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the course guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be available to you, together with the name, telephone number and the address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Make sure that the assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important, therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
Summary This course would train you on the Historical foundation of business education in Nigeria as well as in other countries, major issues in business education and learning styles among other things.
Wishing you the best of luck as you read through this course.
6
