MANPOWER PLANNING AND BHM 654 ADMINISTRATION Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE BHM654 COURSE GUIDE BHM654 MANPOWER PLANNING AND ADMINISTRATION Course Developer/ Writer Mr Shehu Adamu Department of Public Administration and Business Studies Niger State Polytechnic, Bida Campus Niger State Programme Leader Dr O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Co-ordinator Ishola T. Oladele National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE BHM654 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2007 ISBN: 978-058-532-X All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE BHM654 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………………… 1 Course contents …………………………………………….. 1 - 2 Course Aims………………………………………………… 2 Objectives …………………………………………………... 2 Course materials …………………………………………….
2 Study units ………………………………………………….. 2 - 3 Assignments ………………………………………………… 3 Assessments ………………………………………………… 3 Tutor Marked Assignment ………………………………….. 3 Final written Examination …………………………………... 4 How to get the most from this course ……………………….
4 Tutors and tutorials ………………………………………….
4 - 5 Summary …………………………………………………….
5 ivCOURSE GUIDE BHM654 Introduction BHM654: Manpower planning and administration is a semester work of two credit hours.
It will be available to Post Graduate Diploma and B.Sc 600 level students in the school of business and human resources management.
The course is designed to enable students acquire adequate knowledge of the principles and practices involved in the planning and administration of organization’s human resources, the most instrumental element of organization productivity and success.
The course guide tells you what the course BHM654 entails, the range of material you will be using and how to make use of the materials to ensure adequate success.
Other information that are contained in the course include information on tutor-marked assignments questions and assessment modalities.
Course Contents The course content consist of a detailed description of manpower planning system and approaches or strategies for implementing the manpower plans through diverse operative personnel management functions such as recruitment and selection, manpower training and development, staff movement in and out of organization and succession planning and evaluation of manpower performance and contribution to corporate success.
Course Aims The aims of this course are to further expose you to the nature of manpower planning system and manpower administration principles and practice in both public and private sector.
It will also make you familiar with major contributors of ideas on manpower planning and administration.
The aims will be achieved by: 1) Detailed explanation on manpower planning process 2) Identifying manpower plan implementation strategies 3) Explaining manpower training and development strategies 4) Highlighting the essence of motivation to personnel performance and various techniques of staff motivation.
5) Discussing manpower utilization strategies 6) Explain the essence of code of conduct and discipline in organization efficiency and success.
1COURSE GUIDE BHM654 Course Objectives By the end of the course you should be able to: 1) Describe the manpower planning system and strategies designed to implement the plan and effectively utilize organization’s personnel.
2) Discuss the operative functions of personnel administration 3) Understand management succession and promotion policies 4) Assess labour turnover and wastages in organization 5) Identify problems of implementation of manpower planning Course Materials 1) Course guide 2) Study units 3) Text books 4) Assignment guide Study Units There are three modules of 5 units each of this course which should be studied carefully: Module 1 Unit 1 The nature of manpower planning system Unit 2 Manpower plan implementation and administration Unit 3 Manpower recruitment and selection process Unit 4 Staff training and development Unit 5 Employee performance appraisals I Module 2 Unit 1 Employee performance appraisal II Unit 2 Employee movement IN and OUT of the organization I Unit 3 Employee movement IN and OUT of the organization II Unit 4 Employee movement IN and OUT of the organization III Unit 5 Motivation and integration of employee 2COURSE GUIDE BHM654 Module 3 Unit 1 Administrative leadership development Unit 2 Wages and salary administration Unit 3 Code of conduct and discipline in organizations Unit 4 Managing employee grievances Unit 5 Managing Industrial Relations The first five units are to give you hindsight on manpower planning process and activities designed to implement manpower plan.
Unit 3 – 6 are strategies designed to implement manpower plan and address manpower shortages and surplus problems.
Units 7 – 9 are manpower utilization strategies, which are necessary for optimum utilization of human resources in the organization to achieve corporate goal.
Unit 10 – 13 are personnel performance enhancement strategies and morale building devices.
Unit 14 – 15 addresses the problems of discontents, disagreements and conflict management in organization Assignments The assignment file will be made available to you.
You will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marks.
The marks you obtain for this assignment will count towards the final mark you will obtain for this course.
Any further information on assignment will be found in assignment file.
Assessment Your performance in this course will be based on two major approaches.
First, are the tutor-marked assignments (TMAS).
The second method is through a written examination.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAS) With respects to TMAS, you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the laid down rules.
The total score obtained in the TMAS will count for 40% of your overall course mark.
3COURSE GUIDE BHM654 Final written Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of three hours duration.
This examination will also count for 60% of your overall course mark.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercise and TMA you have previously encountered.
You are advised to prepare adequately for the examination; since the general broad area of the course will be assessed.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down: Assessment Marks Eight assignment submitted Best 4 marks of the eight @ 10% each = 40 of course mark Final Examination 60% of overall course marks TOTAL 100% of course marks How To Get Most From This Course The distance learning system of education is quite different from the traditional University system.
Here, the study units replace the University lecturer, thus conferring a unique advantage to you.
For instance, you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at any time and place the suit you best.
Hence, instead of listening to a lecturer, all you need to do is reading.
You should understand right from the on-set that the contents of the course are to be worked at, and understood step by step, and not be read like a novel.
The best way is to read a unit quickly in order to see the general run of the content and then to re-read it carefully, making sure that the content is understood step by step.
You should be prepared at this stage to spend a very long time on some units that may look difficult.
A paper and pencil is necessary piece of equipment in your reading.
Tutors and Tutorials Detailed information about the number of tutorial contact hours provided in support of this course will be communicated to you.
You will also be notified of the dates, times, and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you 4COURSE GUIDE BHM654 are allocated to a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter, and provide assistance to you during the course.
Please do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary: - You do not understand any part of the study units; - You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercise; - You have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should endeavour to attend tutorial classes, since this is the only opportunity at your disposal to experience a physical and personal contact with your tutor, and ask questions, which are promptly answered.
Before attending tutorial classes, you are advised to thoroughly go through the study units, and then prepare a question list.
This will afford you the opportunity of participating very actively in the discussions.
Summary Course BHM654, manpower planning and administration expose you further to the theory and practices of personnel management which is a responsibility of every manager in an organization.
On the successful completion of the course, you would have learnt very much about the principles necessary for efficient and effective management of organization’s human resources.
5
