MANAGEMENT BHM 680 ACCOUNTING Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE BHM 680 COURSE GUIDE BHM 680 MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING Course Writer Ashiru Adamu A. G. University of Abuja, Abuja Course Co-ordinator S. O. Israel Cookey National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leaders Dr. O. J. Onwe National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE BHM 680 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-017-4 All Rights Reserved iiiCOURSE GUIDE BHM 680 CONTENTS PAGES Introduction …………………………………………… 1 Course Contents……………………………………….. 1 Course Aims…………………………………………… 1 Objectives……………………………………………… 1 Course Materials……………………………………….
2 Study Texts…………………………………………….
2 Assignments/Exercises………………………………... 2 Assessment…………………………………………….
2 Tutor-Marked Assignment…………………………….
2 Final Written Examination…………………………….
3 Summary……………………………………………….
3 ivCOURSE GUIDE BHM 680 Introduction Management Accounting is an aspect of accounting designed to assist Management in the creation of policy and in the day-to-day operation of the business.
It embraces all areas where assistance is needed by the management.
It may cover accounting data relating to a variety such as striking a balance between retention policy and dividend policy, replacement of fixed assets, methods of financing, working capital requirements capital requirements, capital structure planning, price fixing, etc.
BHM 680 – Management Accounting – is a semester coursework of two credit hours available for students taking PGD in Corporate Governance in the school of Business and Human Resources management.
The course Guide tells you what the course is all about and the relevant materials that you require to make your study very successful.
Course Contents The course contents include nature of Management accounting and the relationship with other areas of accounting and financial management, cost analysis, marginal costing, activity – based costing, Break-even analysis, Budgeting, pricing and capital rationing decisions, etc.
Course Aims This course is geared equipping you with the knowledge and tools necessary to take day-to-day management accounting decisions necessary for sound business operations.
These aims will be achieved by exposing you to the relevant areas of Management accounting.
Objectives On the successful completion of the course, you will be able to: • Explain the nature of management accounting; • Describe the function of management account system; • Use the knowledge and tools acquired to formulate policies and day-to-day business decisions.
1COURSE GUIDE BHM 680 Course Materials - Course Guide - Study Units - Textbooks - Assignment Guide Study Texts There are 19 units in this course which should be studied carefully: Unit 1 Nature of Management Accounting Unit 2 Cost Analysis Unit 3 Marginal Costing Unit 4 Cost Volume Profit Analysis Unit 5 Activity Based Costing (ABC) Unit 6 Operating Statement Unit 7 Pricing Decision Unit 8 Capital Budgeting Decision Unit 9 Capital Rationing Decision Unit 10 Budget and Budgetary Control Unit 11 The Budget Process Unit 12 Standard Costing Unit 13 divisional financial performance Measures Unit 14 Transfer Pricing in Divisionalized Organization Unit 15 Cash Flow Statement Unit 16 Working Capital Management Unit 17 Quantitative Models for the Planning and Control of Stocks Unit 18 The Application of Linear Programming to Management Unit 19 Learning Curve Theory Assignment/Exercise Self-Assessment Exercise are incorporated in the main text.
You are to do them carefully to enable you test your understanding of the course materials as you go on.
Assessments Tutor-Marked Assignments The NOUN will direct further on the TMAQ you will write and forward to your facilitator for grading.
They will count for 40% of the total course marks.
2COURSE GUIDE BHM 680 Final Written Examination At the end of the semester, you will write an examination.
That will count for the remaining 60% of the course marks.
Do expect that all the areas of the course will be assessed during the examination.
Summary On successful completion, this course will not make you a management accountant but equip you to take important business decision.
3
