 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: BHM 747 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 1  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island Lagos.
COURSE DEVELOPMENT BHM 747 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION COURSE GUIDE BHM747 Course Developer/: Mr. AGBEBAKU, H. U and Dr. (MRS) A. O. FAGBEMI Unit Writer/Adapter: National Open University of Nigeria.
Course Editor: Professor C. P. Maduabum NOUN Programme Leader: Dr. (MRS.) A.O.
FAGBEMI National Open University of Nigeria.
Course Coordinator: Mr. AGBEBAKU, HENRY USIOBAIFO National Open University of Nigeria 2  CONTENT BHM747: INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is a two credit course for the Post-Graduate Diploma in Public Administration Programme.
This course of (15) fifteen units, consist of four (4) modules; the Context of Public Administration, Public Policy and the Chief Executive Officer, Local Government Administration and Bureaucracy, Training and Development.
The material has been developed to suit post-graduate diploma students in Public Administration at the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) by adopting an approach that highlights the key areas of public administration.
The course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
Other information that contained in the course includes how to make use of your time and the information on the tutor marked assignments.
There will be tutorial classes.
Full details concerning the tutorial classes will be conveyed to you at the appropriate time.
2.0 WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The course content consists of the meaning, objective, benefits and problems of public administration in Nigeria.
It also includes the Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration, the Concept of the Chief Executive, Local Government Administration and Reforms/Committees, Public Policy, Bureaucracy, the Nigerian Civil Service, Training and Manpower development.
3.0 COURSE OVERVIEW This course ‘Introduction to Public Administration’ aims to give you an understanding of the techniques used and necessary skills in administering and managing public organizations or establishments.
4.0 COURSE OBJECTIVES The objectives of the course are to: 1.
Explain the context of public administration, the functions of the three tiers of government; Federal, State and Local Governments 2.
Examine the various reforms and committees of Local Government Administration 3.
Analyse the distinguishing features of Public Administration in France, USA and Nigeria 4.
Examine critically financial management documents presented to them for decision making 5.
5.
Perform as public sector managers, administrators, academics, researchers and community development officers.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives and self-assessment exercise.
The units’ objectives are also included at the beginning of a unit; you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit, in this way, you can be sure that you have done what is required of the unit.
3  5.0 WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To successfully complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read related books and read other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assignment exercises, and at certain points during the course, you will be expected to submit assignments.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
The course should take you about a total of about 18 weeks to complete.
The course is of four modules; the Context of Public Administration, Public Policy and the Chief Executive Officer, Local Government Administration and Bureaucracy, Training and Manpower Development.
The following are the components of the course, the course guide, study units and textbooks.
What you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time 6.0 STUDY UNITS The study units in this course are as follows: MODULE 1: THE CONTEXT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Unit 1: Meaning of Public Administration Unit 2: Concept, Nature and Scope of Public Administration Unit 3: Historical Development and Approaches of Public Administration Unit 4: Principles of Public Administration Unit 5: Comparison of Public and Private Administration Unit 6: Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration MODULE 2: PUBLIC POLICY AND THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (CEO) Unit 7: Public Policy Unit 8: The Concept of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Unit 9: The Functions of Chief Executive Officer MODULE 3: LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION Unit 10: Introduction to Local Government Administration Unit 11: Functions of Local Government Unit 12: Finance and Sources of Revenues of Local Government Administration Unit 13: Problems of Local Government and Reforms/Committees 4  MODULE 4: BUREAUCRACY, TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 14: Concept of Bureaucracy Unit 15: The Nigerian Civil Service .
7.0 COURSE OUTLINED PROGRAMME PROPOSAL (OPP) FOR BHM 747 This course is designed to give the students a broad view of what public administration is all about.
The contents are: nature and scope of public administration; principles of public administration; historical development and approaches of public administration; the ecology and evolution of public administration in Nigeria; the concept of chief executive officer and the responsibilities; the bureaucracy, personnel management and public administration, local government administration and reforms/committees; decision making, the structure of the Nigerian civil service.
8.0 COURSE MATERIALS Major Components of the course are: 1.
Course guide; 2.
Study units; 3.
Textbooks; 9.0 COURSE MARKING SCHEME There are two aspects to the assessment for this course: The first is the Tutor-Marked Assignment; and secondly, examination.
Within each unit are self-assessment exercises, which are aimed at helping you to check your assimilation as you proceed.
Try to attempt each of the exercises before finding out the expected answers from the literature.
10.0 ASSIGNMENT FILE There will be an assignment in each unit, the exercise are tailored to help you have a full understanding of the course.
Practice these assignments carefully, it will help you assess the course critically, consequently increasing your knowledge of the course.
11.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA’s) This is your continuous assessment exercise and its accounts for 30% of your total score.
You are expected to answer at least four set of TMA’s questions, before you sit for the end of course examination.
Your best three TMA’s will account for the 30% total score.
12.0 FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING Your course examinations’ would earn you 70% which would be added to your TMA score (30%).
The time for this examination would be communicated to you.
5  13.0 SUMMARY This course, Introduction to Public Administration (BHM 747) is designed to give you some knowledge which would help you understand the basic fundamentals, functions and principles of administration as applied to Public Organizations.
After going through this course, you would be in a good position to pass your e-examination at the end of the semester and programme, the knowledge gained could be applied in the execution of managerial duties and to contribute to the development of scholarly thoughts in public sector management.
We wish you success in this interesting course and hope you will use what you have learnt, in this Post-graduate diploma Programme as a gateway to Master’s degree program in public sector management/administration.
14.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Here are some references for further reading that can assist you.
At the end of each unit, you will see a list of references directly related to the topic treated.
Abari, A.O and Mohammed, M.O.B (2006), Fundamentals of Educational Management, Babs- Olutunji Publisher, First Edition Adamolekun, L. and Gboyega A., (Ed.)
(1979), Leading Issues in Nigeria Public Services, Ile-Ife, and University of Ile-Ife.
Ademolekun, L (1983), Public Administration.
A Nigeria Comparative Perspective, Lagos Longman Ademolekun, L and Rowland, L (1979), The New Local Government System in Nigeria, Problems and Prospects for Implantation, Heinemann, Ibadan.
Ajonrin, D (1989), Man-Power Planning; A Paper Presented at Appreciated Seminar for Director of personnel in the Federal and State Civil Service at the University of Ibadan Augustus Adebayo, (1981), Principles and Practices of Public Administration, Nigeria; Spectrum Limited Bankole Akanji, (2000), Principles of Personnel Management Published, by Fadec, EbuteMetta, Lagos Bello, S. A, Ojodu, H. O, Ogunyomi, P. O and Lagbeti, P (2004), Public Administration System in Nigeria, Revised Edition Raamson Printing Service Drucker, P.F (1979), People & Performance; The best of Peter Drucker on Management: London Heinemann.
Egwurube, J.O (1991) The Evolution of Local Government in Nigeria, A Systemic Government Administration (Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers) Koontz, H. and Weihrich, H. (1990), Essentials of Management.
Singapore.
Mcqraw Hill Book Co. Ladipo, P.K.A and Omoyele, S. Olufemi (2003) Management Theory and Practice, published by Bt and Associates, Ilorin Nigeria.
6  Mintzberg, Henry (1973).
The Nature of Managerial Work (New York: Harper & Row).
Nwankwo, G.O.
(1988) Education and Training for Public Management in Nigeria, Onitsha University Publishing Company Nwosu, H.N (1977) Political Authority and the Nigeria Civil Service: Enugu Fourth Dimension Publishers Nwatu, D. N. (1995) Local Government in Nigeria; An Introduction; Enugu, Agatha Service Publisher Ltd. Obiajulu Sunday and Obi Emeka Anthony (2004) Public Administration in Nigeria, A Developmental Approach.
Bookpoint Limited Orewa G. O. and Adewunmi D. B.
(1983) Local Government in Nigeria, the Changing Scene Bein Ethiopia Publishing Co-operation Patrick Mbieli, (2006) Public Administration, A Broad View, Megavons (West Africa) Limited Remi Anifowose and Francis C. Enemuo, (1999) Elements of Politics, Sam Iroanusi Publications Thomas, Dye R. (1955) Understanding Public Policy, Englewood Cliffs, N. U. Prentice – hall 2nd Ed.
Simon A. Herbert (1946), Approaches of Public Administration.
Book of the Half Century 4th Edition Victor Abia B.E, (1998), A Ground Work of Public Administration.
Olucity Printers Limited Yahaya A.D. Akinyele C. 1ed.
(1990).
New Trends in Personnel Management; A Book of Reading, Ascon Personnel Management Series.
7  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island.
Lagos COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Code: BHM 747 Course Title: Introduction to Public Administration Course Developer: Mr. Agbebaku, Henry Usiobaifo National Open University of Nigeria Course Writer: Mr. Agbebaku, H. U and Dr. (Mrs) Fagbemi A. O National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor: Professor C.P.
Maduabum National Open University of Nigeria Programme Leader: Dr (Mrs) Ayodele, O. Fagbemi National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator: Mr. Agbebaku, Henry Usiobaifo National Open University of Nigeria, 8  COURSE CONTENTS MODULE 1: THE CONTEXT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Unit 1: Meaning of Public Administration Unit 2: Concept, Nature and Scope of Public Administration Unit 3: Historical Development and Approaches of Public Administration Unit 4: Principles of Public Administration Unit 5: Comparison of Public and Private Administration Unit 6: Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration MODULE 2: PUBLIC POLICY AND THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER Unit 7: Public Policy Unit 8: The Concept of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Unit 9: The Functions of Chief Executive Officer MODULE 3: LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION Unit 10: Introduction to Local Government Administration Unit 11: Functions of Local Government Unit 12: Financing Local Government in Nigeria Unit 13: Problems of Local Government and Reforms/Committees MODULE 4: BUREAUCRACY AND THE NIGERIAN CIVIL SERVICE Unit 14: Concept of Bureaucracy Unit 15: The Nigerian Civil Service 9  MODULE ONE: UNIT 1 MEANING OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Public Administration 3.2 Politic and Administration 3.3 Difference between Administration and Management 3.4 Difference between Business, Public and Private Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit introduces you to Public Administration discipline.
You will be exposed to the meaning of Public Administration, some definitions by various scholars, the meaning of Public Administration and Management, the differences between Administration and Politics, the differences between Administration and Management, the differences between Public and Private Administration as well as the significance of Administration to any organization or establishment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Define Public Administration.
.
Examine the various contributions by different scholars.
.
Determine the differences between Administration and Management.
.
Specify the difference between Public and Private Administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MEANING OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Public Administration could be defined as the art and science of managing government affairs, enforcing law and fulfilling public policy.
The term public administration originates from two Latin words: 10  Publicus, which means, people or the public and Ad+Ministaire, which means, to look after people or things It also means to care for or look after people and to manage affairs (Gladden, 1972) Public Administration is a collective mechanism for the expression of the will of the people and the wellbeing of the environment.
Public administration can also be referred to as the political system in action.
Gulick and Urwick (1937), defines Public Administration as the function that has to do with getting things done or the accomplishment of defined objectives.
It is essentially concerned with the management of organizations in the pursuit of desired public goals and objectives.
The ultimate goal of public administration is how to maximize, the efficiency and social effectiveness of public administrative institutions.
Adamolekun (1983), states that, public administration is commonly used to refer to both the activities concerned with the management of government business and the study of these activities.
In order words, it is used in distinct senses, as science or as an art; it is an art since it is concerned with the practical management of human resources and as science as it concerns with the knowledge of the ways and methods for efficient fulfilment of public policy.
Nnoli (1986), defines public administration as the machinery and the integral processes, through which the government performs its functions.
It is a network of human relationships and associated activities extending from the Head of State to the lowest officer charged with utilizing resources on behalf of the people.
Public administration can also be defined as the act of decision-making, planning the work to be done, formulating objectives and goals, establishing and reviewing organizations, directing and supervising employees, exercising control and other functions performed by the government executions and supervisors.
It also means the practice of administration in the public sector which is a sub-segment of the society.
Some scholars viewed public administration as the means by which the public policy will be crystallized by the political class and the administrators (bureaucrats) actualize its process.
However, from the foregoing, one could be able to deduce that the term public administration involves cooperative effort also that it arises in an attempt to realise specific objectives especially as they concern the public sector.
3.2 POLITICS AND ADMINISTRATION The conventional view of the relationship between politics and administration is that of one between ends and means.
Politics in its more specific sense is concerned with the acquisition and use of state power.
Power in this sense can be taken as the collective powers of all duly constituted public authorities.
Administration is concerned solely with the most efficient means for achieving any given set or political objectives.
It is important to note that this is a simplified distinction between politics and administration because public administrators are in various ways, involved in both public policy-making and policy-implementation.
One way of differentiating politics from administration is in terms of careers and vocations.
With regards to this view, politics is concerned in democracies with the activities of elected representatives and those who elect them or influence them and the activities of professional 11  administrators as advisers.
But this distinction does not hold at all times in view of the enormous influence wielded by top professional administrators in public policy-making as a result of their technical expertise which most elected members of the state and National assemblies do not possess.
Another way of differentiating politics from administration is in term of process.
We can envisage an arch with the left representing the political process and the right arc the administrative process.
The junction at the top represents the critical point at which policies flow and energize the administrative system.
It is also the point at which influences that have been generated within the administrative process flow back into the higher levels of the political process.
Figure: 1.1 Melting /Critical Point Political process Administrative Process Source: Austin Ranney, The Governing of Men, 4thed.Hinsdale; The Dryden Press, 1975, p.31 The conventional view of this image would show all, or nearly all, the lines of forces moving in opposite direction – that is from the political to the administrative.
They would show political will being generated by the activities of political parties, interest groups, public opinion, elected representatives etc.
and then discharged into the administrative system where they are broken down into successively more detailed stages of application.
This picture contains a fair degree of truth since it is generally the case that the stronger drives and impulses originate within the political process.
In summary, it can be said that the political processes are concerned with interaction and influences and also, the ability for the political will to flow into the administrative system and back to the political process while administration centred on the efficiency of the political processes.
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the relationship between the Political process and Administrative process 2.
In your own words, define Public Administration and Management 12  3.3 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT Administration and Management can be differentiated in two major ways: a.
The nature of the organization and management levels.
b.
The kind of decisions involved.
The Nature of Organisation and Management Levels The term administration is preferably used in public institutions e.g.
churches, government departments, educational institutions, hospitals etc.
and as such laid down rules, regulations, standards, code of conduct, principles and procedures guide the achievement of set goals.
Hence administration is said to be rigid, and concerned with obeying the stated rules and code of conduct.
Administration tends to concentrate on efficiency “doing things right” and it is somehow autocratic – seeking obedience to prescribed standards.
The output in administration seeks quality which is difficult to measure.
Dichotomy between Administration and Management Administration is seen as any action that is directed towards the analysis of policies, identification of options and to a substantial degree, the implementation of programmes as well as efficient allocation of resources.
In addition to all these calculated decisions, a typical administrative action takes into consideration the goals of the organization as well as the environment within which the actions place (Balogun, 1983).
Haimann, (1983) states that administration means the overall determination of policies, setting of major objectives, identification of general purposes and laying down of broad programmes and projects.
Newman, (1963) states that administration means guidance, leadership & control of the efforts of the groups towards some common goals.
There are several scholars that have contributed to the meaning of administration prominent among whom are Nwankwo (1987), Heyel (1973), Breach (1975) and Guilck (1968).
Administration is the capacity of coordinating many and often conflicting social energies in single organisation.
Peretomode (1980), administration is the process of working with and through others to efficiently accomplishes organisational goals and objectives.
Management on the other hand involves conceiving, initiating and bringing together the various elements; coordinating, actuating, integrating the diverse organizational components while sustaining the viability of the organization towards some pre-determined goals.
In other words, it is an art of getting things done through and with the people in formally organized groups.
Management is seen as the act of handling or controlling affairs.
Management tends to be product-oriented (Obiajulu and Obi, 2004).. Follett (1920) and Peretomode (1980), define management as the art of getting things done through people..
Breach (1975), states that management requires a sequence of coordinated activities undertaken by one person or group of persons in the most effective and efficient way to direct the activities of others for the purpose of accomplishing organisational goals.
Drucker (1979), is of the view that, all organisations operate by the provision, combination and utilization of organisational resources of men, material (material inputs and technology) and money.
The differences between management and administration can be summarized under two (2) categories as follows: - Functions, and - Usage or Applicability 13  On the basis of functions, table-1 shows the major dichotomy between management and public administration.
Table: 1.1 Dichotomy on the basis of functions Basis Management Administration Meaning Management is an art of getting things It is concerned with formulation done through others by directing their of broad objectives, plans and efforts towards achievement of pre- policies.
determined goals.
Nature Management is an executing function.
Administration is a decision- making function.
Process Management decides who should carry out Administration decides what is to a task and how it should be done.
be done & when it is to be done.
Function Management is a doing function because Administration is a thinking managers get work done under their function because plans and supervision.
policies are determined under it.
Skills Technical and Human skills Conceptual and Human skills Level Middle & lower level function Top level function Source: Management Study Guide, (2012) Management and Administration; http://www.managementstudy guide.com.
On the basis of usage or application, table-2 shows the major dichotomy between management and public administration.
Table: 1.2 Dichotomy on the basis of usage Basis Management Administration Applicability It is applicable to business It is applicable to non-business concerns i.e.
profit-making concerns i.e.
clubs, schools, hospitals organization.
etc.
Influence The management decisions are Administration is influenced by influenced by the values, opinions, public opinion, govt.
policies, beliefs & decisions of the religious organizations, customs etc.
managers.
Status Management constitutes the Administration represents owners of employees of the organization who the enterprise who earn return on 14  are paid remuneration (in the form their capital invested & profits in the of salaries & wages).
form of dividend.
Sources: Management Study Guide, (2012) Management and Administration; http://www.managementstudy guide.com.
Table 1.3 shows the degree of administration and management performed by the different levels of management.
Table: 1.3 The degree of administration and management performed in organizations Source: Management Study Guide, (2012) Management and Administration; http://www.managementstudy guide.com.
Practically, the difference between management and administration is woolly.
Every manager is concerned with both administrative management function and operative management function.
3.4 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN BUSINESS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTOR ADMINISTRATION Business administration in simple terms is everything that encompasses a business.
The administration of a business includes managing and monitoring absolutely everything to do with a business, from marketing, advertising, to the hiring and the management of staff.
In business administration program, the students are trained in various sections of the field of business for example corporate accounting, communications, principles of management, and marketing.
The students are trained to take risks and the importance of awareness of risk in business.
Business administration is the process of managing every different angle of a business so it can run, expand, grow and succeed.
Without business administration, all areas of the business would go unmonitored and would eventually break down.
Public Administration is sometimes referred to as public management.
It is concerned with the activities of public institutions and organizations that are owned jointly or principally by the government.
It is concerned with the implementation of policies and activities of the 15  government at the three levels (federal, state and local).
Woodrow (1887),sees public administration as the most obvious part of government or government in action.
Private sector administration on the other hand, is in the domain of private organizations or institutions which are establishments that are not owned (either jointly or principally) by the government.
Their activities and operations are centred on profit-making by minimizing cost of production and maximizing profit.
Private organisations produce goods and render services to their customers.
The differences that exist between public, business and private administration are in their setting, formation and structures as follows: Setting: 1.
Public administration is for service orientation, that is, capitally intensive e.g.
PHCN, NITEL, NTA, NPA, etc.
while private organization is a profit-oriented entity.
The private enterprise is essentially for profit maximization 2.
Public administration performs numerous activities e.g.
external defence (military services), police affairs, currency, maintenance of law and order, whereas the private organizations have limited activities e.g.
engineering, industry, production, communication, textiles, commerce and banking etc.
3.
Accountability in the public administration in not well established or accounted for, but in the private organizations, the level of accountability and efficiency is well established.
Formation: 1.
Public administrations are being financed from various taxes or being owned by the public.
They are being paid by the tax payer fund.
But private organizations are owned by limited number of people not as large as a country 2.
Public organization is opened to more criticism (either constructive or otherwise) while the private organizations are not all that prune to frequent criticism as their operations are not widely known Structure: 1.
The size of public organizations is usually larger than those of private organizations.
Many private organizations structures do not extend beyond their locality.
2.
Recruitment into the public services is based on geographical spread (federal character) those of the private sector, are mostly on merit irrespective of applicant’s state of origin.
3.
Personnel procurement in the public sector is done by a centralized body, civil service commission, or by ministries acting on their behalf and according to the guideline formulated by it.
While in the private sector, individual organization is responsible for the living of its staff.
4.
Decision making in public administration is control by the government or elected officers while the Shareholders control private organizations or sectors 16  4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregone discussion, you have learnt that the term public administration originated from two Latin words, Publicus and Ad+Ministaraire which have no universally accepted definition.
It is concerned with cooperative efforts and the accomplishment of defined objectives such as planning, organizing, staffing, directing coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
The major difference between politics and administration is in the areas of interaction and influences on the political process and efficiency of the administrative system.
The difference between management and administration is on the nature of the organization and the kind of decisions involved.
The differences that exist between public and private administration are in the setting, formation and structure.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt that, Public Administration is seen as the function that has to do with getting things done or the accomplishment of defined objectives.
Public administration involves around decision-making, planning, formulating objectives and goals, establishing and reviewing organizations, directing and supervising employees, exercising control and other functions performed by government executives and supervisors.
Administration tends to concentrate on efficiency.
Management sets standard for attainment of goals, encourages creativity and flexibility.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define Public Administration.
2.
List the differences between Politics and Administration.
3.
Differentiate between Management and Administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, A (1986),.Power in politics; Ibadan, spectrum book ltd Abari, A.O and Mohammed, M.O.B (2006), Fundamentals of educational management, babs- olutunji publisher, first edition Ademolekun, L (1983), public administration.
a Nigerian comparative perspective; Lagos; London ltd Akpala Agwu.
(1988), Management; an introduction and search for Nigerian system; unpublished manuscript.
Bartol, K. M and David, M (1988), Introduction to management; a pacific rim focus; new York mcgraw hill.
Balogun M. J.
(1983), public administration in Nigeria; a developmental approach; Lagos macmillian Breach, B.
(1975), An introduction to public administration; london Drucker, P.F (1979), People & performance; The best of peter drucker on management 17  London, heinemann.
Gladden G.N (1972), A history of public administration; volume 1 Gulick and Urwick (1937), Organisation as a technical problem; a paper on the science of administration.
new york; institution of public administration.
Koontz and Weihrich (1990), Essentials of management; singapore mcgraw hill; book co Ladipo and Omoyele, Olufemi (2003) Management theory and practice, by bt and associates, ilorin Nigeria.
Lawal, A.
A (1993), Management in focus; published by abdul industrial enterprises, lagos Mumem, L (2009), Introduction to health administration in Nigeria: publish by bonny company, lagos Newman, William.
H (1963), Administrative action, Englewood.
cliff prentice hall Nnoli,O.
(1986), Introduction to politics: Ibadan; longman group limited.
Nwankwo, G.O.
(1988) Education and training for public management in Nigeria, Onitsha university publishing company Obiajulu Sunday and Obi Emeka Anthoy, (2004) Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach Patrick Mbieli, (2006) Public administration, a broad view.
megavons (west africa) limited Peretomode, V. F (1980), Educational administration; applied concepts and theoretical perspectives.
Lagos; joja educational research and publishers limited.
Ranney Austin (1975), The governing of men; 4th edition; hinsdale; the dryden press.
Remi Anifowose and Francis C. Enemuo (1999), Elements of politics.
malthouse press limited Haimanm, Theo (1983), Conepts and practices of management, elevent edition, journal of political science and administration vol.14.no.2 boston.
Victor, B.E.
Abia, (1998) A ground work of public administration.
olucity printers limited White, R. (1966), Introduction to public administration; essay and research note; yearn.
h William, M. P. Robert, J. H and Jack, R. K. (2005), Business; eight edition, Houghton Mifflin company, boston new York William, G. N. James, M. M and Susan, M. M (2002), Understanding business; mcgraw-hill irwim.
Woodrow, W (1887), The study of public administration; published in the political science Quarterly 18  UNIT 2 CONCEPT, NATURE AND SCOPE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Public Administration 3.2 Nature of Public Administration 3.2.1 The Evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria 3.2.2 The Control of Public Administration 3.3 Scope of Public Administration 3.4 Public Administration as a Discipline 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section you had an idea about what Public administration is all about.
This unit takes you a step further into the Concept of public administration.
In this unit, the focus is on the Concept of public Administration, Nature of Public Administration, Scope of Public Administration and Public Administration as a discipline.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able: a.
Explain the concept of public administration.
b.
List conditions leading to the evolution of public administration.
c. Define the scope of public administration.
d. Explain why public administration is a discipline.
19  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 CONCEPT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The word public refers to an association of people who are large in numbers and who are faced with a number of issues, concerned with the problem of solving the issues and are engaged in discussing the issues.
Administration involves machinery through which set goals and objectives can be achieved.
Therefore, public administration can be conceived as the study of machinery and structures which can be used to achieve certain objectives which affects the lives of individuals in a particular environment.
For an adequate understanding of what public administration is, an explanation of the operative concept is very imperative.
Scholars are not in agreement of a common definition of Public Administration.
What has been observed is a situation in which each individual tries to picture the concept from its environmental, situational and circumstantial perspective.
Equally worthy of note is the fact that, time and value systems also affect the definition of a concept.
This being the case, we wish to present the definition offered by some scholars in the field of public administration over the years.
We must stress that these definitions are not exhaustive but are representative of the numerous definitions of the concept.
Dimock (1973), defines public administration as concerned with what and how of government.
‘What’ is the subject matter, the technical knowledge of a field which enables an administrator to perform his task.
‘How’ is the technique of management and the principle according to which corporate programmes are carried through to success.
He argues that, what and how of government form the synthesis called public administration.
Nnoli (1986), perceives public administration as the machinery as well as the integral processes, through which the government performs its functions.
It is a network of human relationships and associated activities extending from the Head of state to the lowest officer charged with utilizing resources on behalf of the people.
It’s a system of roles and relationships which defines a clear and practicable terms, detail intentions and programmes of the government.
It is also a system of resources available internally and externally to accomplish them, there, when and how they are to be accomplished; who is to benefit from them.
It is a system that causes these intentions and programmes of government to be realized in real life.
It is a pattern of routine activities involving decision making, planning, advising, coordinating, negotiation, conciliation, arbitration, command and data gathering through which the government carries out its responsibilities.
20  Gullick and Urwick, (1937 )promoted seven principles of administration and in so doing, he gave students of public administration that snappy acronym, POSDCORB that is, Planning, Organizing, Staffing, Directing, Coordinating, Reporting and Budgeting.
He further stated that, public administration has been set firm, and it’s the functions that has to do with getting things done or the accomplishment of defined objectives.
His definition touches vital issues of set objectives being accomplished.
White (1966), defines public administration as all those operations of which their purpose is the fulfilment or enforcement of public policies.
Public administration is essentially concerned with the management of organizations in the pursuit of desired public goals and objectives.
The ultimate goal of public administration is how to maximize, the rationality or efficiency and social effectiveness of public institutions.
Pfiffner and Prethus (1967), defines public administration as the coordination of collective efforts to implement public policy.
Public administration is a collective affair involving many people, for profit majority of the people.
Ademolekun (1983), states that public administration is commonly used for the activities of government and the study of these activities; in other words, it is used in two distinct senses, as practice and as knowledge.
From the foregoing one could deduce that public administration is concerned with the activities and functions of government; the services performed by some groups of officials working together for the interest of the nation.
The institutional arrangement designed to achieve the objective interests and welfare of the public is what we generally refer to as public service and the process of formulation and implementation of strategies, policies and programmes by public officials for the satisfaction of social goals and public welfare is referred to as public administration.
Stone (1939), views the concept of public administration as the process by which the objectives are defined, plan, and policies formulated, institutions created and managed, human energies mobilized, resources utilized and change effected in the overall public interest.
However in Nigeria, there are 3 levels of public administration which are: a.
Federal Government Administration b.
State Government Administration c. Local Government Administration Goodnow (1990), states that, the concept of public administration centred on politic and politics has to do with policies or expressions of the state, while administration has to do with the execution of these policies.
Goodnow (1990), and his fellow scholars in public 21  administration strongly believed that public administration is concerned with the bureaucracy of government.
3.2 Nature of Public Administration The nature of public administration is broad and complex.
The nature focuses attention on the concept of public administration as earlier discussed, the evolution of public administration, and the conditions that made it imperative.
It’s also focuses on the features, control and the scope of public administration.
For the purpose of this unit, the nature of public administration will help you understand the relevance of these issues in improving effectiveness and efficiency in the public sector.
The conditions that led to the evolution of public administration are: (a) The existence of extensive empires (b) the rise of absolute monarchy(c) the need for central management of scarce resources (d) the introduction of money economy (e) Lack of adequate communication.
(f) Increase in literacy rate and (g) Introduction of codified laws.
Many scholars have written and argued about these conditions and how each has helped the origin of public administration; we shall explain in brief, how these factors have helped the emergence of public administration.
The existence of empires whether old or new, has invariably called for the evolution of administration.
These empires called for the setting, structure and formation of a formal organization which is necessary for the day to day running of the empire e.g.
the Roman and Chinese Empires.
Tout (1968), attributes the rise of Public Administration to absolute monarchs and argues that earliest bureaucracy was identified in the king’s household.
He recaptured the experiences in France and Russia between 12 and 14 century and argued that, the servants of the kings or absolute monarchs later became servants of the states when capitalism came into control of the European economy and society.
(Scott and Blau, 1963), believes that public Administration arose in these empires due to the need for management of scarce resources.
He cited an example of the Chinese empire, where as a result of scarce resources; a central management committee was constituted to manage the distribution of resources.
Mere existence of empires did not bring about public administration, but the shortage of resources brought public administration because of the need to manage the scarce resources.
The rise of money economy made it possible for labour to be exchanged for money.
The emergence of money (because of the difficulty of trade by barter) as a medium of exchange became an essential ingredient for the rise of public administration.
Weber (1964), states that, bureaucracy arose essentially because of the emergence of money economy, the armies and the empires.
The need for effective contact between and amongst people made the evolution 22  of public administration.
It became absolute necessary to provide this communication.
Another factor that contributed to the rise of public administration is the introduction of codified laws with specified functions.
Brain (1966), believes that the influence of the Catholic Church attributed to the rise of public administration.
He is of the fact that, in the early days, the Catholic Church of the Roman Empire was the largest employer of human resources.
Others empires that contributed to the rise of public administration are the monarchs in France, Prussia and Britain.
3.2.1 The Evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria.
The origin and growth of Public Administration in Nigeria are articulated from two points of view, which are: a. Tracing the origin of public administration to pre-colonial period in Nigeria and b.
Public administration from the colonial period till date.
During the pre-colonial public administration, the different regions, the northern, eastern and western regions of Nigeria had means of administering themselves prior to colonialism.
Nwosu (1985), analysed that; there are three dominant traditional societies in Nigeria: the Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba.
He states that, the Hausa traditional political system was highly centralized.
Unlike the Igbo system, which has more elaborate structures and organs for performance of social roles?
The Hausa emirate has a central bureaucracy with structures of law enforcement, tax collection articulation and external defence.
At the head of a Hausa political system is an Emir and a political sovereign.
He had advisers that are purely secondary; their views may not be taken by the Emir.
However, from the foregoing one could be able to deduce that the centralized system of the Hausa made the Emir to be strong and to issue instructions to his subordinates with utmost compliance.
The pre-colonial public administration of the Igbo emirate was participatory in tune with the segmented system; there was no centralized and consolidated political authority.
A number of villages constituted a political community.
No person was as powerful as the case of the Hausa system.
The Igbo’s were governed in groups and each community was administered by a council of elders.
These groups includes titled men, heads of families, war lords, heads of secret societies, age grades etc.
Political decisions were reached out by a single leader, but with collective efforts of the members in a village assembly.
Once decisions are taken, the relevant groups were mandated to ensure implementation and execution of the decision of the council.
Bureaucracy of the public administration in the Igbo’s emirate therefore, involved every committed members of the community.
The Yoruba’s kingdom lacked common 23  traditional leadership, the kingdom is divided into several political kingdoms, and their traditional political systems are classified as a centralized chiefdom.
The Oba, who is the administrative head of the emirate, traced his lineage to Oduduwa, he and his council of elders take many fundamental and routine decisions.
Below an Oba, are the lesser provincial and village chieftains who exercised some measures of military execution and ritual powers.
Each Oba of a community has a constituted council made of community’s chiefs.
However, the Yoruba pre-colonial public administration provided a constitutional arrangement in which agents of the community such as the Ogboni society were used to execute the decisions of the councils, and thus the society.
It is interesting to state here that, the then society of the various kingdoms as identified are not as complex as it is today since the needs of the communities were not as diverse as it is today.
However, modern public administration in Nigeria owes its origin to the British colonial administration.
The evolution of Public administration in Nigeria can be traced the handwork of the British.
In the same vein, these institutions that found expression in Nigeria states came purposely to ensure adequate exploitation of the resources of Nigeria.
3.2.2 The Control of Public Administration The control of public administration in Nigeria and all over the world became necessary to ensure effectiveness and efficiency of public service and institutions, Public administration is controlled through some measures that guide against waste of public funds.
Some of the controls measures of public administration are as follows: A.
Ministerial Control: The appointment of members into the public service rest with the Federal Civil Service Commission and same goes for the state.
The Civil Service Commission is under the Ministry of Labour and Productivity that appoints members of the public service and also dismiss them.
B.
Parliamentary Control: Ministries, departments and agencies (MDA) must be made available to the parliament.
This is to enables the parliament to discuss, obtain – information, criticize or approve the activities of each ministries.
During question time, the parliament is free to ask the minister-in-charge of a ministry various questions about the general policy of the ministry and the way forward.
C. Judicial Control: The judiciary is empowered by law to insert some control on the activities of public services and administration through litigations and hearing of cases, ranging from public officers embezzling public funds, dismissal of staff illegally, arbitrary use of excessive powers to oppress members of the public society etc.
The independence of the judiciary has enabled it to insert some sanity into the Nigeria public administration, 24  through fair hearing of all cases that has to do with both public and private laws.
The Judiciary has equally intervened frequently in the Nigeria administrative laws.
However, the judicial control of public services and administration became necessary because of the abuse of powers by public servants who hide under the disguise of performing official duties to oppress the members of the public.
D. The Control of Ombudsman/Public Complaints Commission: The institutionalization of the Ombudsman was a progeny of the expanded previews of the governmental and administrative activities within the last few decades in Nigeria.
The word Ombudsman originated from Sweden in the early part of the 19th century and since then it has gained recognition of many magnitude in many countries including Nigeria, where it is euphemistically called Public Complaint Commission (PCC).
The Public Complaint Commission was set up to enable the less privileged in the society to obtain redress to their grievances and to get protection against human rights by any functionaries or agent whether government, public or private.
E. Public Opinion Control: Price (1776), defines public opinion as composite reactions of the general public.
It expresses reflections of the people and the activities of the government; one could perceive public opinion as the will of the people.
It is expressed through the press, radio, television and other mass media.
Leaders and organizers of public opinion constitute the pressure groups.
However, public opinion has significant influence and control of the public administration through the expression of some ills or wrong doings by the public or civil servants.
F. Pressure Group Control: Pressure group has considerable influence and control on government policy.
It is organized to influence the context of governmental decisions without attempting to replace its members in formal government positions.
The importance of pressure group is premised on the thesis, which is firmly part of the political progress, and also an attempt to reinforce the direction of government policy.
However, pressure groups particularly the trade unions are able to have some control on the functions and role of the government in their various Ministries and Parastatals with references to salary negotiation and staff welfare.
G. Pressman: The pressmen, media houses and journalists through their stories in the newspaper (print) radio and television (broadcast) expose public servants who err or are involved in shady deals and abuse of powers.
The press ensures that, the society is governed without any biasness, sentiment and tribal lines.
The newspapers and other publications medium act as the eyes of the people.
The pressmen do a lot to see that justice, fair play and 25  normalcy is adopted during the course of their duties.
The press has been able to control the public administrators by expressing and exposing public office holders on any act contrary to civil service rules and regulations.
The society generally has its problems vis-à-vis, corruption, embezzlement of public funds, wrongful dismissal of official etc.
such issues are brought to the notice of the press in form of complaints to the appropriate quarters, particularly to the press or the Public Complaints Commissions by public servant.
H. Monetary and Funds Control: This is a special control by the heads of the three- tiers of government in curtailing the financial misappropriation of public administration in Nigeria.
The federal government allocation to states and local governments is one of the measures used to ensure that public funds are well utilized and not wasted.
I.
Monitoring of Projects and Programmes: It has been the practice that public servants do not usually adhere strictly to lay down procedures for the award of contracts and project execution.
A team is always set up by the federal, state and local governments to ensure that all projects are executed and delivered as specified by the award.
The monitoring of projects and programmes is capable of proffering solutions to Nigeria’s public administration problems.
Self –Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria.
2.
In your own understanding, what are the control processes of Public Administration in Nigeria 3.3 SCOPE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The scope of public administration is wide; it involves those issues, functions, spheres and areas in the public domain.
The complex natures of our modern society make public administration to be more complex.
An average citizen is likely to think of public administration primarily in terms of governmental regulations of individual and group conduct.
However, the scope of public administration is vast in nature and varied in form of protection, assistance, and services the government provides.
Adebayo (1981), states that when administration is qualified by the word public, it simple means the practice of administration in the public sector.
Public administration means the same as government administration.
The scope of public administration connotes the service of the public or government.
In Nigeria, the scope of public administration has increased to include the federal government and all its ministries, the federal Parastalals and 26  Commissions, the army, the Police, the Customs department, the state ministries, Commissions and Parastatals owned by the state and the federal capital territory (FCT) Abuja as well as the 774 Local government areas in the country.
However, from the foregoing one could be able to deduce that the Scope of public administration can be categorized as follows: Protection: It is duties of government to provide some level of protection for the society as a whole; e.g.
police, fire protection, healthcare, national and civil defence, prison services, safeguarding and conservation of natural resources of the environment.
Promotion of services: The government owns and operates enterprises services, e.g.
postal services, post facilities, municipal, water supply, electric power, vehicle assembly plants, cement factories, banks and allied institutions, etc.
the government also provides some level of services to education and social groups e.g.
farmers, factory workers, businessmen and women, women and children, the unemployed public administration and the aged.
Regulation: The government through it various departments and agencies regulates the public and private sectors.
The activities of NDLEA, NAFDAC, S.O.N.
etc.
and other regulatory bodies and boards are of significance here.
Furthermore, the scope of public administration deals with intergovernmental and other functional responsibilities such as agriculture, civil aviation, high ways, housing, rural and urban development, vocational rehabilitation, care of the aged, the blind, the destitute, and the refuges.
Public administration is also concerned with how a country’s administration is organized and how it functions.
It’s the machinery for implementing government policy.
The functions of public administration involve social, economic, cultural and political activities.
Woodrow (1887), states that the task of public administration is to strengthen the path of government and to make its business-less, and purify its organization and to crown its duties with dutifulness.
He further states that the expansion of modern societies and the complexities of societal demands have helped to make the scope of public administration rather elastic.
3.4 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATIONS AS A DISCIPLINE Public administrators have often faced with issues of having to argue that public administration is not a field of study.
That public administration now exists, as important academic field of study is no longer debatable.
Public administration is concerned with the study of how a country’s administration is organized and how it functions.
Since it is the machinery for implementing government policy, it follows that its study must lead to the study of the most efficient ways of organizing the executive branch of government.
Public 27  administration as a field of study deals with systematic, analytical and procedural method of arriving at facts which will in turn help in finding solutions to the problem of the society.
However, public administration has gained added impetus as scientific methods are now employed to gather and analyse data and reach logical deductions.
The key issue in the study of public administration is the emphasis on efficiency, the item of public administration has been economy and efficiency that is the provision of public services of the minimum cost.
Although, practitioners would insist that there is a world of difference between theory and practice, it is the view of most scholars that a systematic understanding of the theoretical basis of administration would produce better results in the practical activities of administrators.
4.0 CONCLUSION The foregoing discussion on concept, nature and scope of public administration, confirms the complex nature of public.
Public Administration is concerned with the study of mechanics and structures which are used to achieve certain objectives that affect the lives of individuals.
However, scholars are not in agreement on a common definition of the concept and scope of public administration.
What has been observed is a situation where individuals make pictures of the concept of public administration from its environmental, situational and circumstantial perspective.
The nature of public administration helps you to understand the relevance of issues in improving effectiveness and efficiency in public sector.
The scope of public administration involves those issues, functions, spheres and areas of public administration.
5.0 SUMMARY There is no common definition of public administration, that the concept, nature and scope of public administration are pictured from various perspectives.
The scope of public administration is broad and complex in nature; it covers the areas of protection, provision of services and regulations of government activities.
Public administration is the machinery through which the activities of the government are performed.
The functions of public administration are social, economic, cultural and political.
There are some controls of public administration in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question: 1.
Discuss the concept, nature and scope of public administration in Nigeria.
28  2.
List and explain the significance of the measures of public administration performance in Nigeria 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ademolekun, L. (1983), Public administration: a Nigerian comparative perspective, Lagos, Longman.
Adebayo, A (1986),.Power in politics; Ibadan, spectrum book ltd Dahl, Robert .A (1995), Modern political analysis, prentice hall of India Dimock, M. E (1973), Public administration.
new york; holt rine hart and winston inc Goodnow, F. J (1900), Politics and administration; new york macmillan.
Gulick and Urwick (1937), Organisation as a technical Problem; a paper on the science of administration.
new york; institution of public administration.
Nnoli,O.
(1986), Intriduction to politics: Ibadan; Longman group limited Nwosu, H. N (1985), Political authority and the Nigerian civil service; Enugu fourth dimension publishers.
Obiajulu Sunday & Obi Emeka Anthony (2004), Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach.
Bookpoint limited.
Patrick Mbieli, (2006), Public administration: a broad view.
megavons (west africa) limited Price, D.K (1776), Transaction cost theory and public administration; origin and development.
Piffner and Presthus (1967), Public administration 5th edition york ronald press Remi Anifowose and Francis C. Enemuo (1999), Elements of politics.
malthouse press limited Scoff and Blau (1963), Formal organisation; London ;roufledge and kegan paul coy.
Victor, B.E.
Abia, (1998), a ground work of public administration, olucity printers ltd Woodrow, W (1887), The study of public administration; published in the political science Quarterly Weber, M. (1964), The theory of social and economic organisation collier macmillan 29  UNIT 3 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT AND APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Table of Content: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Development of Public Administration 3.2 Approaches to the Study of Public Administration 3.2.1 The Historical Institutional Approach 3.2.2 The Judicial/Legal Approach 3.2.3 The Structural Approach 3.2.4 The Behavioural/Administrative Approach 3.2.5 The Scientific Approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, you had an idea about what the concept, nature and scope of public administration are all about.
This unit will take you a step further into the Historical Development and Approaches to the Study of Public Administration.
In this unit, the focus is on the Historical Development of Public Administration and the various approaches of the Study of Public Administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Explain the historical development of public administration.
b. Enumerate the various approaches to the study of public administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Historically, the study of public administration as an independent field of political science came about in the late eighteen century, when Woodrow Wilson (1887), a constitutional lawyer and Kinnear (1887), undertook and made enquiry into the field of public administration.
It is an infallible fact that the British colonized Nigeria and that the institutionalization of the sphere of influence by British on Nigerian territory took place in successive stages.
When Lagos was annexed in 1861, by 1862, the situation necessitated the 30  establishment of rudimentary public administration which was confined to the Lagos colony then.
No sooner had Britain settled in Nigeria, was a committee constituted in 1865, on how public administration will be administered.
Goodnow (1890), states that the study of public administration commenced at about 1940 or precisely after the 2nd World War He further stated that, Robert Dahl, Fix Riggs, Fred Riggs, Sulton, David Easton, Davies are among the leaders and pioneering scholars of public administration, However, the work of Rigg is by far the most outstanding.
His work on the concepts of the Sala Model and the Presimatic Society study brought into view public administration of the developing non-western countries.
3.2 APPROACHES OF THE STUDY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION There are various approaches to the study of public administration since the inception of the concepts of public administration.
These approaches are as follows: a.
The Historical Approach b.
The Judicial or Legal Approach c. The Structural Institution d. The Behavioural or Administrative Approach e. The Scientific Approach.
3.2.1 Historical Approach of Public Administration This approach sees public administration from the perspective of historical development of events of a particular nation’s public service and administration.
In this approach, scholars of public administration are categorized into two major groups.
Those who have sound knowledge of public service and public administration such as Woodrow Wilson, Frank Goodnow, a professor of administrative law at Colombia University (father of American Public Administration), F. W. Willonghboy, Mashal Dimock, George Frederickson, Orion White, Leonard D. etc.
and those who are interested in neither public service nor public administration such as the likes of Fridrick Taylor, Urwick, Gulick, Herbert Simon, Max Weber etc.
However, the latter are those without sound knowledge of public administration, but are interested in the practical nature of the discipline efficiency and effectiveness of public organization.
These groups of people however, are saddled with unveiling practical ways of improving work performance.
In Nigeria, for example, the origin of civil service in Nigeria is traced to the administration of Lord Lugard who was governor-general and Head of administration at the time of amalgamation of the Northern and Southern in 1914.
However, the real nucleus of public service in Nigeria evolved under Sir Hugh Clifford who succeeded Lord Lugard administration in 1921, with the establishment of a central secretariat in Lagos for administrative practice.
( Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999) In 1906, the New York Bureau of Municipal Research was founded to promote efficient and economical municipal government and the scientific study of municipal administration.
This Bureau became a model, after the publication of handbooks and materials on public administration.
In 1911, a training school was established for administrative practice (Simon, 1964) 31  3.2.2 The Judicial or Legal Approach The judicial or legal approach is one of the oldest of all of the approaches to the study of public administration since it became a distinctive field of study.
The pre-occupation of this approach is the statutory provisions or legal sanctions upon which an administration is run.
The Judicial approach tends to provide the codes, norms and regulations on which public administration operates within the confines of native authority and to the present modern day administration.
This approach elaborates and analyses all the instruments of laws, regulations, sanctions, and penalties etc, required for the day-to-day running of any organization.
Examples of instrument of laws in modern organization are government orders, civil service rules, financial memoranda, scheme of service etc.
Kinnear (1887), stated that, the judicial approach of public administration is the knowledge of the laws by which civil society is regulated.
(Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999).
Goodnow (1952:103), the founder of administrative law expressed that “there are, then, in all governmental systems, two primary or ultimate functions of government”, which are the expression of the will of the state and the executions of that will.
These functions are, respectively politics and administration.
Goodnow (1893:47), states that in countries like the United States of America and England, no serious attempt had been made to classify the law in accordance with the relations upon which it is governed.
Administrative law is that part of the law which governs the relations of the executive and administrative authorities of the government.
The rule of law is concerned with the functions of administration which is part of the administrative law.
Self- Assessment Exercise 1.
Explain the various approaches of the study of Public administration.
2.
Which of these approaches is most appealing to you?
3.2.3 The Structural Institutional Approach In this approach, policies are clearly separated from administration.
The belief is that the major role of the administrator is to implement the government policies.
This approach sees public administration as an academics field of study, because it covers the political and administrative processes of an institution.
It is also concerned with the distribution of power among the levels of government, public accountability, and planning of local government administration, it analyses organizational structures and constituted authorities and responsibilities of the three organs of government.
However, the major criticism against this approach is that it does not specify the role of individuals and informal groups in structural organizations.
Secondly, it fails to relate public administration to both internal and external environment.
The basic ingredient of this approach is that, it maintains a link and separation of powers amongst the three arms of government e.g.
legislative, executive and judiciary (Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999) However, from the foregoing one could be able to deduce that the major features of the structural/institutional approach of public administration are planning, supervision and leadership, teamwork and group norms.
3.2.4 The Behavioural or Administrative Approach This approach is concerned with the study of administrative attitude, behaviours, actions and reactions, senses of reasoning of the decision makers and policy planners.
Mayo (1927), in 32  one of his researches, stated the importance of groups in affecting the behaviours of individuals at work.
In this approach, great scholars have made significant contribution to the concept of behaviourism.
Dahl (1995), states that, public administration must be viewed and studied from the aspect of human behaviour.
He further argues that “to treat organization in a formal and technical way and with regards human beings at the organization as more or less materials are not desirable”.
He finally, submitted that, the “study of public administration should embrace the totality of man and must not presume that man is a simple machine responding to goals and self-interest”.
(Anifowose and Francis C. Enemuo, 1999) Simon (1976), advocated the careful study of human behaviour, using demonstrated techniques from the physical science.
Such techniques are Critical Path Analysis (CPA) Programme Evaluation Review Technique (PERT), Game Probability Theory (GPT) etc.
These erudite and great scholars see decision-making as the heart of administration and how to understand the behaviour of human beings in any organization.
Behavioural contributions to decision-making are very significant, it tells us that decision-making determines the success or otherwise of any organization.
Simeon (1976), identifies three major stages in decision-making, these are: Intelligence, Design and Choice activities.
(Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999).
Mayo (1927), a psychologist and professor states that the study of public administration is basically concerned with human beings and not machines, but that machines requires human components to functions.
His emphasis is on the effects of human beings on production.
He believes that human beings possessed certain components that make them more efficient and hardworking in the discharge of his duties.
However, he came out with the following findings: a.
There is no relationship between higher wages and increase in production.
b.
There is non-economic reward and sanctions, but self-respecter, self-belonging, etc.
c. Workers do not react or act as an individual but rather as a group.
d. The importance of leadership which constitute another major modification of scientific management.
(Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999) 3.2.5 The Scientific Approach Frederick Winslow Taylor (1856–1917), is regarded as the father of scientific approach to the study of public administration.
This approach is also referred to as the machine approach.
Taylor spent most of his working life at the Steel Company.
He started as a labourer and rose through the rank of a foreman to a chief Engineer and later a consultant.
His vision was to develop public administration into a science from the principles of engineering and management sciences, to the study of scientific methods in management in the field of business and industry.
However, Taylor believed that there is only “one best method” which should be the “scientific management principle” he sees man as an extension of the machine.
His style of approach is seen today in various expressions as “Administration oils the machinery”, “the logs of the business”, “a wheel within a wheel”, and as the “ex-obey”.
Taylor further states that, the desire to increase production of goods and services is by motivating the workers to work harder.
He emphasized that the motivation of workers can be achieved by adopting the “bottom-up” approach which is the decentralized system of management.
(Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999) 33  Fayol, (1841–1925) was also a contemporary of Taylor, he believes in the distribution of work in a centralized management system.
He believed that an increase in production can best be achieved through division of labour rather by motivation.
In one of his book, titled General and Industrial Administration and published in 1929, Fayol’s divided scientific management into a number of functions: which are technical, commercial, financial, security, accounting and management.
He further stated that the job of the manager is to forecast and plan, to organize, to command, to co-ordinate and control of human and material resources.
Other erudite scholars who contributed to the study of public administration on scientific approach are the likes of Urwick, Luther Gulick, and Professor Brit.
However, in 1937 Gulick and Urwick, book titled ‘’ papers on the science of Administration ‘’ introduce the process of scientific management under the acronym POSDCORD (Planning, Organising, Staffing, Directing, Coordinating, Recording and Controlling) 4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion, the approaches to the Historical Development of the study of Public Administration are numerous.
Wildrow Wilson articles of 1887, on the ability to scientifically undertake and make enquiry into the field of public administration marks the beginning and approaches to Public administration as scientific if separated from the hazard of politics.
Some of the pioneering scholars of public administration are Robert Dahl, Fix Riggs, Fred Riggs Sulton, David Easton Davies etc.
The approaches to the study of public administration are Historical, Judicial, Structural – Institutional, Behavioural and Scientific Approach.
Frederick Winslow Taylor is regarded as the father of scientific management.
His methodology and approach to management (one best method) saw man as an extension of the machine.
Henri Fayol, a contemporary of Taylor believed that the distribution of work and an applied centralized management system constitute the scientific approach to the study of public administration.
5.0 SUMMARY Historical development of public administration started in 1887.
Frederick Winslow Taylor and Henri Fayol made remarkable contributions to the history and development of the study of public administration.
The judicial approach is adjudge the oldest of all the approaches to the study of public administration because it holds the instrument of law for the day–to-day running of any organisation.
Intelligence, Design and Choice activities are the three major stages of decision making.
Scholars of public administration are categorized into two, those with sound knowledge and those without sound knowledge of public service.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT.
Question: 1.
Identify the approaches to the study of Public Administration, and explain any two that appeals to you most and why?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHERREADING.
Easton, David (1965), A system analysis of political life; new york wiley Taylor,F.W (1917), Introduction to the study of public administration; new york; macmillan 34  Obiajule Sunday and Obi Emeka Anthony (2004), Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach, bookpoint limited Mayol Elton (1927), Public control and administration; new york Patrick Mbieli (2004), Public administration, a broad view, megavons (west africa) limited Remi Anifowose and Francis C. Enemuo (1999), Elements of politics.
malthouse press limited Simon A. Herbert (1946), Approaches to public administration, book of the half century 4th edition Victor Abia B. E (1998), A ground work of public administration .olucity printers limited Woodrow, W (1887), The study of public administration; published in the political science quarterly 35  UNIT 4 PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Henry Fayol’s Principles 3.2 Principles of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, you learnt about what Historical Development and Approaches to the study of Public Administration are all about.
This unit will take you a step further on the principles of public administration.
In this unit, the Principles of public administration are concerned with efficiency of services, worker welfares political direction, relation, and responsibility soldering public institutions.
The principles of public administration assist the organisation towards the realization of goals and objectives.
These principles are sources of action, regulations and fundamental truths capable of guiding human conduct, behaviour and performance.
However, from the foregoing discussion, one can be able to deduce that the principles of public administration guide the management process of an organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Enumerate the principles of Public Administration 2.
Explain the basic principles of Public Administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HENRY FAYOL’S PRINCIPLES 36  The principles of public administration are referred to as the principles of management.
These principles can be examined from two different perspectives, firstly from the management point of view and secondly, from public administration view.
However, both principles help to organise and direct the affairs of Public administration.
Henri Fayol (1841-1925), Frederick Winslow Taylor (1856-1915), and Lillian Gilberth (1972), all made remarkable contributions to the approaches of the study of Public administration.
Fayol, popularly known as the Father of modern Management until his death in 1925, approached Management from the upper level administration throughout his 50 years worked experience making researches on efficiency of workers in public services.
He began his quest on the principles of public administration as an administrative expertise, Industrial Mining Executive, a Manager, General-Manager and finally, as a member of the Board of Directors Fayol, as manager taught about the challenges the general manager will encountered.
He came-up with a logical conclusion that the activities in an organisation could be divided into six essential groups, which are: a.
Technical (Production, Manufacturing, Adaptation) b.
Commercial (Buying, Selling and Exchange) c. Financial (Finding and Using Capital) d. Accounting (Stock taking, Balance sheet, costing, Statistics) e. Security (Protection of property and Persons Welfare) f. Management (Planning, Organising, Controlling, Coordinating, Directing) Source: (Obiajulu and Sunday, 2004).
However, he states that these six essential groups do exist in all organisations whether simple or complex but that, the first five are well known, the sixth (management) required further explanation.
However, his principles on public administration were credited for being the first to identify the Functions of Management as Planning, Organising, Coordinating, Controlling and Directing.
Fayol, contends that the six essential groups of activities are interdependent and it is management’s role to assure the smooth relationship of the sub-units of management to achieve enterprise goals and objectives.
However, Fayol formulated the 14 principles of management to guide the management process in Organisations.
The Fourteen (14) Principles of Management are as follows: 1.
Hierarchy: This means the pecking order of human influences in an Organisation.
It is the process by which power; function; position and authority of an organisation are orderly distributed among the officers and positions in an organisation with a view of maintaining an effective coordination of both human and material resources.
In essence, it means the level of graded authority in an organisation, for example, in a university setup; authority and 37  directives comes from the Vice Chancellor, down the hierarchy to the lowest staff with full compliance.
2.
Authority: Means the same as power, it is the right to give orders.
Authority and responsibility go together, authority should not be considered without reference to responsibility.
Authority must come from the top of the hierarchy e.g.
Chief Executive, the Vice Chancellor, the Military, the Navy and others Para-Military Operatives.
3.
Unity of Command: Every staff must have a superior upon whom he takes directives that is one man, one superior; no subordinate should report to more than one supervisor at a time to avoid error.
The principles of Public administration presuppose that every member of an organisation should receive orders and directives from one supervisor and the same goes on and on.
4.
Chain of Command: In order to attainment the goals and objectives of the organisation, there should be power and authority linkage.
All operations with the same objectives should have one manager with a common plan, for example, the production manager should be abreast with information, and to give directions to all matters on production of the Organisation.
5.
Division of Labour: Means the same as specialization, it is a process of narrowing down work in line with staff competency.
The process permits specialization of expertise.
The process leads to higher productivity of goods and services.
It helps to develop practices and familiarity in an organisation.
6.
Subordination of individual interest to general interest: This principle is of the opinion that the interest of one individual or groups of individuals should not take precedence over the interest of the organisation as a whole.
7.
Remuneration: Wages for work done should be fair for both the employees and the organisation.
The organisation should consider the cost of living and the ability to pay and motivate workers on performance.
8.
Centralization: This is the extent to which authority is concentrated or dispersed.
Individual circumstances will determine the grade that will ‘give the best overall yield’.
The principle of centralization depends on the size and quality of management in an organisation.
However a good balance should be maintained.
9.
Scalar Chain: There should be a clear line of authority and directives from the top level management e.g.
the Chief Executive, Vice Chancellor, Minister etc.
to the lowest level of staff.
10.
Order: In every organisation there should be in place some sense of order, command and direction.
Everything should have its place, the right man in the right place and for the right job.
11.
Equity: This is a combination of kindness and justice toward employees.
The work force of an organisation should be regarded as members of the same family, guided by the same rules and procedure of the Organisation.
All staff should be free and treated the same irrespective of their race, culture etc.
38  12.
Stability of Tenure of Personnel: Employees need to be given time to settle with the job, though this may take a lengthy period in the case of managers.
Turnover of personnel should be minimised if the goals are to be achieved.
13.
Initiative: Within the limits of authority, all categories of staff should be encouraged to show some level of inventiveness of their skills and potentials.
Subordinates should be allowed the freedom to conceive and execute plan in order to develop their capacity to the fullest.
14.
Espirit de Corps: This is the principle of oneness; it is regarded as the father of all the Principles Management.
Workers are made to understand that, they are members of one family and through their level of team work and unionism work towards achieving the organisational goals.
It also emphasises the importance of communication.
However, this spirit is very high among the Militaries and Para-Military and in others well organised Organisations and Institutions.
However, Fayol (1925) states that different situations may require different managerial techniques.
He therefore summarised this principles as ‘’there is no rigid or absolutes in management affairs, it is all a question of proportion’’.
He further states that allowances should be made for changing circumstances.
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the essential groups of an Organisation.
2.
Identify and explain the 14 Principles of Management.
3.2 Principles of Public Administration This perspective of the principles of public administration believes that, public administration as a true science of government has the capacity to organise and direct human and material resources to achieve set goals, this perspective, believed that the basic principles of public administration are as follows (Mbieli, 2006) 1.
Political Direction 2.
Public Responsibility 3.
Efficiency 4.
Organisation 5.
Research 6.
Social Necessity 7.
Public Relations (a) Political Direction: Public Administration as the youngest branch of political science obtains instruction from the political will of the politicians in providing essential services to the people.
Political direction is instructions in form of leadership role that is, commanding attention and stimulating subordinates to achieve organisational goals.
Public administration provides political directions in terms of the broad policies and laws formulated at the National and States Assemblies, and implemented by the administrative executives of the Federal, State and Local public servants.
(b) Public Relations: This is concerned with informing and relating to the public.
Members of the public need to be enlightened about the affairs of government.
People should 39  be well informed about policies and intentions of the government.
Public relations are concerned about the reactions of the people to government policies, problems and possible solutions.
The mass media has helped to achieve these principles.
The media through its agencies exposes daily activities of the government, these include government ideology and intentions, government budget, public office holder’s etc.
public relation of the government to the people and viz-a- viz are newspapers, radio, television, magazines, etc.
(c) Public Responsibility: People are elected into public offices as representatives of the people’s interest.
Public responsibility ensures the exercise of certain power and authority in the execution of certain specified duties and functions for the benefit of the people.
It also stimulates the need for accountability from the elected officers to the people.
(d) Efficiency: For administration to be efficient in the discharge of its duties, the personnel must have acquired knowledge to execute public programmes and also to satisfy the needs of the society.
Efficiency of public servants can be achieved through pre-entry and in-service training programmes for both the junior and senior cadre.
These career developments are essentially meant to promote efficiency of goods and services.
(e) Social Necessity: The call for public administration from political science as a field of study is purely for effectiveness and efficiency of the institutions of the government.
The essence of public administration is in the process of formulating and implementing public policy and providing the citizenry with civil amenities as well as developing them socially, economically, and politically.
(f) Organisation: The activities of public administration are felt in the local, state and federal levels.
The organs of government are organised into legislative, the executive and the judiciary.
Public administration is organised into hierarchy and auxiliary agencies which engages in different functional roles within the organisational setup.
Organisations whether formal or informal bring human and material resources together for effective use and service to the people.
(g) Research: Research means the process of investigating a problem.
It is the capacity to probe the known and the unknown.
Research in administration enables the organisation to grow and change with the law of nature.
In public administration, the essence of research is to makes amends and corrections of the flaws in the past administrative records, and for improvement and achievement of new ideas.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion on the principles of public administration, it could be seen that the principles of public administration is concerned with the essential tools of providing services, efficiency in production, delivery and development of effective relationships staff in an organisation and also of the elected office holders.
The principles of public administration are also concerned with the activities of the organisation which are technical, commercial, financial, accountability, security, and managerial as stated by Fayol’s.
Management Principles of Administration are Hierarchy, Unity of Command, Division of Labour, Scalar Chain, Authority, Remuneration, Centralization, Equity, Order, Stability, Initiative, Stability of tenure of personnel and Espirit de corps etc.
The functions of Management are Planning, Organising, Commanding, Coordinating and Controlling.
40  5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you learnt about the essentials activities of an Organisation which technical, commercial, financial, accounting security and management.
The 14 Principle of Management guides the management process of any Organisation.
The Principles of Public administration are political Direction, Public Responsibility, Efficiency, Organisation, Research, Social Necessary and Public Relations.
No organisation can achieve its goals without the applications of the essentials of management.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT.
Question: 1.
List and explain the Principles of administration 2.
Discuss five Henry Fayol’s principle that are applicable to the Nigeria public service 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Augustus Adebayo, (1981) Principles and practices of public administration, Nigeria: spectrum Ltd Bello, S. A, Ojodu, H. O, Ogunyomi, P.O, and Legbeti, P. (2004) Public administration in Nigeria (revised edition) raamson printing services Fayol, H (1925) Elements of management; new york, macmillian Taylor,F.W (1917), Introduction to the study of public administration; new york; macmillan Ladipo, P.K.A and Omoyele, S. Olufemi (2003), Management theory and practice, published by bt and associates, ilorin Nigeria.
Nwankwo, G.O.
(1988) Education and training for public management in Nigeria, Onitsha university publishing company Obiajulu Sunday and Obi Emeka Anthony (2004), Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach, bookpoint limited Patrick Mbieli (2006), Public administration, a broad view.
megavons (west africa) limited 41  UNIT 5 COMPARISON OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ADMINISTRATION Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Public and private Administration 3.1.1 Meaning of Administration 3.1.2 Meaning of Private Administration 3.
1.3 Meaning of Public Administration 3.2 Features of Public Organization 3.3 Similarities between Public and Private Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section you learnt about what the principles of public administration are all about?
This unit will take you a step further into the comparison of public and private administration.
In this unit, the focus is on the meaning of public and private administration, the features of public organizations, the differences between public and private administration, and the similarities between public and private administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Define public and private administration.
b.
Identify the features of public organization.
c. Distinguish between public and private administration.
d. Identify the similarities between public and private administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Administration Administration means the organization and direction of human and material resources to achieve specific set goals and objectives.
(Fayol, 1925) The rudiment of administration is the coordination, evaluation and monitoring of Organization’s activities and programmes.
Administration exists in all Organisations whether public or private and for the purpose of effectiveness and efficiency of services, ranges from schools Church/Mosque, Company, 42  Ministries, Extra-Ministries, Parastatals, the Arms of government, Corporations etc.
Administration exists in all these spheres of endeavours.
There are need for human and material resources to be administered, if the Organisation is to attain its aim and objectives and also, of the aspirations of the Organization.
However, renowned scholars of Public administration like Herbert Simon, Smith Burgh and Thompson believes that administration occurs when two men cooperate to roll a stone; which none of them can move alone, the rudiments of administration have appeared.
Administration is concerned with the capacity of coordinating many and other conflicting social energies in single organisms (Simeon, 1976) 3.1.1 Meaning of Private Administration There is no clear distinction between private and public administration.
Private administrations are concerned with the activities of private Organizations that are not owned either jointly or principally by the government.
Public administration is concerned with rendering of services to the public.
Government policies and decisions have little or no impact on the affairs of private Organisations except in areas of regulations and compliance to government rules and regulations guiding their affairs.
Whatever management decisions are taken and policies implemented in private organizations they belong to the realm of private administrations.
Examples of Private Organisations are Doyin Groups of Companies, Shell, Nestle plc.
Chevron Nigeria plc.
Lever Brothers Nigeria Plc (LBN), Arthur Anderson and John Holt Ltd.
Private organisation s which provides essential services is concerned with profit maximization and minimizing cost of productions.
In some private organisation their services are more effective and efficient and are highly patronised by members of the public.
Private organisation performs dual roles which is, profit orientation and rendering of services.
For example, the African Independence Television (AIT), Silver bird Television (STV), TV Continental (TVC), etc.
render effective and qualitative eservices of entertainment, informative, political, socio-economic and a lot of others in the communication industries.
In private administration personnel are recruited the same way as in the public section, Training and Development of staff can be internal or external as that of public section but this depends on the type of organization and nature of services required.
3.1.2 Meaning of Public Administration The word Public Administration means the direct opposite of private administration.
It is the administration of government owned institutions.
The aims are for the provision of essential services to members of the public.
Public administration also means the same as public management or can be used interchangeably.
It can also be referred to as government administration or public sector administration.
In Nigeria, there are three levels of public administration, which are: a.
Federal Government Administration b.
State government Administration c. Local Government Administration Public administration could also be defines as the art and science of managing government affairs, enforcing law and fulfilling public policy.
Public Administration is regarded as an art since it concerns with the practical management of men and materials for public interest.
And 43  it is a science because it concerns with the knowledge of the ways and methods for efficient fulfilment of public policy.
Early scholars regarded public administration as potentially a science that would emerge as the result of hypothesis and research findings.
Woodrow Wilson (1887), referred public administration to the science of executive methods from the confusion and costliness of empirical experiment and set them on the foundations laid deep in principle.
Charles A.
Beard (1874), maintained that public administration is a body of “exact knowledge derived from experience and observation” (Simeon, 1976) Public administration can never become an exact science, for it relates to human behaviour and the cooperative activities of individuals in groups.. At first, the study of public administration was closely identified with the study of law, since the primary task of administration is the execution of law and its activities are circumscribed by law with ways and means of achieving efficiency and economy in the management of governmental agencies and human relations.
Today the study of public administration has matured and is closely identified with political science, which is the study of government.
It draws upon the other social sciences: Economics, Business Administration, Sociology, Psychology and Social Psychology, Statistics, History and Anthropology.
3.2 FEATURES OF PUBLIC ORGANIZATIONS The features of organisation are the same for every organization in all parts where public administration operates.
The features of public organizations assist organizations to attain effectiveness and efficiency of the goals and objectives of such organisation.
The Features are as follows: 1.
Public Organisations serve as a link between the government and the governed.
Information is passed from the government to the people.
Public administration helps to link these two segments.
2.
Public Servants are not allowed to take part in partisan politics; this is so because of the danger that the government which comes to power could victimize public servants, who are not in the same party.
3.
Appointment, discipline, dismissal and promotion into the public services are the responsibility of the Public Service Commission.. 4.
Public Servants must be impartial in the discharge of their duties.
Public administrators should not be influenced by party feelings; they have been barred from participating in politics.
For instance, if a public servant is to take part in politics by standing for election, he has to resign from service before contesting for any political post.
5.
There is the principle of anonymity of public servants.
Public administration is carried out by public servants who do not receive any credit or blame directly as they are acting on behalf of the ministers of the various ministries.
While the Minister defends himself against any mistake and takes all the honours, he does not mention the name of any public servant.
6.
Neutrality of Public Administration refers to the need for public servants to protect the image of the government and without antagonizing the activities of the governments.
44  7.
Organizational Structure.
All public organizations should possess internal structure that may be hierarchical in structure.
They should also contain chain of command, unity of control, etc.
for efficiency and effectiveness of such organizations.
8.
Public organizations are established through the Act of Parliament, with Constitutional provision of their services to the three tiers of government.
However, from the foregoing, one could be able to deduce that the features of Public Organisations can also be applied to private Organizations with little exception where applicable.
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the relationship between public and private Administration.
2.
Identify the features of public Organisation 3.3 SIMILARITIES BETWEEN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS OR ADMINISTRATION.
There exist some similarities between the public and private organizations: in the conditions of service and other operations of these organizations.
1.
Both Organizations are guided in differing extent by government Circulasr, Gazette, Bulletins, Constitution etc.
The regulations ensure both Organizations have an enabling environment to perform.
2.
Both Organizations may have similar conditions of service in terms of pension and other welfare packages offered by these organizations.
3.
Both Organizations provide essentials services like banking services, petroleum and oil supplies, telephone services, educational services, etc.
4.
Both Organizations source for personnel in the labour market, applicants should the minimum qualification before recruitment into these organizations.
5.
Both Organizations exist simply to render goods and services, profit making and the satisfaction of the public through their various activities, programmes and products etc.
6.
Both Organizations source for capital for operations either internally and externally from the public through the sales of shares 7.
Both Organizations have one form of organisational structure or another usually a hierarchical mode of operations, chain of command, division of labour, professionalism etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion on the comparison of Public and Private Administration, we can deduce that there exist some levels of similarities in the performance of their duties.
Both operate by coordinating and directing of human and material resources.
Public administration in government owned organisations is mostly not for profit making, but for the provision of essential services.
Private organisations are purely established to provide goods and services 45  in a profitable manner.
Both organizations have conditions of services and source for personnel in a common market.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, there exist some levels of differences between public and private Organisations.
The differences are mostly felt in the features of these Organizations.
Private Organizations are out for profit making irrespective of the services rendered.
The differences between public and private administration are in the setting and formation of the Organizations.
There also exist some levels of similarities between the two organisations in terms of conditions of service and other operations of these Organizations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question: 1.
Differentiate between Public and Private Administration.
2.
What are the similarities between private and public organisations?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anifowose Remi and Francis C. Enemuo (1999), Elements of politics, malthouse press limited Beard,C (1874) Introduction to public administration; nym press limited.
Fayol, H (1925) Elements of management; new york, macmillian Ladipo, P.K.A and Omoyele, S. Olufemi (2003), Management theory and practice, published by bt and associates, ilorin Nigeria.
Obiajulu Sunday and Obi Emeka Anthony, (2004), Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach, bookpoint ltd Mbieli Patrick, (2006): Public administration, a broad view.
megavons (west africa) limited Simon A. Herbert (1946), Approaches to public administration, book of the half century 4th edition Victor, B.E.
Abia (1998), A ground work of public administration,.
olucity printing limited Woodrow, W (1887), The study of public administration; published in the political science quarterly 46  UNIT 6 ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Ecology of Public Administration in Nigeria 3.2 Public Administration in the Pre-Colonial Northern Region of Nigeria 3.3 Public Administration in the Pre-colonial Western Region of Nigeria 3.4 Public Administration in the Pre-Colonial Eastern Region of Nigeria 3.5 The Organization Structure of Colonial Civil Services in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you were informed about the features of public and private organisations.
This unit is on the Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria.
The focus is on Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria.
We shall look at the meaning of Ecology of Public Administration as well as Public Administration, during the Pre-Colonial era of the Northern, Western and Eastern Regions of Nigeria and the Organization Structure of Colonial Civil Service in Nigeria 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Define Ecology of Public Administration in Nigeria.
b.
Explain Public Administration during the Pre-Colonia era in the Northern, Western and Eastern Regions of Nigeria.
c. Analyse the Organization Structure of Colonial Civil Service in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 47  3.1 Meaning of Ecology of Public Administration in Nigeria Ecology of public administration is concerned with the relation between people (ways and manner of political administration) and the environment in which they operate.
Ecology of Public Administration can also be referred to the influence of public administration by the environment.
The concept of ecology of public administration as a discipline, and field of study started in the late 18th century.
It started with scholars from the United States of America and Europe.
The concept on the ecology of public administration varies in structure, organizations and approach.
Ecology of public administration also varies from region to region due to human interrelationships and influence on the environment.
Evolution of public administration on the other hand, shown the progression and trend it has made over time.
In Nigeria, the essential variables of the Ecology and Evolution of public administration are the diversity of the people, culture, customs and traditions which vary from one state to another.
Each of the ethnic communities has their peculiar style of administration in relations with the influence of the environment.
Furthermore the history of Islam and other religious practices has great influence on the Ecology and Evolution of public administration in Nigeria and other areas of the world.
However, various forms of administration existed in Nigeria during the pre-colonial period in Nigeria.
3.2 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRE-COLONIAL ERA.
3.2.1 Political Structure of Public Administration in Northern Region in the Pre- Colonial Era.
SULTAN EMIRS DISTRICT HEADS SARKIN DAWA MA’AJI DONGARIS SARKIN FADA ALKALIS SARKIN RUWA WAZIRI MADAWAKI GALADIMAS 48  Figure: 6.1 Structure of Public Administration in the Northern Region of Nigeria: Source: (Bello and Ojodu, 2004) During the pre-colonial era, ecology and evolution of Public administration of the Northern region was divided into three main functions which are: 1.
Legislator: The Sultan of Sokoto, performs the role of the Legislator in the whole of the northern region.
As the overall head, he makes and enacts laws in the whole of the Hausa/Fulani Empire.
2.
Executive: The Emirs are the Chief Executive of the kingdom.
They perform the role of the executive.
They are fully in charge of matters affecting the property and life of the whole Hausa kingdom.
They operate Islamic law derived from Sharia 3.
Judiciary: These are the Islamic lawyers vast with Islamic teaching; they adjudicate and punish anyone that contravenes Islamic laws.
The Hausa and the Fulani’s constitute the diversity of people in the Northern region.
The type of administration practiced in the Northern Region of Nigeria during the pre- colonial era was a centralized system.
The system was successful due to the influence of Islamic jurisdictions and style of leadership adopted.
However, public administration in the northern region during the pre-colonial era was easy.
The Sultan and its kinsmen were in charge before the advent of colonialism.
The Sultan was at the apex of affairs with unquestionable powers.
He has absolute control of power and authority of the traditional administration of the northern region.
His powers were equated to that of the Governor-general, Sir Lord Lugard.
The Emirs are the Heads who ruled their domains or jurisdictions on behalf of the Sultan.
These emirs, head their domains and are accountable to the sultan for effective and efficiency of administration.
The kingdom was divided into districts and governed by district head.
Each unit of government had specialized departments handling specific duties.
The Galadima’s are in charge of the daily administration of the Northern region.
The treasury (internally generated revenue) was controlled by the Ma’aji, who move all over the region.
Internal security and maintainer of laws and order is controlled by the Dongaris, they exercised the powers of the military and performs police duties.
The Alkalis were those who interpret and enforce the laws; the alkalis are experts in Islamic jurisprudence and are Lawyers by profession.
The Sarkin-Ruwas are in charge of fishing and other related aquatic activities in the region.
The Sarkindawa are the officers in charge of butchers and other related activities while the Madawaki are the commanders in charge of Calvary (cemeteries) and other related activities.
However, from the foregoing we can deduce that powers and authorizes flow down 49  the seat of power (the Sultan of Sokoto) to the Madawaki, Wiziri and the Galadimas on the field.
However these lines of powers and authorities are strictly adhered to.
3.3 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRE-COLONIAL WESTERN REGION OF NIGERIA.
3.3.1 Political Structure of Public Administration in Pre-colonial Western Region of Nigeria.
ALAFIN BASHORUN (Prime Minister) OYOMESI (Minister) AARE ONA KAKANFO (Head of Army) NATIVE BABALAWO DIVINER SOOTHSAYERS DOCTORS Figure 6.2 Structure of Public Administration in the Western Region of Nigeria: Source: (Bello and Ojodu, 2004) Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration in pre-colonial western region in Nigeria was a mixture of Centralization and Decentralization of powers and authorities.
Six states constituted the Western region.
There was a mixed variation in the administrative system and governance of the Western region unlike in the Northern region.
The system of administration was centralized because power and authority come from the Alafin and decentralized because some groups of persons were engaged in the removal of the centralized power in areas where these powers and authorities have stronghold.
The Alafin was fully-in-charge.
He was the political head and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces.
The Alafin was so powerful that he was considered as “next to God” (Obikeze and Obi, 2003.)
with the cooperation of the Baale’s.
He conquered villages and communities within the region paid tributes to the Alafin.
Subordinating the Alafin was the Bashorun(Prime 50  Minister) their power and functions are similar to that of the Emirs in the Northern region.
The Bashorun and Cabinet ministers administered their domains on behalf of the Alafin.
They head functional departments of the Western region and are accountable to the Alafin.
The Oyomesi, are the ordinary ministers whose major role is to check the excesses of the Alafin.
However, the Alafin could not rule without the full co-operation of his chiefs, if his administration is autocratic, the chiefs could decide to depose him, and if convinced of an offence they pass judgement on his office.
The Aare Ona-kakanfo is in command and control of the Army.
His role is equivalent to the Dongaris of the Northern region, he exercised the powers of the military and the police; he is in control and maintenance of laws and security of the region.
Other specialized departments of the Western region are the Native doctors, Sooth Sayers, Diviners, Babalawo’s and the Orisa Priest (diviner) whom are under the powers of the Aare Ona-kakanfo.
However, the Alafin consults their opinions for the way forward on the entire region.
Any Oba (Alafin) that defaults to carry the people along will be asked to commit suicide or to leave his seat.
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain Public administration in Pre-Colonial Eastern Region of Nigeria 2.
Comment on the Organisational Structure of the Colonial Civil Service.
3.4 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN PRE-COLONIAL ERA IN THE EASTERN REGION OF NIGERIA 3.4.1 Public Structure of Public Administration in Eastern Region in the Pre-Colonial Era.
VILLAGE HEAD (Okpara Title) VILLAGE GROUPS (Ozo Title) AGE GRADES SECRET SOCIETIES Figure: 6.3 Structure of Public Administration in the Eastern Region of Nigeria: Source: (Bello and Ojodu, 2004) 51  Ecology and Evolution of public administration in the pre-colonial era of the Eastern Region in Nigeria took a different scenario.
The diffused system of authority was described as fragmented (Obikeze and Obi, 2003).
During this era, political administration varied from one town to another and this undoubted encountered major problems.
The central government is a mixture of politically equivalent units; such as village groups, towns’ lineages, age grades and secret societies.
Each head of lineage makes law for members of his lineage.
Each fragment head has full powers and control of the armed forces unlike the Western and Northern regions.
Each fragment had defined obligation in community’s service.
There is rivalry and power tussle among communities over trivial issues and good will.
The secret societies of the Eastern region were valuable instruments of social control; there activities are not binding by law.
The eldest man in every family provides political and administrative powers.
A good number of families formed a lineage and every lineage is headed by the most senior person.
Head of all the lineages constitutes the elders of council; the Okpara is the over-all head, he is the most senior person of the council of elders.
However, the most senior Okpara title holders are crowned with the Ozo title and this automatically make them members of the elder’s council of the Igbos Empire.
However, the Okpara has no power and authority on issues bordering the Igbo Empire except those one’s that affects his own lineage.
The Okpara has no supreme power unlike the Emirs and Oba of the Yoruba’s and Hausa kingdoms.
This is why the system was regarded as decentralized since each head makes law for members of its own lineage, there is devolution of powers and authorities in the Eastern region of the Pre-Colonial Era.
However, the Legislative and Executive functions where performed by the elder’s council, while judiciary functions are performed by the age grade groups.
However, in some Igbo speaking states like Anambra is ruled by king.
The institution of chieftaincy was alien to them, religious leaders, warriors, village heads combined to carry out the administration of the villages and to some extent, vested with powers and authorities to exercise absolute control of these areas.
It was the absence of chieftaincy institution in the Eastern region that the British had to create the “warrant chief” to administer the Igbo land like their counterparts in the Northern and Western regions.
However, the entire region was divided into different lineages and each lineage is made up of families.
52  3.5 THE ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF COLONIAL CIVIL SERVICE.
QUEEN COLONIAL SEC RETARY GOVERNOR-G ENERAL PROVISIONAL COMMISSION RESIDENT OFFICERS DISTRICT COMMISSIONER DISTRICT OFFICERS Figure: 6.4 Structure of Colonial Civil Service Source: (Bello and Ojodu, 2004) In the organisational structure of the Colonial Civil Service, power and authority come from the Queen of England; the Queen was fully in charge of administration of the colonial civil service in Nigeria.
She was commander in chief, all powers and authorities are confined to the Queen.
The Queen together with the colonial Secretary in England makes and enacts law for the civil servants.
Her Legislative functions is strictly law making.
Next to the queen is the colonial secretary.
He is directly accountable to the British cabinet and Member of Parliament constituted by the queen.
The Governor-general was directly answerable to the colonial secretary who in turn fed the Queen with information.
The Governor-general acted as the representative of the Queen of London.
He exercised total control of power and authorities’ over the territories they occupied.
He accounts directly to the colonial secretary in London.
The provincial Commissioner acts as the Chief Secretary to the Governor-general.
They coordinate the activities of the Civil Service.
This includes the departmental (technical and professional) and political administration of the territory.
Below the provincial commissioner were the resident officers, their major function is to assist the provincial commissioner to initiate policies, participate in legislation and to supervise the 53  execution of re-enacted bills and approved policies as directed by the Queen of London.
However, the resident officers operate from the central control of district Commissioners.
The district commissioners carried out their duties without deference to any clientele.
The district officers were the field officers, they are sometimes referred to as Lieutenant- Governors.
These set of officers do not administer to the people directly instead, they ruled the people through the indirect rule system with the aids of the Oba, Sultan and Obi.
(Obikeze and Obi, 2003).
However, whatever changes and transformation that have occurred to Nigerian public administration, the legacy of the Colonial Civil Service had an enduring effect on the character and structure of the Nigerian civil service.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion on Ecology and Evolution of public administration in Nigeria, the origin of Civil Service administration in Nigeria can be traced to the British during the pre-colonial era.
The diversity of the people’s culture, customs and traditions varied from one region to another.
Each ethnic community has a peculiar style of administration in relation with their immediate environment.
In the Northern region, the system of public administration was centralized.
The Sultan of Sokoto was in control of affairs.
The Alafin of Oyo Empire was in control of affairs of the Western region.
The region witness a mixture of centralization and decentralization of powers and authorities.
The Alafin cannot rule without the full co-operation of his chiefs.
The Eastern region, witnessed a different scenario.
The system of administration adopted was completely decentralized; there was devolution of powers and authorities.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt that Ecology and Evolution of Public administration are concerned with human influences and the environment.
The progression and trends that have been made over time.
The concept of Ecology and Evolution varies from one region to another in term of structure, organizations and approach.
In Nigeria, the diversity of the people, culture, customs, and traditions testifies to this.
The essentials of Public administration in the Northern region were mainly Legislative, Executive and Judicial.
In the Western region, the Bashorun was seen as the Prime Minister with so much power.
Power and authority in the Northern and Western regions was Centralised, while in the Eastern region the system of administration practised was decentralised.
The Nigerian Civil Service structure is a legacy of the colonial Civil Service of the pre-colonial era.
54  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define Ecology to Public Administration?
2.
Compare the system of Public Administration of the Northern and Western Regions of the Pre-Colonial Era in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Ademolukun, L. (1983), Public administration: a Nigerian comparative perspective, Lagos, longman ltd. Bello, S.A, Ojodu, H. O, Ogunyomi, P.O and Legbeti,P (2004), Public administration system in Nigeria ,raamson printing service.
Obiajulu, Sunday.Obikeze and Obi, Emeka Anthony, (2004), Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach.
bookpoint limited Mbieli Patrick, (2006) Public administration, a broad view.
megavons (west africa) limited 55  MODULE TWO: UNIT 7 PUBLIC POLICY Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Public Policy 3.1.1 Features of Public Policy 3.1.2 Significance of Public Policy 3.2 Types of Public Policy 3.3 Components/Stages of Policy Making Process 3.4 Approaches to Public Policy Analysis ` 3.4.1 Political Systems Theory 3.4.2 Group Theory 3.4.3 Elite Theory 3.4.4 Functional Process 3.4.5 Institutionalism Theory 3.5 Roles of Public Administration in Policy Making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you have learnt about what public personnel management is all about.
This unit will take you a step further into the concept of public policy.
In this unit, the focus will be on the meaning and features of public policy, the differences between public policy and decisions making, the components and types of public policy, the various approaches to Public Policy analysis, the roles and relationship between public administration and policy making process in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define Public Policy.
56  2.
Differentiate between Public Policy and Decision Making.
3.
List the types and components of Policy Making Process.
4.
Identify the various approaches to Public Policy Analysis.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MEANING OF PUBLIC POLICY Noticeable scholars of public administration have made contributions on what public policy is all about.
The definitions of Thomas Dye, Patrick Mbieli, Ikelegbe , James Anderson, Carl Friedrich, Theodore Lowi and a host of others centred on a common concept.
Policy is set of decisions put in place by individuals and governments within a given society (Nwankwo, 1988).
Dye (1955), defines Public Policy as whatever governments “choose to do or not to do”.
There is a rough accuracy to this definition.
Dye’s definition portrays policy as a single action instead of a course of actions with a well-defined purpose.
Dye explains public policy in terms of what government proposes to do instead of what it actually does.
Carl (1963), defines policy as a proposed course of action of a person, group, or government within a given environment providing obstacles and opportunities which the policy was proposed to utilize and overcome in an effort to reach a goal or realize an objective or a purpose”.
His definition contains the idea of policy as a course of action directed towards the accomplishment of some purpose or goal.
James (1960), defines Policy as a purposive course of actions followed by an actor or set of actors dealing with the problem or matter of concern.
This concept of policy focuses intention on what was actually done as against what is proposed or intended, and it differentiates a policy from a decision, which is a choice among competing alternatives.
Public Policies are those policies developed by governmental bodies and officials.
The special characteristics of Public Policies stem from the fact that they are formulated by “authorities” in a political system.
Examples of such authorities are The Provisional Ruling Council, Armed Forces, Ruling Council, the Presidency, the Legislature, Councillor etc.
Mbiele (2006), defines Public Policy as the general statement of the people’s intentions, goals and objectives with the adoption of workable measures for the realization of targeted interests and satisfaction of needs.
Eyestone (1971), defines Public Policy as the relationship of the governmental units to their environment”.
Dye (1955), also sees public policy as “what government choose to do or not to do.
It is the integrated courses and programmes of actions and practices in certain problem areas”.
Public policy is simply governmental actions and programmes of action towards solving societal problems.
Policy is flexible and dynamic in nature and it differs from rules which are specific and rigid.
Policy is a conscious effort and it differs from custom which springs from the land of the society.
Policy is of a wider nature having the goals, means and the end while decision is selection of one alternative out of several alternatives.
It is pertinent to emphasize that policy consists of courses or patterns of action by governmental officials rather than their separate decisions.
For example, a policy includes not only the decision to enact a law on some issue but also subsequent decisions relating to its implementation and enforcement.
Public policy may be either positive or negative in form.
A policy is positive, if it involves some form of overt government action to solve a particular problem.
It is negative, if it involves a decision by government officials not to take action or to do nothing on some matter for which governmental involvement is sought.
3.1.1 Features of Public Policy: The features of public policy are: 57  a.
It is subject to constant changes that is, dynamic in nature.
b.
It utilizes opportunities and states how to overcome obstacles in accomplishing a purpose.
c. It is a course of action of activity of a person, group or government.
d. It is an activity involving governmental and non-governmental actor and factors etc.
3.1.2 Significance of Public Policy Public policy is significant for the following reasons: a.
It is an instrument for expression of the will of the people.
b.
It is a chief tool of the government.
c. It develops the people socially, economically, politically and administratively.
d. It represents verbal, written or implied basic guide to all administrative management actions.
3.2 TYPES OF PUBLIC POLICY Public policy varies from one sector to another.
There are different types of policies depending on different criteria of classification; there can be public policy in the areas of Housing, Education, Health, Transport, Agriculture, Industry etc.
Policies can also be classified based on intent, operating process, issues and clientele.
However, Lowi (1964), classified Policies into three; Distributive, Regulatory and Redistributive.
a. Distributive Policies These are policies relating to tariff or taxes and public and, allocation of public amenities etc.
Ikelegbe (1996), states that, distributive policies are those which involve incremental dispersal, unit to different segments of the population and to individuals and institutions, they are actually favours benefits or patronage policies, dispensed to a small number of people.
The dispersal is continual and thus, those not favoured at one point may be accommodated through further dispersal at some other time.
One distinguishing attribute of distributive policies is that it does not generate conflict among those seeking to benefit from the policy.
The main reason for this is that distribution is continual and those who lose out initially are almost certain of gaining later (Ikelegbe, 1996) In this type of policy, the decision maker is neither aware of all the alternatives nor of their consequences.
This condition is more rampant in real life situation as most decision making are done under conditions of uncertainty.
Here, the decisions are based on the few alternatives known to the decision maker and his limited knowledge of their consequences.
b.
Regulatory Policy Regulatory policies are meant to control the activities of different groups in the society.
Regulatory policies are targeted at particular sectors and as such, they generate tensions and even conflicts between competing sectors.
The government in the discharge of its duties of protecting the citizens has to issue guidelines, rules and regulations that guide the conducts of various groups and sectors of the society.
Regulatory policies are made for victor and losers, a lot of conflicts are usually involved since people don’t like losing, people who lose may not accept in good faith and they strive to change the policy to their favour.
Examples of these 58  policies are Labour laws, import policies, financial regulation and other government policies aimed at regulating business and the activities of groups in society.
c. Redistributive Policies These are policies that tend to transfer resources from one sector or group to another.
e.g.
revenues from the Oil sector to Health or Transportation sectors.
Redistributive Policies are government policies that favour a particular group to the detriment of others to achieve equity or inequity.
These types of policies naturally generate conflicts and tensions.
The beneficiaries of these policies are quite easy to identify because the issue in question may involve class, ideological, tribal, religious or geographical lines.
Examples of these policies are government’s progressive tax policies, social welfare programmes and sectorial allocation preference policies.
3.3 STAGES OF THE POLICY MAKING PROCESS There are three stages in the policy making process, they are (a) Policy Formulation (b) Policy Implementation and (c) Policy Evaluation.
A.
Policy Formulation The process of policy formulation varies from society to society.
In most democratic societies today, the Judiciary and Legislature play a major role in the policy making process.
Individuals and groups are getting more and more involved in decision making process.
It is this realization that has given rise to the concept of the pluralist theory of policy formulation”.
Others have argued that instead of talking of pluralism, the dominant factor is the elite.
In other to balance the view of both the pluralist theory and the elite theory Lindblom (1990), came out with what is called Partisan Mutual Adjustment, which facilitates agreement among partisans on values and decisions.
However in policy formulation, public involvement is very important because it helps in the implementation stage.
People easily obey or accept polices they take part in formulating than those forced on them.
The following are steps in Policy formulation process: i.
Identification of the problem: What is a policy problem, what makes it a policy problem, how does it get on the agenda of the government?
ii.
Development of alternative courses of action: How are alternatives for dealing with the problem developed, who participates in policy formulation, what is the cost implication of the proposed policy?
iii.
Analysis of alternative: Where the alternatives are critical analyse for the best option.
iv.
Selection of one alternative/policy choice for adoption: How are alternatives analysed, adopted and enacted, what requirements must be met?
B.
Policy Implementation This is the critical stage in policy making process as it determines the overview of the quality of the decision made.
This stage is very sensitive and subject to criticism.
The quality of a policy is determined by its implementation, and not how good it looks on paper.
The 6 – 3 – 3 – 4 policy on education looks so good on paper but how effective is it since inception?
In Nigeria, it is well known fact that, the ability to implement a policy is a big problem.
However, policy implementation centres on, who is involved, what is to be done to carry 59  policy into effect, what resources are available for policy implementation, what impact does this have on policy content.
The following factors are considered when policies are to be implemented.
I.
Clarity and Specificity of Policy: Before policies are adopted for implementation, the intention of such policies would have been known clear and specific on a particular sector, item or purpose.
Any policy that is not clear, direct and specific in nature may be rejected by the masses.
The interest and opinion of the people have to be considered before implementing such policy.
The government should enlighten the people on public policies in order to enlist their support and cooperation.
ii.
Implementation Organization: Before embarking on Programme implementation there is supposed to be an appraisal of the institutional capacity of the implementing organization to know whether the policy can be implemented or not.
Most government policies are not properly implemented due to inadequate institutional capabilities which need to be created or to upgrade the existing ones.
iii.
Identification/Assessment of the Target Group: Every policy formulation has a purpose and target group once this has been achieved, implementation of such policy takes centre stage.
For instance, if a group has an organized leadership, the government may decide to penetrate the group through its leaders.
iv.
The Environment: The environment where the policy is to be implemented must be taken into consideration.
Some salient features within the environment have to be considered for the success and failure of the policies.
In Nigeria, the enactment and implementation of Sharia law was restricted to few states of the country because the people’s religion or way of life permits such policies.
The peculiarities of each location must be of much concern to the policy implementation team.
C. Policy Evaluation Evaluation of policies can be done by the policy makers, the implementing organ, members of the public and public policy analysts or experts.
There are some good techniques used in policy evaluation, these include the Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA), the Cost Effectiveness Analysis (CEA), Management by Objectives (MBO), Programme planning and Budgeting System (PPBS), Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT), and Zero Based Budgeting (ZBB).
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the Component of Policy Making Process.
2.
Explain the factors to be considered for Policies Implementation.
3.4 APPROACHES TO PUBLIC POLICY ANALYSIS.
Theoretical approaches are relevant to public policy analysis in the sense that they direct our attention to important political phenomena, help clarify and simplify our thinking, and suggest possible explanations of the form and outcome of public policy.
The approaches in this unit include systems theory, group theory, elite theory, functional process theory and institutionalism.
60  3.4.1.
Political Systems Theory Public Policy may be viewed as the response of a political system to demands arising from its environment.
Easton (1965), states that the political system theory, is composed of those identifiable and interrelated institutions and activities in a society that make authoritative decisions (or allocations of values) that are binding on society.
Inputs into the system from the environment consist of demands and supports for the policy.
The environment consists of all those conditions and events external to the boundaries of the political system.
Demands are the claims made by individuals and groups on the political system for action to satisfy their interests.
Support is rendered when groups and individuals abide by election results, pay taxes, obey laws, and otherwise accept the decisions and actions of the authoritative political system made in response to demands.
These authoritative allocations of values constitute public policy (David, 1965).
The usefulness of systems is limited by its highly general nature.
It does not say much concerning how decisions are made and policies developed within the political system.
Despite these limitations, systems theory is a useful concept in organizing inquiries into policy formation.
It also gives alerts of some significant aspects of the political process, such as: How do environmental inputs affect the content of public policy and the nature of the political system?
How does public policy affect demands for action?
What factors or forces in the environment act to generate demands upon the political system?
How is the political system able to convert demands into public policy and preserve itself over time.
3.4.2 Group Theory Group theorists perceive the political system as a gigantic network of groups in a constant state of interaction with one another.
This interaction takes the form of pressures and counter pressures, the outcome of which defines the state of the political system at any given time.
A group may be defined as an aggregate of individuals who interact in varying degrees in pursuance of a common interest (David, 1965).
Examples of groups are Trade unions, Cooperatives, Business, Ethnic and Religious Organizations; institutional interest groups such as Legislatures, Bureaucracies, Political parties, the Military, Churches etc.
There are also interest groups in the form of spontaneous and eruptive aggregations such as riots, demonstrations and other manifestations of mob activity.
A group becomes a political interest group when it makes claims through or upon any institutions of government.
This group believes that public policy is the product of the group struggle.
From this perspective, public policy is the equilibrium reached in the group’s struggle at any given moment, and it 61  represents a balance which the contending factions or groups constantly strive to weigh in their favour.
Public Policy at any given time will reflect the interests of dominant groups.
As groups gain and lose power and influence, public policy could be altered in favour of the interests of those gaining influence against the interests of those losing influence.
Limitations of Group theory Even though it focuses attention on one of the major dynamic elements in policy formulation in pluralist societies, group theory seems both to overstate the importance of groups and to understate the independent and creative role that public officials, political leaders, institutions and ideas play in the policy process.
Group analysis has traditionally assumed that individuals are bound together in order to enhance their chances of obtaining a common goal or good.
Implicit in this reasoning is the assumption that groups pursue their self-interest in the same manner as individuals seek their self-interest.
(Olson, 1997) Shown in his Theory of Collective Goods is that individuals within large groups will not ac t to achieve the common or group interest.
This conclusion is based on the premise that individuals act rationally and in their own self-interest.
However, Olson (1997) states that, If the members of a large group rationally seek to maximize their personal welfare, they will not act to advance their common or group objectives unless there is coercion to force them to do so, or unless some separate incentive, distinct from the achievement of the common or group interest, is offered to the members of the group individually on the condition that they help bear the costs or burdens involved in the achievement of group objectives.
Despite these limitations, real or perceived inter-group hostilities and struggles have sometimes been exploited in the process of colonial or neo-imperialist penetration of political systems in the less/technologically developed countries.
3.4.3 Elite Theory The fundamental perspective of the elite approach is summarized by the assertion that all political systems are divided into two strata – those who rule and those who are ruled.
The rulers are labelled the political elite, and these elite are the most significant aspects of any political system.
The political elite are that group which possesses most political power and which makes most important political decisions in a society.
The elite group is composed of minority individuals who are most active in political affairs.
By focusing analysis upon this particular group within the political system, one can best understand the processes of political life.
However, one can deduce that public policy can be regarded as the values and preferences of governing elite.
The essential argument of elite theory is that it is not the 62  people or the “masses” who determine public policy through their demands and action; rather public policy is decided by ruling elite and carried into effect by public officials and their Organizations.
Basic Elements of the Elite Theory (a) Society is divided into few, who have power and the many who do not.
Only a small number of persons allocate values for society; the masses do not decide public policy.
(b) The few who govern are not typical of the masses that are governed.
Elites are drawn disproportionately from the upper socio-economic strata of society.
(c)The movement of non-elite positions must be slow and continuous to maintain stability and avoid revolution.
Only non-elites who have accepted the basic elite consensus can be admitted to governing circles.
(d) Elites share a consensus on the basic values of the social system and the preservation of the system.
In the United States, for example, the elite consensus includes private enterprise, private property, limited government, and individual liberty.
(e) Public policy does not reflect demands of the masses but rather the prevailing values of the elites.
Changes in public policy will be incremental rather than revolutionary.
(f) Active elites are subject to relatively little direct influence from apathetic masses.
Elites influence masses more than masses influence elites.
Elite theory focuses attention on the role of leadership in policy formulation and on the fact that in any political system a few govern the many.
However, the crucial issue of the participation of the masses in policy formulation depends upon the types of regimes in power.
3.4.3 Functional Process Theory Another way to approach the study of policy formulation is to focus on the various functional activities that occur in the policy process.
Lasswell (1954), presents a scheme involving seven categories of functional analysis that will serve as the basis for our discussion: i.
Intelligence: How is the information on policy matters that come to the attention of policy makers gathered and processed?
ii.
Recommendation: How are recommendations (or alternatives) for dealing with a given issue made and promoted?
iii.
Prescription: How are general rules adopted or enacted, and by whom?
63  iv.
Invocation: Who determines whether given behaviour contravenes rules or laws and demands application of rules or laws thereto?
v. Application: How are laws and rules actually applied or enforced?
vi.
Appraisal: How is the operation of policies, their successes and failures appraised?
vii.
Termination: How are the original rules or laws terminated or continued in modified or changed from?
The scheme of analysis is not tied to particular institutions or political arrangements and lends itself readily to comparative analysis of policy formation.
One can inquire how these different functions are performed, to what effect, and by whom in different political systems or government units.
However, its emphasis on functional grounds may lead to neglect of the politics of policy formulation and the effect of environmental variables on the process.
Obviously, policy formulation is more than an intellectual process.
3.4.5 Institutionalism Theory The study of government institutions is one of the oldest concerns of political science.
Political life generally revolves around governmental institutions such as Legislative, Executive, Courts, and political parties.
Public Policy is initially authoritatively determined and implemented by government institutions.
Even though earlier studies of institutions tended to place emphasis on formal and structural aspect, they could be usefully employed in policy analysis.
An institution is a set of regularized patterns of human behaviour that persist over time.
As such they can affect decision making and the content of public policy.
Rules and structural arrangements in organizations are not usually neutral in essence; they tend to favour some interests in society over others, some policy results rather than others.
3.5 ROLES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATORS IN PUBLIC POLICY MAKING IN NIGERIA The role of public administrators in policy making in Nigeria varies with the regimes in power.
The First Civilian Regime (1960 – 1966) i.
Permanent Secretaries were Heads of the various Ministries and assisted in the development of policies and plans and the determination of the means of their implementation.
ii.
Top Civil Servants (in theory) are to advice the ministers on policy issues by preparing a list of possible policy options from which ministers preferred option.
64  iii.
Ministers relied vary greatly on technical expertise of civil servants for development of policies, the reasons is because Party bureaucracies could not deal with development of policies.
iv.
Permanent Secretaries could go for briefings with the Prime Minister when they felt that a wrong policy decision was about to be taken by the Minister or Cabinet.
The Military Regimes (1966 – 1979) i.
The military rely too heavily on public servants for advice on policies, simply because they are not trained in the art of government.
ii.
Under military regimes, Permanent Secretaries were accountable to and advised Commissioners, the Federal Executive Council, the Supreme Military Council, and sometimes the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, for example the top civil servants advised against the ratification of the Aburi accord.
iii.
The increased political role of the civil servants brought them into limelight as a political interest group.
Thus, the Murtala Mohammed regime embarked on the historic “purge of 1975” in which about 11,000 civil servants were fired or retired from the service.
He blamed public administrators, for the indecision of the Gowon Regime.
The Civilian Presidential Regime i.
Top civil servants were accountable to the politicians under the civilian regimes – the President and Vice-president, the Ministers, and Special advisers to the President and the Legislature.
ii.
Public Servants had indirect influence on the initiation and implementation of policies because of their possession of technical expertise.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion on public policy, we can deduce that Public policy is the bedrock of any government whether military or civilian.
It is what differentiates one government from another.
The programmes and projects of the governments are usually derived from the policies.
This therefore makes the development of policy management skills necessary for both public servants and public office holders.
A bad policy can make a government loose an election.
It is therefore important that public policy formulation process should include a very robust consultation stage which will enable all the ramifications of the policy to be considered 65  5.0 SUMMARY Public policy means the general statement of the people’s intentions, goals, objectives and decisions put in place by individuals and government within a society.
Public policy refers to government actions and programmes towards solving societal problems.
Policy can either be analysed as positive where the impact is felt and accepted and negative where the people react negatively.
Policies are supposed to be flexible and dynamic in nature and not rigid.
Policies are significant in that they of help to develop the people socially, economically, politically and administratively.
Policies can be classified into Distributive, Regulatory and Redistributive and these can further be classified as Broad, Specific and General Policies.
The stages of policy formulation process are Formulation, Implementation, and Evaluation.
These processes vary from one sector or society to another.
The approaches of public policy analysis are systems, group, elite, functional and institutionalism theories.
The oldest of public policy is the institutionalism theory which activities and concerns revolve around governmental institutions.
The roles of public administrators in policy making in Nigeria vary with the regimes in power.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. a.
Define Public Policy.
b.
List and explain the types of policies 2.
List and discuss the approaches to public policy analysis.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anderson, James E. (1960), Public policy making; new york, mcgraw – hill.easton, David (1965), A system analysis of political life; new york, wiley Eyestone, R (1971), Public administration; decision making books; new york, macmillan Friedrich, Carl J.
(1963) Man and his government, new york mcgraw – hill.
Ikelegbe, A. O.
(1996) Public policy making and analysis, benin; uri publishing ltd Lasswell, H. D (1954), Public administration; new york; meridian books Lindblom, C. E (1990), The science of muddling through; public administration review Nwankwo G. O.
(1988) Education and training for public management in Nigeria, onitsha; university publishing company Obiajulu, Sunday O and Obi, Emeka (2004) Public administration in Nigeria; a developmental approach.
bookpoint limited Olson, M. (1997), The logic of collective action in bill, comparative politics: the quest for theory Patrick Mbieli, (2006) Public administration a broad view.
megavons (west africa) limited Thomas, Dye R. (1955) Understanding public policy, englewood cliffs, n. u. prentice – hall 2nd ed.
66  UNIT 8 THE CONCEPT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (CEO) Table of Content: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) 3.2 Types of Chief Executive Officer 3.3 Responsibilities of Chief Executive Officer 3.4 Roles and Functions of the Chief Executive Officer 3.4.1 Roles of the Chief Executive Officer 3.4.2 Functions of Chief Executive Officer 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference and Further Reading … 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, you have an idea about what public policy is all about.
This section will take you a step further into the Concept of the Chief Executive Officer.
In this unit, the focus is on the Chief Executive Officer, we shall be looking at meaning and concepts of the Chief Executive Officer.
The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is the term used for the Head of an organisation both in the public and the private sectors.
This unit will discuss the responsibilities, roles and functions of the Chief Executive Officer.
In the public service, the (CEO) comes under the nomenclature: Minister, Director General, Chairman, Commissioner or Managing Director.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Define the Chief Executive Officer.
b.
Identify the roles and responsibilities of the Chief Executive Officers.
67  c. List and explain the functions of the Chief Executive Officer 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (CEO) The Chief Executive Officer is an administrator, Head and Coordinator of all the activities in an organization.
The Chief Executive Officer can be found in the following sectors e.g.
educational, financial institutions, Company, Industries, firm or corporate establishments etc.
He is a diplomat of his Organization.
The Chief Executive Officer is at the top of the management team, and exercises full powers, authority and control over its subordinates (Lawal, 1993)The Chief Executive Officer directly or indirectly gets involved in all the major functions or activities of the Organization.
He/she is basically responsible for formulating the goals of the organization with the aids of the management in place.
Before any meaningful decisions about what, where and how resources would be put into use, the (CEO) must ensure that they are carefully and logically made after considering various alternatives.
For his subordinates to accomplish the set goals of the Chief Executive Officers they must have common interest, to actualize the objectives of the Organization, they must be professionals or technocrats in their various fields and be able to work with minimum supervision.
The Chief Executive Officer must bear in mind staff welfare, customers’ interest and the achievement of the goals and objectives of the Organization.
In the public service, the Ministers at the Federal and Commissioners at the state levels could be referred to as the Chief Executive Officers because they are fully in-charge or they occupy the apex position in their various ministries or department; they exercise full powers, authority and control over their subordinates, even though they occupy elective positions.
Stewart (1967), believes that a CEO is one who has the capability to achieve results through other people by instructing, controlling, influencing, guiding and persuading or a mixed of these in a particular situation.
From this definition, we can deduce that the Chief Executive Officer is an achiever.
In private organizations, the CEO is best described as an achiever only when the organization is profitable irrespective of the qualities of services offered.
In the public service, the effectiveness and efficient of the resources by the administrators or civil servants determines if the Chief Executive Officer is an achiever or not.
Abrogated Decree 43 of 1988 made the Minister both the Chief Executive and Accounting Officer.
This is one of the major changes in the civil service structure of 1988.
The position of Chief Executive Officer is the highest rank in any Organization whether private or public service.
He is in charge of job description of his personnel; he determines salary schedules and grade of staff, and takes full responsibilities of the resources (Human, Material and 68  Finance) of the Organization.
In the public service, a Minister who occupies the position of the Chief Executive take charge and responsible for the resources of a ministry.
He is the person entrusted with the responsibility of the operation and functions of the ministry.
In the private Organisation, the Chief Executives are the Managing Director (MD).
But in the Public Service, a Minister is the Chief Executive officer (MD).
He is accountable to the presidency.
He acts as the Operational Head of Administration and reports to the President directly, he take decisions on the implementation of government policies.
The Chief Executive Officer receives all types of information.
He initiates changes where necessary and establish organizational goals, he formulates strategies in implementing these goals and spent more time in policy formulation 3.2 TYPES OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER Stewart (1967), Outlined the following types of Chief Executive Officers.
a.
The Emissaries: These are the Chief Executive Officers who spend most of their time outside their designated office.
They work mostly as administrators and delegate the main responsibilities of their jobs to competent subordinates (with close supervision).
b.
The Committee Man: These are the Chief Executive Offices who spend most of their time in attending meetings outside the Organization.
They work mostly, on contracts and exist mainly in large Organizations.
They also delegate most of their responsibilities to competent hands just like the Emissaries.
c. The Writers: These are the Chief Executive Officers who spend most of their time in writing, reading, and dictating.
Their working days are shorter compared to the Emissaries and Committee Man.
These Executives are staff specialists who rise to become the Chief Executives.
d. The Trouble Shooters: These are set of Chief Executive Officers who spend most of their time coping with crisis outside the Organization.
Their working days are also fragmented.
e. The Discussers: These are the Chief Executive Officers who spend most of their time discussing and negotiating with other groups for the progress of the Organization, they are involved in diverse ranges of activities.
3.3 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (CEO) The following are the major responsibilities of the Chief Executives Officers: 69  1.
He/she ensures that their subordinates are well motivated, activated and trained with the set standard of the Organizational goals.
2.
He/she is responsible for disseminating information to all sectors (Internally & Externally) of the Organisation.
3.
He/she is responsible for monitoring the environment for a variety of special information required for adequate understanding and exploitation of the environment.
4.
He/she is responsible for taking corrective actions and decisions when the need arises.
5.
He/she is responsible for allocating organizational resources of all kind e.g.
Money, Human and Materials Resources.
6.
He/she searches and explores the Organizational environment for opportunities, such as improvement of projects that would bring about change in the society.
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the responsibilities of the Chief Executive Officer.
2.
Enumerate the types of the Chief Executive Officer 3.4 ROLES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 3.4.1 The Role of the Chief Executive Officer The basic role of the Chief Executive Officer of any organization is that, he is the Chief Accounting and Budgeting Officer.
He needs to use the available resources judiciously.
As the Chief Accounting Officer, his major role is to approve Budget plans, and to achieve the goals of the Organization.
He makes estimate of costs and benefits of a project before the Organization can embark on such project.
He will be responsible for both success and failure of the Organization.
However, Mintzberg (1973) believes that, the roles of the Chief Executive Officer can be divided into three categories (1) Interpersonal Role (2) Informative Role and (3) Decisional Role.
1.
Inter-personal Role: The Chief Executive Officer is responsible for ensuring that the policies of the Organization are clearly interpreted and implemented.
He acts as a figurehead, a symbol of legal authority, handling ceremonial duties etc.
As a leader, he liaises and motivates his subordinates; he serves as link in the communication chain.
The Chief Executive Officer is the person entrusted with responsibilities of the operation of the Organization and usually the Managing Director (MD) in a private enterprise.
70  2.
Informative Role: The Chief Executive Officer serves as a nerve centre receiving all types of information.
He acts as a spokesman, monitors and disseminates information.
He initiates changes within the Organization.
3.
Decisional Role: The Chief Executive Officer is responsible for resources (Money, Human and Material) which are critical inputs into the management of the Organization.
He acts as a disturbance handler, arbitrating labour conflicts.
He establishes Organizational goals, formulates strategies for existing goals and spends more time in policy formulation.
He/she acts as the operational head of the management team and reports to the Board of Directors, the results of his implemented policies, programmes and projects.
3.4.2 Functions of the Chief Executive Officer (C.E.O) The Chief Executive Officer performs daily essential and routine functions such as: 1.
He/she makes complex decisions and delegates functions to qualified and competent subordinates of the Organization.
2.
He/she determines goals and set priorities through others to achieve results.
3.
He/she has a conceptual and analytical view, he/she is a diplomat and communicate with his employer, employee and government if need be to move the Organization forward.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion on, the Chief Executive Officers (CEO) are the heads and coordinators of the activities of any organisation whether public or private.
He/She is responsible for formulating policies, and supervised implementations of duties assigned.
In the Public Service Ministers, Commissioners, Directors General and Councils Chairmen are Chief Executives.
The responsibilities of the Chief Executives are to Decision-making; Monitoring, Disseminating and allocation of organisational resources.
The roles of the Chief Executive Officer are divided into, Interpersonal, Informative and Decision-making.
5.0 SUMMARY The Chief Executive Officer is an administrator who is fully in charge and control of the activities of an Organizational.
They formulate and supervise the implementation of the policies within their Ministries.
Their duties are categorized as planning, communicating; controlling, staffing, directing etc.
They act as the Operational Heads of Management and reports directly or indirectly to the Board of Directors in the case of Private organisations and to the Presidency in Public Service.
The Chief Executives are after the attainment of Organisational results.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the Concept of the Chief Executive Officer.
2.
Identify the Roles and Functions of the Chief Executive Officer.
71  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abari, A.O and Mohammed, M.O.B (2006), Fundamentals of educational management, babs- olutunji publisher, first edition Bello, S.A, , H. O, Ogunyomi, P. O and Lagbeti, P (2004), Public administration system in Nigeria, raamson printing services.
Lawal, A.
A.
(1993) Management in focus, abdul industrial enterprises, Lagos.
Mintzberg, Henry (1973),The nature of managerial work (new york: harper & row).
Patrick Mbieli, (2006) Public administration, a broad view, megavons (west africa) limited Stewrat, L. (1967), Public administration; changing the constitution; new york, macmillan coy Yahaya A. D. Akinyele C. 1ed.
(1990).New trends in personnel management; a book of reading, ascon personnel management series.
72  UNIT 9 THE FUNCTIONS OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (CEO) TABLE OF CONTENT: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of the Chief Executive Officer 3.1.1 Planning and Decision-Making 3.1.2 Organising 3.1.3 Staffing 3.1.4 Planning 3.1.5 Controlling 3.1.6 Directing 3.1.7 Communicating 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference and Further Reading … 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, you had an idea about what the Chief Executive Officer does.
This unit will take you as step further into the functions of the Chief Executive Officer.
In this unit, the focus will be on the detailed functions of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) which are Planning and Decision making, Organising, Staffing, Planning, Controlling, Directing and Communication.
These functions are universal and are performed by all CEO’s whether in the private or public sectors.
1.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the duties of the Chief Executive Officer 2.
List and explain the Processes of Decision making 73  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1Functions of the Chief Executive Officer The duties of the Chief Executive Officer are related in functions, these functions are also called management functions.
They are: (a) Planning and Decision-making (b) Organizing (c) Staffing (d) Planning (e) Controlling (f) Directing (g) Communicating 3.1.1 Planning and Decision Making.
Planning and Decision-making are part of the functions of management, all management actions depend on decision making.
Decision-making is the rationale behind the success of an organisation.
Most Executives are rated on the basis of the quality of planning and decisions they make in their Organizations.
Decision-making is the selection of an alternative course of action from among various alternative courses of action.
The decision-making process is the chain of events involved in identifying, analysing and choosing the best alternative from among many causes of action (Simon, 1976) Decisions are made to tackle problems that arise in the course of an organizations business.
Making good decisions demand that the decision-maker should have good understanding of the consequences before choosing the best alternative that can effectively solve the problem.
Decisions are of two types, the programmed and non-programmed decisions.
Programmed decisions are made to solve structured problems.
A structured problem is one that is recurring and can be solved by the application of rule.
Non-programmed decisions are used to solve unstructured problems, which are problems that do not occur often and as such have no procedure to be used in solving them.
Examples of non-programmed decision are an organizational expansion scheme, introduction of new product lines etc.
details of decision making and its processes are well explained in the next unit (Simon, 1976).Decision making also takes place under three (3)different conditions: a.
Decision-making Under Certainty: Under this condition, the decision-maker knows precisely all the available alternatives and the consequence outcome.
Once he is sure of the certainty of the alternative, he makes the right decisions because he is already sure of the result.
b.
Decision-making under Risk: Under this condition, the decision-maker makes decisions based on probability and should be ready to face the consequence of the alternatives, if his analysis works he gains and visa-versa.
c. Decision-Making Under Uncertainty: Under this condition the decision-maker is neither aware of all the alternatives nor of their consequences.
This condition is more 74  rampant in real life situation as most decision-making is done under conditions of uncertainty.
Here the decisions are based on the few alternatives known to the decision-maker and his limited knowledge of their consequences.
The steps to be taken in Decision-making are identification of problem, identification of alternative course of action, evaluation of alternative, selection of best alternative, implementation of best alternative and follow-up (Simon, 1976) 3.1.2 Organizing Organizing suggests orderliness.
It is the instrument by which people get things done.
Organizing means that the Chief Executives has to set out the formal structure of authority and flow of work in such a way that, the work in the various sub-divisions, sections and branches are carefully arranged; clearly defined and effectively coordinated in order to accomplish the objectives of the Organization.
Organizing applies not only to business organizations but also to government, educational, religious Organisations etc.
(Akinyele, 1990) .If an Organization is run smoothly, it may seem to an outsider that the whole process is relatively simple.
Organizing helps in coordinating, that is, blending efforts of all members for an efficient and effective result within Organizations.
Organizing also means the process by which Chief Executives strives to achieve Organisational objectives by combining the efforts of the people under their supervision for the success of the Organization.
Process of Organizing The processes of Organizing are: (a).
Departmentalization of the operating task to be performed.
(b).
Establishing the authority relationship among those who will, be performing the tasks.
©.
Decentralizing the managerial work, and (d).
Determining the overall organizational structure.
Departmentalization, deals with the horizontal dimension of an Organization structure and it is the process of rationally grouping the work necessary to achieve the goals of the Organization through cooperation and coordination of the different sections or departments.
The process of departmentalization takes place at all levels in an Organization, and in most cases, the activities are grouped as follows: (1) By Function: The primary task to be performed by each department e.g.
marketing, production, accounts etc.
75  (2) By Process: This is a specialized functional departmentalization; similar activities are grouped into one department e.g.
painting, manufacturing and assembly departments.
(3) By Geographical Areas: This is where all the organizational activities within a region or location are brought together and integrated into a single unit.
(4) By Products: This is where associated products or sources are grouped together or departmentalized.
E.g.
products like cosmetics, diaries, beverages are grouped together into separate units.
(5) By Customer: This is found in sales operation where some customers are given special treatment e.g.
large customers (wholesaler) are treated differently from the smaller customers (retailers).
(b) Establishing Authority Relationship: The Chief Executive Officer must have an understanding of who is supposed to do what, before a managerial team is organized.
In establishing authority relationship, the specific responsibility or work load of the individual must be clearly defined or outlined in the organization.
Authority relationships are usually established on the bases of: (I).
Line Authority Relationship: This involves the direct supervision of subordinate in the chain of command which indicates the formal authority relationships that run in a direct line from the top e.g.
Chief Executive to the bottom of the Organization e.g.
workers/junior staff.
Line authority means the same as line manager in the chain of command, and they are responsible and concerned with the accomplishment of quantitative objectives, cost control and the on-going decisions that allow them to accomplish the task of the Organization.
(II).Staff Authority Relationship: This involves the relationship that exists among the staff, and it is based on expertise in specialized activities and includes the authority to advise, plan, gather information.
However, there should exist a cordial relationship between the line manager or authority and the staff authority.
(III).Functional Authority Relationship: This involves the rights of individual staff with functional authority to issue directives expect compliance: A marketing manager may for example, have the authority to specify marketing schedules for sales representative in any part of the company.
(c) Decentralization of Managerial Process – The Concepts of Decentralization of Managerial Processes are; (i) The span and level of management and (ii) The decentralization of managerial authority This span and levels of management is based on the executive control that is, the number of subordinates, a manager can effectively supervise, the narrower the span, the less levels that are needed.
Decentralization is the delegation of authority for making managerial decisions to 76  subordinates at lower levels in the organization.
A broader span occurs when the chief executive decentralizes authority.
However, certain factors such as: 1.
Competency of subordinates 2.
Nature of work 3.
Time required for the job and 4.
Organisational policies, are considered when making this decision to ensure that the delegation of authority accomplishes the organizational goals.
Common Mistakes in Organizing Some common mistakes in Organising are: a.
Failure to plan properly.
b.
Failure to clarify relationship.
c. Failure to delegate authority.
d. Granting authority without exacting responsibility.
e. Misuse of functional authority.
f. Multiples subordination.
g. Holding people who do not have authority responsible etc.
These mistakes can be avoided.
(d) Determine the Overall Organizational Structure – It is the duty of the Chief Executive to draw the chart of the organization.
It shows the actual positions held by an employee or the relationship between the position holders and their lines of authorities that is, who is responsible to whom.
3.1.3 Planning Any Organization that fails to plan for the future plans to fail.
Planning is the process of setting goals and choosing the means to achieve these goals.
Planning as a management function is the act of making decisions about goals and activities that an individual, a group, a work unit or the overall Organization will pursuit in the future.
Plans set the stage for action and for major achievements; it defines where the Organization wants to be in the future and how to get there.
Without plans the Chief Executive cannot know how to organize people and utilize resources effectively.
He may not even have a clear idea of what they need to organize.
Without planning the Chief Executives have little to achieve and as a result, will stray from the set goals.
Planning is deciding in advance, what to do, how to do it, who to do it and when to do it.
Planning bridges the gap between where we are today and where we intend to be.
Planning helps in shaping the future rather than accepting it the way it occurs.
Lack of planning or poor planning by the Chief Executive can retard an organization’s performance.
Steps in Planning There are some planning steps that managers have found useful: a.
Identify goals: The objectives, mission, goals or purpose fixed must clearly indicate what is to be achieved.
Where should action take place, who to perform it, how is it to be undertaken and when is it is to be accomplished.
All the above can be referred as planning.
77  b.
Developing premises (collect and forecast information): This also means the same as scanning the environment in which plans are to be implemented.
Since the future is uncertain, it is unrealistic for the Chief Executive to make assumption in great detail about environmental factors.
c. Determine and evaluate alternative plans: Once an alternative course of action has been determined, they must be evaluated.
Future uncertainties, financial problems and other intangible factors make the evaluation process difficult and complex, alternative plans are evaluated against such factors like cost, risk, benefit etc.
d. Select the plan and develop the sub-plan: Once the alternative plan has been identified and accepted, a sub-plan of the accepted alternative is implemented.
Selection of one course of action to face future challenges introduces rigidity and inflexibility in the planning process.
Managers take risks when they commit organizational resources to pursue a particular strategy.
Benefits of Planning The benefits of planning are: a.
It gives a sense of direction control and purposes to an Organization.
b.
It helps Organization to achieve steady growth and development.
c. It enables Organization to take advantage of opportunities and contains threats in the operating environment.
d. It enables management to take calculated business risks and think ahead.
e. It provides awareness of emerging environment so that an Organization can adapt better to it.
3.1.4 Controlling Controlling as a management function means the act of monitoring progress and making needed changes in an organization.
It also means monitoring employees activities, determining whether the organization is on target toward its goals, and making correction as necessary.
Every Chief Executive must make sure that the Organization is moving towards its goals.
It involves using Information System to advise managers on the performances of employees.
Lack of control or information is one of the reasons for organizational failure (Simon, 1976).Control in an organization focuses on individual tasks and is carved out and the strictly defined guideline issues by strategic planning and management decisions.
In order to exercise control, Chief Executive must decide which goals to measure perhaps goals pertaining to productivity, quality responsiveness to customers and then they must design information and control systems that will provide the data they need to assess performances.
Controlling function also allows Chief Executives to evaluate themselves in terms of performance of other functions of management.
Importance of Control Control is important in that: a.
It helps in verifying whether results are in conformity with set standards.
b.
It helps to pointing out errors and weaknesses.
c. It helps to eliminate wastages and unnecessary cost.
78  d. It helps in keeping employees motivated by making them know how well they have performed.
However, control helps management to achieve an Organization’s objectives by providing a framework for the development of good plans.
The outcome of the control process is the ability to measure performance accurately and regulate Organizational efficiency and effectiveness.
Steps of Control Process - Establishing Standards – Standards are criteria for measuring performance, and the first step in control process is to establish Organizational standards.
- Measurement and comparison of performance with standard – The Chief Executive makes comparison of the established standards of the organization with the performance of his employees through personal contact and auditing of their activities and to determine if their performance is measurable and in accordance with Organizational plan.
- Corrective action/shortcomings – For every established standard there must be a corrective action taken to correct undesired deviations.
Corrective action should not be restricted to negative deviations but must extend to positive deviations.
3.1.5 Staffing By Staffing we mean the manpower strength of the organization.
It is the duty of the Chief Executive to manage people.
Staffing in an Organization is the whole process of getting a sufficient pool of candidates from among whom the most suitable are selected to fill existing vacancies in Organizations.
A well-established organization attracts people to work but only the best are selected for employment.
It is the duty of the Chief Executive to ensure that the right calibre of people are employed at the right time with the right salaries and wages to what is most profitable for the Organization, he tries to avoid under and over staffing of the Organization because of the financial implication and effects.
3.1.6 Directing This is making things happen through other people.
It is the duty of the chief executive to direct the affairs of the organization to ensure that all efforts and resources, human, financial and material are directed towards the achievement of the stated Organizational goals.
Directing is the managerial process of ensuring that employees do the job assigned to them.
The Chief Executive who is regarded as the Accounting Officer communicates and ensures effective coordination of the activities of the subordinates to achieve the Organizational goals.
The duties of the Chief Executive as far as directing are to: a.
Provide required counsel, leadership and final decision-making authority.
b.
Determine the broad policy and strategy of the Organization.
c. Appraise the company’s profit planning and their profit performance.
d. Co-ordination of inter-departmental activities within the Organization.
e. Provide favourable working climate for workers to achieve results and to design programme aimed at attaining the predetermined goals of the Organization.
3.1.7 Communication 79  Communication is the means whereby people in an organization exchange information regarding the operation of the organization.
Communication is the transmission of information und understanding from one body to another through the use of common symbols.
It is the interchange of ideas, facts and emotions by two or more persons through the use of words, letters and symbols.
Bernard (1948), stressed the need for communication to occupy a central place in Organization.
Communication can be regarded as the foundation upon which Organization or administration is built.
The media of communication are memos, letters, news bulletin, radio, television etc.
Communication is the process of transmitting information from one person/place to another and the message been understood by the receiver/encoder.
It involves the transmission of a message through a medium/channel from a transmitter to a receiver.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion on, the duties of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) we can deduce that the duties of the Chief Executive Officer are the same as Managerial duties or functions.
He heads and coordinates the activities of an organization.
He is directly or indirectly involved in all functions or activities of the Organization.
He is responsible for formulating policies, and supervises implementations.
The core duties of the Chief Executive Officer are Decision-making, Staffing, Planning, Communicating, Directing and Controlling.
Each of these duties has various steps, processes and significance to the success of the Organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the duties of the Chief Executive Officer.
Most Chief Executive Officers are rated for the quick, timely and quality of decisions they make.
Decision making takes place under three different conditions: under certainty, risk and uncertainty conditions.
There are two of kinds of decision, the programmed and Non- Programmed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT QUESTION: 1.
Explain the duties of the Chief Executive Officer.
2.
Differentiate between Planning and Directing.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abari, A.O and Mohammed, M.O.B (2006), Fundamentals of educational management, babs- olutunji publisher, first edition Bernard, M. (1948), Approaches of public administration.
new york schocken books Bello, S. A, et al (2004), Public administration system in Nigeria, raamson printing service 80  Mintzberg Henry, (1973) The nature of managerial work (new york: harper & row).
Lawal, A.
A.
(1993), Management in focus, abdul industrial enterprises, Lagos.
Patrick Mbieli, (2006) Administration public, a broad view, megavons (west africa) limited Simon, A.
(1976), Approaches of public administration.
book of the half century 4th edition Yahaya, A. D. Akinyele C. Led.
(1990), New trends in personnel management; a book of reading ascon personnel management series 81  MODULE THREE UNIT 10 INTRODUCTION TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Evolution of Local Government in Nigeria 3.1.1 Meaning of Local Government in Nigeria 3.1.2.
History of Local Government in Nigeria 3.1.2.1 Pre-Colonial Period 3.1.3.2 Post-Colonial Period 3.1.4.3 Early Military Era (1967 – 1976) 3.1.5.4 Late Military Era (1976 – 1979) 3.1.6.5 2nd Republic Era (1979) 3.1.7.6 2nd Military Era (1987 – 1999) 3.2 The Principles Underlying the Creation of Local Government Institutions.
3.2.1 The Legal Framework of the Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, you had an idea about what the types, styles and process of planning and decision-making are all about.
This unit will take you a step further into the Introduction to Local Government Administration.
In this unit, the focus is on Introduction to Local Government administration, we shall be looking at the meaning and evolution of Local 82  government institutions, in pre and post-colonial era, the Principle underlying the creation, as well as the Legal Framework of Local Government administration in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the evolution of Local government administration in Nigeria.
2.
Identify the Legal Framework and principles underlying the creation of Local government institutions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 EVOLUTION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION 3.1.1 Meaning of Local Government Administration The Nigeria system of Local Government administration started with the British system and later change to the American’s System of administration.
This is to achieve efficiency of service delivery.
Local Governments are semi-autonomy in their votes and powers allocated to them.
Local government as a tier of government has generated much interest globally.
It is seen as a sub-organ of the state or central government at the Local level where government administration is practiced at the grass-root and closer to the people.
A Local government institution is a subordinate existence to a State which derives its powers from the general laws made by the state.
Usually, it has a less complete governmental framework.
In some Francophone countries of the World, e.g.
France, Local governments’ administration is rigidly supervised by the central government.
In the Anglophone countries e.g.
U.S.A., Local government are autonomous except where they are subordinate to the state, Local government administration in Nigeria fall within this group.
(Orewa and Adewumi, 1992) points that Local government is a system of Local communities and towns which are organized to maintain law and order provide some limited range of social services and co-operation of the inhabitants in join endeavours towards the improvements of their conditions of living.
From the foregoing definitions on Local government, one can deduce that Local government provides the community with a formal organizational framework which enables them conduct their affairs effectively and regulates the actions of their members for the general public.
The Federal Republic of Nigeria guidelines for Local government reforms of 1976, defines Local government councils as government exercised through representative councils established by law to excise specific powers within defined areas.
83  3.1.1 History of Local Government Administration in Nigeria For the purpose of clarity, the Evolution of the modern Local government system in Nigeria shall be discussed in six (6) analytical phases, which are: a.
The Pre-Colonial Period.
b.
Post-Colonial Period.
c. Early Military Era (1967 – 1976).
d. Late Military Era (1976 – 1979).
e. The Second Republic 1979. f. The Second Military Era.
3.1.2.1 The Pre-Colonial Period This period marked the beginning of modern Local government system in the country.
Prior to this period; the traditional institutions were at liberty to practice any system of administration that suits their environment.
This period saw the establishment of the native administration or native authorities, where the people were enlightened on political and administrative education.
This system of administration allowed the traditional authorities to flourish under the closer supervision of the resident who introduce the indirect rule system.
However, under this system, the British were able to penetrate and exploit the vast territory of Nigeria prior to the indirect rule system.
The traditional institutions were inferior before the colonial authorities did not accept of parity of status between the Local chiefs or traditional rulers and the Resident Officers.
Oyediran (1988), states that, the structure of Local government administration is described as a military-like chain of responsibility extending from the Governor and Lieutenant Governor down to the Resident, District Officer, Chief Emir, District Head, Chief and Village Head.
In summary, authorities of Local government administration during this period where centralized but despite the advent of indirect rule system, the traditional native authorities were still able to carry out Legislative, Executive and Judicial functions.
The problem during these periods was corruption of the chiefs and Oba’s.
They were arrogant and over bearing, making Local government administration during this era a failure.
3.1.2.2 Post-Colonial Period Local Government Administration in Nigeria during the post-colonial period was essentially the responsibility of the regions or what is termed as regionalization or Localization of Local governments in Nigeria.
The system of administration varies slightly from one region to 84  another.
In the Northern region, they adopted and retained the status as it was under the colonial master, which was the native authority system.
The emirs adopted and retained the enormous powers, influence and prestige of the colonial masters to have a stronghold and control of the political will of the region.
In the Eastern region, they practiced a two tiered system; District and Local Council System in the Local areas and a three tiered system compose of an all-purpose municipal, urban county and county councils.
During this period, members of the various councils were mostly elected.
These councils were supposed to be autonomous since the members were elected representatives of the people.
The control over the councils was from the Ministry for Local government Inspectorate and the Local Government Service Board (Obiajulu and Obi, 2004).
In the western Region, the Local government administrative system was similar to that of the Eastern region in terms of administration and elections.
Three tiered structure was in operation, the municipal, urban county and county councils.
The councils were thus seen and used as avenues from planting the coalition’s surrogates at the grass-roots.
The major achievements in the three regions during the post-colonial era were primarily to maintain laws and order, prevention of crime etc.
The institutions were poorly financed and over staffed; there was no proper election into key positions.
3.1.2.3 Early Military Era (1967 – 1976) This era witnessed a period of great political instability and all efforts were geared towards maintaining stability and combating the Biafran treat of succession.
The entry of the military did witness some changes in the councils as the Local government administrations were dissolved and new care-taker imposed on them.
The nature of military regime which was usually centralized and authoritarian affected the Council since the various regional governments made no pretence of allowing the Councils a semblance of authority.
Nothing really remarkable happened at the Local government councils during this period.
3.1.2.4 Late Military Era (1976 – 1979) This period was a watershed of the evolution of the Local government administration in Nigeria; it witnessed remarkable reforms of the Local government system in Nigeria.
The main thrust of the reform was the standardization of the Councils nationwide.
The objectives of the reform were: 1.
To bring even and rapid development of Local government administration at all levels throughout the country.
85  2.
To facilitate the exercise of democratic self-government at the Local levels and to encourage initiative and leadership potentials.
3.
To mobilize human and natural resources through the involvement of members in Local development.
4.
To appropriate serious and development activities responsible to Local wishes and initiative by developing or delegating them to Local representative bodies.
5.
To provide a two way channel of communication between the Local communities and the government.
Criticism of the Reform Some scholars have argued that the changes induced by the reform were not as far-reaching as it ought to be.
To this group, they believed that the changes induced were more apparent than real.
Egwurube (1991), states that the reform was more symbolic than real and that the changes it introduced were cosmetic.
3.1.2.5 The Second Republic (1979) This period is tagged to be the anti-climax in the evolution of Local government administration in Nigeria.
The Councils were empowered with avenues for rewarding their political allies.
Appointments were made into the Councils on partisan patronage, thereby employing corrupt and unqualified personnel to man the affairs of Local governments.
This period did not record any remarkable achievement in the evolution process.
Local government administration during this period was highly ineffective, unnoticed and made little or no significant impact on the lives of the people.
3.1.2.6 The Second Military Era (1984 – 1999) The second military era, led to the present status and transformation of the Local government system in Nigeria.
The military were quite unsatisfied with the state of the Local governments.
The Dansuki Panel (1984), was set up to look into the affairs of the Councils and stipulate guidelines for operation and efficient administration.
The Committee, in its report attributed the problems of Local government as operational factors arising directly from the behaviour and attitude of the persons who operated the system.
Some of the recommendations of Alhaji Ibrahim Dasuki Panel were as follows: 1.
The councils should be directly funded and granted autonomy status.
2.
The abolition of the Local Government Ministries.
86  3.
Decentralization of the services provided by Local Governments.
However, these recommendations of the Committee could not be implemented as Buhari’s administration was overthrown in a palace coup by General Babangida in 1985.
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the phases of Local Government System in Nigeria 2.
What are the main objectives of the reforms on Local Government System in the late Military era (1976-1979) 3.2 THE PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING THE CREATION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS.
The need for Local government institutions emanated from the facts that different geographical areas have diverse people, visions, and potentials.
The vision and potentials of the people to a great extent influence in the creation of Local government institutions.
In establishing Local government institutions and in assigning powers to them to be autonomous the state should put the following into considerations.
1.
The State should attempt to set Local units that are homogenous in nature and whose affairs need Local management.
Two un-identical communities cannot stay together under the umbrella of one Local government.
During the 2nd military era, General Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida delineated Ife and Modakeke into two different Local Government Councils because of uncommon interest.
However, a measure can be achieved if only the boundaries are shifted or adjusted to enable peace to reign.
2.
The State should guide against designating on excessive number of units as councils as would result in overlapping powers, duplication of functions and consequent wastage of public funds.
3.
The State government should properly supervise on exercise of power within Local units; they should work towards the prevention of dishonesty and inefficiency of officers.
The State should reserve the executive power to appoint and remove officers entrusted with the administration of state laws.
3.2.1 The Legal Framework of the Local Government.
Local government institutions are ‘’corporations with perpetual succession’’ (Bello et al 2004).
They have legal – existence like an ordinary individual, they are legal entitles which can sue and be sued in the court.
The Local institutions once established can never die; they are continually in existence as far as the state provides them with the necessary allocations.
87  The Local government institutions can only act within the framework of the law in which it was established.
Unlike an ordinary individual who can do anything against the law forbid him to do.
The Local government institutions may only do those things which the law specifically order or permit them to do.
The Local government will not for any reason assist the State in carrying out or to maintain its responsibilities.
Any contrary action would infringe the doctrine of ultra-vires, which means acting beyond the powers given to it.
The law which binds Local government institutions may be either mandatory or permissive.
A mandatory law is one which orders Local government institutions to do something e.g.
the provision of schools markets etc.
while a permissive law is that which permits the council to establish a rural health service centre within its jurisdiction.
However, Local government institutions may pass bye-laws, which is the power and authorities to enable them to carry out their responsibilities.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion on, Local government administration is a sub-organ entity of the state, where government administration are practiced at the grass-root areas and closer to the people.
The evolution of Local government system in Nigeria could be traced back to the colonial era of the British administration.
There are six analytical phases of Local government administration in Nigeria, the colonial, the past colonial, the early military era, late military era, the second republic and the second military era and all recorded remarkable achievements in the history of Nigeria.
The essentials of Local government administration cannot be ignored because it brings the government closer to the people.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the evolution of Local government administration in Nigeria.
The powers of the Local government institutions are derived from the State.
The underlying principles for the creation of Local government institutions vary in geographical areas and diversity of people and culture.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question: 1.
Define Local Government Administration?
2.
Explain the Evolution of Local Government in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 88  Bello, S. A, Ojodu, H.O, Ogunyomi, P.O, Legbeti, P (2004), Public administration system in Nigeria, revised edition, raamson printing service Egwurube, J. O.
(1991),The evolution of local government in Nigeria.
a systemic government administration, (Enugu fourth dimension publishers).
Federal Republic of Nigeria, The constitution of local government reforms 1976, Kaduna government press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, The constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria 1976, apapa daily times publication.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999), The constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria, Lagos government press.
Obiajulu Sunday and Obi Emeka Anthony (2004) Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach bookpoint limited.
Orewa, G. O. and Adewunmi J.
B.
(1983), Local government in Nigeria, the changing scene benin Ethiopia publishing co-operation Oyediran,O.
(1988) Essays on local government and administration in Nigeria, Lagos government press.
Nwatu, D. N (1995) Local government in Nigeria: an introduction, Enugu agatha service publisher ltd 89  UNIT 11 FUNCTIONS OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN NIGERIA Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Comparative Perspective of local government functions in some selected countries.
3.2 Functions of Local Government in Nigeria 3.2.1 Exclusive /Mandatory Functions of Local Government Institutions 3.2.2 Concurrent /Permissive Functions of Local Government Institutions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, you learnt about introduction to local government.
This unit will take you a step further into the functions of the local government in Nigeria.
In this unit, we shall be looking at the roles of rural and urban local government institutions, the different between Concurrent and Exclusive functions of local government and a comparative view of some selected Local government institutions in some countries.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Explain the importance of Local government institutions.
b. Differentiate between rural and urban Local government administration.
c. Distinguish between concurrent and exclusive functions of the Local government institutions.
d. Make a comparison of the functions of the Local government in USA and Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONS IN SOME SELECTED COUNTRIES.
90  Local government as the third tier of the government performs primary functions.
The central government controls more of the funds.
The central government has better competence and expertise to handle secondary programmes.
The urban local government takes-up greater and more sophisticated functions because of the demands and challenges of urban communities.
The Acts or constitution of local government institutions established functional areas that they can engage in.
Some functions are concurrent between the local government and the State, while others are exclusive such as: revenue generation, welfare, maintenance, agriculture, health, education and other functions as prescribed from time to time by the State House of Assembly (Nwatu, 1995).
The Soviet Union before its disintegration operates a Central system of government.
The Union was sub-divided into a variety of local government institutions each headed by a Council called Soviet.
The councils are large sometimes numbering several hundred numbers and operate through a system of committees.
Council men are not necessary members of the communist party but drawn from a wide cross section of the workforce.
The Council has considerable decision making authorities on Local matters although all policies must operate within constraints established by the Communist party.
The Soviet pattern of Local government institutions has been copied in many Communist countries for example, China on either a two or three level basis (Nwatu, 1995).
In France, financing local government institutions is the primary control of the Ministry of Interior.
This makes the Local government to be weak and this had adverse effects on the paste of services administered both at the rural and urban centres.
The most important and substantive functions of the French Local government institutions are provision of free education, that provides political education and participation as well as police services.
The French Local government councils have great authority over items that are more difficult and local in character such as parks or gardens, recreations centres and street maintenance (Nwatu, 1995).In Britain, Local Government performs three broad functions and these are classified as: (A) Environmental (B) Protective and (C) Personal.
The environmental functions of Local government in Britain are concerned the with the immediate physical environment via, land, air and water, through the protection of the atmosphere, road construction and maintenance, labelling, cleaning and provision of street lights, water supplies, refuse disposal etc.
The protective functions are those that deal with safety of citizens, police and fire services, while the Personal service deals with individual well-being such as health, schools, housing, museum, libraries services.
In Britain today, the most significant complex and cumbersome function of Local government is the provision of housing for the teeming population.
However, not all Local government institutions can 91  perform these functions.
In rural districts, parish councils have limited control in matters of Local interest such as allotments, burial grounds, lighting and provision of amenities (Nwatu, 1995).
In the United States, special districts are created to carry out specific functions or projects.
The main function of Local government administration is the management of the public schools system.
The other functions performed by Local government in the USA are policing, public works, libraries and recreation, public utilities, city planning, public health, airports, harbour and housing.
These are indeed gigantic functions which municipal city government can take on (Nwatu, 1995).
In India, Local government administration is known as Panchyali-Raj.
The functions of Local government institutions in India follow a similar pattern like that of the USA except for police and the gigantic function of harbours and airports.
The functions of Local government administration are similar to the Nigerian situation.
Their functions can also be classified as obligatory and discretionary, such functions include agricultural programmes, animal husbandry, building and communications, education administration, fishery, forestry, small- scale industries, medical services, security disposal etc.
The urban councils could perform obligatory functions like conservation, street lighting, drainage construction, waste management and road maintenance, while the larger councils could also engage in water supply, street cleaning and labelling; refuse disposal, fire service, primary educations etc.
(Nwatu, 1995).
In the Nigerian situation, the functions of Local government institutions are usually spelt out by the Central government, and the local units are expected to operate within the framework of the status establishing it.
The urban Councils provide more services because of challenges than their rural counterparts.
The functions of Local government institutions in Nigeria as discussed in the 1999 Constitution (fourth schedule) are discussed in the next section.
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Identify the functions of local government institutions in the USA, Britain, France, India and USSR.
3.2 FUNCTIONS OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT The functions of the Local government are usually spelt out by the central government.
The administration of Local government can either be rural or urban.
The functions of rural Local government institutions are simpler than their urban counterpart.
The Local government institutions are subjected to the standards required by the Central government especially in 92  the provision of efficient services.
Functions of Local government institutions can be divided into two, the Exclusive or Mandatory and the Concurrent or Permissive functions: 3.2.1 Exclusive or Mandatory Functions of Local Government Institutions (Revenue Generation) The exclusive functions of local government in Nigeria are: a.
The consideration and the making of recommendations to a State Commission on Economic Planning and Development; particularly in area of authority of the council.
b.
Construction and maintenance of “trunk C” roads, cleaning and labelling of houses, drains construction, open spaces or public facilities as may be prescribed from time to time by the state House of Assembly.
c. Assessment of privately-owned houses or tenement for the purpose of levying such rates as may be prescribed by the State House of Assembly.
d. Registration of all births, deaths and legal services e.g.
marriages.
e. Establishment and maintenance of communities, and homes for the destitute.
f. Establishment, maintenance and regulation of slaughter houses, slaughter slab markets, motor parks, sewage and refuse disposal and public convince.
g. Collection of rate, radio and television licenses, licenses of bicycles, trucks, (other may be mechanically propelled trucks) canoe wheel barrow and carts.
h. Control and regulations of the following: (i).
Licensing regulation and control of the sale of liquor.
(ii).
Movement and keeping of pets of all description.
(iii).
Shops and kiosks.
(iv).
Restaurants, bakeries and other places for sale of food to the public.
3.2.2 Concurrent or Permissive Functions of Local Government Institutions The functions of a Local government institution shall include-participation of such Council in the government of a State in respect of the following matters: a.
The provision and maintenance of health and environmental services such as public health inspection of drains and sewages; b.
The provision and maintenance of primary-adult and vocational education centre; c. The development of agriculture and natural resources other than mineral resources; 93  d. The provision of legal services e.g.
marriage registration; and e. Such other functions as may be conferred on a local government institution by the House of State Assembly.
However, the above are social functions of the local government.
In a nutshell, local government institutions are saddled with a lot of functions from mere political enlightenment and integration of the people to the provision and maintenance of essential services.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion on, the functions of Local government institutions are virtually the same in all parts of the World.
Urban Councils performed more functions due to the demands and challenges than the rural councils.
In Nigeria, the functions of Local government institutions are classified into 2, Mandatory and Concurrent functions which are the provision and maintenance of essential services to the people at the grass root.
In USSR and France, the primary functions of the Local governments’ administration are similar in nature.
In Britain, the functions of Local governments are classified into three: environmental, protective and personal while in the USA, the major function of Local government administration is in the management of public schools.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt about the functions of Local government administration in Nigeria.
The functions are classified into two, the exclusive or mandatory and the permissive or concurrent.
In India, local government institutions are called Panchayali-Raj.
The Urban councils performed more functions than their rural counterparts.
The functions of Local government institutions in France, and USSR, are majorly in the provision of primary education.
In USA, Local government institutions are classified into three; environmental, protective and personal.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question: 1.
Explain the functions of Local government institutions in Nigeria.
2.
Explain the functions of the French system of Local government administration.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Ademolekun, L and Rowland, L (1979), The new local government system in Nigeria, problems and prospects for implantation, heinemann, Ibadan Adewunmi J.
B.
(1983), Local government in Nigeria, the changing scene benin Ethiopia publishing co-operation 94  Egwurube, J. O.
(1991) The evolution of local government in Nigeria.
a systemic government administration, (Enugu fourth dimension publishers).
Federal Republic of Nigeria, The constitution of local government reforms 1976, Kaduna government press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, The constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria 1976, apapa daily times publication.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999), The constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria, Lagos government press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, Operational guidelines for local government councils, Abuja 1997 Obiajulu Sunday and Obi Emeka Anthony (2004) Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach bookpoint limited.
Oyediran, O.
(1988) Essays on local government and administration in Nigeria, Lagos government press.
Nwatu, D. N (1995) Local government in Nigeria: an introduction, Enugu agatha service publisher Ltd 95  UNIT 12 FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN NIGERIA Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Internal Sources 3.1.1 Property Tax 3.1.2 User Charges 3.1.3 General Administration Revenue 3.2 External Sources 3.2.1 Grants 3.2.2 Loans 3.3 Central Government Control over Local Government 3.3.1 Legislative Control 3.3.2 Administrative Control 3.3.3 Financial Control 3.3.4 Judicial Control 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, you had an idea of what the functions of Local government are all about.
This unit is on financing Local government in Nigeria.
In this unit, the focus is on the finance, sources of revenue and Federal government control over Local government financing in Nigeria.
We shall be looking at the sources of revenues (externally mobilized and internally generated) how funds are raised.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Identify the various sources of revenue to Local government councils in Nigeria.
b.
Explain the Federal government financial controls of Local government council in Nigeria.
96  3.0 MAIN CONTENT Local government institutions need adequate funding to be able to service the functions assigned to them by the Federal government.
Local government funds are raised in different ways.
Anifowose and Enemuo (1999), states that the sources of revenue to Local government can be grouped into two categories via internally generated or domestically mobilized revenue and externally mobilized income.
Internally generated revenues are funds collected within the jurisdiction of the Local government council.
The externally generated revenues are funds mobilised outside its territories, which could be in form of grants and loans.
3.1 INTERNAL SOURCES OF REVENUE Internal sources of Local government revenue are those generated within the tax jurisdictions of Local government.
As mentioned earlier, such jurisdictions are sometime in line with the constitution while others are conventional.
In the Nigerian case, these sources are specified in the constitution.
There are also tax laws to support revenue generation.
Local government internal revenue can be classified as Local tax revenues, user charges and administrative revenues.
The most common of these three, is tax revenue or levies by the Councils on the people for services rendered.
The principles of taxation are efficiency, equity and revenue productivity.
Tax administrations are better managed at the city or urban areas than rural ones.
A local tax is generally seen as a tax whose base or rate is determined or decided by the local government (Anifowose and Enemuo 1999).
Local government taxes include property rates, poll or community tax, graduate rate (based on income levied on all inhabitants of the Local authority’s area).
Special rates levied on the whole or a section of the community for a particular purpose e.g.
school, building of water supply and business tax.
However, in the rural areas the tax system is structured in a way that it relates to either person’s property or transactions.
Community taxes are easily collected in rural areas while taxes on property and transactions are more applicable to urban Local governments.
3.1.1 Property Tax/ Tax Revenue Property Tax is the tax on properties acquired by individuals and companies.
It is a highly reliable tax in terms of revenue generation for the Local governments all over the World (Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999).
Local government councils in the developed world e.g.
Britain, U.S.A., France, Japan, Germany, and a host of others depend greatly on it.
The percentage of tax derived varies from one urban government to another (Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999).
97  In Nigeria, property taxes are collected in major cities (Lagos, Part-Harcourt, Ibadan, Kano, Benin, Abuja, etc.)
than in rural areas.
Examples of urban property taxes are: a.
Site value tax on vacant or unapproved vacant land (tenement) b.
A tax on urban housing or building not subject to the site tax.
Despite the promising nature of this tax, it is associated with some problems.
These constraints are mainly administrative, technical and political.
The administrative problems have to do with the attitude of the tax collectors who are not usually efficient and effective.
The problem is technical, where the machines for computation of data and classification of property malfunction and are limited in supply, and political, where political forces influence compliance with property valuation.
In Nigeria, the rating of property tax mostly in rural areas are faced with a lot of challenges such as unwillingness to comply while in the urban areas there is no clear measure of determining property tax.
3.1.2.
User Charges Taxes of this kind are fees paid in exchange for a service provided by the Local government.
Most of the exclusive and concurrent functions assigned to Local government as earlier mentioned are sources of revenue.
These could be classified as user charges administrative or general revenues.
They come from the sale of economic goods, services and resources by the government, fares in Local government buses, fees for using Local government properties, car park etc.
In Nigeria, the Council generates more of these fees and charges from the urban Local government councils than the rural ones.
3.1.3.
General Administrative Revenue Local government powers over revenue are largely residual.
In Nigeria, the following cases are codified under the following Local government revenue heads (Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999).
1001 – Taxes 1002 – Rates 1003 – Local licenses, fees and fine 1004 – Earnings from commercial undertaking 1005 – Rent in Local government property 1006 – Internal payments and dividends.
98  Part of what has been treated under property tax and user charges fall under 1001 and 1004 respectively.
In Nigeria, Local governments’ heads 1003 – 1004 continue to be the mainstay of Local government revenue.
A few revenue items, such as market and motor parks licences and fees from television and radio have shown to be visible sources of revenue.
However, most items of internal revenue in Nigeria Local governments are inelastic, this means, that the administrative cost of collecting them could exceed the benefits.
Furthermore, a revenue head like Head 1003 alone covers a range of items or subhead of 1001 items.
These include licenses on dogs, bicycles and other minor permits which may add up to little.
From the foregoing, one can deduce that the internal sources of revenue of urban areas are likely to raise higher revenue than local areas.
Hardly do rural governments in Nigeria go beyond the 10% of total Local government revenue, and in some cases less than 5%, while urban Local government may generate up to 15 – 20%.
However, the survival of Local governments rests largely with external sources rather than internal ones, despite the huge internally generated revenues realized by some selected states or urban Local government council.
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the differences between grants and loans as sources of revenue to Local government institutions 2.
Identify and explain the central government control over Local government institutions 3.2 EXTERNAL SOURCES (GRANTS AND LOANS) 3.2.1 Grant/Statutory Allocation External sources or externally mobilized incomes of the local governments areas are revenue generated outside their jurisdiction or territory.
They include inter-governmental grants and loans.
External sources are the mainstay of most Local governments in most developing countries of the world.
There are two main types of inter-governmental grants (A) general revenue or unconditional grants (B) specific or conditional or matching grants.
Inter- governmental grants are funds from the Federal to Local government councils or government allocations to Local governments.
The Federal government is required by law to transfer 20% of the federation account to the Local government and States are expected to disburse 10% of its internally derived income to Local governments.
The general revenue or unconditional grants where consistent and stable enable Local governments to plan their budgets effectively.
In Nigeria, the proportion of sharing grants or statutory allocation has changed 99  over time.
It had changed from 10% – 20% in the past to the present 20% that Local government enjoy its share of statutory allocation, while the State governments are to pay to Local government 10% for the following reasons.
a.
To augment the resources of the Local authorities; b.
To meet the exceptional needs or the limited means of particular areas; and c. To influence aggregate Local government expenditure as part of the process of controlling the national economy.
The specific or conditional or matching grants are those motivational grants from the Federal to Local government council to meet specific projects e.g.
the Universal Primary Education.
In Nigeria, Local government areas would not have been in existence without statutory allocation from the federal government.
Most Local government institutions in West African countries obtain about 40% - 50% of the incomes from the Central government.
Such grants are often in the form of percentage grants or block grants (Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999).
3.2.2 Loans Local government institutions are empowered by law to borrow funds from external sources, usually to finance major capital projects.
These loans may or not be necessary need to be guaranteed by the State governments.
They can be raised either from financial institutions or specialized municipal credit agencies.
This may not however apply to overdraft especially since their statutory allocation goes straight into their account for now.
Local government institutions everywhere need loan (1) to provide infrastructural services such as health, roads etc.
(2) for productive investment such as motor parks or mass transit-ventures etc.
Local government institutions either rural or urban have access to acquired loans, be it urban or rural.
The purpose of such loans is purely for infrastructural development and investment projects.
3.4 FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CONTROL OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS There are various controls or bodies charged with the supervision of Local government councils.
The three main federal government organs – the Legislature Executive and Judiciary exercise different forms of control over Local government institutions.
These forms of controls are: a.
Control by Service Commission.
b.
Control by the Ombudsman.
c. Control through Administrative Tribunal.
100  d. Control within each Administrative Agency.
3.3.1 Legislative Control Local governments operate within the framework of the laws passed by the legislature because Local government institutions are the creations of the supreme legislative organ of the State.
The Legislative controls may include fiscal, supervisory, disciplinary and constitutive controls.
The Legislature can amend the law establishing such Local government and also enact laws forbidding the Local councils to do certain things.
Moreover, since Local authorities exercise only delegated powers, all bye-laws passed by such authorities must be approved by the Minister for Local government.
3.3.2 Administrative Control a.
The Federal governments through the Ministry of Local government and the Local Government Service Commissions have administrative controls and regulatory powers over the conditions of service and dismissal of Local government personnel.
b.
The Local Government Service Commission have the powers to appoint, suspend and dismiss staff of the Local authorities, and in some situations order for public inquiry into Local government affairs.
Where this occurs, a Management Committee may be set up to take over the administrative controls of the affected councils areas.
c. The State appoints a Commissioner who takes control and responsibility of the affairs of Local government administration in line with the directives of the Local Government Service Commission.
3.3.3 Financial Control a.
The bulk of Local government revenue comes from grants from the Federal government.
The Federal government may decide to reduce the grant or to withhold it entirely if the services for such grants have been allocated are either not being provided for satisfactory, the grant to Lagos state was with-held for a while during Obasanjo’s second term in office over the creation of additional Local council’s development areas.
When grants are withheld, the Local government councils can hardly function with regards to the provision of essential services.
b.
The Local governments’ institutions are compiled to prepare Annual Accounts at the end of the financial year.
These accounts show actual revenue and expenditure of the Councils.
The accounts are subjected to audit and all improper or unauthorized funds detected against any person’s by the auditor must be refunded to the Local government institutions.
101  3.3.4 Judicial Control Judicial control of Local government institutions are exercised by the courts under the doctrine of ultra-vires.
The Court may declare void any act of Local authorities which is contrary to the law or in excess of the powers granted her by the legislature.
Any person or group of persons who consider themselves to be aggrieved by any action of a Local government can institute a legal action against the Local institutions.
They have the power to pardon and grant amnesty to any person or officers that contravene Local government laws.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion, revenues constitute the mainstay of Local government institutions in Nigeria.
No Local government councils can survives without allocations from the government.
Financing of Local government councils can be from internally and externally generated revenues.
The most common source of internally generated revenue is the tax collection from government employees and user charges.
Grants and loans constitute the external sources of revenue to Local government.
Urban Councils generate more revenues than their rural counterparts.
In Nigeria, the proportion of sharing grants has changed from 10 – 20%, State governments pays 10% from their revenues for the financing of Local government institutions.
5.0 SUMMARY Local government institutions need adequate funds to operate.
The sources of revenues to Local government institution are internally and externally generated.
There are tax laws to support revenue generation.
Local government institutors are empowered by law to borrow funds from external sources.
The Federal government is required to transfer 20% of the Federal accounts to Local governments.
Each state is expected to disburse 10% of its internally generated revenues to Local government.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question: 1.
Explain the Sources of Revenues of Local government institutions in Nigeria 2.
Differentiate between judicial and administrative control of Local government 7.0.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Egwurube, J. O.
(1991), The evolution of local government in Nigeria.
a systemic government administration, (Enugu fourth dimension publishers).
Obiajulu Sunday and Obi Emeka Anthony (2004), Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach bookpoint limited.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, The constitution of local government reforms 1976, Kaduna government press.
102  Federal Republic of Nigeria, The constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria 1976, Apapa daily times publication.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999), The constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria, Lagos government press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, Operational guidelines for local government councils, Abuja 1997 Orewa, G. O. and Adewunmi J.
B.
(1983), Local government in Nigeria, the changing scene benin Ethiopia publishing co-operation Oyediran, O.
(1988), Essays on local government and administration in Nigeria.
Lagos, government press.
Remi Anifowose and Francis C. Enemuo (1999), Elements of politics, sam iroanusi publications Nwatu, D. N (1995), Local government in Nigeria: an introduction, Enugu agatha service publisher ltd 103  UNIT 13 PROBLEMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND REFORMS/COMMITTEES Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of Local Government Councils 3.1.1 Finance 3.1.2 Administration 3.1.3 Political and Leadership Constraints 3.1.4 Community 3.1.5 Intergovernmental Relations 3.2 Local Government Reforms 3.2.1 The President Olusegun Obasanjo Reform 3.2.2 The Dasuki Reforms Committee 3.2.3 The Babangida Reforms 3.2.4 Local Government Reforms in the Fourth Republic 3.2.5 The 2003 Local Government Reform Committee 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, you had an idea of what the sources of revenue and Federal government control over Local government are all about.
This unit will take you a step further into the problems facing Local government and reforms of Local Government in Nigeria.
This unit discussed the problems of finance, administration, inter-governmental relations among others.
It also discussed the reforms under President Obasanjo and Babangida administration among other.
104  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Identify the problems of Local government system in Nigeria.
b.
Explain the various reforms of Local governments’ institutions in Nigeria.
3.0 PROBLEMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS The problems facing Local governments in Nigeria are enormous.
It is the general consensus in Nigeria that Local governments have not made any significant mark in the country’s attempt to promote rapid social and economic change.
These problems facing Local government reforms include; inadequate finance, administration, leadership community attitude, inter governmental relations, planning and ideology (Egwurube, 1991) 3.1.1 Finance Inadequate financial resource is a major problem facing Local government administration and in Nigeria.
The collective impact of several factors have compounded these problems, for instance, some Local governments are generally poor.
Many citizens do not see the need to pay taxes, as the amenities on which they are taxed are inadequate in supply or never provided.
Other financial problems of Local Government in Nigeria are: a.
Too much money is spent by the Local governments on recurrent budget, sometimes up to 80 – 90% leaving a smaller percentage for social and economic services.
b.
With the low level of finance, massive corruption takes place in Local governments institutions, money realized are either embezzled administratively or by elected officials.
Politicians see Councils as a place for rehabilitation and not service to the community.
Money that would have been channelled into projects finds its way into private pockets (Egwurube, 1991).
c. Problems of proper methods of revenue collection as mentioned earlier had in the past resulted in inadequate financial support of Local government institutions.
The method of collection was inefficient.
3.1.2 Administrative a.
Despite, the Federal government controls over Local government institutions, there is lack of strict enforcement.
Some Local government authorities have in certain areas neglected the performance of the statutory functions with impunity.
105  b.
Surveys have shown that in recent years, the quantum of staff has increased.
Though, there have been more quality staff in administration than the technical (Engineers, Architect) and professional fields (Planning and Research) in Local government, the appointment of incompetent staff is rampant.
The resultant effects of this are mismanagement, incompetence, embezzlement, misappropriation, corruption and failure to provide the necessary opportunities for the Local people (Egwurube, 1991).
c. The problems of boundaries disputes amongst some Local government authorities have led to killings and arson.
The crises in Ife-Modakeke (Oshun) and the Biliri- Kaltungo (Bauchi) have led to the splitting of these communities into different and Local Government areas.
The reason for the frequent crises in the Southern part of Jos in Nigeria may not be far from this (Nwatu, 1995) 3.1.3 Political and Leadership constraints a.
Changes in government are accompanied with changes in Local government structure.
These changes bring interference in the operations of the Local authorities which might affect the people negatively or positively.
However, these changes in Local government structure have not provided the needed stability and performance that Local government Councils need to fulfil.
b.
Political constraint has been the lack of political or ideological framework with its consequent ill-defined functions of Local government Councils.
There have been duplication of duties, operational inefficiencies and wastage of materials and human resources because the Federal government agencies at the Local level used to exercise similar functions.
c. The problems of ineffective and incompetent political functionaries in the membership of the councils are also critical.
3.1.4 Community The communities often feel marginalized in development.
Community development efforts are not adequately supported by Local government even where intervention occurs.
The net effect of this is that, the community feels marginalized from development programmes and efforts.
The more programmes and projects are community driven and participatory, the more the community would want to own and sustain the programme.
Community attitude also reinforces the corruptive attitude of politicians.
Instead of demanding for accountability from politicians who amass lots of wealth and status symbols while in office, they perceive this as 106  the ultimate objectives of politics.
Such political actors are acclaimed.
They have on the basis of “this is his time”.
This is a very negative attitude to anti-corruption and development.
3.1.5 Intergovernmental Relations Intergovernmental relationships in Nigeria exist among the three organs of government – legislature, executive and judiciary.
The Legal or Constitutional Framework, within which these relations take place and the position of the government functions in the hierarchy are institutionalized.
However, there exist four (4) types of intergovernmental relations; these are vertical, horizontal, diagonal and external intergovernmental relations (Obiajulu and Obi, 2004).
a. Vertical Intergovernmental Relations: This is where the institution at the higher level has a position of influence and authority over the institution at the lower level e.g.
the influence of Public Service Commission on Local government Councils.
b Horizontal Intergovernmental Relations occur between government institutions which find themselves at a particular level of government, for instance, State or Local governments can decide to institute a programme aimed at assisting other States or Local government in dire need e.g.
“Security Watch” programme of the Local governments for the purpose of overseeing the neighbourhoods and reducing armed robbery in this type of relations.
c. Diagonal Intergovernmental Relations: This takes place between two or more government institutions, it occurs when liaison takes place across government institutions of different location e.g.
a Local or State government, a State finds itself in a relationship with another State or Local government.
d. External Intergovernmental Relations: This exists when the central or Federal government enters into relationship with another government or institutions outside its geographical areas or boundaries.
There exist three sub-divisions of external intergovernmental relations, which are regional, international and external relations.
Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the problems facing Local government administration 2.
Explain the Babangida reforms on Local government administration 3.2 LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORMS 3.2.1 President Olusegun Obasanjo Reforms on Local Government The 1976 Local government reforms by President Olusegun Obasanjo gave Local government areas full governmental support to manage their finances and initiate their own 107  programmes.
The reason for the reforms was due to the increase in the number of States and subsequent increase in Local governments’ institution throughout the federation without adequate consideration for their viability.
The creation of Local government areas in Nigeria is clear expression of patronage by revenue distribution to favour some areas or interest groups.
The reforms were carried out by a ten-man technical committee headed by Esta Nupe.
Obasanjo, believes that Nigerians have worked for democracy and deserved qualitative lift in their living conditions at the grass-root areas (Obiajulu and Obi, 2004).
The terms of reference for the Committee are as follows: a.
To examine the problem of inefficiency, high cost of governance and to proffer solutions to reduce cost and wastage.
b.
To review all Local government performance from 1971-1976, and to determine the need of retaining them or not.
c. The look at the possibilities of assigning specific roles to traditional institutions in the Local government areas.
d. To examine the high cost of election serving in the country.
3.2.2 The Dasuku Reform Committee Alhaji Ibrahim Dasuku Local government Reform/Committee was set up by Buhari administration in 1984 with the aim of revamping the system of the Local government administration, finance and control.
Before now performance and service of the Local government areas were grossly unsatisfactory.
The Committee was charged with the responsibility of looking into the problems of Local government administration and recommend solutions.
Committees’ Observations 1.
The major problem to Local government was attributed to operational factors, which hinder equitable distribution of amenities of Local government through the federation.
2.
A proposal for decentralization of the services provided by Local government Councils, but these recommendations could not be implemented as Buhari’s administration was overthrown in a palace coup by General Babangida in 1985 (Egwurube, 1991 3.2.3The Babangida Reforms Babangida reforms on Local government councils complemented the reports and recommendations of the Dasuki Committee and that of the National Service Scheme for Local government employees.
Babangida administration set up a ten-man Committee to 108  produce National Scheme of Service for all cadres of Local government Councils.
The Committee from its findings recommended autonomy for Local government Councils.
The following were some of the reforms: a.
The release of National Scheme of Service for Local government employees, in 1988 afforded the Local government the chance to promote their staff up to grade level fifteen.
This created opportunities for the employment of professionals such as engineers, legal officers, health officials, architect etc.
b.
The power given to elected Local government Chairmen to appoint their own government secretaries had made them real Chief Executives in their domains while the creation of Local Government Legislative Assemblies made the separation of powers and responsibilities complete.
Local governments became a distinct third-tier level of government in the country.
c. The remitting to States of annual Local government grants was stopped.
Local government Councils started getting their grants directly from the Federal government.
d. State Ministries of Local governments were abolished and State Governments were directed to terminate their joint services with Local governments.
e. Federal government reviewed the grants allocated to Local governments from 10% to 15% in 1989 and to 20% in 1992. f. The scrapping of Local government Services Commission in January, 1992, made the Local government autonomous with regards to issues of discipline, promotion and even development.
The channel through which the State Government controlled and influenced Local government was thus terminated.
However, the major constraint in the Babangida reforms was that staff of Local governments, were not prepared for the reform, no induction course was organised to familiarize them with the new system.
Secondly, government lacked the financial base to sustain the autonomy of these Local government Councils (Egwurube, 1991).
3.2.4 Local Government Reforms in the Fourth Republic (1979) The implementation of Babangida reforms boosted the performance and activities of Local government Councils but the major setback was the frequency of postponed elections.
The Council Chairmen and their councilors were voted into office.
Decree 36 of 1998 specified three year tenure for them which ought to expire on 29th of May, 2003 but the Council chairmen demanded of a-four year tenure.
They felt that what was obtains at the Federal level 109  should apply to them.
They formed an Association of Local Government Chairmen of Nigeria (ALGON) and lobby the National Assembly for one year extension of tenure as contained in the Electoral Act 2007.
However, this resulted in a court case and on the 28th of March, 2002 the Supreme Court ruled against the Local government Chairmen.
The judgement was a big blow to Council bosses that were preparing to spend one more year in office; State governors thereafter started making arrangements for council polls.
The Council polls that were fixed for April 13th, 2002 could not hold until March 2004.
This was due to the inability of the Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) to provide the electoral register, and the registration of new parties and all those led to the change of date till, 2004, after the general election of 2003 (Obiajulu and Obi, 2004).
3.2.5.
The 2003 Local Government Reforms The 2003 Local government reforms were set up due to the problems of Local governments in the fourth republic.
The President in a nationwide broadcast on the 18th of June, 2003, informed the nation that the Council of State, (made up of the President, his Deputy, the 36 State Governors, all past Presidents and the leaders of National Assembly) has agreed on a reform of the nation’s Local government system.
The decisions of the Council of States were based on: (a) The non-performance or gross-performance of the Local government (b) The high cost of government and high cost of electioneering campaigns to individual political contestants in Nigeria and (c) Fragmentation of Local government councils etc.
A technical committee was drawn from the six-geopolitical zones headed by the Etsu Nupe to examine the way forward for Local government affairs.
Their terms of reference were; a.
To examine the problem of inefficiency and high cost of government with a view to reducing cost and wastages.
b.
To review the performance of Local government within the last four years and desirability of retaining the Local government as the third tier of government.
c. To examine the high cost of electioneering campaign in the country and consider any other matter of the Local government system.
The report of the Committee to the President states that The Federal, State and Local governments have failed in meeting the aspirations of the people.
They recommends was that, there is the need to grant the Local governments third tier status, abolish the State Joint Local 110  government account and retain the 774 constitutionally recognized Local government councils, among others.
The committee faced a lot of challenges especially from opposition parties (Obiajulu and Obi, 2004).
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussion, Local government institutions were faced with many challenges and problems ranges from Finance, Administrative, Community, Political and Leadership and Intergovernmental Relations.
Various Reforms and Committees were set-up to reviews the activities and make recommendations on Local government systems in Nigeria.
The reports have similar views and intentions.
There is the need to grant Local governments third tier status.
Changes in government are accompanied with changes in Local government structure.
5.0 SUMMARY Inadequate funding poor administration, political and leadership constraints are among the problems of Local government councils in Nigeria.
Grants allocated to Local government institutions were reviewed from 10% to 15% in 1959 and to 20% since 1992 till date.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question: 1.
What are the objectives of the Obasanjo Local government Reforms 2.
List two important recommendations of the Dasuki Local Government Reforms 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ademolekun, L. and Rowland, L. (1979) New local government system in Nigeria, problems and prospects for implementation, heinemann, Ibadan.
Egwurube, J.O (1991) The evolution of local government in Nigeria, a systemic government administration (Enugu: fourth dimension publishers) Federal Republic of Nigeria, The local government reforms 1976, kaduna government printer.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, The constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria, 1979 Apapa daily times’ publication.
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999, The constitution of the federal republic of Nigeria Lagos government printer.
111  Federal Republic of Nigeria, Report of the bureau directorate for social mobilization production, 1987.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, Operational guideline for local government councils, Abuja 1997 Obiagulu Sunday and Obi Emeka Anthony (2004), Public administration in Nigeria; a developmental approach.
bookpoint limited Orewa G. O. and Adewunmi D. B.
(1983) Local government in Nigeria, the changing scene bein Ethiopia publishing co-operation Nwatu, D. N. (1995) Local government in Nigeria; an introduction; Enugu, agatha service Publisher Ltd. 112  MODULE FOUR: UNIT 14 CONCEPT OF BUREAUCRACY TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Bureaucracy 3.1.1 Forms of Power/Authority in Bureaucracy 3.1.2 Power and Authority 3.2 The Process of Bureaucratization 3.3 Elements of Bureaucracy 3.4 Functions of Bureaucracy 3.5 Criticisms of Bureaucracy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, we discussed about what training and manpower development are all about.
This unit will take you a step further into the concept of bureaucracy.
In this unit, the focus is on the process of bureaucracy, the elements of bureaucracy, the functions of bureaucracy, and the criticism of bureaucracy.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Define Bureaucracy b.
List and explain the elements of Bureaucracy c. Enumerate the functions of Bureaucracy.
113  d. Explain the criticism of Bureaucracy an Organization.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MEANING OF BUREAUCRACY Generally people think of bureaucracy as unexplained delay and general frustration, red- tapeism, pettiness and silly rules that seem to create barriers that prevent the working of common sense (Krimmer, 1977).
Bureaucracy could be referred to as the general formal structural elements of a type of human Organization, particularly the collective personnel and structures of a government organization (Weber, 1918).
The concept of bureaucracy is generally used in modern organizations to refer to orderly and structural arrangement of things in organizations.
It is pertinent to note that, pure bureaucracy does not exist in the real sense of it (Mai, 1897).
.However, it is believed that bureaucracy has contributed immensely to the precise and reliable ways to efficiently achieve organizational aims and objectives.
The term bureaucracy is identifiable with the 19th century German sociologist.
Max Weber, who was referred to as the founder and widely acclaimed to have propounded the concept of bureaucracy believes that, there was the need to differentiate universalism and particularism model and traditions, and between inscriptive and merit.
He further states that, there is a difference between public administration and bureaucracy.
Weber believes that public administration is all about formalized and institutionalized process where defined rules and procedures are operated in an organizational setting.
Weber, (1918) states that for bureaucracy to hold there is the need for unity of command and hierarchical structure.
Weber (1918) was more concerned about the concept of power.
He was concerned specifically with power domination in terms of how the proportion of the population dominates or controls the rest of the society.
3.1.1 Forms of Power/Authority in Bureaucracy Weber, (1918) built his model of Bureaucracy on authority which he divided into three types as follows: (A).
Traditional Power or Authority: In this form of power, authority is derived through traditional rules, customs and beliefs.
In this situation authority is inherited through established customs and traditions e.g.
the Institution of Obaship, Emir and Igwe in Nigeria.
(B).
Charismatic Power or Authority: In this form of power, authority is based on the innate personal qualities and ability of the leader to command obedience of his followership.
Leaders with this authority exist because of the extra-ordinary qualities they possess and authority exercised.
For example, the late, Obafemi Awolowo, Moshood Kasimawo Abiola, 114  Nmandi Azikuwe, Nwame Nkrumah of Ghana, Senegal Senghor and a host of others were charismatic leaders who had a strong control over their followers.
C. Legal – Rational Power or Authority: Legal – Rational Authority is based on the obedience which is owed to the legally established impersonal set of rules rather than a personal ruler.
Weber, (1918) Legal-rational authority and power rest in the office rather than, the occupier of the office.
Legal rational authorities reside in rulers who are rationally appointed by people and can be changed through a formal process or through an established procedure.
3.1.2 Power and Authority Weber (1918), defines power as higher forces which compel a person to do what he would not have done; while authority is referred to a legitimate power which wills makes a holder responsible for certain functions.
He further states that, authority is inseparable from responsibility for the achievement of goals for which any organization was established.
3.2 The Process of Bureaucratization One feature of all government organizations is to implement policies through an administrative body of officials.
However, the appointment of these officials and the way they carry out their tasks differentiate one type of political structure from another.
Under the Feudalism System of government, Weber observed the following Process of Bureaucratization (Weber, 1918).
(A).
The ruler appoints his loyalist to court; he granted them powers and commissioned them to perform these tasks.
(B).
Household officials and favourites were often recruited into sensitive positions on patrimonial basis from among the slaves.
(C).
Qualifications for officers depend on the rulers personal judgement of quality among his household officials.
(D).
Through abrupt changes in appointment and the series of other arbitrary acts, the rulers make every efforts to prevent the identification of anyone household official or favourite with the office he occupies at any one given time.
(E).
The ruler himself and his subordinates conducted the affairs of government when appropriate.
The Feudal system of government was considered an extension of the rulers’ private domain and the officials had no rights and securities.
However, this was the situation before Weber’s 115  Bureaucracy came into practice.
During the Industrial Revolution and with a determined movement towards rationalization and secularization of the mind; reactions against the personal subjugation, nepotism, cruelty, and subjective judgement paved the way for the development of a new and more accommodative bureaucratic machine model.
Bureaucracy emerged out of the Organization’s need for order and precision and workers demand for impartial treatment.
Weber conceived an ideal type bureaucracy exhibiting some major characteristics anchored firmly on a body of impersonal rules and regulations.
His ideal type bureaucracy is a triumph of complex impersonal rules and an effective separation of the organization from their incumbents.
He further stated that organizational rules, orders, and structures are necessary and sufficient conditions for organizational efficiency.
Ideal bureaucracy in advanced countries of the world is practiced using the merit type of bureaucracy as against the anti-merit system and quota system.
Weber believed that in the developed world, selection of people is based on competence, qualification and examination.
Negro and Negro (1973), subscribed to this conception, they believes that in an ideal form of bureaucracy the best candidates should be able to secure jobs.
The Characteristics of an Ideal Bureaucracy include: (1) Knowledge of entry requisites (2) Selection based on competition and examinations (3) Adoption of Principle of equal job (4) Maintenance of rank on the job (5) Political independence of the officials (6)Incentives given for prompt performance (7) Security of tenure e.g.
pensions and gratuity (Victor, 1998).
However, for the purpose of clarity, Weber’s Characteristics of Bureaucracy are: (a) Uniformity (b) Continuity (c) Hierarchical Structure and (d) Competence Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the Elements of Bureaucracy 2.
What are the Criticism of Bureaucracy 3.2 ELEMENTS OF BUREAUCRACY The elements of bureaucracy are discussed as follows: A.
Hierarchy of Authority This is the hallmark of all bureaucratic organization.
The pyramidal structure assures that the superior offices direct the activities of their subordinate.
The ultimate authority resides at the apex.
Consequently, the pyramid narrows as it moves upward.
There are more people and 116  less power at the base and in that order until it reaches the apex.
Hierarchy gives the organization its structure and allows the organization authority to follow the chain of command.
The reason for this supervision is to oversee the activities of the lower officers with a view to training the junior employees and ensuring their activities tilt towards realizing organizational aims and objectives.
B.
The Framework of Law-Rules/Regulations Bureaucracy operates within the framework of law which guides both the superior and the subordinates.
(The rule of law requires the administration of actions affecting individual’s rights and should reflect: (i) precedents and (ii) legal sanctions not personal discretion of the official.
The pre-imminent position of the rule of law means: (a) The official leans heavily toward precedents (b) He leans towards inflexibility in his actions; (c) He is dependent on legal and financial assistance (d) There is strict conformity to established rules, procedures and legal regulations.
The framework of law is to regulate the employee’s behavioural patterns in the organization.
This will help to coordinate activities in the organisation and ensure uniformly in the actions of the employee.
C. Technical Specialization Weber (1918), in conjunction with Taylor (1917) believes in the preference for scientific methods of appointing employee into sensitive positions.
Weber emphasized the need to base promotion on security and ability of employee to meet the targets agreed with him/her.
He emphasized the need for training and development of workers through internal movement from one position to the other.
Every organization seeks to ensure stability and continuity.
Organisational processes are reviewed, over and over again, to make the workers more specialized and competent.
The division of activities called routinization of work and it is implicit in the idea of specialization.
Another aspect of specialization is that bureaucratic Organizations tend to divide its entire aims and goals, to sub-units until it reaches the level of targets for individual.
D. Search for Rationality This is the ability to think and make decisions on reasons.
It was the search for rationality that hastened the development of bureaucracy.
Rationality represents the systematic organization of task and individuals to maximize efficiency.
Bureaucracy facilitates the channelling of individuals’ behaviour into productive ends by means of rule, regulations and sanctions.
It provides its members with valuable and factual premise for decision making.
The goals of 117  rationality are promoted by the principles of unity of command, ultimate authority as well as rules and organisations.
E. Written Records/Documentation Organizations place high importance on written records and documentation.
Weber, (1918) emphasized the need for documentation of records.
This allows for community decisions, instructions and adequate planning.
F. Value System Bureaucrats work within a value system that determines the conduct of their actions.
Values consist of opinion of colleagues and cultural values of the society.
Bureaucracy and its characteristics vary from society to society.
This phenomenon modified Weber’s contention that bureaucracy is universal.
Bureaucrats identify value system with the rules of their organization; bureaucrats rarely attach loyalty to persons, but attribute loyalty to the impersonal functions they perform.
This notwithstanding, they are also, under the influence of other loyalties e.g.
social clubs, church, ethnic group, political parties, relations, colleagues e.g.
(giving job or admission to a brother who is qualified, first before any other person).
3.4 FUNCTIONS OF BUREAUCRACY The functions of bureaucracy are as follows: (Obiajulu and Obi, 2004) 1.
Implementing Policies: The traditional role of Bureaucratic organisation is to execute the programmes and policies of government.
This function is more essential and complex in this age of rapid technological and social change.
Modern society is becoming complex and professionalized, special knowledge and technology are brought to bear on major policies.
Legislators are not well equipped in this area; naturally they fall back on the bureaucratic information, advice and deliverance.
2.
Framing Legislation: When bureaucrats discover a discrepancy in Legislation, they use their discretion to fill in the gap and if the action is sustained, they help in framing Legislation.
Under military regimes Bureaucrats play important role in legislation primarily because the Armed Forces were not well equipped with legislative knowledge and information.
3.
Influencing Legislature: Bureaucrats influence Legislative activities at various stages.
In the advanced countries e.g.
United State of America for example, Bureaucrats are summoned to congressional committees to give evidence in some measure of Legislation.
Bureaucrats possess the wealth of information which is necessary for effective debate of a proposed bill.
In a parliamentary system of government, the Legislative influence on the Bureaucrats could 118  be more pronounced and direct.
Here a Minister could propose a Bill, which his Permanent Secretary had initiated.
Since Ministers come and go bureaucrats remain.
As career officers they are in better position to advise the government on any proposed Legislation.
4.
Ensuring Survival and Growth: Michel (1923), describes the tendency for survival and growth as the “Iron Law of Oligarchy”.
He states that Organizations tend to perpetuate themselves even when the primary goals have disappeared.
Bureaucracy ensures survival of the polity as an entity by performing certain crucial functions.
For example, during the turbulent period (1966-1970) in Nigerian, the survival of Nigeria as a nation owed much to the dedication and actions of the Federal Bureaucrats.
5.
Environmental Functions: Environmental functions which are performed by bureaucrats include: a.
Balancing of public and private interests: Ideally: bureaucrats weigh every issue first and foremost against public interest.
Unfortunately, there is no way of determining what public interest is, especially in situations where they are vague and ambiguous.
b.
Balancing professional and ethical considerations: This happens when a Bureaucrat is in a dilemma arising from conflict between loyalty to his supervisor and loyalty of his official function.
This happens in areas where professional consideration differs from political considerations.
c. Carrying Routine Work Government: This is perhaps the most important and least appreciated function of the Bureaucrat.
Junior officers in government organizations carry out the routine work of government, ranging from refuse disposal and protections of public utilities.
6.
Economic Planning and Management Functions: In contemporary societies of the world, whether developed on developing Bureaucracy is enmeshed in the planning and management of the State economy.
3.5 CRITICISMS OF BUREAUCRACY From Weber’s (1918), submission on Bureaucracy and types of authorities, it could be observed that bureaucracy cannot be practiced in its totality in developing nations like Nigeria.
Boulding, (1920), expresses concern over growing roles of Organizations in modern societies.
He claimed that, ethical values as love, freedom, justice, laws etc., tend to run at cross purposes as such loose out to such Organizational features as power, impersonality etc.
Argyris (1957), made a case for inevitable conflict between the needs of the individual and those of the Organization.
This conflict is self-perpetuating since the employee and manager 119  have divergent interests.
Another criticism of Bureaucracy is that, it attempts an up-hill task of removing all undesirable – extra-organizational influence upon the behaviour of members.
For example, the ideal official is supposed to conduct his office in a spirit of formalistic impersonality.
Bureaucracy does not provide for rapid and unplanned changes.
It thrives best under stable routine conditions.
Weber (1918), failed to recognize that men are endowed with limited intelligence.
Men are not Omniscience and therefore all Organizations must be designed for the normal man and not for a superman.
Knowledge of organizational effectiveness of operations may not always come from the superior.
There are situations where the subordinate could be very relevant to the success of the Organization than the boss.
Weber, (1918), did not recognize that environmental factors affect the operation of the Bureaucrats, for example, Nigeria Bureaucracy is affected by ethnicity, Federal character and Quota systems and such other cultural and environmental factors which a dynamic Bureaucracy must put into consideration for harmonious co-existence its members.
Marx (1848), a prudent scholar of Bureaucracy, sees bureaucracy as an apparatus of the state, that emerged under capitalism as an “auid pro quo”.
He states that bureaucracy emerged because of the division of people into social classes.
To Marx, bureaucracy is not directly related to production but it constitutes the unproductive sector of economy.
Lenin (1984), argues that, bureaucracy is historically contingent on the capitalist mode of production, and this mode of capitalism production pre-supposes a situation in which there is division of people into social class – namely Bourgeoisie and Proletariat (privileged and less privileged people).However, reutilization and rigid adherence to rules have made bureaucracy sluggish, drudgery and full of red tapeism.
The ideal form of bureaucracy brings about precision, speed, effectiveness, efficiency and increased productivity and performance.
4.0 CONCLUSION Bureaucracy refers to orderly and structural arrangement of things in an organisation.
The essentials of bureaucracy are to implement policies of large entities such as government and non-governmental organizations.
The purpose and mission of bureaucracy are to determine efficiency of organisations.
Bureaucracy ensures division of labour, hierarchy, rules and regulations and impersonal relationship in organisational set-up.
Power is a higher force that compels ones to do what he would not want to do.
Power can be in the form of traditional, charismatic and legal-rational.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that Bureaucracy centred on human organizations particularly the collective personnel and structure of government organizations.
Bureaucratization processes 120  ensures the execution of laws and commands and the need for security of tenure of officer.
Pure bureaucracy does not exist in the real sense.
The Functions of Bureaucracy are Policy implementation, framing legislation, influencing Legislature, ensuring survival and growth of organization, economic planning, and environmental functions etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT QUESTION: 1a.
Define Bureaucracy b.
List the process of Bureaucratization 2.
Explain the functions of Bureaucracy 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamolekun, L. and Gboyega A.
(Ed.)
(1979), Leading issues in Nigeria public services, ile- Ife, and university of ile-Ife.
Krimmer, Robert.
(1917), Bureaucracy and reforms; pengum books; new york; usa Micheal, Hill.
(1923), The journal of public administration; volume 2; tennessee Negro, F.O and Negro I.G (1973), Modern public administration; London; harper and row publishers.
Obiajulu, Sunday O.
& Obi, Emeka A.
(2004), Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach.
bookpoint Limited.
Patrick Mbieli (2006), Public administration, a broad view, meavons (west africa) Limited.
Remi Anifowose and Francis C. Enemuo (1999), Elements of politics, sam iroanusi publications Taylor, W. (1917), Public affairs and administration; a primer and case books Victor Abia B. E. (1998), A ground work of public administration.
olucity printers limited Weber, M. (1918), Characteristics and paradoxes of bureaucracy; new york, usa 121  UNIT 15 THE NIGERIAN CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Evolution of the Nigerian Civil Service 3.1.1 Organisational Structure of the Nigerian Civil Service 3.2 Personnel Practices Performed by the Civil Service 3.3 Principles/Characteristics of the Civil Service 3.3.1 Hierarchy 3.3.2 Anonymity 3.3.3 Neutrality 3.3.4 Performance 3.3.5 Loyalty and Impartiality 3.4 Functions of the Civil Service 3.4.1 Policy Implementation 3.4.2 Continuity of Public Administration 3.4.3 Advising Policy Makers 3.4.4 Provision of Input Policy 3.4.5 Informative Functions 3.5 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last section, you had an idea of what bureaucracy is all about.
This section will take you a step further into the concept of the Nigerian Civil Service.
In this unit, we shall be looking at the meaning and evolution of the Civil Service; the organizational chart of the service, the principles or characteristics of the Nigerian Civil Service, the functions, advantages and disadvantages of the Nigerian Civil Service.
122  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a) Explain the meaning and evolution of the Nigerian Civil Service b) Identify the principles of the Nigerian Civil Service.
c) List the functions of the Nigerian Civil Service d) List the advantages and disadvantages of the Civil Service 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MEANING AND EVOLUTION OF THE NIGERIAN CIVIL SERVICE The Civil Service is an institution created by the government to take care of the various needs of the society or a country either directly or through agencies responsible or answerable to the service (Nwosu, 1977).
The Civil Service had laid down rules and regulations but the service is designed primarily to govern the conduct of governmental affairs and to safeguard public interests.
The service spent time taken in considering issues thoroughly and ensure that decisions are not based on wrong conclusions and premises but that facts are made available.
The Civil Service is the body of permanent officials employed to assist the political executives in implementation of governmental policies.
The effectiveness of the Civil Service in the discharge of its functions depends on the will of the society it serves and also on its ability to respond in practical terms to its policy decisions (Nwosu, 1977).
It can therefore be said that, civil service is narrower in scope and exclude some government employees who are public servants.
According to the defunct 1998 Civil Service reforms, civil servants exclude the President and Commander-in-chief of the Army Forces, Governors, Local Government Chairmen, Ministers, Commissioners, Supervisory Councillors etc.
(precisely all political office holders).
The term civil service therefore covers all employees of the State other than those holding political appointments who are employed into the Civil Service.
The vision of the civil service is to develop professionally sound, highly competent and qualified personnel, technological-driven and performance-oriented.
The Office of the Head of Service of the 123  Federation is responsible for providing leadership and direction to the service through the promotion of good relations between Ministers and the civil servants.
The mandate of the Head of Service is to provide management leadership, training and motivation of civil servants in all the ministries and departments of the government.
Ademolekun, (1983), believes that the civil Service is meant to provide social services to the populace.
Public service as a term is broader in scope than civil service.
It includes not only those who are employed into government ministries and departments but also, statutory cooperation e.g.
(PHCN, NITEL) etc.
and the armed forces.
Public service means the totality of services that are organized under government authorities.
The evolution of the Civil Services in Nigeria started from 1900 when Britain formally established her authority in most areas in Nigeria.
The British divided the country into three regions (Colony of Lagos, and the Protectorates of Northern and Southern Nigeria).
In 1906, the Colony of Lagos was merged with the Southern Protectorate and by 1914 the Northern and Southern protectorates were amalgamated, and subsequently became the colony and protectorate of Nigeria.
Before now, the British imposed an alien Civil Service on Nigeria without giving much thought to the impact on the Nigeria traditional communities, their conflicting values, interest, norms, and structures.
Despite the amalgamation and its attendant unification the two regions developed at their own space.
The major function of the Civil Services at that time was mainly the maintenance of law and order and secondly to raise revenue to sustain the colonial authorities.
Economic and social Development were never the major objectives of the administration.
However, Nwosu, (1977), outlined the structure of the colonial service in Nigeria thus: The Governor-general was the Head of Public Service; he was accountable to the colonial secretary in London.
The colonial secretary was himself accountable to the British cabinet and to the parliament.
The Governor-general delegated his authority to the Chief Secretary as the effective Head of Service.
The Chief Secretary divided the activities of public services into two parts for effective coordination.
A department, comprises of 124  (technical, professional) and the political administration class.
This category of personnel assists the Chief Secretary in overseeing the territory.
The departmental and political heads, do not only advise the governor, but initiate policies, participates in legislation, and supervised the execution of enacted Bills and approved policies.
The Head of the technical and professional departments operate from the Central Secretariat in Lagos with the assistance of the Field Officers.
They carried out their duties without deference to any clientele.
The Field Officers who were referred to as Lieutenant Governor do not rule the people directly; instead they ruled them through their own people-indirectly.
In the North, the indirect rule system was easy because the Emirs were fully in control of the people before the advent of colonialism; they had unquestionable powers.
In the West, the indirect rule was also successful; the Obas were fully in control (though with some measures of checks and balances).
In the East, it was a different scenario all together, with the exception of few areas.
The diffused system of authority was described as segmentary /fragmented; this made it difficult for the indirect rule system to be introduced.
However this did not deter the colonial officials from building an administrative.
They created the warrant chief and made them to perform the roles of their counterparts in the North and Western regions.
However, the system of administration in the Eastern region undoubtedly encountered many problems as stated in Unit six of module one (Ecology and Evolution of Public Administration).
During this period, Nigerians were restricted to the lower echelons of the civil service.
3.1.1 Organisational Structure of the Nigerian Civil Service The defunct 1988 Civil Service reforms recommended the organisational structure of the Nigerian Civil Service as: (a)Secretary to the Government (b) Permanent Secretary (c) Directors (d) Deputy Directors (e) Assistant Directors (f) Principal Officers (g) Senior Officers(h) Administrative Officer I&ll (j) Junior Officers.
However, the Structure of the 125  Civil Service can be divided into the following categories: (A) The Administrative Class (B) The Executive Class (C) The Professional Class (D) The Junior Cadre.
The Administrative Class: The administrative classes are officers admitted into the Civil Service with a University degree in any discipline or with the attainment of a Professional qualification.
These categories of staff are referred to as the core Civil Servants.
They could rise to the peak of the Civil Service.
A university graduate enlisted into the Nigeria Civil Service starts from the position of an administrative officer ll and can rise to the position of the Permanent Secretary and probably Secretary to the Government.
The Executive Class: These categories of Civil Servants are called ‘Assistants’.
They are admitted into this class with a Polytechnic degree, Higher National Diploma (HND) or other lower qualifications and can rise through the ranks.
Unlike the administrative officers, the highest level for them in service is Grade Level 13.
On the attainment of this level, they either obtain additional qualification (a degree or professional qualification or mark time on the level until they retire).
These categories of Civil Servants can be converted to administrative class only if, they have the necessary qualification.
The Professional Class: These categories of Civil Servants are the Engineers, Doctors, Lawyers, Architects and Accountants etc.
The academic and professional qualifications they possess determine their positions as officers or assistants.
They can rise to the peak of the Civil Service.
The Junior Cadre: These are Officers on Grade Level 01-07, their academic qualifications may range from First School Leaving Certificate to National Certificate of Education (NCE) they are not specifically trained, and they are not professional.
They constitute the unskilled and semi-skilled labour.
They constitute about 40-60% of the workforce of any Organisation.
These categories of civil servants are the clerical officers, drivers, massagers/office assistants, cleaners, typist, gardeners, security guards, key punch operators, receptionist etc.
126  Self-Assessment Exercise: 1.
Explain the Personnel practices performed by the Civil Service 2.
Explain the Organisational Structure of the Civil Service 3.2 PERSONNEL PRACTICES PERFORMED BY THE CIVIL SERVICE The Civil Service like any other organisation has organisational goals (provision of social services) Personnel management in the civil service encompasses the following functions: (a) Recruitment: The mode of recruitment into the civil service is through the Civil Service Commission for officers on grade level 08-17 on the completion of civil service form, while the individual ministries recruited officers on grade level 01-07.
A written and oral interview is conducted before suitable candidates are offered appointment.
A list of the successful candidates is sent to the Office of the Secretary of the Government for posting to the different Ministries and Departments.
Civil service appointments are pensionable.
There is also contract appointment (the appointment of Officers who have retired from the service of the government on the attainment of the retirement age of 6o years or who has put in 35 years of service).
However, this is a form of contractual agreement between the employee and the employer.
This appointment is not pensionable and subject to termination with one Month Notice by either party involved or as stated in the condition of service.
(b) Confirmation of Appointment: On appointment into the Civil Service, an officer will be placed on probation for two years.
This period is to test the person’s abilities and behaviour on the job.
On satisfactory performance during this period he or she is given Letter of Confirmation.
(C)Training and Development: The defunct 1988 Civil Services reform placed emphasis on training and re-training of personnel.
The reform suggested that each Ministry should have a departmental training officer to train people on level 01–12, while the office of establishment, pension to training, and train officer on level 13–17.
Training makes workers to be more efficient on specific areas of the job to the accomplishment of the organisational set objectives.
Training and development constitutes one of the major cardinal areas of personnel 127  management as it entailed the process where successful employees are subjected to some systematic process to acquire technical knowledge, skill and attitude required to perform a specific task.
In organising training programme either internal or external, top management staff are involved to share their worth of knowledge, experience and skills acquisition to the newly recruited employees.
(d) Promotion: Civil Servants are entitled to promotion.
Each Department or Ministry prepares at the end of the year a comprehensive list of staffers, showing the order of seniority of all the staffer in each grade, within each cadre officers are eligible to undertake promotion.
(e) Annual Increment: Civil Servants are entitled to an annual increment of salary on the same grade, different steps until the person is due for promotion (Attwood, 1985).
3.5 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CIVIL SERVICE The Characteristics of the Civil Service encompass the features of the German Sociologist (Weber, 1914).
3.5.2 Hierarchy: The nature of the Civil Service in Nigeria is hierarchical in structure.
It involves the supervision and control of lower officers’ from the higher class.
For instance, we have the administrative class, professional class, executive class and the junior cadre.
Each unit exercise some measure of control over the unit below.
3.2.2 Anonymity: The principle of anonymity states that, Civil Servants should be seen and not heard.
Though they advise political office holders on issues relating to government, they either take neither the blame nor the glory for such policies.
They are not expected to be seen defending such policies, that job is better left for political office holders and not the career officers.
Civil servants thus work for the Minister but they are not mentioned.
3.2.3 Neutrality: The Civil servant must be politically neutral, it major responsibilities is to serve the government of the day with full dedication irrespective of what they feel about a particular government.
He is not expected to carry placard or get involved in partisan politics.
He is expected to vote at election time: they not expected to have a strong attachment of any particular government.
This is to enable them give their best and to make government policies to succeed.
3.2.4 Performance or Permanency: Politicians are birds of passage, they are essentially temporary administrators.
The Civil Service is often defined as a permanent body of officials that carry out government decisions.
It is permanent and its stewardship is not tired to the life of any particular government.
A Civil Servant is sure to keep his post, and pensionable unless he misbehaves.
3.5.3 Loyalty and Impartiality: The Civil Servant is expected to treat everybody with a high degree of impartiality.
Favouritism is against the principle of Civil Service and should not be encouraged; they performed their duties without fear, favour and with equal loyalty to any government of whatever complexion.
128  3.4 FUNCTIONS OF THE CIVIL SERVICE The civil service covers all staff of ministries and departments from the Permanent Secretary to the daily rated employees in the local government councils and whose remuneration are paid out of the money voted by the legislature.
The following are the functions of the Civil Service: 3.4.1.
Policy Implementation: The major function of the Civil Service is the implementation of government policies.
Civil Servants are not policy makers and are not really in a position to question government policies.
Whenever policy is made, it becomes the role of the civil servants to implement the policy the way it ought to be implemented.
Often times, it is when policies are being implemented that most people become aware of the policy and its effects and where the policy is unfavourable to the masses, they may react adversely to it.
Policies are subject to adjustment and the Civil Servants give feed-back to the political office holders who are policy makers.
3.4.2.
Ensuring Continuity of Public Administration: The Civil Service being a body of permanent officials of the state stands for continuity, this helps to stabilise the state by ensuring the continuity of government activities mostly to societies like Nigeria with unstable political history.
As governments come and go, the civil service makes sure that vital activities of the state do not break down.
3.4.3 Advising Policy Makers: Civil servants are people with a lot of experience and are expected to advice political office holders on policies (formulation and implementation).
This role was more emphasized during the military regimes were young military officers with little experience found themselves in power.
Being ‘novice in parade’ they had no choice than to rely on the expertise of top Civil Servants.
Where the advice of the civil servant is rejected, he must go ahead to implement the decision of the government even though it is against his personal wish.
3.3.4.
Provision of Input for Policy: Civil Servants with vast knowledge of experience make provision of inputs for policy formulation.
Whenever a policy is to be formulated, some top level Civil Servants (professional and seasoned administrators) makes their inputs with the elected office holders (Ministers, Governors, Special advisers, Commissioners) etc.
3.3.5 Information Function: It is one of the duties of the Civil Servants to pass information from the political office holders down to the masses and vice versa.
It is expected that the Civil Servants who come into contact with the masses, should give a feed-back to the political office holders who are policy makers who can then adjust the policy, to suit the demands of the people.
The core civil servants are always on ground to give information to the public.
3.5 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF THE CIVIL SERVICE 3.5.1 Advantages of the Civil Service: (a).
As a career service; there is a measure of security of tenure of Office, Pension and Gratuity etc.
129  (b).
It gives room for speed, precision, unambiguity, continuity, discretion, unity, strict subordination and restriction of friction of materials.
(c).
The sense of being fulfilled and the achievement of being appointed to a senior post call for high qualities of judgement, ability and knowledge.
(d).
Recruitment is usually based on the merit, quota and federal character system (e).
It placed total emphasis on effectiveness and efficiency of services delivered and less on profit making.
3.5.2 Disadvantages of the Civil Service (a).
There is too much red-tapeism, the excessive use of formalities and over-devotion to precedence and or reliance on established practices.
(b).
Lack of segmented control as Civil Servants have no opportunity to exercise individual judgement.
The power of control rests on the boss (political office holders) and this does not encourage efficiency (c).
Under the umbrella of anonymity, civil servants sometimes ill-advice the governments which brings about confusion in the society.
Some of them exercise wide discretion of power simply because they have access to vital information and power than public office holders (d).
Most officials join the service straight from the University with additional qualifications and limited experience.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Nigerian Civil Service started in 1900 when the British established her authorities in Lagos, Northern and Southern Nigeria and by 1914 the country was amalgamated into two regions, the Northern and Southern protectorate.
There have been remarkable differences in the organisational structure of civil service during the British era and the current civil Service.
The programmes and projects of the government are well implemented by the Civil servants.
Emphases are placed on hierarchy of structure and anonymity of personnel.
The Nigerian civil service is characterised with security of tenure of office, pension and gratuity of personnel while the major default is on red-tapeism and lack of segmented control.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that, civil servants are the body of permanent officials appointed to assist the political executives in formulating and implementing governmental policies.
They provide social services to the populace.
The personnel practices performed by the civil services are recruitment, confirmation of appointment, training and manpower development, promotion and discipline of personnel.
The principles of the civil service of Nigeria are hierarchy, neutrality, anonymity, permanent and impartial in the discharge of their duties.
The functions of the civil service are policies implementation, ensuring continuity of public administration, advising policy makers, provision of inputs for policy and informative functions.
There is security; gratuity and tenure of office holders in the Civil Service.
130  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the evolution of the Nigerian Civil Service 2.
List the advantages and disadvantages of Civil Service 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ademolekun, L (1983), Public administration.
a Nigeria comparative perspective, london longman Attwood, M.(1985), Introduction to personnel management (london breakthrough pan books).
Bankole Akanji (2000), Principles of personnel management, published by fadec, ebute- metta, Lagos Bello, S. A, Ojodu, H.O, Ogunyomi,P.
O, Legbeti, P (2004), Public administration system in Nigeria, (revised edition) raamson printing services Nwosu, H.N (1977), Political authority and the Nigeria civil service: Enugu fourth dimension publishers Obiajulu Sunday and Emeka Anthony Obi (2004), Public administration in Nigeria, a developmental approach.
bookpoint limited Remi Anifowose and Francis C. Enemuo (1999), Elements of politics, sam iroanusi publications Weber, M. (1914), Public administration and public policy; new york, usa 131
