INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL COP 111 AGRICULTURE 1 Course GuideCOP 111 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE COP 111 INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL AGRICULTURE I Course Developer/Writer Mr. A.D. Adeleye Federal Co-operative College Eleyele, Ibadan Programme Leader Dr. G.O.
Falade National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Mr. M.A.
Gana National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOP 111 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No 5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058- 409-9 All Rights Reserved iiiCOP 111 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGES Introduction.............................................................................. 1 What you will Learn in this Course………………………….. 1 Course Aims.............................................................................. 1 - 2 Course Objectives...................................................................... 2 - 3 Working through the Course...................................................... 3 Course Materials……………………………………………… 3 Study Units................................................................................. 3 - 4 Textbooks and References…………………………………...... 4 Assignment File……………………………………………….. 5 Presentation Schedule………………………………………….
5 Assessment................................................................................. 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………………......... 5 - 6 Final Examination and Grading……………………………......6 Course Marking Scheme……………………………………….6 Course Overview……………………………………………… 7 How to Get the Most from this Course…………………………7 - 9 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials……………………………….
9 -10 Summary………………………………………………………10 -11 ivCOP 111 COURSE GUIDE Introduction COP 111 - Introduction to General Agriculture 1 is a semester course 2 credit units for students pursuing the B.Sc.
Co-operative Management programme.
It will also be useful for those who want to practice agriculture in their garden or backyard.
The course consists of eighteen units that involve the basic concepts in agriculture and the practice of agricultural production especially on the common food crops.
This course guide tells you the nature of the course, the materials you are going to use and how you are to use the materials for meaningful benefits.
There are no compulsory pre-requisite.
The Senior Secondary Certificate examination or General Certificate of examination will be an advantage, for success in this course.
The course requires you to study and devote at least 2 hours for each of the eighteen units.
You are also advised to do the exercises which are necessary for proper understanding of the unit especially all the materials presented.
You are also requested to pay more attention to tutor marked assignments of which the details is provided in a separate file.
The tutor marked assignments also serve as revision arid continuous assessment.
There is likely going to be regular tutorial classes that are linked with the course while the practical part or activities will come up in the second semester.
Details of the time and locations of the tutorials will be made known to you by the National Open University (NOU) and this is a great opportunity for you to have a face to face with your course coordinator.
Any area that is not clearly understood will be properly explained.
What You will Learn in this Course The overall aim of COP 111 -Introduction to Agriculture 1 is to introduce you to the fundamental principles of agriculture and it application to the activities and to production.
During the course you will learn about the importance of agriculture and its socio economic importance as to enhancing the standard of living of the rural areas i.e.
Rural development and contributions to the economy of Nigeria.
Course Aims The aim of the course is to give you a better understanding of Agricultural development with the essentials of Agriculture bearing in mind the development and modernization of Agriculture especially in production of both food and vegetable crops.
1COP 111 COURSE GUIDE The aim of the course will be achieved by: • Introducing you to agricultural practices right from the traditional approach to the use of modern implements.
• Understanding the concept of land tenure system.
• Knowing the various factors that affect agricultural production.
• Understanding the main problems of Agriculture.
• Classifying the various crops.
• Knowing the characteristics and types of soil.
I • Understanding methods and strategies in agricultural extension.
• Explaining the main cropping systems.
• Providing you the basic knowledge of practicing agriculture effectively.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has a specific objective.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit, you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may also want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way you can be sure that you have done what was required of you by the unit.
Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course you should be able to: • define agriculture and its branches; • explain the importance of agriculture in terms of its contributions to the socio economy of the country; • explain types of land tenure and factors affecting them in Nigeria; • describe traditional farming types in Nigeria and compare with the modem farming; • explain the merits and demerits of each of the farming system; • describe the importance of research in modem agricultural development; • describe types of cropping system; • explain the problems militating against agricultural development; • proffer solutions to these problems; • explain the importance of extension services in agriculture; 2COP 111 COURSE GUIDE • explain the various types of soils and crops; and • advise on the type of soil suitable for crops.
Working through this Course To complete this course you are required to read the study units, read set books and read other related materials.
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
The course should take you about 42 weeks in total to complete.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Text books 4.
Assignment 5.
Tutorials Study Units There are seventeen study units in this course as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Introduction to Agriculture Unit 2 Agricultural Development Unit 3 Essentials of Agriculture Unit 4 Problems of Agricultural Development Unit 5 Land use in Nigeria Module 2 Unit 1 Methods of Farming in Nigeria Unit 2 Importance of Research in Agric Unit 3 Agricultural Systems Unit 4 Agricultural Extension Service Unit 5 Importance of Agricultural Extension 3COP 111 COURSE GUIDE Module 3 Unit 1 Importance of Agricultural Production Unit 2 Environmental Factors Affecting Agricultural Production Unit 3 Types of soil Unit 4 Identification of crops Module 4 Unit 1 Common Food Crops Unit 2 Vegetable crops Unit 3 Root Crops.
The first five units concentrate on the basic theory of Agriculture and land use in Nigeria.
This constitute module 1.
The next five units address the methods of farming, agricultural system and the extension services and this constitute module 2.
Units 11 -14 constitute module 3 which highlights the different type of crops with the other environmental factors affecting agricultural production while module 4 which is Units 15 -17 dealt with the production of crops especially the food crops.
Each units consists of four to six weeks work and includes specific objectives, direction for study reading materials other resources and summaries of key issues and ideas.
If there is any deviation go back to the contents of the unit.
There are text books which will also provide additional information.
The exercises in each unit have to be done to make sure that you are following the course.
It is also a way to gauge your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the material.
Together with tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Textbooks and References It is advisable that you have at least two of the following text books.
Adegeye, A. J. and Ditto, J.S.
(1982).
Essentials of Agricultural Economics, Centre for Agricultural and Rural Development (CARD).
Aweto, R.A. (1996).
Agricultural Co-operatives.
4COP 111 COURSE GUIDE Agbo, F. U.
(1999).
Elements of Agriculture for Co-operative Colleges, Polytechnics and Universities.
Assignment File In this file, you will find the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these course assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in this Course Guide in this course.
The six course assignments will cover: Assignment 1 All questions in Units 1 -3 Assignment 2 All questions in Units 4 -6 Assignment 3 All questions in Units 7 -10 Assignment 4 All questions in Units 11-13 Assignment 5 All questions in Uf1its 14 and 15 Assignment 6 All questions in Units 16 and 17 Presentation Schedule Your course materials give you important dates for the early and timely completion and submission of your Tutor-Marked Assignments and attending tutorials.
Do remember that you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the Tutor-Marked Assignments and third there is a written examination.
You are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercise.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessments in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 40% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course you will need to sit for a final examination of about three hours duration.
This examination will count 60% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are six tutor marked assignments in this course.
You only need to submit five of the six assignments.
You are encouraged, however to submit all the six assignments in which case the highest four marks of 5COP 111 COURSE GUIDE the six marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course marks.
Assignment questions for the Units in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units in this course are contained in the assignments file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading references and study units.
However it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more other references which will give you a broader view point and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignments send it, together with a TMA (Tutor-Marked Assignment) form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
Final Examinations and Grading The find examination for COP 111 will be three hours duration and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflects the types of self testing practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review yourself Tutor-Marked Assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1 – 4 Four assignments count 12.5% each = 40% of course marks Final Examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks 6COP 111 COURSE GUIDE Table 1 – Course Marking Scheme Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignment that follows them.
Units Title of Work Weeks Assessment (End Activity of Unit 1.
Introduction to Agriculture 2.
Agricultural Development 3.
Essentials of Agriculture 4.
Problems of Agricultural 1 Assignment 1 Development 5.
Land use in Nigeria 6.
Method of Farming in Nigeria 1 7.
Importance of Research in Assignment 2 Agriculture 1 8.
Agricultural Systems 1 9.
Agricultural Extension Service 1 10.
Importance of Agricultural Extension 1 11.
Importance of Agricultural Assignment 3 Production 1 12.
Environmental Factors Affecting Agricultural Production 1 13.
Types of Soil 14.
Identification of Crops 1 Assignment 4 15.
Common Food Crops (Tomato 1 and Pepper) 1 16.
Vegetable Crops 1 Assignment 5 17.
Root Crops Assignment 6 Table 2: Course Organizer How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set books or other material, and when to undertake computing practical work.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
7COP 111 COURSE GUIDE Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Readings section.
Some units require you to undertake practical work on a computer.
You will be directed when you need to use a computer and guided through the tasks you must do.
The purpose of the computing work is two fold.
First, it will enhance your understanding of the material in the unit.
Second, it will give you practical experience of using programmes which you could well encounter in your work outside your studies.
In any event, most of the techniques you will study are applicable on computers in normal working practice, so it is important that you encounter them during your studies.
Self-tests are interspersed throughout the units, and answers are given at the end of units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self-test as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units; work through these when you come to them, too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, contact your tutor.
Remember that your tutor's job is to help you.
When you need help, don't hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the "Course overview" for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather together all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use you should decide on and write in your own dates for working or each unit.
8COP 111 COURSE GUIDE Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the "Overview" at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the exam.
Submit all assignments no later than the due date.
Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 20 hours of tutorials (ten 2-hour sessions) provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your 9COP 111 COURSE GUIDE tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
• you have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises.
• you have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor's comments on any assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them, you will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary COP 111 Introduction to General Agriculture is a course that intends to introduce you to agricultural activities ranging from Land preparation, planting, weeding, harvesting and then entire agricultural production even storage activities.
Upon the completion of this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of the nature, scope, principles and techniques of production and farm management activities in agriculture.
You will be able to answer these kinds of questions: • What do you understand by the term agriculture?
• What are the essential factors for agricultural development?
• The importance of agriculture to the socio-economic development.
• How can you identify the conditions favourably for the growth of food crops?
• How can you identify the different types of soils'?
• Why is it necessary to practice agriculture?
• What is the contribution of agriculture in Nigerian economy?
• What is the contribution of agriculture in rural development?
10COP 111 COURSE GUIDE • What are the various pests and diseases affecting agricultural crops?
The list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the above list.
To gain a lot from this course you should try to apply the principles you have learnt to the agricultural practices especially in the production of food crops and in B.Sc.
Co-operative Management programme.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
We hope you will enjoy your acquaintance with NODLP.
Goodluck.
11
