PATTERNS AND TRENDS OF CSS 655 CRIME IN NIGERIA Course GuideCOURSE GUIDE CSS655 COURSE GUIDE CSS655 PATTERNS AND TRENDS OF CRIME IN NIGERIA Course Developer Dr. Folashade Okeshola Department of Sociology Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria Course Writer Dr. Folashade Okeshola Department of Sociology Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria Programme Leader Ifidon Oyakhilomen, Ph.D; B.L.
Schoolof Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiCOURSE GUIDE CSS655 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-664-4 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiCOURSE GUIDE CSS655 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………….
1 What You Will Learn in this Course………………………….1 Course Aims………………………………………………… 2 Course Objectives…………………………………………... 2-3 Working Through this Course……………………………….. 3 Course Materials…………………………………………….
3 Study Units………………………………………………….. 3-4 References and Further Readings…………………………… 4-5 Assessment………………………………………………….. 5 Assignment File……………………………………………... 5-6 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMA)………………………… 6 Final Examination and Grading…………………………….. 6 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………….
7 How to Get the Most from this Course……………………… 7-8 Tutors and Tutorials………………………………………… 9 Summary…………………………………………………….
9 ivCOURSE GUIDE CSS655 Introduction CSS655: “Patterns and Trends of Crime in Nigeria” is a criminology course, within the Department of Sociology.
Criminology itself is a scientific study of crime, criminal behaviour and societal reactions to crime.
To be able to appreciate the importance of this course, you should have had a background in Sociology, Law, or Security Studies.
This course covers a wide range of topics such as legal and sociological definition of crime, classification of crime, theories of crime, meaning and uses of crime statistics, sources of crime statistics, patterns and trends of crime during the pre-colonial, colonial and post-colonial era; as well as emerging crime of the 90s.
You will also get to know more about victims of crime, cost of victimisation, challenges to law and law enforcement, the profile of Nigerian offenders as well as the problems and prospects of crime prevention and control in Nigeria.
This Course Guide provides you what the course is all about, and what is expected of you at every stage of your study.
It is also believed that tutorials will be organized for you in the course of study before you sit for your final examination.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall objective of CSS655 Patterns and Trends of Crime in Nigeria is to expose students to the various ways of defining crime.
It will expose the students to the pattern and trends of crime in Nigeria.
This course consists of 21 units.
It is very relevant to those serving in military and paramilitary establishments.
It is of equal importance to students with first degrees in Law, Business Administration, Sociology, and other allied disciplines.
It is also relevant to those working in the financial institutions and government parastatals.
Apart from broadening students’ knowledge on different theories explaining crime, it will also enlighten them about crime commission as a two-way traffic.
It involves not only the offender, but also the victim of that particular crime.
For a successful prevention and control of crime in Nigeria, the cost of victimization must be mentioned, as well as the current challenges of crime to law and law enforcement agents.
Students will also be expected to know at the end of this course the emerging crimes and the trends both in Nigeria and internationally.
Knowledge of this course will enable students to contribute meaningfully to the discussions on crime and the way forward.
1COURSE GUIDE CSS655 Course Aims The basic aim of this course is to broaden students’ knowledge on the pattern and trends of crime in Nigeria.
It also exposes them to the various definitions given to crime by different scholars vis-à-vis their area of discipline and specialization.
This course will enable students to know the emerging trends from conventional crimes to the modern crimes of the 21st century globally.
Course Objectives The overall objective is to enable you to know the various crimes in existence and to be able to examine the patterns and trends of its occurrence as it relates to Nigeria.
In addition to the broad aims stated above, there are specific unit objectives, which are presented at the beginning of each of the 21 study units forming this course.
It is very important to familiarize yourself with the unit objectives before reading through the respective units.
It is also necessary to look at the units’ objectives after studying each unit.
This will enable you to know whether you have covered what is expected of you in the unit or not.
At the end of this course, you should be able to do the following: 1.
Understand crime from both legal and sociological points of view.
2.
Identify seven elements that qualify an act to be defined as crime.
3.
Examine the various classifications of crime.
4.
Distinguish various theories and explanation on the concept of crime.
5.
Know how crime is measured.
6.
Differentiate various sources through which crime statistics could be generated.
7.
As a student of this course, your knowledge should enlighten you on the uses of crime statistics for future planning for crime prevention and control.
8.
Know the changing patterns and trends of crime in Nigeria during pre-colonial, colonial, and post colonial periods.
9.
Create awareness on both traditional and modern crimes.
10.
Alert students on the emerging and special categories in crime such as terrorism, human trafficking, assassination, money laundering, cyber crime etc.
11.
Examine the victims of crime and their typology.
12.
Identify cost of victimization to the individual victim, victim’s family and the society.
13.
Examine the profile of the Nigerian offenders.
14.
Discuss the internationalization of crime as a global problem.
2COURSE GUIDE CSS655 15.
Understand the challenges of crime to law and law enforcement agents.
16.
Discuss the problems and prospects of preventing and controlling crime in Nigeria.
Working Through this Course To complete this course you are required to read the study units, reference texts, newspapers and magazines.
Listen to local and foreign news in the radio, television and cable satellites.
Be current with issues of crime going on in the country, Africa and the rest of the world.
All materials made available and provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) should be thoroughly read and understood.
In each unit, you will see self-assessment exercises, which should be practised.
This will enable you to evaluate the extent of your knowledge concerning the unit you have just read.
At some points, you are expected to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
You will also sit for final examination at the end of this course.
For the purpose of this course, you are expected to have the following that will serve as a guide on what is expected of you.
Course Materials i.
Course Guide ii.
Study Units iii.
Textbooks and other Reference Sources iv.
Assignment File v. Presentation It is necessary for you to obtain text materials as provided by NOUN.
You may also purchase the materials from the bookshop.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor, if you have problems in getting these materials.
Study Units There are twenty-one study units in this course.
These include: Module 1 Unit 1 The Legal Definition of Crime Unit 2 Sociological Definition of Crime Unit 3 Classification of Crime Unit 4 Classical and Neoclassical Approaches to Explaining Crime Unit 5 Critical Approaches to Explaining Crime 3COURSE GUIDE CSS655 Module 2 Unit 1 Meaning of Crime Statistics Unit 2 Uses and Factors that make Crime Statistics Useful Unit 3 Official Sources of Crime Statistics Unit 4 Unofficial Sources of Crime Statistics Unit 5 Suggestions for Better Measurement of Crime Module 3 Unit 1 Patterns and Trends of Crime in the Pre-colonial Era Unit 2 Patterns and Trends of Crime in Colonial Era Unit 3 Transition from Conventional Crime (1960 – 1991) Unit 4 Emerging and Special Categories of Crime Unit 5 Consideration of Victims of Crime Module 4 Unit 1 Cost of Crime Victimization Unit 2 Profiling Nigerian Offender Unit 3 Challenges to Law and Law Enforcement Agents Unit 4 Internationalization of Crime Unit 5 Preventing and Controlling Crime in Nigeria: Problems and Prospects.
Marking Scheme Each unit contains a number of Self-Assessment Exercises.
This will assist you on the materials you have covered.
It will also assist you to evaluate your progress as well as increase your understanding of the material.
Similarly, the Tutor-Marked Assignments will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and the course in general.
References and Further Readings Bohn, R. M. and Haley, K.N.
(2002).
Introduction to Criminal Justice, 3rd Edition.
California: McGraw Hill).
Danbazau, A.B.
(1994).
Law and Criminality in Nigeria: An Analytical Discourse, Ibadan: University Press PLC.
Danbazau, A.B.
(1999).Criminology and Criminal Justice, Kaduna: Nigerian Defence Academy Press.
4COURSE GUIDE CSS655 Danbazau, A.B.
et al (1996).
Issues in Crime Prevention and Control in Nigeria, Kaduna: Baraka Press and Publishers Limited Gibbons, D.C. (1977).
Society, Crime and Criminal Careers: An Introduction to Criminology, 3rd edition.
Englewood Cliffs: NJ.
Prentice – Hall.
Iwarimie – Jaja, D. (2003).
Criminology: The Study of Crime, Owerri: Springfield Publisher Limited.
Ladan, M.T.
(1998).
Crime Prevention and Control and Human Rights in Nigeria, Zaria: Econet Publication Co. Ltd. Schafer, S. (1969).
Theories in Criminology: Past and Present Philosophers of the Crime Problem, New York: Random House Inc. Swanson, C.R.
et.
al.
(2003).
Criminal Investigation.
New York: McGraw Hill Higher Education.
Vold, G. (1958).
Theoretical Criminology, New York: Oxford University Press.
Wolfgang, M.E.
and Ferracuti, F. (1967).
The Subculture of Violence, London: Tavistock.
Wolgang M.E et.
al.
(1964).
Sociology of Crime and Delinquency, New York: John Wiley and Sons; Inc. Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First, is the Tutor- Marked Assignments (TMA).
The Second is the written examination.
The written examination will be of three hours duration and will constitute 70% of the total course marks.
The TMA will constitute the remaining 30%.
In tackling these assignments, you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and experience acquired during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the Assignment file.
The work submitted to your tutor for assessment will account for 30% of your total course mark.
Assignment File There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for 5COURSE GUIDE CSS655 marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignment will be found in the assignment file itself, and later in this Course Guide.
There are many assignments for this course, with each unit having at least one assignment.
These assignments are meant to assist you to understand the course.
Tutor-Marked Assessment There are 20 Tutor-Marked Assignments in this course.
You only need to submit some of the assignments.
The best three (i.e.
the highest three of what you submit) will be counted.
Each assignment counts for 10 marks.
The total score for the three will be 30% of your total course work.
The assignments for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in the reference books, reading and study units.
You should read very widely so as to demonstrate an in- depth knowledge of the subject matter.
When each assignment is completed, send it together with a TMA (Tutor-Marked Assignment) form to your tutor.
Ensure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Assignment file.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due, so as to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances warranting such.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for CSS605: Patterns and Trends of Crime in Nigeria will be of three hours’ duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the practice exercises and tutor-marked assignments you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between the completion of the last unit and sitting for the examination, to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your tutor-marked assignments and comment on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all aspects of the course.
6COURSE GUIDE CSS655 Course Marking Scheme Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignments Best three marks of the assignments at 10% each = 30% of course marks Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the Study Unit replaces the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some readings to do, the study units tell you when to read, including your text materials or reference books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the Study Units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives allow you to know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from the reference books or from a reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or post the question on the NOUN website discussed above.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
7COURSE GUIDE CSS655 2.
Organise a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester are available from the NOUN Website.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedules of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they fail behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late, to get help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep an eye on the NOUN Website.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously be posted there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), access the Assignment File on the NOUN Website and download your next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
8COURSE GUIDE CSS655 Tutors and Tutorials There are 10 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter, and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board.
The following might be circumstances in which you will find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: i.
You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
ii.
You have difficulties with the exercises.
iii.
You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
Summary This unit is an overview of the course, Patterns and Trends of Crime in Nigeria.
Its major purpose is to prepare you on what to expect in terms of the modules and units, and the kinds of activity they will entail.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefits from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn quite a lot from participating in the discussions.
In this stand-alone unit called the Course Guide, you have been guided through what the course: Patterns and Trends of Crime in Nigeria entails.
You should really familiarize yourself with its contents before delving into the course proper.
Doing this will ensure that you begin the course psychologically and mentally well prepared.
You have to be aware that some guidelines presented here have to conform to the general guidelines of the National Open University.
In other words you need also to familiarize yourself with, and keep abreast of, the general guidelines.
9
